A SERIOUS ADDRESS TO SUCH OF THE PEOPLE CALLED QUAKERS, On the CONTINENT of
NORTH AMERICA, As profess SCRUPLES relative to the PRESENT GOVERNMENT:
EXHIBITING The ancient real TESTIMONY of that PEOPLE, concerning OBEDIENCE to
CIVIL AUTHORITY. WRITTEN before the DEPARTURE of the BRITISH ARMY from
Philadelphia, 1778. BY A NATIVE OF PENNSYLVANIA. To which are added, for the
Information of all RATIONAL ENQUIRERS, AN APPENDIX, CONSISTING OF EXTRACTS from
an ESSAY concerning OBEDIENCE to the SUPREME POWERS, and the DUTY of SUBJECTS
in all REVOLUTIONS, published in England soon after the Revolution of 1688.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by R. BELL, next Door to St. Paul's Church, Third
street. M.DCC.LXXVIII.

A serious ADDRESS to the People called QUAKERS, on the Continent of
North America, relative to the late great Revolution.
AS there are diverse opinions in the Society, respecting the presont
Government, and doubts in the minds of some, whether it be right or proper to
withdraw their obedience from preceding rulers and powers, and to submit to
rulers and powers, who are separated from, and set up in the stead and without
the consent of, the former: The right understanding and settling of this point
appears to be the first necessary consideration. I would therefore, in the
first place, observe and lay it down as an axiom, that, in cases of such
maguitude as the present, there must certainly be something more than human,
and that God Almighty, the Supreme Governor of the Universe, who is no
respecter of persons, who does whatsoever he pleases with the powers of this
world, sets up and pulls down whomsoever he pleases, and, for causes best
known unto himself, has allowed and permitted, and still does allow and
permit, changes and alterations in and of states and empires, to take place. It
may not be amiss to call to mind the vatious mighty and well-known revolutions
that he has permitted at different times, not only amongst the people of Great
Britain, but most if not all the empires and people upon the face of the earth,
to the subduing and setting aside one, and raising up another in the room
thereof, from the times of Saul and David down to this very day; some of which,
for the sake of the doubting, uninformed, or inconsiderate, I shall remark, as
concisely as conveniently may be.

The kingdom of Saul, which was the first we read of in Holy Writ, although
regularly and solemnly established, yet by degrees was weakened and reduced,
and that of David by degrees raised over it; the introduction and rise of whose
government we may see 1 Samuel 22, where we find that, on account of Readiness
tyranny, David fled and escaped to the cave of Adullam, and when his brethren,
and all his father's house heard it, they went down thither to him, and every
one that was in distress, and every one that was in debt, and every one that
was discontented, and gathered themselves unto him, and he became a Captain
over them: This was the beginning of David's power, and these men, we learn,
continued together with David until he was made King in Readiness stead, which,
though by the order and appointment of Providence, yet it may be observed that
it was contrary to nature, as well as to the usual customs of all ages, since
David not being heir to the crown, the claim thereto upon those principles
belonging to the house of Saul, which I think, was notwithstanding declared
should grow weaker and weaker, and that of David stronger and stronger.

And of Solomon, (David's son and immediate successor) the Lord declared,
Forasmuch as thou have nor kept my covenant and my statutes which I have
commanded thee, I will surely rend the kingdom from thee, and will give it to
thy servant. Notwithstanding in thy days, I will not do it, (for David thy
father's sake) but I will rend it out of the hand of thy son. Howbeit I will
not rend away all the kingdom, but will give one tribe to thy son, (for David
my servant's sake, and for Jerusalem's sake, which I have chosen.) And in the
next verse it is expressly declared, that The Lord stirred up an adversary unto
Solomon, Hadad the Edomite. -- And in the 23 d verse it is again said, that God
stirred him up another adversary, Rezon the son of Eliadah. Which passiges
clearly manifest, that the hand of the Lord is in such events, and particularly
the fulfilling of the foregoing prediction, which we find consumed by the
declaration of the Prophet to Jeroboam, as also by the exemplification of the
rent garment; the Prophet telling him in the name of the Lord, "I will take
thee, and thou shall reign according so all that thy soul desires, and shall
be King over Israel," ver. 37. -- which accordingly came to pass by the revolt
of the ten tribes, as we may see in the 12th chap. upon the unjust, ha^sh and
insolent answer, which Re^^oboam gave to the petitions of the people.

Another instance of the dealings of the Lord with the kingdoms of men, we may
see in the 16th chap, of I. Kings, where "the word of the Lord came to Jehu,
the son of Hanani, against Baasha, (King of Israel) saying, forasmuch as I
exalted thee out of the dust, and made thee Prince over my people Israel, and
thou have walked in the way of Jeroboam; behold, I will take away the POSTERITY
of Baasha, and the POSTERITY of his house." -- And in the 9th of II. Kings, we
find that the Prophet Elisha foretold the reign of Jehu, the son of
Jehoshaphat, (though a servant) in preference to his master, who had 70 sons,
saying unto Jehu, by a messenger which he sent for that purpose, Thus faith the
Lord God of Israel, I have anointed thee King over the people of the Lord, even
over Israel, and thou shall smite the house of Ahab thy master, -- which was
accordingly fulfilled, notwithstanding the contemptuous speech of the impudent
woman Jezebel, who, upon his entering the city of Jezteel, cried out, Had Zimri
peace, who flew his master? -- but she lived not long to repeat her folly: --
Of this Jehu, although he flew his master and his 70 sons, by orders for that
purpose, yet, according to the 30th ver. of 10th chap. the Lord said unto him,
because thou have done my will in executing that which is right in my eyes, and
have done unto the house of Ahab, according to all that was commanded thee, thy
children of the fourth generation shall sit on the throne of Israel.

Our ancient friend George Fox, in an address to Kings and Rulers of all sorts,
wherein he speaks of the Lord's power and dealings, says, his hand is turned
against Kings, and shall turn wife men backward, will bring their crowns to the
dust, and lay them low and level with the earth. -- Journ. p. 135. And the same
friend, in a paper given forth in the year 1660, p. 309, says, -- All friends,
concerning the changing of times and governments, let not that trouble any of
you, for God has a mighty work and hand therein --

Edward Borough, in a piece called a representation to London, an. 1659, page
610 of his works, says, -- Now friends, do but truly consider, and with an
humble mind, what the work of the Lord has been in these nations, for diverse
years, and how he has proceeded to overthrow and overturn powers and
authorities, princes and rulers, and made them of no account before him; and
because of the oppression of Rulers among us, the nation has groaned, and been
left without a comforter from any man, and could not repose confidence in its
Princes and Rulers, and this was that the nation might look unto the Lord, and
that through him they might be saved, and expect healing from him alone; and in
all these overturnings, you need not fear but the hand of the Lord has been in
them, and his arm has suffered and even brought these things to pass; and
therefore, why should you murmur against God, and be unsatisfied in what he
has done. -- The same author, page 672, speaking concerning the sufferings of
King Charles, says, -- As for the afflictions and sufferings sustained by him,
so far as they were just and righteous judgments from God because of iniquity,
can no man be charged with, but that is on God's account, who was pleased to
chastise with afflictions and sufferings, and no man can be blamed with
injustice, for that affliction which comes from the hand of God. The public
causes of Charles's sufferings are well known, and who can say but the case is
the same at this very time; of which the very permission of the present
opposition is a strong presumptive proof.

Francis Howgill, an ancient and eminent minister and author amongst us, in an
address to the army, committee of safety, and parliament, p. 325 of his works,
about the year --, speaking of the end and intent of rule and authority, says,
-- For the thing intended being lost, the Ruler or Rulers rule no more for God,
neither does he account them such, whatever they may account themselves; and
therefore has raised another thing to overthrow that power, as has been
evident in this nation, in these many revolutions, although that power which
was first in being," (no doubt meaning the King's) which was ordained for the
end aforesaid, might say to that which rose up against it, that it was
rebellion and treason, and declare it to be such in the ears of the people, as
has been done by diverse, which is in the memory of most; so that I need not
instance, when I say it was not so accounted by the Lord, and he has given a
testimony of this by the overthrowing of the former, and raising up the latter;
-- and a little further, speaking of the form of government, says, -- Was not
Israel governed sometime by Judges, sometime by Elders, and sometime by Kings?
and while they stood in the counsel of the Lord, the people hearkened to them,
was not the Lord among them, and sometimes raised up unlikely means, as David a
shepherd's boy, and Gideon a thresher, and he was made a Judge and a Redeemer
of Israel out of their slavery. -- By which observations it appears, that
Francis Howgill was a strong friend to public justice, and that he did not
apprehend an attachment to any particular form of government merely as such, by
any means essential or indispensible. -- The same author, page 320, further
says, -- Now many are so doting on the name of a parliament, as though it were
essential, or the name to be the foundation of government, and cry up the
privilege of parliament, as some have done prerogative, and would fight about a
name in their heat and passion, and lose the thing intended, though they be the
representative of the people, to do good to the people, and not hurt, they are
accounted as good servants to God, and to them that elected them; but if they
would, so soon as got together, set up a particular interest to the imbondaging
of the whole," (as the parliament of Great Britain toward this country "in all
cases whatsoever") and then cry up their privilege to do what they list; then
it is no rebellion in God's account, neither in the account of just men to call
them away, w^^a they do not perform the thing intended, and will not hearken to
the cry of their masters (the people) but perhaps call them rebels and
traitors, if they should be turned out. -- And page 329 of the same work,
speaking of the conduct of the parliament, with regard to their obstruction of
the liberties of the people, he says, Therefore the army in putting a stop to
that which did retard and draw back from the end aforesaid, in God's sight and
in the sight of illuminated men, is no rebellion, no treachery. --

The numerous changes and revolutions in the kingdoms and empires of the earth,
clearly described and foretold by the Prophets Isaiah, Jeremiah, Ezekiel,
Daniel, Amos and Zephaniah, particularly concerning the Philistines, Ammonites,
Edomites, Moabites, Damascus, Babylon, Jerusalem, Tire, Sydon, Media, Persia,
Graecia, Assyria, Ethiopia, etc. as may be seen in holy writ, and which, for
brevity sake, are not now repeated, fully prove the truth of the axiom laid
down in the beginning; and though that mode of communicating to mankind the
will and purposes of God concerning the powers of this world, may be now almost
ceased or at least suspended, yet the Creator of Heaven and Earth, who sees
from everlasting to everlasting, no doubt takes the same cognizance, and
exercises the same superintending and executive power he did in days of old.

The prous and judicious Rollin, author of the ancient history, considering and
remarking the great changes, which often take place in human affairs, and
parti^u^arly the case of Nebach^dn^zzar, says, they show the predigiou, case
with which all the power and riches of a kingdom are carried away, when God
appoints the revolution, and shift like a garment to a new Owner. Vol. 1, p.
100. -- The same author, vol. 7, p. 340, speaking of the fall of Carthage,
says, that Scipio, on that occasion, reflected that cities, nations and
empi^es, are liable to revolutions no less than particular men, and had the
truth (observes Rollia) enlightened his soul, he would have discovered what we
are taught in the Scriptures, that because of unrighteous dealings, injuries
and riches got by deceit, a kingdom is translated from one people to another.
Ecc. 10, 8. -- And (...) 298 of the same vol. treating of the accomplishment of
Daniel's prophecies, relative to earthly kingdoms, says, What man but must
adore that sovereign power, which God exercises in a secret manner, over Kings
and Princes, whose very crimes he renders subservient to the execution of his
sacred will, and the accomplishment of his eternal decrees; in which all
events, both general and particular, have their appointed time and place fix^d
beyond the possibility of failing, even those which depend most on the choice
and liberty of mankind. He further informs us, vol. 8, p. 298, that, on account
of the arbitrary and unjust behavior of Antiochus, (to whom part of Daniel's
prophecy related) the people revolted from him; and page 369, speaking of his
successor S^l^u^us, whose fate app^ars to be predicted by Daniel, chap. xi, v.
20, where the text says, then shall stand up in his (Antiochus) estate, a
raiser of taxes, in the glory of his kingdom, but within few days he shall be
destroyed; or, according to the Hebrew text. There shall arise up in his
(Antiochus) place, a man who, as an extortioner, a collector of taxes, shall
destroy the glory of the kingdom; which clearly point out the miserable
effects, and just punishment, consequent of such arbitrary conduct: The
foregoing author, at the conclusion of his history of the ancients, p: 224,
recounting the varions kingdoms, states and empires of the world, their
governments, customs, arts, sciences, grandeur, power, richer, etc. remarks
thus, But whilst we are in admiration of so many shining accomplishments, the
Supreme Judge, who can alone estimate all things, sees nothing in them but
trifle, meanness, vanity and pride; and whilst mankind are continually busied
in perpetuating the power of their families, in founding kingdoms, and
eternizing themselves, (if that were possible) God from his throne on high
overthrows all their projects, and makes even their ambition the means of
executing his operations and designs; ^llagres are present to him: He (...)
from everlasting to everlasting. (Ecc. 39, 19) He has (...) all empires their
fate and duration. In the different revolutions, (which he had related) we have
seen that nothing has come to pass by chance. --

Before I leave this part of the subject, it may not be amiss to insert some
further observations of E. Borough before mentioned, in answer to some queries
proposed to the people called Quakers, by one of King Charles's friends,
supposed to have been the Earl of Clarendon; to which Edw. Borough replied
thus, Yet notwithstanding must still say, and it is my judgment, that there was
very great oppression and vexation under the government of the late King, and
Bishops under his power, which the Lord was offended with, and many good people
oppressed by; for which cause, the Lord might and did justly raise up some to
oppose, and strive against oppressions and injustice, and to press after
reformation in all things. This principle of sincerity, which in some things
carried them on in opposing oppressions, and pressing after reformation, I can
never deny, but acknowledge it. -- See Sew^ll's hist. p. 283.

The foregoing precedents and observations one would think might be sufficient
to satisfy the doubting, that the present revolution is the work of the Lord,
and according to the plan and design of his providence, and tend to prove the
safety and propriety of a submission to the powers which now rule: But it may
be objected in justification of the present scruples and refusal by some, that
the present powers and government are usurped and contrary to law: To this it
may be answered, that the same objection would have held good under every
revolution which has heretofore been brought about, as they must no doubt have
been contrary to the authority of the preceding powers, and by their friends
and adherents been deemed usurpations, which might also have been alleged
against the present constitution of GreatBritain, as may be hereafter remarked.

It appears to me that it is for those who choose not to have any hand in the
formation of governments, to take governments such as they find them, and
comply with their laws, so far as they are clear of infringing religious rights
and matters of faith toward God: It cannot perhaps be found that friends, ever
since they were a people, ever refused to assist in the support of government,
but have ever held it right and necessary to comply with the laws of the
various governments under which they lived; for as, according to our own
repeated declarations as a society, (see Sewell's hist. p. 748, etc.) -- the
setting up and putting down Kings and Governments is God's peculiar prerogative
for causes best known to himself, and that it is not our work or business to
have any hand or contrivance therein, nor to be busy bodies in matters above
our stations. Whether then can such a people, by any means, undertake to weaken
or oppose the present government, seeing these things are allowed to belong
only unto God, is a matter worthy of consideration: for though some may say
that the King's right is infringed, and that no other power than the King has
a right to this country and the government thereof, it may be alleged in
return, that the King has long since actually and expressly put the people of
this country out of his own protection, without distinction of persons, whether
private or public, civil or religious: But I would seriously ask how any one
knows, or can undertake to say, that the above assertion, on the part of the
King, is really the case, and altogether right in the sight of God, who does
whatsoever he pleases in the kingdoms of this world. How know we, but as has
been the sentiment of diverse living and powerful servant^ of the Lord, and
members of society in these days, but that the Almighty, for canses best known
unto himself, may have a special hand in this work, as was generally agreed by
friends that he had at the beginning, even in the apparently usurped revolution
under Oliver Cromwell, as may be seen by the epistles of Francis Howgill, E
Borough, and diverse others written to him; which if it be the case, we
possibly, and not without strong probability in the view of some, may be found
fighters against God, which is a most awful consideration, and ought strongly
to operate in the minds of all; so that if they cannot actively unite with,
they be very careful, by no means, to op^ose (...) powers that now are, and
which we are now under; unless they can say as a church, that it is clearly
revealed unto them from God, that this government shall not stand, but come to
naught, which I judge none will adventure to say: Let us then, I beseech of us,
attend to the above mentioned profession and declaration, and see that if we
are to have no hand in such matters, it may be uniform, if not on one side,
neither on the other; for our declaration is that we have no hand either in the
setting up or p^lling ^own, neither by this way or that way, as a religious
society, there is no distinction made of what King or of what government, if
not as to one, so neither as to another: if not by encouraging, so neither by
discouraging.

As to the acknowledgement of submission and fidelity to the different
governments we have lived under, the aeras or time in which such
acknowledgments have been necessary, have been so distant, and so few, that
there has not been much said on that head in the society; indeed the assenting
practice of friends on these occasions, where no oath has been required, has
been so common and uncontended, that it has hitherto occasioned ve^^ little
observation, and now one would think needed little or nothing said on the
occasion: Nevertheless it is necessary to observe that George Fox, in a letter
to Oliver Cromwell, during his protectorship, an. 1655, tells him, many are
cast into prison, and made a prey upon, because they cannot take the oath of
abjuration, though they denied and that is ABJURED in it; and by that means,
many of the messengers and ministers of the Lord Jesus Christ are cast into
prison. -- Jour. p. 152. From which it appears clearly, that the refusal, even
of the ministers in society, at that time, and under that revolution, which was
built not only upon the opposition but hanishment and destruction of a King,
arose from no other serupie than merely because it was ^^ministered in the form
of an path, which otherwise, as appears by this letter, they would reacily have
taken, although it was not simply a declaration of fidelity, but an abjuration;
that is to say, a renouncing of all opposite powers, claims, and pretensions:
indeed the common and f^^quent answer of friend, when they were questioned or
persecuted for not taking the oaths of allegi^^ce and supremacy, was, we cannot
take an oath, if we could take any oath, we could take this -- Now if George
Fox and the friend of that day could have ^^fely and freely given a declaration
of fidelity to Oliver Cromwell, (...) w^ll as a renunciation of all other
temporal authority, what hinders that the some may be done (...) --

At the revolution which happened under King William, upon James's being
obliged to quit the kingdom, it appe^rs by Sewell's hiaory, p. 705, that the
parliament, in compliance with the people called Quakers, framed and enacted a
Test, which, though of a very str^ct and binding nature, W. Sewell speaks of with
great satisfaction, notwithstanding it was to be performed to a ^^^son, who
(though worthy of the trust reposed in him) yet, by her^di^ary right, had no
claim to the crown.

The Test is as follows: I A. B. do sincerely promise, and solemnly d^clare
before God and the would, that I will be true and faithful to King William and
Queen Mary; and I do solemnly profess and declare, that I do from my heart
abhor, detest and renounce, as impious and heretical, that damnable doctrine
and position, that Princes excommunicated, or deprived by the Pope, or any
authority of the Sea of Rome, may be deposed or murdered by their subjects, or
any other whatsoever. And I declare that no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate,
State or Pot^n^a^^, has, or ought to have any power, j^^isdiction,
superi^ri^^, preeminence or authority, eccles^^tical or spiritual, within this
realm. This was the Tes^ mad^ for and accepted by the society, although
expressly for ^ec^a^ion of the natural lawful ^eir, who, at the very same time,
maintained a court, and was encouraged and supported by one of the most
powerful states in Europe; a Prince who had ^^^dered the society many signal
services and favors, and who, it is remarked, had received more addresses from
the people he governed, than perhaps any other King in the same space of time;
particularly from the London friends, who, but about two years before this act
of abj^ration or renunciation, told him, It should be their ende^vour (with
God's help) ALWAYS to approve ourselves the King's faithful and loving
subjects, -- praying God to bless him, his royal family and people, with grace
and peace, and that after a long and prosperous reign here, he might receive a
better crown among the blessed. -- See the address in Sewell's hist. p. 683 --
Also the whole body of friends, in and from the yearly meeting of London, 1687,
in the conclusion of an address, tell him that while we live, it shall be our
endeavor (through God's grace) to demean ourselves, as in conscience to God, and
duty to the King, we are obliged, his peaceable, loving and faithful subjects.

Several other instances might be adduced on this occasion, but it is
apprehended that these may be sufficient to show, that notwithstanding
preceding obligations, attachments and declarations, the society have not
apprehended themselves implicitly and unexceptionably bound to any King or
Power, further than they governed according to the fundamental principles of
the empire; but that they were dissolved from their promises and declarations,
when the Prince manifestly and actually attempted to subvert the principles of
the constitution; otherwise how can we reconcile the solemn declaration and
promises made to King James, with the promises and declarations made to King
William, and those who succeeded.

Now seeing this has been the real and declared sentiment and conduct of
society on former occasions, would it not be hard for them to censure or
condemn those who apprehend themselves excusable for conforming or submitting
to the present powers, which, according to Scripture, must be allowed "to be of
God." This appears to some to be going a great length; but let us consider that
if we examine the conduct and characters of former Rulers and Governors,
particularly those concerning whom the Apostle makes that solemn
acknowledgment, we shall have reason to believe that they were not more likely
to be ordained of God, than the powers which are now set over us, seeing they
were superstitious and warlike Heathens immersed in gross idolatry: -- But it
may be objected the proceedings against King James, and the subsequent
conformity of friends and others to the succeeding powers, was chiefly upon a
religious account and principle, which he evidently attempted unlawfully to
infringe: This is granted; but are not all laws and obligations between men
conditional, and no longer binding than the terms, upon which they were made,
are kept and observed, agreeable to that well known maxim adopted by Wm. Penn
in his famous trial, -- Cessante ratione legis, cessa^ Lex. That is, The reason
of the law ceasing, the law itself cease: This must have been the principle
upon which they acted; and shall those be now censured for acting as to civil
affairs, what the society itself did as to religious concerns? Are not promises
and obligations made equally valid in both, and the breakers of the one
criminal (in such cases) as well as the other?

Without entering far into a political disquisition of the merits of the cause
now in agitation, I would just refer to consideration the glaring undeniable
and repeated strokes given to, and breaches made in the constitution under
which we have heretofore lived, by those who were bound and sworn to maintain
it inviolably, even at the risque of their eternal salvation, as may be
gathered from W. Penn's works, v. I, p. 685, etc. where, amongst other things,
he recites the sentence pronounced against the breakers of the articles in the
Great Charter, which is as follows: -- In the name of the Father, the Son, and
the Holy Ghost, Amen. Whereas our Sovereign Lord the King, to the honor of God
and of Holy Church, and for the common profit of the realm, has granted for
him, and his heirs for ever, these articles above written. Robert, Archbishop
of Canterbury, Primate of all England, admonished all his province, once, twice
and thrice, because that shortness will not suffer so much delay, as to give
knowledge to all the people of England of these presents in writing: We
therefore enjoin all persons of what estate soever they be, that they, and
every of them, as much as in them is, shall uphold and maintain these articles
granted by our Sovereign Lord the King, in all points: And all those that in
any point do resist or break, or in any manner hereafter procure, counsel, or
in any wise assent to resist or break those ordinances, or go about it, by word
or deed, openly or privily, by any manner of pretense or color; We the
aforesaid Archbishops, by our authority in this writing expressed, do
excommunicate and accurse, and from the body of our Lord Jesus Christ, and from
all the company of Heaven, and from all the sacraments of Holy Church do
sequester and exclude.

Upon which W. Penn observes, We may here see, that in the obscurest times of
popery, they were not without a sense of justice and a care of freedom, and
that even Papists, whom many think no friends to liberty and property, under
dreadful penalties, enjoin an inviolable observance of this Great Charter, by
which they are confirmed. And though I am no Roman Catholic, and as little
value their other curses pronounced upon religious dissenters, yet I declare
ingenuously I would not, for the world, incur this curse, as every man
DESERVEDLY DOES, that offers violence to the fundamental freedoms thereby
repeated and confirmed

Now if Kings, as well as others, deserved the penalties here mentioned, for a
breach of that charter, then the mere renunciation or refusal of their right to
a small spot of this earth, must certainly be considered in the mildest point
of view. Plutarch (in Pyrrh. p. 390) says that Kings, when any revolution
happens in their dominions, are apt to complain bitterly of their subjects
unfaithfulness and disloyalty; but they do them wrong, and forget that it was
themselves, who gave them the first lessons of their disloyalty, by
disregarding justice and fidelity, which they sacrificed to their own
particular interests.

The judicious Rollin, author of the ancient history, vol. 2, p. 288, after
treating of the cause of the declension in the Assyrian empire, says, Surely
the oaths by which Treaties were sealed and ratified, and the Deity brought in
not only as present but as guarantee of the conditions stipulated, (as was the
case between the Kings of Great Britain and their subjects) is a most sacred
and august ceremony, very proper for the subjecting of earthly Princes to the
Supreme Judge of Heaven and Earth. -- Now if Princes, by their unfaithfulness,
will teach their people not to stand in fear of the Supreme Being, how shall
they be able to secure respect and reverence to themselves? -- Nor is it all
astonishing, that the contempt which an impious Prince, who has no regard to
the sanctity of an oath, shows of God and religion, should shake the very
foundations of the firmest and best established empires, and sooner or later
occasion their utter destruction. And page 275, the same author says, that
Among other causes which brought the ruin of that empire, the four following
may be looked upon as the principal: Their excessive magnificence and luxury,
the abject subjection and slavery of the people, the bad education of their
Princes, and their want of faith in the execution of their Treaties, Oaths and
Engagements.

As to the renunciation of the King's heirs and successors, which seems to be a
material cause of objection with some, do we not find that when any person or
persons forfeit their estates to the King or country where they dwell, that
their heirs and successors are also deprived of the same; indeed nothing can be
claimed by an heir, as such, but in virtue or right of his ancestor or
progenitor; and if there be no right in them, or the right, if any, were
forfeit or lost, it is also lost to their heirs and successors; for though
right not forfeited or aliened, does not die, though it may sleep, yet right
once forfeited or properly lost, can never properly be regained: Beside the
King (as has been observed) has already put the people of this country,
without distinction, out of his protection, by express declaration; and as
protection and allegiance being reciprocal, is an established maxim in all
states, and is according to the nature and reason of things: Upon this
principle, by the King's own act, the allegiance of the people is dissolved --
The same may be said with regard to these States, if, by the will of
Providence, they should hereafter be subdued, and no longer capable of yielding
protection; which is according to the declaration of Congress, as well as to
the preamble of the act for securing the present government, which expressly
declares that protection and allegiance are reciprocal: This is the object and
ultimatum of the act, and is the natural, simple and true construction of the
same, being, without doubt, no other than what must be intended and expected at
the framing of the same, as is allowed by the judgment of those now in power,
nor can it indeed be otherways rightly understood.

Having said thus much as to declarations of fidelity and renunciation, it may
not be amiss to add something on the subject of the payment of Taxes.

For this purpose I shall produce an epistle of George Fox, taken from his book
of epistles, p. 137, where he advises, All friends every where, who are dead to
all carnal weapons, and have beaten them to pieces, stand in that which takes
away the occasion of wars, which saves men's lives, and destroys none, nor would
have others; -- and as for the Rulers that are to keep peace, for peace sake,
and for the advantage of truth, give them their tribute; but to bear and carry
weapons to fight with, the men of peace, (who live in that which takes away the
occasion of wars) they cannot act in such things, under the several powers, but
have paid their Tribute, which they may do still for peace sake, and not hold
back the earth, but go over it, and in so doing friends may better claim their
liberty.

W. Penn, in an address to the high court of parliament, anno 1671, vol. 1, p.
41, tells them, that "We both own and are ready to yield obedience to every
ordinance of man, relating to human affairs, and that for conscience sake; and
that IN ALL REVOLUTIONS, we have demeaned ourselves with much peace and
patience, disowning all contrary actings; and that we have lived most peaceably
under all the various governments that have been since our first appearance,"
-- which could not have been said with propriety, unless they had submitted to
the civil ordinances of men, as above declared.

Thomas Story, in his Journal, p. 269, speaking concerning a law made to
enforce the bearing of arms, which he disapproved, yet in the course of the
debate, which he had with the judge of a court, says, -- I began with the
example of Christ himself for the payment of a Tax, though applied by Caesar unto
the uses of war, and other exigences of his government; and was going to show
the difference between a law that directly and principally affects the person
in war, requiring personal service, and a law which only requires a general
tax, to be applied by Rulers as they see cause; -- for though we as a people
readily pay such taxes impartially assessed, yet as the kingdom of Christ is
not of this world, his servants will not fight, though they may and ought to
pay taxes, according to the example of Christ their head:" And what that
instance and example was, he relates p. 410, where he says, that "The Lord
Jesus Christ obeyed all the righteous laws both of Jews and Romans, so far as
his condition in this world subjected him to them: For though he was, and is
the peaceable Savior, and came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them,
yet in obedience to the laws of men, where not opposite to or interfering with
the laws of God, he wrought a miracle to pay a poll-tax, where in strictness
the law did not require it of him, nor of his disciples; for having Roman
privileges by virtue of an old league between the Jews and Romans, whereby they
were as children and not strangers, nevertheless to obviate all occasion of
offense, he submitted to it, though only an ordinance of men, and his apostles
likewise, as an example to his church through all ages then to come."

Though this example is generally well known, it may not be improper here to
recite it, which was thus: "And when they came to Capernaum, they that received
Tribute money, came to Peter, and said, does your master pay Tribute? He says
yes. And when he was come into the house, Jesus prevented him, saying, what
think thou, Simon? Of whom do the Kings of the earth take Custom or Tribute;
of their own children or of strangers? Peter says unto him, of strangers.
Jesus says unto him, then are the children free. Notwithstanding lest we
should offend them, go thou to the sea, and cast an hook, and take up the fish
that first comes up, and when thou have opened his mouth, thou shall find a
piece of money: That take, and give unto them for me and thee." Mat. 17th, v.
24, 25, 26, 27.

It is here remarkable that our Savior appears to have revolved in his mind
the whole nature of the case, and of the demand that was made; for upon Peter's
informing the Tax-gatherers, that his master paid Tribute, our Lord took
occasion to remind him by a gentle rep ehension, that he had gone further in
his reply than he was bound to do, or than was requisite from the nature of
their condition and circumstances; and immediately upon Peter's entering the
house, prevented his speaking by making use of a very strong and lively
argument to convince Peter, that he had been quite as quick as was necessary;
and that instead of being bound to pay the Tax, they were, according to the
custom of the country, exempt and free; yet notwithstanding this freedom and
privilege, or without the least objection to the use to which the money might
be applied, though the Romans were in general Heathen idolaters, and about that
time, as appears from history, actually engaged in war on several sides, and
the character of their Emperor Tiberius marked as debauched, unjust, cruel,
tyrannic, sanguinary and inhuman. -- Yet Christ our Lord, though clothed with
majesty and power above all the laws and powers of this world, and was thereby
able to have subdued all things unto himself, and made them subservient to his
will, was so tender of giving uneasiness to the powers that then bore rule,
that he ordered Peter, by producing an astonishing miracle, as we have read, to
comply and pay the Tax for this very striking reason, " let we should offend."

Thomas Story before mentioned, in his journal, page 413 says, That the
sufferings of the faithful in Christ, in all ages, have not arose from the
breach of any laws relating only to civil government, which they do readily
observe and conscientiously obey. -- And in the same page, adds, That as there
always is and must be, in the nature of things, a great and necessary charge
attending government, (a kingdom or state being but as one great house or
family, and no private or particular family c^n subsist without charge) for
that cause, all are to pay Tribute, as justly (or equally) imposed by the
legislature.

The said author, in a conference had with the Czar of Muscovy, says, Though
we are prohibited arms and fighting in person, as inconsistent (we think) with
the roles of the gospel of Jesus Christ; yet we can, and do, by his example,
readily and cheerfully pay unto every government, and in every form, where we
happen to be subjects, such sums and assessments as are required of us by the
respective laws under which we live. For when a general Tax was laid by the
Roman Czar, upon his extensive empire, and the time of payment came, the Lord
Jesus Christ (according to Scripture, Mat. 25, as recited by T. Story) wrought
a miracle to pay a Tax, where yet it was not strictly due; we, by so great an
example, do freely pay our Taxes to Caesar, who of right has the direction and
application of them, to the various ends of government, to peace or to war, as
it pleases him, or as need may, according to the constitution or laws of his
kingdom. Jour. p. 125.

W. Penn, vol. 2, p 33, says, That since we are as large contributors to the
government as our antagonists, we are entitled to as large protection from it.
-- Now this saying could not have been true, unless they paid all the public
Taxes, in common with other men, which no doubt their antagonists did; and by
analogous conclusion, if we, under the present dispensation, refuse to
contribute to the government under which we live, how can we expect to be
entitled to its protection, not only at present, but in case the Almighty
should see meet further and fully to establish it.

The said Author, in the same vol. p 788, in answer to some objections made
against the society, observes among other things, that it was said The Quakers
will not support civil government, etc. -- To which he answers, This is also
untrue upon experience; for what people, (says, he) under government, pay their
Taxes better than they do.

Samuel Bownas, in the account of his life, relates an epistolary argument he
had with one Ray, a Priest, who charged friends with an inconsistency in that,
while they actually paid and even collected Tax for the purposes of carrying on
a war against France with vigor: They yet refused to pay Tithes and
Militia-assessments. -- To which S. Bownas replies, We are still of the same
mind with R. Barclay, that wars and fightings are inconsistent with the gospel
principles, and still lie under sufferings with respect to the militia, being
careful to walk by the rule of Christ's doctrine; and yet do not think
ourselves inconsistent in actively complying with the law of Taxes, in
rendering unto Caesar the things that are Caesar's, and he may do therewith
what pleases him. -- Where it may be well to observe, that he there speaks of
Taxes as due unto Caesar; thereby no doubt meaning the power that for the
present bears rule, whether Emperor, Protector, King, or Congress.

From what has been observed, I think it may plainly appear that friends
heretofore have been so far from censuring or condemning their members on such
occastions, that they have rather encouraged the Payment of Taxes, (except
those in lieu of personal service) and advised a submission to the powers that
bore rule, under the various governments and revolutions in which they lived;
but if this be doubted, or any thing has been advanced that is not conformable
to the truth, it will be well for any one to point out the same; but if they
are consistent with reason, justice and truth, it will be well to be cautious
how any thing is acted opposite thereto; and whilst we declare that we cannot
have a hand in public revolutions, (as belonging unto God) by promoting and
encouraging, we may beware of taking an active part by opposing and
discouraging, whether as to Non-payment of Taxes, or other civil acts; and then
of consequence, none can, with propriety or consistency, be censured or
condemned concerning the same, especially in cases where no precedent for
censure or condemnation can be found in the history or proceedings of friends.

As it is queried by some, whether Friends paid their Taxes under the
government of Oliver Cromwell, although there is as great or greater reason to
conclude they did, than there is to suppose or prove that they did not; yet it
may be observed that the practice of friends, ever since the time of Geo. Fox,
has been to keep a particular account of the sufferings they sustained, and the
amount thereof, when it was on a conscientious or religious account, which have
been recorded, and transmitted down to as from time to time: Now as it never
yet has appeared in the accounts of friends sufferings, that any thing was
taken from them, on account of Taxes, even under Cromwell's government, the
committee of safety, or any of the then powers, which, if on a religious
account, they had refused to pay, would have amounted to a very considerable
sum, equal if not superior to any recorded by them, and would no doubt have
been taken particular notice of amongst their other sufferings; but as nothing
of this kind appears, it is therefore more than probable, and may be very
safely concluded, that they submitted in these respects to the several
governments, of what kind soever, under which they lived; and that they paid
their Taxes for the support of those governments, in common with other men,
according to their uniform practice as a people.

To the above Testimony of the dead, let us attend also to one of the living,
an anonymus author; though well known to be Timothy Davis; a worthy friend and
minister of the gospel; in a letter to some of his intimate friends on the
subject of paying Taxes to the present government, printed at Watertown about
two years ago, and sold by B. Edes, near the Bridge, has fully declared his
sentiments in the following manner:

"If it be safe to follow the example of our predecessors, why not comply. --
"What did they do?" -- I answer, they have from their very first appearance, as
a separate society, been subject to such who were invested with the authority
of the nation, without meddling with the various disputes that have arisen
since their time, concerning regal authority, and on whom it ought to devolve.
For a farther consideration hereof, you may remember, that Friends made their
appearance in the reign of King Charles the First; who by his too much aspiring
after sovereignty or despotism, alarmed the people; who, headed by Oliver
Cromwell, prevailed against the king, and took the reigns of government into
his own hands, and governed the kingdom himself, under the character of lord
protector. --

Here we do not find but that Friends, who had paid their allegiance and their
taxes to the king, continued to pay them to Oliver Cromwell, during the time he
held the reins of government: And what can be said of him, but that he headed
the populace, and was an opposer of kingly authority, not merely as such, but
as it became, through the hands of the king, subversive of the rights and
privileges of the people: What harder things can be said of those who are at
the head of the present opposition, that may render them less worthy of
receiving taxes to defray the charges of government. By all that I have been
able to discover, our society in England have ever made a point of being
careful and exact in paying all taxes that are legally assessed, except the
Priests rates.

After CROMWELL, king Charles the second came to the throne, and they paid
taxes to him also. After which, the crown continued in the family of Stewarts,
until the disturbances in king James the second's reign; who, by his favoring
popery, justly alarmed and incensed the people against him, that thinking
himself not safe among a justly provoked people, took shelter in France, which
made way for the Prince of Orange. Here we find the line of Stewarts
interrupted again, which devolved on them according to legal succession, and
the Prince, in conjunction with the people, opposing the then kingly government
in James; much the same as is laid to the charge of those who are at the head
of the present opposition; and Friends who were desirous to live in peace with
all men, paid taxes to him likewise; but say they -- "James favored popery and
endeavored to introduce popish government, and therefore forfeited his right
to the crown." Be it so -- but is favoring popery the only instance in which
the kings of England can forfeit their rights to reign over a free people?" --
I should think, that when the sword is put into the hands of a king, to be
directed for the punishment of evil doers, and praise to them that do well, we
might have some reason to expect him to act, in some measure, answerable to his
exalted station, and the trust the people have reposed in him, (askingly
authority originates from the people) -- But if to the contrary he should act
so far below his exalted station as to turn the point of ^^e sword at the
vitals of the people, it must be very alarming, especially when they have
conferred all the favors upon him, that were in their power, consistent with
the safety of the kingdom, he as fully forfeits his right to reign over them,
as in the case of popery.

Every considerate man, no doubt, would be glad of such a form of government as
might be unexceptionable; but we have no reason to expect it, in this imperfect
state of things: Yet we ought to use all just and reasonable means to rectify
all disorders in government, that are in the compass of our power, consistent
with the peaceable profession we make; and at the same time, to be as careful
not to complain without just cause, but be as content as we can, under such a
form of government, as it has pleased Divine Providence to cast our lots: And
it must be a very bad one indeed, that is not preferable to a state of anarchy.
In a word, let a man be under any form of government he can imagine to himself,
where he receives any advantage by it, and while he remains under it, he ought
to bear his proportion of the charge of it; for the thoughts of having our
lives and every thing that is near and dear to us, lie wholly at the mercy of
every invader, without any possibility of redress from any legal authority, I
should think would incline us to be willing to bear our just proportion of the
charge of such government as we are under, if it should not in every respect be
consistent with the most perfect system.

Our Savior has set this matter in an indisputable light to me, by the
conversation he had with Peter on that subject, at a time when those who
received tributemoney came to Peter querying with him, whether their Master
paid Tribute or not, Peter said he did. Christ willing, it appears, to take
advantage of this opportunity to leave an example to future ages of his
approbation of paying taxes, in a case similar to the present, in every thing
essential to the present argument, and as an additional weight to the holy
example, introduced a conversation with Peter, not waiting for him to introduce
it, or propound any questions on the subject, but prevented him, as if with
design to remove every hesitation, proceeded thus, What think thou Simon, of
whom do the kings of earth take custom or tribute, of their own children or of
strangers? Peter says unto him, of strangers. Jesus says unto him, Then are
the children free. As much as if he had said, "then have they no just demand on
us, we being children, may very well refuse paying of it. -- Nevertheless,
least we should offend them, it is best it should be paid, therefore I would
have thee do it," which he was enabled to do by an extraordinary miracle. I
cannot see how it is possible for any thing to be expressed more clearly to
remove every scruple. It is further observable, that there is not one word of
objection either from Christ or Peter, that part of this tribute money went to
defray military charges, (for it undoubtedly did) which we might expect to find
here if any where, seeing they were then upon the point of paying taxes.

If our rulers pursue measures for the defense and support of civil government,
that we think not strictly consistent with the rules of the gospel, even by
repelling force by force, to the shedding of human blood, it is out of our
power to help it; they proceed in the defense of government as it suits them
best; and if their manner does not suit us, that may not hinder, but we may
receive as much advantage from it as if they pursued such measures as we may
think we could point out. However, let them proceed in a hostile manner or not,
in the defense of our rights and privileges, it is certain, if we receive
advantage from civil government, we ought to bear our part of the charge of
maintaining of it, or else have no recourse to it in any case whatever; for it
would be very odd for us to seek protection against the encroachments or abuse
of our fellow creatures, from an authority that we refuse to help to support.
It may farther be observed, that the tribute that Peter paid by our Savior's
direction, was at a time when the Jews were under the Romans and Caesar at great
expense in supporting his legions for the defense of his empire: That as Christ
by the hand of Peter, paid a tax, He must consequently pay a proportionable
part of such charge.

In one place Christ says, Render to Caesar the things that are his; but in
the instance before us, he sets us an example of paying the requisition of
civil authority, not only when the soldiers received a part of it, but even
where not strictly due, rather than give offense; although it helped to uphold a
government under which they ( i. c. the Jews) were ^ed^ced by the dint of
sword; an example of meekness that ought to have place in every considerate
mind; that whilst we remain steady to our testimony against shedding human
blood, we may preserve ear consciences v^id of offense toward God and man, and
by no means, at any time, throw out any unbecoming reflections against those in
authority, nor mistake will for tender scruple of conscience in paying taxes,
or in any thing else, nor give civil authority any unnecessary trouble."

The matter now under consideration is serious. Many valuable members of
society, both public and private, at this time, in different places, do not
think themselves called or bound to join in the refusals and scruples which
some make, and many more who have not yet fully considered the matter, will
probably be of the same mind; if this be allowed, which I believe may safely be
done, will it not be exceeding hard that they should be denied the privileges
of that society, in whose ways they have been educated, and whose religious
principles they profess and hold, and to which they are closely attached? In
time past, though there was diversity of sentiments with regard to some
matters, yet we bore one with another without censure, in that spirit of
condescension and brotherly regard, which is peculiarly characteristic of the
followers of the lamb, and shall we now, in very similar cases, give up that
christian temper, cast one another off, and produce a sparation, when love and
union might be preserved as well as in former days, and for which there is
probably as much occasion as ever there was since the foundation of the
province.

If indeed we think it proper as a society, to maintain an opposition to the
present powers of government, in civil as well as religious respects, it may
preclude the use of the present observations, or at least render any service,
which might be expected from them, very improbable; but as that would appear to
be so contrary to the profession we have made, as well as inconsistent with our
established principles, that I presume it cannot really be the case: I have
therefore taken the freedom of laying these observations before us for our
serious consideration.

Never was there a people more deeply interested in the event of public
proceedings, than we now are. We are considerably numerous in various parts of
the continent, and particularly so in this state. We are not only interested
ourselves, but future generations may likewise be deeply affected by the part
we now act. I wish us therefore so to conduct, as that Jew nor Gentile, or the
church of Christ, either at this or any future time, may have just occasion of
offense.

Now, notwithstanding what has been offered, as there may be some who may
allege that their scruples and non compliance with the demands of the present
government, as to civil affairs, arises from a principle of conscience, which I
am sensible is a very delicate point to touch upon, yet as I have no other end
in view, but the good of society, as well as individuals, I would therefore beg
them to consider that conscience, according to the general idea annexed to it,
is a very sacred thing. Let us therefore be cautious how we apply is to common,
civil, and merely human affairs, lest we make the plea for it upon more
important occasions of too light ellimation: It is deeply expedient for us to
consider its nature, or what we are to understand thereby in religious affairs,
and what are the proper and sit objects and subjects thereof, which may be
necessary to claim and assert as independent of the power of the civil
magistrate: For this purpose let us observe Rob. Barclay's sentiment of the
matter, who, in the latter part of the 5th and 6th proposition, after speaking
of the light of Christ, and the light of man's natural conscience, says, To
the light of Christ then in the conscience, and not to man's natural
conscience, it is that we commend men: This, not that, it is which we preach up
and direct people to, as to a most certain guide unto eternal life. -- From
hence we may safely infer, that no objection arising from any thing short of
the light of Christ, can be sufficient to operate with the professors of Christ
our Lord, as a christian church, in their proceedings and determinations; so
that it essentially be^oves them, certainly to know, that it is altogether from
the illumination and power thereof, and not at all from the other, that they
are a^tuated: -- This appears to be absolutely and indispens^^^^ necessary for
the right and true support of a pure christian testimony, and which I heartily
with only be deeply and sufficiently att^^ded to by all the active members of
society; for in vain is it ^o endeavor to list up a standard to the nations,
unless in and by that power alone which is able to strengthen for the work;
without which pure and unmixed qualification it will prove too large and too
heavy; so that being beaten and driven by the winds, it will fall to the
ground, to the shame and confusion of those who attempted to erect and support
it.

The said author, in the 14th proposicion of the apology, treating of the power
of the civil magistrate, says, "The question is first, whether the civil
magistrate has power to force men in things religious, to do contrary to their
consciences, and if they will not, to punish them in their goods, liberties and
lives? This (says h^) we hold in the negative -- but secondly, -- as we would
have the magistrate to avoid this extreme of incroaching upon men's consciences;
so, on the other hand, we are far from joining with or strengthening such
libertines, as would stretch the liberty of their consciences to the prejudice
of their neighbors, or the ruin of human society. -- We understand therefore
by matters of conscience, such as immediately relate betwixt God and man, or
men and men, as to meet together to worship God in that way which they judge is
most acceptable unto him; and not to incroach upon or feek to force their
neighbors, otherwise than by reason, or such other means as Christ and his
apostles used, viz. preaching, and instructing such as will hear and receive
it; but not at all for men under the notion of conscience, to do any thing
contrary to the moral and perpetual statutes generally acknowledged by all
christians; in which case the magistrate may very lawfully use his authority."
-- The doctrine here preached is excellent both for those in, as well as those
under authority, as it may clearly appear from thence that "in things
religious," such as he there mentions, he apprehends the magistrate has no just
power, and that conscience may safely be pleaded; but observe the care and
caution with which he writes, and how positively he excludes from that sacred
claim any thing that is acted contrary to the moral and perpetual statutes
generally acknowledged by all christians. -- But it may be asked, what are
those moral and perpetual statutes? I at once take it for granted, that the
laying and paying of Taxes for the support of human and civil governments, and
acknowledging the authority of the same, are material parts; seeing they have
been very generally assented and submitted unto by christians of all sects and
denominations, at and from the personal appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ, in
all countries, and under all revolutions, down to this very day; and without
which "human society" could not be supported, but inevitably verge into
confusion and ruin: -- From which I would as concisely as possible, according
to the worthy author's manner, and nearly in his own words, lay down a
position, and then draw and prove what I apprehend to be an undeniable and
conclutive argument, as follows: -- Pos. That it is unlawful and improper to
counteract the moral and perpetual statutes generally acknowledged by
christians.

But the laying and paying of Taxes for the support of human and civil
governments, and acknowledging the authority of the same, are of those moral
and perpetual statutes, etc.

Therefore, it is unlawful and improper to counteract them.

If the cause of refusal and noncompliance were a matter of mere faith and
conscience toward God, the case would be exceedingly different, and there would
probably be no dissent; but as it appears to be only of civil concern, and
relates solely to human affairs, it is therefore apprehended not censurable by
the church, or properly cognizable thereby: And here I cannot but remark one
reason why I believe many among us are led into a mistake, and scruples arise
against paying of Taxes for want of a well informed judgment. It is a received
opinion among us, that all wars without distinction are sinful: Hence arises
this scruple against paying of Taxes for the support of war; but this is not
the genuine doctrine of our ancient friends, as will fully appear in the
following extract from the writings of Isaac Pennington, where speaking to what
he very properly styles "a weighty question concerning the magistrates
protection of the innocent." It is to be observed, that this enlightened author
views magistracy and defensive war, as the same thing, or, if I may use a
simile, as one building (though consisting of diverse parts) standing on the same
foundation. The question is as follows: Vol. 1st, p. 444. Whether the
magistrate, in righteousness and equity, is engaged to defend such, who (by the
peaceableness and love which God has wrought in their spirits, and by that law
of life, mercy, good will, and forgiveness, which God, by his own finger, has
written in their hearts) are taken off from fighting, and cannot use a weapon
destructive to any creature.

Answer: Magistracy was intended by God for the defense of the people; not only
of those who have ability, and can fight for them, but of such also who cannot,
or are forbidden by the love and law of God, written in their hearts so to do.
Thus women, children, sick persons, aged persons, and also priests in nations
(who have ability to fight, but are exempted by their function, which is not
equivalent to the exemption which God makes by the law of his spirit in the
heart) have the benefit of the law, and of the magistrates protection, without
fighting for the defense of either.

Now if magistracy be appointed by God, and it be the magistrates duty to
defend such, who are either not able, or cannot for conscience sake defend
themselves; is it possible any can be right who lay waste this ordinance, or
speak of such defense as sinful? If any man be appointed by God to defend my
life, is it possible that God can authorize me to call him a sinner for doing
his duty? or is it possible that I can, consistent with my duty, refuse him
that tribute which is absolutely necessary to enable him thus to defend me? But
had I much greater abilities to speak to this subject than I am conscious of,
no reasoning of mine could be of equal authority with the author above quoted.
Hear him therefore again, p. 448, where, treating on this peaceable principle
professed by the society, he says, I speak not this against any magistrates or
peoples defending themselves against foreign invasions, or making use of the
sword to suppress the violent and evildoers within their own borders; for this
the present state of things may and does require, and a great blessing will
attend the sword, when it is uprightly borne to that end, and its use will be
honorable; and while there is need of a sword, the Lord will not suffer that
government, or those governors, to want sitting instruments under them for the
management thereof, who wait on him in his fear to have the edge of it rightly
directed; but yet there is a better st^te which the Lord has alrealy brought
some into, and which nations are to expect and travel toward.

A candid and judicious author, to wit, Richard Finch, in a Treatise called
Second Thoughts concerning War, see page 95, after the above quotation, further
adds, It is evident that this great man holds forth plainly the divine economy
I have hinted at above. We see it was his judgment that men using the sword, in
this gospel day, may be God's instruments; and that herein, though not come to
the better state or summit of christian perfection, they may yet be good enough
to use or direct the sword to be used religiously in God's fear: When perhaps
many would think that religion in all, instead of using the sword, would if
regarded, lead directly from the use of it; but it seems this writer, though a
great advocate for our doctrine, thought otherwise; and I profess myself to be
his proselyte, though at present, it there are a few persons so pious, I should
almost as soon expect to find the philosophers stone, as an whole army of such
warriors: And I am persuaded a due regard to what may be urged upon his and my
principle, will require more benevolence and reflection of mind than can be
expected from unthinking bigotry. Again the same author, I admire the wisdom
and charity of this writer, in his prudent and generous concessions, though
some may think he thereby gives his cause away; but I believe them so essential
to the preservation of it, that what he writes is the very truth, and that
without such concessions it will be impossible to maintain our ground against a
keen adversary. All attempts to explain and defend our doctrine, which go upon
the literal sense of the precept, or consider defensive war as a thing in
itself wicked, how specious soever worked up or received by shallow judges,
instead of honoring and serving, have injured a good cause by multiplying many
if not needless absurdities and contradictions upon all such ill judged
attempts to state and clear the controversy. The same author, page 100: The
sword then which in tenderness of conscience thou can not draw, may in
another (whom for wise reasons it has not pleased God to lead in the manner he
has cone thee) become the cutward providential means to preserve thee and
others, as well as himself; upon which principle his arms may protect thy
person and property, and thy virtue and piety be a defense and blessing upon
his arms. Again, p. 118: King William the Third was a great warrior, and a
great blessing to England, as he interposed for its deliverance in a trying
time, when the liberty of the subject, under a specious solemnity of preserving
is, was secretly undermined; and the great duke of Marlborough, instead of
being convinced of our principle, was a glorious instrument in a warlike way.
From what has been laid down we may strongly conclude, that though a measure of
divine grace, according to scripture, is given to every man, yet there may be
an infinite diversity in degrees, and all things considered, it seems even
impossible that it should by the giver, in every age and person, be designed to
make precisely the same discoveries, and exalt to the same degrees of knowledge
and perfection.

The above doctrine corresponds with a matter of fact, wherein the apostle Paul
himself was nearly interested: It was at the time when upwards of forty of the
Jews had "bound themselves under a curse, saying that they would neither eat
nor drink till they had killed Paul." Acts 23d chap. from the 16th to the 24th
v. And when Paul's sister^ son heard of their lying in wait, he went and entered
into the castle, and told Paul. Then Paul called one of the centurious unto
him, and said, Bring this young man unto the chief captain: for he has a
certain thing to tell him. So he took him, and brought him to the chief
captain, and said, Paul the prisoner called me unto him, and prayed me to bring
this young man unto thee, who has something to say unto thee. Then the chief
captain took him by the hand, and went with him aside privately, and asked him,
What is that thou have to tell me? And he said, The Jews have agreed to desire
thee that thou would bring down Paul tomorrow into the council, as though
they would enquire somewhat of him more perfectly. But do not thou yield unto
them: for there lie in wait for him of them more than forty men, which have
bound themselves with an oath, that they will neither eat nor drink till they
have killed him: and now are they ready, looking for a promise from thee. So
the chief captain then let the young man depart, and charged him, See thou tell
no man that thou have showed these things to me. And he called unto him two
centurions, saying. Make ready two hundred soldiers to go to Cesarea, and
horsemen threescore and ten, and spearmen two hundred, at the third hour of the
night. And provide them beasts, that they may set Paul on, and bring him safe
unto Felix the governor." It is evident here that the apostle's life was
preserved through the interposition of the chief captain; and Paul hesitated
not to put himself under his protection, although he had been previously
assured of the Lord's particular providence and protection; the Lord having
stood by him, and said, "Be of good cheer, Paul, for as thou have restined of
me in Jerusalem, so must thou bear witness also at Rome."

Upon the whole, much more might be produced to show that it is perfectly
consistent with the doctrines of christianity, and the practice of friends to
acknowledge allegiance to the government that God, in the course of his
providence, has thought proper should take place, and to conscientiously pay
our proportion of Taxes for the support thereof; but it is hoped the above is
sufficient with every unprejudiced mind.

END OF THE ADDRESS.
ADVERTISEMENT
SINCE the foregoing sheets were prepared for the press, there having fallen
into my hands a Treatise entitled an essay concerning obedience to the supreme
powers, and the duty of subjects in all revolutions; it was first published in
the year 1694, and written to justify the revolution in England, in 1688,
against the doctrine of kings ruling by divine right, etc. and to show the
reciprocal duties of prince and people. The present revolution in America,
being a case in many respects similar, and the arguments advanced in the
aforesaid Treatise, appearing equally strong to justify obedience to the
present American government, the following extracts are subjoined by way of
appendix.

APPENDIX showing the Reasonableness of Obedience to the Supreme Powers, and
the Duty of Subjects in all Revolutions.
CHAP. I. Of Government, and the Origin of it.
Government, as it is usually defined, is The care of other peoples safety;
which consists in protecting and securing them from being destroyed or
oppressed by one another, as well as by strangers; and redressing the
grievances of those who are injured, and preventing the like for the future, by
punishing offenders. In order to which, the governor must have a right to
command the natural force of those who expect his protection, to enable him to
put his laws and decrees in execution. Though without power government cannot
consist, yet power and government are not one and the same thing; a man may be
in the power of another, and yet not be governed by him: It is necessary that
this power be made use of for protection, without which it is impossible to be
protected; so that protection and government are the same thing: for where
people are not protected, they are still in the state of nature, and without
government.

It is government alone which gives the form, life, and unity to a civil
society or body politic, by which the several members have their mutual
influence, sympathy, and connection: so that to be a member of a civil society,
and to be under government, is the same thing; and to be without government,
and to be in the state of nature, are reciprocal, and predicated of one
another. None can pretend to be, or claim any civil rights as a member of a
society, without owning the actual government which makes it a society: and
they who disown the government of the society they live in, 'do outlaw
themselves, and virtually declare they are no members of it; because they have
reduced themselves to a state of nature, by disowning there is among them a
common judge, who has a right to decide their controversies, and redress their
injuries, and in whose determinations they are obliged to acquiesce.

God, who is the author of every good thing, may be said in a more special
manner to be so of government, because it is absolutely necessary to the
well-being of mankind; and, by the law of nature, which obliges mankind to act
for their good, he has instituted it, and by his positive law since ratified
and confirmed it. Yet he did not constitute any particular form of government,
but left mankind at liberty to dispose of themselves, as (when they instituted
societies) they thought fit. God was so far from depriving any nation of this
liberty, that when he was pleased to take upon him the office of a king over
his own people the Jews, he first required their consent; and a contract
between God and the people (as is plain by the 19th of Exodus) was the
foundation of the Theocracy. And since it is not by God's positive law, that
one form of government, rather than another, is any where established, there
remains no other way by which any government can be erected, or that one man
can have a right to command over others, than by the law of nature, or by the
consent of the parties concerned. But there is no law of nature for any one
form of government, so as to make the rest unlawful, or that one person rather
than another should have the sovereign administration of affairs: Nor can there
be any one law of nature urged, why any particular person should have a power
over so many millions of different families, with no manner of relation or
dependence one upon another, and who are by nature equal, being of the same
rank, promiscuously born to the same advantages of nature, and to the use of
the same common faculties. And therefore it remains, that government must be
derived from consent.

CHAP. II. Of the Public Good.
I Suppose I need not spend many words to show the absolute necessity of
government, for the good and well-being of mankind; or that it was for no other
reason that men parted with their liberties (for what else could be an
equivalent?) than the mutual defense and security they receive by government,
which is the sole design and end of all laws, punishments and rewards. As this
reason was at first the sole motive for submitting to particular persons, so
it is the only reason still for continuing allegiance to them; and when this
reason ceases, natural liberty returns, and then men are obliged, for the sake
of their own safety and preservation, to pay allegiance where it is most for
their interest and advantage.

Obedience is due to government, and not to the person who governs, but on the
account and for the sake of it; otherwise people might be obliged to pay
allegiance to a king after he had resigned his regal office. It Is impossible
for a king to lose his government, and not lose the allegiance of his subjects,
because they are relatives; and according to the nature of all relatives, one
cannot subsist without the other.

Natural relations, as that between father and son, last as long as both
parties live; but those which are artificial (if I may so term 'em) as between
master and servant, king and subject, may be destroyed during their lives: and
when these relations cease, all obligations on both sides cease. The relation
between sovereign and subjects is destroyed, when the sovereign will no longer
protect his people, and so freely withdraws from the government; or when he is
deprived of the power of protecting 'em, and so is driven from his government:
which, as to the people, (for whose sake government was instituted) has the
same effect: and they equally lose that protection and defense for the sake of
which alone allegiance is paid, whether the sovereign will not or cannot any
longer govern 'em, and is forced to leave his government in the hands of
others, whereby those who were his subjects are as incapable of paying him
allegiance, as he is to protect 'em; and the same force which justifies his
leaving 'em, will equally justify their transferring their allegiance. And
since no society is able to subsist without having justice administered, and
enjoying those other blessings derived from government; either they must by
living without government become a prey to every one, or else there is a
necessity of preserving themselves by paying allegiance to the new government.

For none can have a right inconsistent with the public good, which is the
only fundamental law of all societies; contrary to which, no law (and
consequently no legal right, which is built upon law) can be valid; to which,
as to a center, each man's actions ought to tend, because the more universal
any good is, the more it ought to be embraced: And societies could not subsist,
but must necessarily fall into a state of war and confusion, if every man
should prefer the advantage of any particular person before the good of the
whole.

As every particular person's interest must yield to the general good of the
society, so must that of a particular society to the more universal good of all
societies; and no principles can be true, (however they may serve a particular
turn) which, if generally practiced, would be against the good of all
societies. But nothing can be more destructive and pernicious to all human
societies, than those principles which assert that allegiance must be only paid
to him who has a legal title; because it must oblige vast numbers in all
revolutions to be destroyed for the sake of a single person, rather than submit
to another who is in the same station, and by whose power they might be
governed and protected.

Can it be supposed, that when men submitted to government, (because 'twas
absolutely necessary for their preservation) they did it on such terms, as
should oblige 'em in so many cases to run into those inconveniences which they
desired to shun, rather than live peaceably under a government which actually
protects 'em?

Nothing can justify such principles, unless the misery and destruction, not
the preservation of human societies, be the supreme law; or that it is a sin to
act for the general good of a society, and a duty in the people to expose
themselves to certain destruction, rather than act for their own good in a
matter solely instituted for their benefit.

A man may be obliged to suffer rather than act against his duty; but that he
should be obliged to suffer rather than do his duty, in promoting the general
good of the nation, is a strange paradox. If it be a duty to act for the
public good, and the general interest of a society; and it the more universal
the good be, the more it ought to be sought for; then the means necessary to
this duty, or end, must be as necessary as the end itself, because the end
prescribes the means.

The paying obedience to those in possession, is a doctrine which tends so much
to the interest of human societies, and of all the particular members thereof,
that even they who oppose it, did they consult their own happiness, must wish
it were true: And what greater argument can there be of the truth of it, than
that it is so conducive to the good of of mankind?

And that common objection, or rather reflection, That it is interest makes
these tenets, which require obedience to the present government, so universally
embraced, (however uncharitably designed) is so far from destroying the credit
of 'em, that it is a demonstration of their truth; because they are for the good
of particulars, of which the public is made up.

CHAP. III. Of the Obligation of Human Laws.
ALL writers allow, That the leagues and contracts which princes make with one
another, do oblige them no longer than they are in possession of their
kingdoms; because the sole reasons of making these leagues were upon the power
each kingdom had to afford mutual assistance and benefit to one another. And if
this be a constant practice with kings, that their treaties oblige them no
longer than while each king has possession of his kingdom; why will they not
allow the same reason to hold for subjects, that they should be free from all
obligations to princes, when they no longer receive any protection from 'em?
Seeing that was the only ground and sole cause of their paying allegiance; and
in truth they cannot be any longer obliged, than the reason for obliging 'em
holds. For why should people be obliged, when there is no reason they should be
so? No laws can bind any longer, than the reason for enacting 'em holds good;
and when the sole reason which made 'em laws ceases, the laws themselves must
so too: much more must any particular law be null and void, when not only the
reason of keeping it ceases, but the keeping it thwarts the general intent of
all laws, which is the happiness of the societies, to which all laws are but
means: and there is no reason that the means should oblige, when the end for
whose sake the means were ordained cannot be obtained by those means, much less
when they become destructive of the sole end for which they were ordained.

If there were a law that ships should sail on such a side of the channel, and
the sole reason, whether expressed or not, were for avoiding the dangerous
sands on the other side; should the sands chance to be removed to the safe side
of the channel, the pilot would be so far from being bound because of that law,
to run his ship on the sands, that he would break the law if he kept to the
letter of it, and would observe it by going contrary to the letter. So again,
if a law, which required obedience to one particular person, should happen to
be destructive of the public good, and of fatal consequence to the community,
the letter of the law would oblige no more in one case than in the other; nay,
the reason of not observing the last would be stronger on account of the
disproportion of the number: But the true meaning and intent of the law would
in one case as well as the other, oblige people to act contrary to the letter
of it; and they would be as much bound to pay obedience, where it is for the
public good, as in the other case the ship would be to sail on the safe side
of the channel.

CHAP. IV. Objections answered.
Object. THOUGH the good of the society be supposed the grand ultimate law, yet
those principles, which require obedience to the possessor, cannot be true,
because they are against the peace and happiness of nations, by encouraging
rebellion against all princes, in obliging people to pay the same allegiance,
'ven to those who unjustly depose' em.

Answ. These principles are so far from being destructive to the peace and
quiet of nations, or encouraging rebellion against their governors, that they
require obedience to all in possession, upon pain of damnation; but if neither
the fear of eternal punishment in the next life, nor the severest which can be
inflicted upon 'em in this, can secure people from rebelling, I must confess, I
know nothing that can. It is the duty of all subjects to do their utmost to
defend the government; that is only a just return, and what is due for its
protecting and defending 'em: But if by the chance of war, or any other way, it
should lose the power of protecting 'em, they are not obliged to have their
throats cut, rather than pay allegiance to that government, by whose savor and
protection they subsist, and enjoy what they have. And that prince is very
unreasonable, and acts against the rules of humanity as well as charity, who
when able no longer to protect the people, would rather have 'em destroyed,
than own that government which can.

Nothing can justify such an inhuman and barbarous opinion, unless it can be
proved that men entered into societies barely for the sake and interest of a
single person; and that if his pleasure or profit require it, millions of lives
must be indispensably sacrificed. This is to place men in a worse condition
than beasts, if they are in conscience obliged to lose their lives to gratify
the unlimited pride, ambition, revenge, o^ interest of a single person.

It is strange that any Englishmen, who are the freest nation in the world,
should think they are no other than the King's property: Though it is but
reasonable that men who design to bring the most insupportable slavery on
themselves, should be qualified for it by notions and principles so much below
the dignity of human nature. While the contrary principles are so far from
being any ways prejudicial to mankind; that it is they alone which in all
revolutions can secure human societies, and make governments easy and safe both
to kings and subjects, by putting an end to those otherwise endless disputes of
titles. And princes may without fears or jealousies mind the public good,
because it secures them who are in possession against all pretenses.

The most that can be objected is, That a prince who has once lost his
dominions, may by these principles chance to lose the hopes of ever recovering
'em again.

A prince unjustly expelled, ought to acquiesce, if he has no way of recovering
his kingdom but by disturbing the peace and quiet of a nation; he ought not to
make use of such unlawful means for the recovery of his kingdom: and certainly
others can have no reason to act against the good of the community for his
interest, when he himself is obliged not to act.

The interest of a prince is only more sacred than another's, when that of the
public is involved in it; but when that is no longer concerned in his actions,
he ceases to be the public person, and is upon equal terms with other private
men, and ought as well as any other to acquiesce, rather than disturb the quiet
of a nation. And there is then the same reason for not endeavoring to restore
him, as there was at first for not turning him out.

All the ill consequences which can happen in this case are, That the less
hopes princes have of being restored by such unlawful means, the more careful
(it is hoped) they will be in governing the commonwealth, and more afraid of
arbitrary and illegal practices.

Object. If all persons, how unjustly soever they get a crown, have the same
right to the obedience of the people, to wit their consent, then there can be
no such thing as an usurper.

Answ. He who without any just cause destroys the right which any prince has to
the allegiance of his subjects, by making him incapable to protect 'em, and
protects 'em himself, may be called an usurper: Though the people by the former
prince's losing his power to protect 'em, are reduced to the state of nature,
and by consequence free from any allegiance; and may lawfully, or rather are
obliged (every one else being out of a capacity to protect 'em) to consent to
be governed by him who has the power to protect 'em; who being so chosen, has
the only right a king can have, the consent of the people, who are as much
obliged to obey him, as they are any king whatever. The former king is so far
then from being their legal king, that he is none at all, nor has any manner of
right to their allegiance. It Is true, the usurper having done him anjury, ought
to make him satisfaction, and (if he ^^n without any damage to the public) to
place him in that condition he was in before he made him incapable to protect
the people; who then, for the sake of protection which they receive from him,
are obliged to pay him obedience. The having a right to be restored by the
usurper, is the only right a prince unjustly deprived of his regal office can
pretend to. And when I speak of his legal right, I mean only this by it: Among
the Jews, though none could have a legal right except one of their own nation,
because they were obliged by God himself to choose a king from among their
brethren, and God afterward entailed the crown on the posterity of David; yet
when these were disabled to protect the people by their being in the power of
strangers, 'twas so far from being a crime, that 'twas their duty
(notwithstanding the divine legal right any of their brethren could pretend to)
to pay allegiance to 'em, though for the most part they were usurpers, having no
just cause to conquer 'em.

CHAP. V. Of Possession.
ALL writers, I think, allow, that after a possession of a long continuance
(though they extremely differ how much time is necessary) a right accrues to the
possessor, though there are some of the right line still in being. If it be
unjust to pay the first possessor obedience, I don't see how a long possession
can alter the case. A continuance in an injustice may make the injustice
greater, but not alter the nature of things, and make the greatest wrong to be
right: Though all things are done in time, yet time itself operates nothing.

This mistake, like many others, is occasioned by the parallel men draw between
private persons (who are tied up by laws enacted by the supreme powers) and the
supreme powers themselves. By the laws of most nations, if private men neglect
to make a legal demand of their rights in a certain time appointed they lose
'em, and a right accures to the possessor; but this depends on a law enacted by
the supreme powers, who have a right to dispose of private estates as they
judge best for the public good, whose laws can oblige only their own subjects.
But what authority have the subjects, or the possessor, to dispose of the legal
prince's rights? Besides, it might justly be imputed to a private man's own
neglect, if, when the law is open, he does not recover his right: It may well
be presumed he has relinquished it. But that cannot be said of a prince who has
no court of justice to appeal to, or any other likely way to recover his right;
yet by bearing the arms and title, and by other ways, still asserts his right.

How numerous are the instances of princes possessed of territories belonging
to others, and who have been so for a great many years? Yet none dare affirm,
the subjects who pay'em allegiance, are, and have been all along traitors. To
give but one instance among hundreds: The kings of England have a right to the
kingdom of France, and have constantly claimed it by causing themselves to be
styled kings of France, and by bearing the arms of that crown; yet none will
condemn the French as traitors, who have all along paid allegiance to the
French kings. But if the kings of England by tract of time lost their right to
the obedience of the French. and before that time 'twas treason for those of
that nation to pay allegiance to the French kings, I should be glad to know
what month, or year, it ceased to be treason; for it is a thing of mighty
consequence to know how long it is treason to obey a king in pessession, and
when it becomes treason not to obey him. In short, if a king can have a right
to a country, and it be no crime in those of that country not to pay him
allegiance, it demonstrates that allegiance is not annexed to the title, but is
due to the person who protects 'em.

Object. Though time does not give a right, yet the acts, or the no acts, that
is, the omission of some, may in time amount to a resignation of the right of
the legal prince to the usurpers.

Answ. I grant a man's mind may be expressed by acts as well as words; yet
'twou'd be very hard to condemn all those of treason who have paid allegiance
to the possessors, before they had sufficient grounds to believe, the legal
prince or his heirs had by their acts (if such acts could destroy the right of
the next of kin) resigned their and their legal successors right to the
usurper. In how few cases is there reason for such presumption? If till then
all people should be obliged to be destroyed rather than pay allegiance, what a
destruction would it make in the world: Would it not in most cases expose, at
least the good and conscientious, to certain ruin? And others could not
preserve themselves without a sin, the reward of which is damnation.

Long possession is not at all necessary to justify the peoples obedience; for
that very moment the people receive protection and defense from the new powers,
they ought to pay 'em the same allegiance as if they had been in possession of
the government a thousand years. The less time a nation has been settled, the
more need it has of rest and peace, and the more dangerous would any violent
revolution be.

CHAP. VI. Of Protection.
IF any would not be thought enemies to the society, but part of it, ought they
not to act equally with the rest for the peace and quiet of it, and submit to
the head, that rules and governs it? How can they pretend to be members of the
society, and consequently claim any civil rights by being so, without owning
the actual government which makes 'em so? Do they not, by disowning it,
renounce the benefit of the laws (which only can be put in execution by the
government) and outlaw themselves? How can they have any more right to the
protection of the government, if they out law themselves, than if the
government, by putting 'em out of its protection, had out-lawed 'em? So that
it is wholly by the favor of the government (for they have no true pretense to
'em) that they enjoy any legal rights. If they think they should be severely
dealt with, did not the government protect 'em, why do they not what is
necessary to enable the government to protect 'em? If they will the
consequence, the protection of the government, ought they not to will the
antecedent, all that is necessary to it? And if it be lawful to desire and to
receive the advantages which flow from government (which I suppose no Jacobite
will be so hardy as to deny) why must not the means necessary to obtain these
advantages, be so too?

How can they who are willing to be protected by any person, be unwilling
(except they desire contradictions) that he should have a power to govern 'em,
since without such a power he cannot protect 'em? And they who are willing to
receive a universal protection, are presumed to be willing to pay all obedience
necessary for that end; which is as universal as the protection they expect.
It Is evident, that he who is willing to receive a universal protection from a
government, is willing that the government should have a coercive power over
all others, to restrain 'em from injuring him; and that it should have
sufficient authority to do justice, and oblige all to pay obedience to the
laws, when put in execution for his sake, because in it wholly consists his
protection: And he who is for the government's having power over all other
people on his account, ought to be willing it should have the same over him,
for the sake of others, except he would be the only man in the nation without
government; and is unwilling to do that himself, which he would have all others
(whatever their principles are) to do.

If the nonjurors desire to be protected, and do actually receive the
protection of the government (though at the same time they pretend it is against
their consciences) it is manifest they own the government, and by their actions
consent to submit to it: And what force can a protestation have against their
own acts?

Do not all who go into any foreign princes dominions, during their stay, by
receiving the protection of the government, own themselves subject to it
(except ambassadors, over whom sovereigns have agreed to suspend the exercise
of their right) and are they not obliged equally with the natives, to pay
allegiance; and alike guilty of treason, and so tried, if they attempt any
thing against it? And upon this head, all private attempts upon a prince in his
own country, have been abhorred by all nations: and they who designed any thing
of this nature, have not been treated as just enemies, though in time of war;
because it is presumed, they enter as subjects into the dominions of that prince
who protects 'em.

By examining what it is which gives government a right to the obedience of men
who are by nature free, twill the better appear what right the present
government has to the allegiance of those it protects.

The reason usually given, why people are obliged to obey any particular
government, is (no prince being ridiculous enough to pretend a right, as the
firstborn in a direct line from Adam or Noah) because 'twas the intent of
those who first formed the society, that such person, and their successors (if
they made the government hereditary) should have a right to govern the nation
for ever. But how could they, whose authority with their being ceased so long
since, oblige the consciences of those who were not then in being? Or how could
any acts or compacts of their ancestors take away the natural liberty of those
who were born so many years after, and who have the same right to freedom as
they had? Or how could their compacts oblige those who are not descended from
'em, but come from other countries into the society; and make it a sin in them
not to obey the present governors of any society, on whose authority alone and
not on the founders of the society, depends the validity of ali former laws,
which can only bind, because it is the will of the present powers they should?
otherwise no laws could be repealed if their very being did not depend upon the
pleasure of the present supreme powers, who design they shall oblige, till they
declare the contrary.

Every person, though born free, yet he is for the sake of his own safety obliged
to part with his liberty, and put himself under the protection of government.
Nor can he be secure in what he enjoys any other way. Nor can he have a right
in a country (which is already possessed) to any thing, but by owning the
government of that country. And by pretending to the privileges the rest of the
society enjoy, he has owned himself a member of the society, and a subject of
the government of it. And this is the only way that any (except by verbal
promises) consent to become subject to a government.

Whatever society people chance to be members of, whether their native or any
other, they are during their stay equally obliged, for the sake of the
protection they receive, to pay allegiance to the governors of that society.
It Is not material, whether they enjoy properties for their lives, years, weeks,
or days; the greatest part of the natives have no more properties, or enjoy no
greater advantages by the government than foreigners, yet they are obliged to
pay the same allegiance the rest of the society do.

Though they who reside in a foreign society are equally subject with the natives
to the laws of it, and by opposing the government would be equally guilty of
treason; yet if during their stay, a^^ alteration happens in the government
contrary to the laws, they never scruple to pay allegiance to him who gets
possession of the government, though his title be ever so illegal I see no reason
why they should not do the same in their first society, since whatever society
they are in during their stay, ^^^y are equally obliged to ob^y the laws of it.

Are not these reasons as strong for paying allegiance to the present
government? Can any m^^ enjoy the privileges of the society, without being a
member of it? Or can any one be a member of a society, without owning the
power, or paying allegiance to it? Or is there any other head that rules and
governs the members, than the present powers? Is it not by their authority,
that the members of the society receive a universal protection, as to their
lives, liberties and estates; under whose government they are or else under
none, but in the it (...) of nature? And there is no ^eason or law, to oblige
people to reman in a state so inconsitent with their happiness. And 'twoud be
injustice for any to remain in that state, because they would be their own
judges in all the disputes they had with others, who were willing to refer
their differences to a standing impartial judge. After this, what pretense can
any member of the society have of refusing to pay their allegiance to a power,
whom they have all along by their actions owned, and by whom they have been
secured from groaning under the wor't of slaveries, which had been to them the
more intolerable, because of the great liberty and freedom they before enjoyed?
So that all the reasons which can well be imagined to oblige ^ecple firmly and
entirely ^o any human authority, do conspite to tie'em up in (...) strongest
bo^ds of allegiance an^ fidelity to the present government.

CHAP. VII. Of Oaths of Fidelity.
PERHAPS 'twill be faid, Th^' upon supposition there is no reason why people
should pay allegiance any longer than they are protected, yet if they have
otherwise tied themselves by their oaths, they are in conscience obliged by
those oaths. But I answer:

Such oaths, if ever they were imposed, would be so far from binding, that they
would be ^ull upon the account of the sinfulnes; of 'em, as being directly
against the good of human society. In all promises and oaths concerning things
not moral, this tacit condition is always included, of their not being, or upon
alteration of the circumstances becoming contrary to the public good: and this
is without all doubt to be observed about government, because 'twas instituted
for no other reason than the public good.

Oaths do not alter the nature of allegiance, or make it due where it was not
before; or any ways extend it, but only add a new tie to pay that allegiance
which is due on the account of protection. He who lives under a government,
though he has not sworn to it, owes it the same allegiance as he who has; and if
he should deny his allegiance to it, would be equally guilty of treason, though
not of perjury. It Is evident by the universal practice of mankind, that no
subjects ever thought themselves obliged by their oaths of fidelity, which
governments have constantly imposed on 'em, when they ceased to be protected by
'em. The legislative power, especially where the people have a share in it, are
presumed to recede as little as possible from natural equity, and to design, by
imposing such oaths, the good and preservation of the society; whose interest
it is, that they who have the public administration of affairs should not be
disturbed. But it is not at all material whether this or that man, provided they
are well managed, has the direction of 'em: Nor can it without the greatest
absurdity be supposed, that such numbers of men as societies are composed of,
who are by nature equal, should oblige themselves by the most solemn ues to
become most miserable, by living without protection; nay, to lose even their
lives rather than own the government which can protect 'em, for no other reason
than barely an extraordinary fondness to one of their number, to give him not
the necessaries or real conveniences of life, but only an office (for
government is no other) which is but an imaginary happiness: For it government
were a real happiness to the persons who possess it, several upon their parting
with it would not have found themselves happier than before. That people should
be true to those who have the administration of civil affairs, is all which
oaths of fidelity require; and it is evident by the words of it, that the late
oath of allegiance required no more; and to extend it further than the power in
possession, is not reconcilable with the reason, end, and design of paying
obedience, which is the peace and happiness of the society, and which can never
be maintained, if people may, for the take of a single person, disturb 'em who
have the administration of their common affairs: and 'twoud require
impossibilities, because a private person is incapable of paying allegiance to
a king when out of possession of the government.

CHAP. VIII. Of Proofs of Scripture concerning Obedience to those who actually
administer Government.
CHRIST in the directions he gave, Mat. 23, to his disciples, and to the
multitude, about their behavior to the Scribes and Pharisees, requires
obedience to be paid 'em only on the account of possession; saying, The Scribes
and Pharisees sit in Moses's (...), all therefore whatsoever they bid you
observe, that observe and do. And he gives no other reason for this great
obedience in doing and observing whatever they command, than because they sat
in Moses's sear; that is, were possessed of Moses's authority, who in the
Theocracy was the chief magistrate. Not that the Scribes and Pharisees had so
great a power as Moses; but as far as they did enjoy his seat, throne and
authority, so far they were to be obeyed: They were then the greatest, as well
as chiefest part of the grand Sanhedrin, which in all causes where the Romans
had left the Jews to their liberty, had the supreme power both in civil and
ecclesiastical matters. (There were not in the Jewish republic two distinct
independent powers, one for civil, another for ecclesiastical causes) If the
people were then obliged to pay so great obedience, barely on account of
possession, why may not the same direction serve for a standing rule to the
multitude in all times? And not only to the inferiors, but even to the supreme
magistrate himself, Christ requires obedience on no other account than that of
possession. If Caesar be in possession of the empire, as it did appear by his
coining of money, and stamping his image upon it, that being a mark of
sovereignty and empire, but not of any legal title to it; then Caesar is to have
tribute and all other parts of allegiance paid him.

And St. Paul in express terms requires obcoience to the powers which be, and
declares there is no power but what is from God. The Jews being influenced by
the Priests and Pharisees, and obliged by their law to place no stranger over
'em, scrupled to pay obedience to the Roman emperors, because they were
strangers, and not capable of a legal right; not considering that the law
obliged 'em only when it was in their own choice, and not when they were under
the power of the Romans, to whom for the sake of pro^^ction they were obliged
to pay obedience. St. Paul therefore, to take away these scruples, assures 'em
all powers are from God: But had he only meant legal powers, since only Jews
were capable of being such, he had confirmed 'em in their error. But the reason
why he obliges men to submit, will demonstrate that all actual rulers are
meant, and only they, because they alone are a terror to evil works, and a
praise to the good; none but the actual ruler is a minister of God, a revenger
to execute wrath upon him who does evil, or a minister of God for good. What
can more fully demonstrate that the reason of obedience is for the benefits men
receive by government? And what makes the crime of resisting 'em so great, is,
that men oppose those by whom they receive so many advantages: It is, because
they have the power of the sword (which includes all manner of punishment) by
which they secure and protect their subjects from all manner of injury and
violence from ill men. And being ministers of God for good, includes all the
good they receive both to their persons and properties: for which cause you pay
tribute also, for they are God's ministers, continually attending upon this
very thing. It Is their dispensing these advantages to mankind, that makes 'em
God's ministers and God's ordinance; the scripture affirming those things which
are necessary for the good of mankind to come from God, as plowing and sowing,
Isa. 28, 23 -- 29. If it once be known, as the discovery cannot be difficult,
who it is that bears the sword, who administers justice, who rewards, and who
punishes; and the apostle's word may be taken, subjection is not only due to
him for wrath, but for consciencesake. And the same apostle exhorts, That
prayers be made for kings, and all in authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. These reasons can only concern
those who have actual power and authority, by whose protection they who live
under 'em may lead such lives; and if it be our duty to pray that we may lead
such lives, it must be our duty to enable them who have authority over us, to
secure us in the enjoyment of a peaceable and quiet life.

And St. Peter for the same reason requires people to submit to the supreme
magistrate, whom he calls the ordinance of man; so that it is plain, that God by
approving this human ordinance, approves it as human, and requires obedience to
it for the same reasons that men a^ first inftituted it. And it is the power
governors have to do good, which makes 'em to be not only God's ordinance, and
God's ministers, but even Gods: for since they are not Gods by nature (though by
some peoples way of arguing one would suppose they thought 'em such, or at
least beings in themselves superior to to the rest of mankind) it must be for
the protection they afford that they are termed so; who when they no longer
protect the people, cease to be a human ordinance, and then too they cease to
be a divine one. And the same reason which obliges people to submit to 'em,
when they act for the good of the society, as much obliges people to oppose
'em, if they design to ruin and destroy 'em. It cannot well be supposed, that
God, who has obliged mankind to preserve their lives, and consequently to use
the means necessary for that end, should require people to suffer themselves to
be destroyed, only to gratify the lust or barbarity of a single person, or a
few, who are by nature but their equals, and only above 'em by being in an
office which they erected only for their convenience.

Object. St. Paul makes no manner of exception, but declares, Whoever resists
shall receive damnation.

Answ. As the apostle requires obedience to parents in all things; and to
masters, husbands, pastors, without mentioning any exceptions: so here he
declares (which was sufficient for his purpose) that all people ought to obey
the supreme powers, without mentioning this exception: which necessarily flows
from the nature, end, and design of government, and even from those reasons he
gives for obedience.

It cannot be presumed that Christ authorized his apostles to make slaves of
mankind, by giving the emperors a new power, who before by no law of God or
nature had such a power over peoples lives. All the power the Roman government
had, was immediately from the people; who, as it is plain in history, by their
mutual consent erected that commonwealth: and what power the emperors had, was
given 'em too by the people, who by the Lex Regia conferred it upon 'em.

All that can be deduced from scripture is, That obedience is due to those who
protect the people; and nothing can be plainer than those Texts which require
it: By which plain and ignorant people may know their duty as well as the
learned and wise. 'Twou'd have been inconsistent with the goodness of God to
require obedience on the greatest penalties, and yet leave it so uncertain, as
the Jacobitish principles would render it, to whom obedience is to be paid.
What can be more uncertain than generally titles are? And are there not
innumerable intricate difficulties, about long possession, presumed consent, a
just cause for a total conquest? etc. If about these points the learned so
extremely differ, as any one may perceive who examines what authors have writ
upon it, who give good reasons for destroying one another's hypothesis, but
none for confirming their own, which are not liable to equal exceptions; What
means or possibility have almost all mankind, the unlearned and common people,
of knowing their duty?

The primitive christians all along complied with the revolutions of the
empire; and whoever was in possession of it, without examining his title, they
paid him allegiance, and thought him invested with God's authority: And as the
Goths and Vandals, and other barbarous nations on the one hand, and the
Saracens, Turks and Persians on the other, without any just cause, overturned
the Roman empire; the christians were so far from disputing their titles, or
refusing to transfer their allegiance to 'em, that they never scrupled to own
their government. If these Pharisaical notions had been then believed or
practiced, those nations would have extirpated all the professors of
christianity as enemies to government and order, instead of being converted to
their religion, as most of the northern nations were. Nor do the christians who
now live under the dominions of the infidels vary from this primitive practice,
or scruple to transfer their allegiance to any who gets possession of the
sacred office of governing, though the legal prince be still alive. Did not the
Jews, though commanded by a divine law to take a king from among their brethren,
and God himself had entailed the crown on the posterity of David, practice the
same as they fell under the power of the four great empires? And did they not
submit to Alexander, without endeavoring to oppose him, when Darius, to whom
they had sworn obedience, could no longer protect 'em?

I shall add only one instance more, and that shall be of David, who thought it
not unlawful, when Saul designed to take away his life, to transser his
allegiance, and fly to Achish, king of Gath, for protection, who made him
keeper of his head, or captain of his guard: and whilst he was under his
protection, he thought it his duty to pay all manner of allegiance to him; and
(though contrary to his interest, and the hopes he had of being king after Readiness
death) even to join with the uncircumsised to invade his own country, and fight
against the Lord's anointed, his late king and father-in-law; and, as appears
by 1 Samuel 29, 8, he was much g^iev'd, and humbly expostulates with the king for
not permitting him to attend him in the battle: But what have I done? or what
have thou found in thy servant, so long as I have been with thee until this
day, that I may not go and fight against the enemies of my Lord the King? Saul
by designing to destroy David, had freed him from the allegiance he owed him:
for he who designs to destroy a person, cannot have a mind to govern that
person; and if he will not govern him, he is free from his government, and at
liberty to pay his allegiance where he thinks best. And if David expected from
the king of Gath a universal protection from all his enemies, he ought to pay
the king a universal obedience.

If a private person be freed from the government which designs to destroy him,
the argument will hold as strong in behalf of a nation designed to be
destroyed; and whoever attempts it, not only renounces the government of the
nation, but puts himself in a state of war, and declares he is an utter enemy
to 'em, who are as much obliged to resist him, as they are any other enemy.

Upon this head the Jews, in the time of the Maccabees, took up a^ms against
their legal king Antiochus (whom they all along acknowledged as such, and who
was successor to Alexander, who had the same right to their obedience as the
Persians or Assyrians had) who was resolved to extirpate'em if they would not
turn idolaters. And'tis manifest that God, by the miraculous assistance he
gave'em (for what they did must be imp^ted to more than human force) did
approve of their design. And the same reasons will justify any nation for
opposing that prince who endeavors, upon a religious or any other account, to
destroy'em.

By what has been said I hope'tis plain, that by the positive law of God, by
the law of right reason, by the law of nations, the universal practice of
mankind, and the express law of the land, obedience is due to that power who
actually governs the people: which right I think has been sufficiently
demonstrated by those who have writ on that subject, at least to lawyers, and
men who are competent judges in such points; of which a great many can judge no
better, than of mathematical demonstrations, which are nevertheless
demonstrations. But none can be mistaken who they are that actually govern the
nation; and if obedience for that reason be due to 'em, other inquiries are
needless.

To conclude, I hope I have demonstrated, That it is the duty of all people to
bear true faith and allegiance to the present government, by reasons and
arguments which are as firm as government itself, and which will endure as long
as that, because built upon the same foundation, The good of societies; and
which may serve for directions in all changes and revolutions, as well as for
the justification of that happy one, which (by the blessing of God on his
Majesty King William's heroic endeavors) preserves us in the enjoyment of all
our happiness both spiritual and temporal.

THE END.
Lately published, and now selling at BELL's BOOK-STORE, next Door to ST.
PAUL's Church, in Third-street, Philadelphia, PHILOSOPHICAL, and POLITICAL
STRICTURES, on the good and bad EFFECTS of NATIONAL PRIDE: Translated from the
German of Mr. ZIMMERMAN, Physician in Ordinary to his Britannic Majesty at
Hanover.
EXTRACT from the Preface by the English TRANSLATOR.
THIS production bears so much the stamp of truth, freedom and virtue, that it
is surprising a work of such character has not yet been translated into
English, and laid before a nation never wanting to countenance merit, wherever
met with. The author is a SWISS, and writes with the freedom becoming a
virtuous man, born in a country from whence liberty, virtue, truth and
simplicity, have not yet been expelled by oppression, vice, battery, and
luxury. The applause of his own country and of Germany has rendered four large
impressions necessary; to the last of which the author made important
additions. The French, a people not easily pleased in works of this nature,
have read this performance, translated into their language, with distinguished
approbation; and some of their capital writers have bestowed their encomiums
upon it.

Impartial judges will, on perusal of this work, find it to abound with
sterling sense and judicious sentiments; and although it may possibly appear to
disadvantage in the translation, there will however still remain some of the
masterly strokes of our author, however weakened through the transfusion of his
original ideas into English expressions.

But what gives us the best grounded hopes of the success of this publication
is derived from our author's aim to combat prejudice, and to promote the cause
of liberty and virtue, which have always found the most numerous and most
zealous friends in the thinking part of this great and wealthy nation.

A few COPIES of the following much-esteemed modern Work, may be had at BELL's
Book-STORE, next Door to ST. PAUL's Church, in Third-street, Philadelphia, An
ESSAY ON CRIMES AND PUNISHMENTS: WRITTEN by the MARQUIS BECCARIA, of MILAN.
With a COMMENTARY, Attributed to Monsieur De VOLTAIRE.
EXTRACT from the PREFACE of the TRANSLATOR.
PENAL laws, so considerable a part of every system of legislation, and of so
great importance to the happiness, peace and security of every member of
society, are still so imperfect, and are attended with so many unnecessary
circumstances of cruelty in all nations, that an attempt to reduce them to the
standard of reason must be interesting to all mankind. It is not surprising,
then, that this little book has engaged the attention of all ranks of people
in every part of Europe. It is now about eighteen months since the first
publication; in which time it has passed no less than six editions in the
original language, the third of which was printed within six months after its
first appearance. It has been translated into French; that translation has
also been several times reprinted, and perhaps no book on any subject was ever
received with more avidity, more generally read, or more universaly applauded.

N. B. At Bell's Book-Store may also be had, great variety of Books in all
arts, sciences, and languages; especially Greek, Latin, French, and English
classics, Bibles of various kinds, likewise the very best French and English
Dictionaries.

N. B. The observations and quotations, which are found in this pomphlet from
the ninth line of the first column of page 21, to the end of the Address, were
added by a Friend of the Author's, who was entrusted with the publication while
he was in the country, with a discretionary power to add whatsoever he thought
necessary.


