LETTERS FROM GENERAL WASHINGTON To several of his FRIENDS in the Year 1776. IN
WHICH ARE SET FORTH, A FAIRER and FULLER VIEW OF AMERICAN POLITICS, THAN EVER
YET TRANSPIRED, Or the PUBLIC could be made acquainted with through any other
Channel. TOGETHER WITH The Reverend Mr. JACOB DUCHE's (late Chaplain to the
Congress) LETTER to Mr. WASHINGTON, and an ANSWER to it, by Mr. JOHN PARK, a
Lieutenant Colonel in Mr. Washington's Army.

PRINTED IN THE YEAR 1778.

LETTERS FROM GENERAL WASHINGTON.
THE public will naturally be inquisitive as to the authenticity of the
following letters. For every thing else, they will speak for themselves: and,
for their genuineness, the Editor conceives himself concerned to give only such
vouchers as he himself has received. By the last packet he was savoured with a
letter from a friend, now serving in a loyal corpse under Brigadier-General De
Lancey of New York, of which ^e here subjoins a faithful extract. Pleased with
the communication himself (and, as he is not ashamed to add, instructed by it)
he could not be ^^sy to withhold it from the public at large: inasmuch as, in
his judgment, it exhibits a fairer and fuller view of American politics, than
the world has yet seen.

-- "Among the prisoners at Fort-Lee, I espied a mulatto fellow, whom I thought
I recollected, and who confirmed my conjectures by gazing very earnestly at me.
I asked him, if he knew me. At first, he was unwilling to own it; but, when he
was about to be carried off, thinking, I suppose, that I might, perhaps, be of
some service to him, he came and told me, that he was Billy, and the old
servant of General Washington. He had been left there on account of an
indisposition which prevented his attending his master. I asked him a great
many questions, as you may suppose; but found very little satisfaction in his
answers. At last, however, he told me that he had a small portmanteau of his
master's; of which, when he found that he must be put into confinement, he
entreated my care. It contained only a few stockings and sh^rts; and I could
see nothing worth my care, except an Almanac, in which he had kept a sort of a
journal, or diary of his proceedings since his first coming to New York: there
were also two letters from his lady, one from Mr. Cu^^is, and some pretty long
ones from a Mr Lund Washington. And in the same bundle with them, the first
draughts, or foul copies, of answers to them. I read these with avidity; and
being highly entertained with them, have shown them to several of my friends,
who all agree with me, that he is a very different character from what they had
supposed him. I never knew a man so much to be pitied. If I remember right, you
have seen, and have some knowledge of him; but it is impossible you could form
so just an estimate of him, as these letters will give you. They contain also,
as you will find, a deal of information, not to be had any where else: I assure
myself therefore, you will thank me for the trouble I have taken in copying
them for your perusal."

New York, June 12, 1776. To Mr. Lund Washington, at Mount Vernon, Fairfax
County, Virginia.
DEAR LUND,
THOUGH I wrote to you but a very few days ago, and have nothing new of much
moment to communicate, I cannot deny myself the comfort of unburthening my mind
to you, whenever I have a little leisure, amid the thousand anxieties and
disquietudes that almost distract me. I know the goodness of your heart, and
that you will attend to me with indulgence* and sympathy, though it be not in
your power any otherwise to afford me relief. There cannot, in the nature of
things, be a situation so truly irksome to an ingenuous mind, as the being
perpetually obliged to act a part foreign to our true feelings; yet this alas!
as you know, is, and must be my lot. I wear a countenance dressed in the calm
serenity of perfect confidence, whilst my heart is corroded with infinite
apprehensions, and I have no bosom friend near me, to whom I dare lay it open.
Tell me Lund, for you have long been privy to my most secret thoughts, --
trusting to thy native candor, I have never hesitated to lay my heart bare and
open to thy inspection; tell me then, am I, do you think, more subject to fears
than other men? For I will not conceal it from you, that, at this moment, I
feel myself a very coward. Do not mistake me -- I thank my God, I have never
yet known what it was to fear for any personal danger that might befall me. I am
not afraid to die -- why should I? I am afraid only to die with infamy and
disgrace. And, if I am afraid so to die, need I tell you that I am ten thousand
times more afra^d to live, like Lucifer, a fallen Angel. No, Lund, that were
too much; betide what will, I cannot, and I will not, survive either my
misfortunes, or my disgraces. Heaven, knows how truly I love my country; and
that I embarked in this arduous enterprise on the purest motives. But we have
overshot our mark: we have grasped at things beyond our reach: it is impossible
we should succeed; and, I cannot with truth, say that I am sorry for it;
because I am far from being sure that we deserve to succeed. That the British
Ministry had meditated schemes fatal to the liberties of America; and that, if
we had not opposed their first efforts to impose taxes upon us, without our
consent, we might have bid adieu to every idea of constitutional security
hereafter, I have not a doubt. Nay, I am so thoroughly persuaded of the
unworthiness of their designs, and of the duty of every honest American to
oppose them, that, dissatisfied as I am with my situation, were it to do over
again, I would rather be even as I am than tamely crouch, whilst chains were
fastening round my neck. For there is not in my estimation, so vile a thing
upon earth as a human being who, having once enjoyed liberty, can patiently
be^r to see it taken from him. I would, and I will die ten thousand deaths,
rather than be this thing myself. On these principles, and these only, I first
took up arms; but my misfortune, and the true source of all my uneasiness is,
that though in good policy, as well as honor, these ought to be the principles
of every American, I have long ago discovered they are not. And on this account
alone, that I dread our defeat. Our want of skill, our want of ammunition, in
short, our want of every thing which an army ought to have, are all, no doubt,
exceedingly against us: but, they are all nothing to our want o^ virtue. --
Unused to the many arts and devices, by which designing men carry their points,
I unwillingly listened to my own apprehensions, when early in the first
Congress, I thought I saw a tendency to measures which I never could approve
of. I reasoned myself, however, out of my fears, with no ordinary reproach on
my own meanness, in having given way to suspicions, which could not be true,
unless we had men amongst ourselves more flagitious than even those we were
opposing. At length, however, when a continental army came to be voted for, my
fea^s returned with redoubled force: for then, for the first time, I clearly
saw our aims reached farther than we cared to avow. It was carried with an
unanimity that really astonished me; because I knew many wh^ ^oted for it, were
as averse to the independency of America, as I was. And they even ridiculed me
for my apprehensions on that account: and, indeed, when they suggested that
Great Britain, seeing us apparently determined to risque every thing rather
than that they should tax us, would never think of engaging in a civil war with
us, which must necessarily cost her more than even America could repay her, I
could not but hope, that I was mistaken; and that our military preparations
might be a good political movement. In one thing, however, we all agreed, that,
as the forces were chiefly to be raised in New England, it would be extremely
rash and imprudent in the southern delegates to leave them in the possession of
so formidable a power without any check. I need not tell you, that it was this
consideration which, if I am to be credited, sorely against my will, determined
me to accept of the command of this army. We set out with bad omens* I was
mistrustful of them in every thing; and they were taught to look upon me with
jealousy. This soon mani^ested itself in forming them to any thing like decent
discipline. But I have, long ago, pestered you more than enough with complaints
on this head. I knew not, however, certainly, that I had been appointed to this
high station only to be disgraced and ruined, till about the middle and latter
end of last February: when contrary to my wishes, I found it absolutely
necessary that we should come to open hostilities against our fellow subjects
in the ministerial army: doubtless, common prudence required that when we did
attempt it, we should, if possible, do it speedily and effectually. And, having
all the reason in the world to believe that large armies would be sent against
us early in the summer, I resolved, cost what it would, to cut off those
already here, which would have given us such infinite advantages over any
future reinforcements that might be sent. And this I believed was easily in our
power; but, as I have already told you, noth^ng is to be done with our
New England allies, unless they are let into all your secrets. I could not
advance a step without communicating my intentions to the gentlemen in the
civil department; a thing even ruinous in war. It soon got wind, as I had
foreseen; and it appeared, that the General of the enemy was apprised of my
design. Still, however, I persevered in my purposes; which in spite of all his
care and caution, I was confident must succeed, and reduce him to the utmost
extremity. But (as every military man must know) so capital a blow was not to
be struck without the loss both of many men, and much property; for my design
was, if they would not surrender by an honorable capitulation, to burn the
town about their ears, and so rush in, and cut them off in their attempts to
escape to the ships. And this, with our superiority of numbers, we certainly
could have effected though, no doubt, it would have been a bloody business, if
they had not surrendered, as I think they would. But when, as I was obliged, I
laid this before the Council and Representatives, they not only found a
thousand objections to it but absolutely restrained me and I could not have got
a man that would have gone on what they called so desperate a scheme. Hence was
I under a necessity of proceeding in that poor, s^^w, and unsoldier-like
manner, which not only gave them an opportunity to escape, but has taught them
to despise us. There is no forming an idea of the importance of such a stroke
at that conjuncture. If any thing upon earth could have made America
independent and glorious, that was the golden opportunity. I confess to you, I
had worked my imagination up to such a pitch of high expectation, that my
disappointment has dispirited me in a manner I never can recover. For, from
that moment, I have despaired of our ever doing any thing truly great. Any
little gleams of success, or fairer prospects we have since had, serve but to
make our inferiority the more conspicuous. For what incidents can fall out to
aggrandize us, who can be made great only by great and spirited efforts, when
we have shown that we wanted both the understanding and the virtue to purchase
to ourselves immortal glory on better and cheaper terms than ever we can hope
hereafter to have it? But, the worst remains yet to be told. Some of those very
men who were the most forward to thwart me in this measure, had discovered a
different way of thinking on other occasions, and, I am pursu^^ed that were the
question put to them now, as t^ this city, and the southern regiments, I should
not hear a dissenting voice. But let me spare you.

After all this, you will again, I doubt not, as you often have, ask why I
continue in a situation so disagreeable to me? I wish you had forborne this
question, the truth being, that I neither am able, nor very willing to answer
it. My resolution to hold it out as long as I can is dictated by my feelings,
which I neither can describe to you, nor wholly justify on paper; but which,
however, I find it impossible for me to disregard. The eyes of all America,
perhaps, of Europe, of the world are fixed on me. It has been our policy, (and,
at the time, I thought it well founded) to hold out false lights to the world.
There are not a hundred men in America that know our true situation; three
fourths of the Congress itself are ignorant of it; yourself excepted, their
lives not a man at all acquainted with my peculiar circumstances. The world
looks upon us as in possession of an army all animated with the pure flame of
liberty, and determined to die rather than not be free. It is in possession of
proofs, that it is so, under my own hand: I have always so spoken of it and I
still do. But, you know how remote in my judgment all this i^ from the truth;
though I am not sure that that there is another man in the army, besides
myself, that thinks so. I should guess, however, that there are many. But, tied
up as my own mouth is, it is little to be wondered at that theirs are so too,
at least to me.

-- Thus circumstanced, can you point out a way in which it is possible for me
to resign, just now as it were, on the eve of action, without the imputation of
cowardice? There is no such way. Besides, diffident and desponding as I am, how
do I know, that it is not so with those we have to oppose? they certainly have
reason. The events of war depend on a thousand minu^^a, without the ken of a
mere bystander. I know not that the commander of the armies of the
low countries, could his heart have been read as you do mine, had not the same
fears, and the same causes for them that I have. You learn not this from the
history; nor was it to be expected you should. Yet, he succeeded at last. And,
who knows, what an overruling Providence, who often brings about the greatest
revolutions by the most unlikely means, may intend for America? If it be the
will of God, that America should be independent of Great Britain, and that this
be the season for it, even I and these unhopeful men around may not be thought
unworthy instruments in his hands. And, should we succeed, we are heroes, and
immortalized beyond even those of former times. Whereas disgrace only, and
intolerable infamy await our retreat. In this persuasion, I resolve to go on,
contented, with the glorious King William, to save my country, or die in the
last ditch.

I am, my dear Lund, Your faithful Friend and Servant, G. W.

To John Park Custis, Esquire at the Hon. Benedict Calvert's, Esquire Mount Airy,
Maryland.
MY VERY DEAR JACK,
YOU have exceedingly obliged me by your letter which I received by yesterday's
post. It discovers an attention to the great affairs now carrying on, and an
information concerning them, which I own to you I had not given you credit for.
Your youth and inexperience pleaded your excuse: and though you gave me no
opportunity to praise you for any active ex^rtions, I paid you no ordinary
compliments, in my own mind, for your modesty in forbearing to meddle with
things which it was no reproach to you to confess, were out of your reach.
Considering your rank, fortune, and education, whenever it is proper for you to
come forward on the theater, it must not be any underpart that you act. You
are, therefore, certainly, in the right to decline taking any part at all, till
you are fit for a first and leading character. And you have my full and perfect
approbation of your resolution to persist in your purpose, for the present, not
to accept of any rank civil or military. I see your anxiety, left the present
opportunity for signalizing your just love for your country should, by your not
unnecessary cautions, be suffered to ^lip by you, unimproved. Your ardour is
commendable; and far be it from me to discourage in you a spirit I so much
love. But, whilst you retrain these honorable principles, there is little
danger of your wanting opportunities to call them forth into action. The
momentous enterprise, in which your country is engaged is not to be
accomplished in this or that year. If, in no longer a period than the siege of
Troy, we bring all our mighty schemes to bear, it will be the greatest work
that ever was perfected in so little a time. You have set your heart, you tell
me, on a military employment. This is the usual bent of young men; and, as it
was my own, it will be with an ill grace that I reprehend it in you. But with
the experience that I have had of it, I should be wanting in that love and
esteem I owe you, should I hesitate to tell you that, as your Father, there is
not a profession you could have chosen in which I should not more cordially
have concurred with you. Yet, I love arms; I am married to my sword, as well as
to your most amiable mother: and, herein is my witness, that I am in earnest
when I say, death alone shall divorce me from either. I am not so blindly
devoted, however, to my profession, as not to see by how frail a tenure I hold
the little reputation I have in it. As a statesman, as a senator, it is in the
general, sufficient that you mean well, that you are careful to qualify
yourself to form a right judgment of the true interests of your country, and
that, with the honest impartiality of a free man, you have still exerted your
best endeavors to promote those interests. But, with a soldier, success alone
is merit; and there is nothing that can atone for the want of it. The world is
a worse judge military of matters, than any other. It would astonish you, to
find, on a minute comparison, how very little difference there was in the skill
and spirit which guided Braddock and Wolf in the last actions of their lives.
But, how different has been their fate! -- I think, I am not without some
talents for the line of life which has fallen to my lot. But, opposed as I must
be by men, probably, of infinitely superior skill, and encompassed moreover
with such hosts of other difficulties and discouragements as I am, it is not
mine to command success. And when either my cotemporaries, or future
historians, shall sit in judgment on my conduct, if, happily, ill fortune should
overtake me, seeing our miscarriages, only, and having neither curiosity nor
ability to investigate the thousand causes which led to them, am I not too well
warranted in concluding, that they will be attributed to mismanagement? Have I
not then reason to wish that your choice had fallen on the quieter but not less
important calling of a private gentleman; in which, as a senator, you might
have given proof of your abilities, in a way in which fortune would not have
had so great a share? But notwithstanding all this, and if after all, you be
irrevocably determined to try your fortune in the field, and you can gain your
mothers and your wife's consent, I here give it you under my hand, that you
shall not want mine. Most certainly there cannot be a more honorable
employment: and if (which Heaven avert) Fortune should declare against you, my
consolation will be, than I can assure myself, you will deserve to be
successful. I will, on the opening of the next campaign, procure you an
appointment to the command of a regiment, either here, or in the southern wing.
And, if my opinion may have any weight with you, you will, for many reasons,
prefer the being stationed in some of the southern states. There is no fear of
its being an inactive station. I have little expectation that this year will
close with ^aught considerably decisive on either side: and if our enemies be
able to hold out another campaign, it is most likely their policy will be, by
means of their naval superiority, to carry on a kind of an incursive war, by
making unexpected descents in different and distant places. Mean while, permit
me to press you to presevere in your attention to military matters. The manual
exercise, which you were so justly diligent to learn, whilst I was with you, is
but the A, B, C, of your profession. Neither will you profit so much as you
might reasonably expect, from the study of th^se authors, who have written
professedly on the art of war. This is like the learning the game of Whist by
reading Hoyle. I have been witness to the mischievous effects of it. A man,
book-learned only, does very well in the still scenes of marchings and
encampments. But when, in the various bustles of actual war, a cause arises, as
must often be the case, not described in his books, he is utterly at a loss. I
would not, however, have you to understand me as if I meant to discourage your
reading these books, at all, so far from it, I would have you read them very
often, and make yourself acquainted with the subject as much as you can, in
theory My caution meant only to guard you against placing too much reliance on
them. Their best commentators, next to your own experience, will be the
historians of Greece and Rome; which it is your happiness to be able to read in
the originals. But, the main and most essential qualification is an high sense
of honor, an elevation of sentiment, and a certain dignified ^tile of
behavior, that distinguishes, or should distinguish, a soldier from every
other man. It is a shame indeed, if he who undertakes to command others, has
not first learned to command himself: I will not endure any thing mean or
sordid either in your principles, or your manners; having determined, if it
were left with me, to be as a strict and rigorous in these particulars, as were
the knights of old, when a candidate was to be invested with the orders of
chivalry. I cannot dissociate the ideas between a soldier and a gentleman: and
however common it may be to give that last appellation to persons of every
character, it yet conveys to me an idea of worths I want words to express. I am
not solicitous to pay you compliments, even by implication; but, I may
certainly be permitted to say, that if I had not known you to be a gentleman,
you never should have had my consent to your becoming a soldier.

Your observations on this important contest are just and accurate, and
discover a reach of thought, and a penetration beyond what I had expected of
you. What you say on the subject of independency is perfectly ^udicious, and,
no doubt, highly worthy of all our most serious consideration. Yet, I have a
praesentiment, that it will take place, and speedily. Open and unreserved as my
conduct toward you has ever been, I have no reluctance to confess to you, that
the measure is diametrically opposite to my judgment^, for I have not yet
despaired of an honorable reconciliation; and whilst I can entertain but an
hope of that, both interest and inclination lead me to prefer it to every thing
else upon earth. Human affairs are oddly ordered: To obtain what you most wish
for, you must often make use of means you the least approve of.

As in bargaining, to obtain a fair and equal price, you must frequently ask
more than you wish to take. I do not really wish for independence. I hope there
are few who do; but, I have never heard the reasonings of those, who have
proved that, if we did not declare for it, we should fail to obtain the
constitutional subordination to which we are entitled, fairly refuted. I would
not have you, therefore, hastily conclude that if, in this struggle, we fall
short of every thing we have claimed; we are worsted: perhaps, the very worst
thing that could befall us, is that we should gain all. I do assure you that, in
my opinion, the next misfortune to that of being thrust from our just rank in
the order of freemen, would be the giving us up, and leaving us to ourselves.
But, this Great Britain will never do, voluntarily: for, if even she does,
whatever may become of us, from that moment, she may date the commencement of
her own downfall.

I am exceedingly happy in the becoming moderation which you observe and
endeavor to introduce toward the unhappy men whose political creeds differ
from ours. But for this blot in her scutcheon, thrown on her by too many of her
rash and unworthy advocates, by a contrary conduct, this effort of America
would have done her honor, even though she had failed. I am shocked at the
instances of intollerance I daily hear of, and have no power to prevent. But,
like the other evils of war, it is a calamity that unavoidably grows out of
such a convulsion; and one might as well hope to stem the fury of a torrent, as
to give laws to an enraged people. It is, however, the duty of every true
friend to liberty, by every gentle and conciliatory means in his power, to
restrain it. And, I am happy to find this sentiment daily becoming more general
amongst us. All things considered, I cannot but think it not a little to our
honor that things have not been carried to a still greater height in this way.

Remember me affectionately to Nelly, and tell her that though I should be
happy to see her, I may not hope for that happiness speedily: as the din of
arms, I imagine, would be but unpleasing entertainment to her; and I have
little prospect of any leisure, at least before we go into winter quarters. I
hope Mr. Calvert, and all the family are well: I beg to be remembered to them.
I will write to your mother in a few days. You are very good in leaving her
alone as little as may be. Continue to write to me frequently, freely, and
fully: the hearing of my dearest friends and family's welfare being the only
true happiness I have any chance to enjoy amidst the perpetual hurry in which I
live.

I am my dear Jack, Your very affectionate Friend and Father, Ge^. Washington.
(...) 18, 1776.
New York, July the 8, 1776. To Mr. Lund Washington, at Mount-Vernon, Fairfax
County, Virginia.
Dear Lund,
WE are still going on with all imaginable briskness and success with our
works, which, I think are already impregnable. It would really astonish you to
see the progress we have made. I do not believe that all history can furnish a
precedent of so much being done in so little time, or in so masterly a manner,
where you had so little right to look for consummate skill. If in every thing
else, we could but come up to our exertions in these fortifications, I should
hardly know how to doubt the judgment of those who think that we may bid
defiance to the world. But, I know not how it is, I am diffident of every
thing. Whilst almost every body else seem to have persuaded themselves, that we
have nothing to fear, I alone torment myself with thinking that every thing is
against us. Even from these very works, which have inspired us with such
confidence, I anticipate only misfortune and disgrace. By this time the die is
cast, and America is authoritatively declared free and independent; and unless
we can be contented to appear ridiculous in the eyes of all the world, we must
resolve to support this declaration by a suitable conduct; -- we must fight our
way to freedom and independency; for in no other way, shall we be permitted to
obtain it, farther than words.

A war, therefore, and a most serious one, is now inevitable. Next to good
finances, which it is not my province to provide for, a good army is,
doubtless, a main requisite to the carrying on a successful war. And a good
army, is by no means secured, as some seem to reckon, by securing a large
number of men. We want soldiers, and between these, and raw, undisciplined men,
there is a wide difference. The question then is, how are these raw and
undisciplined men to be formed into good soldiers? And I am free to give it as
my opinion, that so far from contributing to this, will strong holds, fortified
posts, and deep intrenchments be found, that they will have a direct contrary
effect. To be a soldier, is to be inured to, and familiar with danger; to dare
to look your enemy in the face, unsheltered and exposed to their fire, and even
when repulsed, to rally again with undiminished spirit. The Indian maxim i^,
that it is equally your duty to take care of yourself, and to annoy your enemy.
To a General, this may not be an unusual caution; but I will venture to assert,
that whenever a private sentinel allows himself to act on this principle, the
odds are, that, in the moment of trial, in his exceeding solicitude not to
forget the former, the latter will be but little attended to. Now, what I ask,
are all these mighty ditches and breast-works, but so many lessons and
admonitions to our men of what prodigious importance it is to take care of
themselves? It would be almost worth our while to be defeated, if it were only
to train us to stand fire, and to bear a reverse of fortune with a decent
magnanimity. If it had not been for this ill-judged humor of fighting from
behind a screen, the 19th of April and 17th of June last year, might have been
the happiest days America ever saw. All these things have I, again and again,
represented to my masters; I am ashamed to say, to how little purpose. They
return me answers and instructions, which, though I cannot refute, have not yet
convinced what I would call the feelings of my own mind.

This day week, the enemy's fleet was first descried off Sandy-Hook. They have
been employed since then in debarking their troops on Staten-Island, where they
are cantoned, as far as I can judge, in a very uncompact and unguarded manner.
I cannot exactly ascertain their number, but I have reason to believe, that
they fall short of seven thousand. It is more extraordinary still, that I am
not able to inform you of the exact number of forces under my own command: I
fancy however, we might bring into the field, at this place, double their
number at a minute's warning; and with this superiority of numbers, making all
possible allowances for our other disadvantages, one would hope we might be
able to give a good account of them. You, who are sanguine in the extreme, and
all impatience, will eagerly ask, why we suffered them to land unmolested, and
to remain so ever since. What excellent expeditions your fireside generals can
instantly plan and execute! But you forget that they are posted on an island,
and that we have no way at coming at them unless they would lend us their ships
and boats, which I have not presumed to ask of them. Aware, however, of the
importance of falling on them, whilst there is a chance of doing it with
success, and e're they become a match for us, by reinforcements, which they
daily expect, I have formed a scheme, which, at least, is plausible, and
promises fair to be successful. I have submitted it to Congress, and every
moment expect their answer; and if they will but support me with alacrity, and
in good earnest, my next, I trust will not be so desponding. I expect to be all
ready to put my plan in execution on Tuesday, or at farthest, on Wednesday
night; so that probably, at the very moment you are reading this, we may be
engaged in a very different service. You will, no doubt, be impatient to hear
from me as soon as may be after Wednesday, and I will not disappoint you.
Meanwhile, I shall not need to tell you, that end how it will, all that I
freely chatter to you, is to remain a profound secret to every body else.

Doctor, now Brigadier General Mercer is here, and is a great comfort to me.
Like myself, he wants experience; but he is very shrewd and sensible, and
though a Scotsman, is remarkably humane and liberal. I have communicated the
whole of my design to him alone; and am not ashamed to own, that I have
received much assistance from him. I know not how it may turn out; but though
neither he nor I are very apt to be sanguine, we have both confessed to be so
on this occasion. Animated, however, as I feel myself with the near prospect of
at length doing something, not unworthy the high rank to which I am raised, I
own to you, I take a serious pleasure in it, only as it flatters me with the
hope of thereby obtaining a spedier and happier peace. Let us, since war must
be our lot, distinguish ourselves as freemen should, in fields of blood, still
remembering, however, that we fight not for conquest, but for liberty.

I am with the truest Esteem, Dear Lund, Your Faithful Friend and Servant, G. W.

New York, July 16, 1776. To Mr. Lund Washington, etc.
DEAR LUND,
HOW cruelly are all my hopes in one sad moment blasted and destroyed! I am
positively ordered to wait for the enemy in our lines; and lest I should be
made enough not to obey their mandates, not a single tittle of any thing I had
asked for, is granted. Thus has a second opportunity of rendering my country an
essential service, in the way of my profession, been unwisely, and in the most
mortifying manner denied me. I profess, I hardly know how to bear it: having to
regret not only, that two opportunities, such as may never again occur, have
been suffered to pass by us unimproved, but that none can happen, we can
improve. Managed as matters are, we neither are, nor ever shall be a military
people; and yet, in the train in which things are now put, unless we are, it
were idiotism to hope for either freedom or independence.

I remember well, in a conversation I once had with a friend, now most unjustly
as well as unwisely, driven from his friends and his home, on the subject of
monarchies and republics, he objected to the unavoidable slowness and
dilatoriness of the executive power in the latter. Aiming to answer him in his
own way, I replied that, if popular councils were slow, they yet were sure, and
that in the multitude of counselors there is safety. His answer was
prophetical If ever (he said) we of these countries should rashly put these
things to the proof, it would be found that, however true this adage might be
in the cabinet, it was not so in the field. Convinced, by melancholy
experience, that this is the case, and, that without some different system, we
shall but expose ourselves to contempt and ruin, I resolve this evening
honestly and openly to say so to the Congress. I will go farther, and add, that
if they cannot in fact, as well as in appearance, trust me with the
uncontrouled command of their army, I will no longer be their puppet. Why
should I? it being now morally certain that by going on as we have hitherto
done, I can neither bring honor nor profit to them; and yet am sure to lose
all the little of either which I either have, or might have, possessed.

I want words to express to you what I have felt, and still do feel on this
disappointment of all my hopes: I had allowed myself to build too much on my
scheme I and I seem to be in the situation of one who should be allowed to
rise, on purpose only to be thrown down. The enemy, in the midst of all our
blusterings, must despise us; and did not shame, or some better principle
restrain them, I should be but little surprised to find General How, even with
his present little handful attacking us, -- yes, attacking us in our
entranchments. -- What shall I do? to retreat is to entail on myself the curses
of every public man in my country; and to go on is certain ruin and disgrace.
Were the world to know only my true history on this try^ occasion, I persuade
myself, all the candid and ^^^^iderate (...) would (...) me of blame. But this
the world can know only ^y my resolving to tell a tale, which, considering the
rank I now hold in it, must involve my country in such internal broils and
quarrels, as must be fatal to the glorious cause in which we have embarked. And
this, I trust, I shall have the virtue never to do, be my private wrongs and
sufferings ever so great.

I have finished my letter to the Congress, to whom I have at length, spoken in
a more peremptory tone, than, I fancy, they have been used to. It was
absolutely necessary; and I should ill deserve their confidence, if through any
mistaken complaisance or diffidence, I hesitated to point out to them the
mischievous consequences of their interference. I have also insisted on precise
instructions in what manner I am to conduct myself toward the British
commissioners, if peradventure, as is probable, their overtures shall be made
through me. Their answer will have a great influence on all my future measures;
as I shall then know, (and surely it is time I should) on what ground I stand.
The very decided and adventurous measure, which Congress itself has just taken,
i^ big with the most important consequences, not only to the community at
large, but to every man in it. The temper and judgment which they shall now
manifest, on their first avowed assumption of the rein^ of government, will be
indicative of what we may hereafter expect. Hoping for the best, I yet will
watch them most carefully.

It Is all fearful expectation: Every man I see seems to be employed in
preparing himself for the momentous rencontre, which every man persuades
himself must shortly come on. There is an offensible eagerness and impetuosity
amongst us, I could willingly have excused: I should have been better pleased
with that steady composure which distinguishes veterans. One thing is in our
favor, the passions of our soldiery are seldom suffered to subside; being
constantly agitated by some strange rumor o^ other. Happen what will, it can
hardly be more extraordinary, than some one or other is perpetually presaging.
And, we have already performed such (...) of valor, whilst we have no enemies
to engage but such as our own imagination^ manufacture for us, that I cannot
but hope we shall do well, merely because no one ever seems to entertain a
suspicion that we shall not. I can as yet, give no guess, where or when they
will approach us: I conclude, however, that they will hardly stir, till they
are joined by all the men they expect, desponding as I am, I wish they were
arrived; and that, at this moment, they were in a condition to attack us: They
may gain by procrastination, but we are sure to lose.

I wrote to Mrs. Washington lately, and shall again in a week or two, if I do
not hear of her ere that in Philadelphia. It has surprised me that, after what
I wrote, she should hesitate. I beg of you if she be still fearful, to second
my persuasions by every means in your power. Exposed as she must be to so many
interviews with people in the army all of whom are in the way of the smallpox,
I have the most dreadful apprehensions on her account. I know not well how the
notion came into my head, but it is certain, I have, for several days,
pursuaded myself that she is already inoculated, and that out of tenderness and
delicacy, she forbears to inform me of it, till she can also inform me she is
out of danger.

I note sundry particulars in your letter, to which I am not solicitous to give
you answers. Why, when you have so often asked in vain, will you press me for
Congress-secrets? Whatever you or my priva^^ sentiments or wishes may be, it is
sufficient for us ^^at we know the highest authority in our country has
declared it free and independent. All that is left for us to do is, as far as
we can, to support this declaration* without too curiously enquiring into
either its wisdom or its justice. I firmly believe, that the advocates for this
measure, meant well; and I pay (...) but an ordinary compliment in thinking
that they were fitter to determine on a point of this sor^, than either you or
I are. At any rate, the world must allow i^ to be a spirited measure; and all I
have to wish for i^, that we may support it with a (...) spirit.

I am, my Dear Lund, Yo^^ most affectionately, G. W.

New York, July 15, 1776. To Mr. Lund Washington, etc.
Dear Lund,
LAST Friday, the British fleet was seen off Staten-Island; they have since
been employed, uninterrupted by us, in debarking their men, stores, etc. And as
they must now, I should imagine, be pretty nearly as strong as they expect to
be this campaign, no doubt we shall soon hear of their motions. I have reason
to believe, their first essay will not be on this, but on Long Island; where
injudiciously I think, we also are, or soon shall be in force. Yet, if we do
but act our parts as becomes us, be the issue as it may, we shall at least give
them no pleasing earnest of what they have to expect in the course of the war.
But there is no relying on any plan that is to be executed by raw men.

You have heard much of the powers with which commissioners were to be in
vested, for the purpose of settling this dispute. Like most other things
belonging to it, these too have made a much greater figure in talk, than they
do in fact. There are but two commissioners, the two Howes; and their powers
are extremely vague and undefined. It is a pity, methinks, that Congress had
not had better information on this subject; if they had, it is to be presumed,
they would not have precipitated the declaration of independency, so as to
preclude all possibility of negotiation. I may venture to whisper in your ear,
that this excepted, I firmly believe, that America might have carried every
other point; and certainly, there was a time, when this would have been deemed
a conquest beyond the warmest w^shes of the warmest American. Whether in the
present posture of affairs, it still be so, is another question: I can answer
only for myself, that I would not even ask so much. -- Different men will judge
differently with respect to this conduct, on the part of Great Britain; I own I
am bewildered and puzzled to account for it. After such an astonishing expense
as they have been at, and with such fair prospects as they have before them of
being soon in a capacity to prescribe their own term^, it certainly is
extraordinary to find them condescending to be friends with us, on conditions
as mortifying and degrading to them, as they are flattering to us. I can
account for it but in one way; I really ascribe it to their magnanimity. It
must be an unpleasing contest to the nation: I say the nation; for however
expedient it may be for us to have it called a ministerial war, no man who
knows any thing of the English government, can imagine, that the ministry could
have moved a step in it, if it had not been the sense* of the nation. It must,
too, be a most fruitless and unprofitable war; since every advantage they can
gain, must in fact be a loss, as being gained over themselves. No wonder,
therefore, they have been slow and backward to enter into it; no wonder they
would be glad to be well rid of it, on almost any terms. I have ever been of
this opinion, and it was this persuasion alone that reconciled me to the
measure of taking up arms. I see, however, the world around me viewing it in a
different light; every concession that is made to us, they attribute to
timidity only, and despondency. I own appearances make for this conjecture;
and, no doubt, Congress will give it its sanction.

I have not adopted this opinion, that we might have peace with Great Britain,
on terms which would once, have been thought most honorable, on slight grounds.
Yesterday, a letter was bro't to me, making overtures for a nego^iation, from
Lord How. -- I had expected it; and had my instructions. It was addressed, as
I had foreseen, to me as in my private character only. On the ground of
independency, if we chose to maintain it, this was not a mere matter of
punctilio; it was the critical moment of trial, whether we would assert, or
recede from our pretensions. Never did men sit in debate on a quest^on of
higher magnitude: and when they had once determined to declare their country
free, I see not why they might not support this their declaration, by this as
well as other means. A contrary conduct would certainly have indicated some
want of firmness. Yet, I confess to you, I felt awkward upon the occasion. The
puncti^io seemed, and it could not but seem, to be my own: and as such it
looked, methought, as though I were proud of my titles. Put yourself in my
place, and see me, longing as you know I do most earnestly for peace, yet
turning my back on a gentleman, whom I had reason to consider as the harbinger
of it, only because he asked for Mr. and not, GENERAL WASHINGTON. How often it
is my lot to find it my indispensible duty to act a part contrary to both my
own sentiments and inclinations! But, if I mistake not, it is in such instances
only, that, properly speaking, we manifest our fortit^de and magnanimity.

I shall astonish you, when I inform you, that this first rebuff abated not the
ardour of the noble commissioner. His Deputy paid as a second visit, and
vouchsafed to honor me with the appellation of General. What name will you
give to this condescension? I own it hurt me; and has well nigh led me into a
train of thinking very different from all my former opinions. The gentleman who
brought the message, is a Colonel Patterson, Adjutant General, and a sensible
well informed man. He requested to speak to me alone; and I was glad he did.
After the first salutations, he told me the purport of the letter which had
been refused; and his errand now was to ask me to point out the most eligible
means of opening a negotiation, for the purpose of accommodating the unhappy
dispute. I replied, that I knew but of one way; and that was by application to
Congress. He said, the King's Commissioners would have no objection to treating
with the members who composed the Congress, provided only that they came with
legal authority from the regular legislatures of their respective countries. I
answered, they, doubtless would come with such authority; as indeed, they could
come with no other. I evidently saw his drift in the exception, as he did mine:
and so put a stop to all possibility of mistake; he declared it impossible for
his masters ever to acknowledge the Congress, as such, a legal, and
constitutional body of men; and as it seemed to be rather a punctilio of pride,
than of any real importance, he hoped it might be waved. I stared: How, Sir,
have you not already acknowledged the powers of Congress, by acknowledging the
honorable rank I hold, and which I hold from them, and them only? That said
he, was the concession merely of politeness; and made for the purpose only of
getting access to me; and he was persuaded, I was too sensible a man to lay any
stress on so m^re a trifle; I thanked him for his compliment, but assured him,
that I meant to lay the most serious stress on it. If he really had had that
opinion of my understanding which he was pleased then to express, he must have
supposed, that though a trifle in itself, it ceased to be so after I had made a
point of it.

Words could not have told him more strongly that our resolutions were to
assert and maintain our independency. And if the commissioners of the King of
Great Britain found themselves either unable or unwilling to give up this, as a
preliminary article, they, and he must pardon me for saying, that I could but
think them very idly employed in soliciting an interview with me. On this he
prepared to take his leave, first adding with a degree of sharpness and
animation, that I own affected me. Sir, said he, you are pleased to be cavalier
with me: I consider you as a well-meaning -- I wish I could say, well-informed
man; yet, I am mistaken, if your head, as well as your heart, would not, at
this moment, dictate a very different language. There may be heroism, for ought
I know, in desperately resolving to go all length^ with the men with whom you
have connected yourself; but it is madness: and you may be thankful, if
posterity gives no worse a name to a man who has no judgment of his own Wrong,
Sir, your judgment no longer. We certainly have stooped as low as the proudest
wrong-head among you could ask us; but, if you really think as you seem to
affect to do, that we have made these overtures either from meanness, from a
distrust of our cause, or our ability to make good our just claims, you are out
in all your reckoning. That the mean and narrow-minded leaders of your councils
may disseminate such opinions, in your unhappy country, I can easily suppose;
but remember, Sir, you, and your party, owe some account to the world! and when
the world shall come to know your infatuated insolence in the instance before
us, as know it they must, think how you will excuse yourselves? I replied with
no less warmth, nor I trust, dignity. I was, indeed, flung: for after once
having owned me as a General, you must confess there was something singularly
contemptuous in presuming thus to school me. A few personal civilities put an
end to the conference.

I have transmitted a faithful account of it to Congress; but, as I can hardly
suppose, they will judge it expedient to make it public, I thought I owed to
you, not wholly to disappoint your curiosity. You will not, however, need me to
caution you to be secret, as well on this as on other things, which I write to
you.

One thing more I must not omit to mention to you. In my conference with
Colonel Patterson, I thought I could discover that it was intended I should be
impressed with a persuasion that the commissioners thought not unfavourably of
our pretensions, as urged in the beginning of the dispute. This is to be
accounted for. They are whigs; and if I am rightly informed, the General owes
his seat in Parliament to the interest of the dissenters. But why approve of
our first pretensions only? Surely if we were then right, we are not now wrong:
I mean as to what we have a right to, by the principles of the constitution;
the expediency of our measures is now out of question. I cannot dissociate the
ideas between our having a right of resistance in the case of taxation, and the
same right in the case of legislating for us. You know I am no deep casuist in
political speculations, but having happily been brought up in revolution
principles, I thought I trod surely when I traced the footsteps of those
venerable men. Wonderful! These too are the principles of our opponents; so
that all our misfortune and fault is the having put in practice the very tenets
which they profess to embrace

But I shall exhaust your patience; which I should not do, foreseeing as I do,
that I shall, hereafter, have occasion to put it to the trial.

I am, with the truest regard, Dear Lund, Yours, etc. G. W.

New York, July 22, 1776. To Mr. Lund Washington, etc.
I WISH I could say I thoroughly approved of all the new regulations in the new
institution of government in my native state. It could, however, hardly have
been expected that a reformation so capital and comprehensive should be perfect
at first; the wonder is, it is not still more exceptionable. My heart glows
with unusual warmth, when I advert, as I often do, to that pure and
disinterested ardour which must have animated the bulk of my countrymen
throughout the whole of this controversy. There may be exceptions amongst us,
and no doubt, there are; but it is not fair to infer this from our uncommon
impetuosity and violence. This one would wish restrained, but, by no means
extirpated; for is it not the effect of a highly agitated public spirit; the
mere effervescence of good principles thrown into a state of strong
fermentation? And, surely* even precipitancy is preferable to the
spirit-breaking cautions of chill despondency. Yet I am no advocate, in
general, either for rash measures, or rash men; but at such a conjuncture as
this, men had need to be stimulated by some more active principle than cool and
sober reason. They must be enthusiasts, or they will continue to be slaves.

I give this in answer to my friend Mr. Carter's objections to the first
procedures of the new government. No doubt, Henry is, in many respects, the
unfittest man in the state for Governor of Virginia. He has no property, no
learning, but little good sense, and still less virtue or public spirit; but he
is the idol of the people; and, as it is by their means only that you can hope
to effect the grand schemes which you have meditated, you must humor them, and
indulge them with their rattle. They will soon tire of him; and the opportunity
must then be watched gently to lead them to a better choice; for they may be
led, though they cannot be driven. And though it be, alas! but too true, that
they often mistake their real interests, I am of opinion they never mistake
them long. Sooner or later, they will judge and act from their settled
feelings; and these I take it are generally founded in their settled interests.
When great enterprises are to be performed, we may well dispense with some
little errors in judgment: when without that, we have, in its stead, that which
perhaps, we could not have with it; I mean, that undisciplined ardour which is
infinitely better adapted to our purposes.

There cannot be a more striking instance that the judgment of the people may,
in general, be safely trusted, in the long run, than is to be met with in
Virginia. Very few countries have to boast of more men of respectable
understandings; I know of none that can produce a family, all of them
d^stinguish^^ as clever men, like our Lees. They are all of them the very men
one would wish for to take the le^^ of a willing multitude; for, they are
certainly men of shining talents, and their talents are of that particul^r kind
which usually render men popular. No men were ever more so, than the men in
question once were. It is obvious, this is no longer the case; and the reason
must be that they are no longer worthy of it. With all their cleverness, they
are selfish in the extreme. The people, at length, have found this out; or, no
doubt, R. H* Lee would have now been governor, the grand object of all his aims.

You would be mortified to hear the criticisms which are common here on Henry's
inauguration speech. It is, indeed, a poor and pitiful performance; and yet I
can believe, that set off by his smooth and oily delivery, it would appear
clever when he spoke it. Why did he not ask Mr. Page to prepare it for him?
There is not a man in America more capable. The Counselors of state are
certainly irreproachable, and will do honor to those who appointed them. I am
particularly pleased with the success of my honest brother-in-law, B^t^
Dandridge; and the pleasure is not lessened by the assurance he makes me, that
my letters were serviceable to him, there being but few men whom I love more
than I do him. As you are soon to go down the country, you will see him, and
therefore spare me the trouble of writing, particularly to him. My friends must
now be so indulgent to me, as to wave the matter of compliment; I think myself
happy, whenever I can write, as I should, on urgent business. You know how
ticklish my situation is; little as one would think, there is to be envied in
it, I yet am envied. And though, in all good reason; their fears should take a
direct contrary course, there are who are for ever suggesting suspicions and
jealousies of the army and its commander. My own heart assures me, I mean them
no ill; however, if I really have the influence and ascendency which they
suppose, I will, for their sakes as well as my own, hereafter maintain it at
some little cost. A thousand considerations determine me to strain every nerve
to prevent the army's being under any other control, whilst I live. Let a
persuasion of the necessity of this, if occasion should arise, be seasonably
urged in my native state: and, in the mean while, let some more than ordinary
pains be taken to make me popular. Their own honor and interest are both
concerned in my being so. Show this to Mr. Dandridge; and, as you both can
enter into my meaning, even from the most distant hints, I can rest satisfied,
that you will do every thing I wish you.

We have lately had a general review; and I have much pleasure in informing
you, that we made a better appearance, and went through our exercises more like
soldiers, than I had expected. The Southern states are rash and blameable in
the judgment they generally form of their brethren of the four New England
states; I do assure you, with all my partiality for my own countrymen, and
prejudices against them, I cannot but consider them as the flower of the
American army. They are a strong, vigourous, and hardy people, inured to labor
and toil; which our people seldom are. And though our hot and eager spirits
may, perhaps, suit better in a sudden and desperate enterprise: yet in the way
in which wars are now carried on, you must look for permanent advantages only
from that patient and persevering temper, which is the result of a life of
labor. The New-Englanders are cool, considerate and sensible; whilst we are
all fire and fury: like their climate, they maintain an equal temperature,
whereas we cannot shine, but we burn. They have a uniformity and stability of
character, to which the people of no other states have any pretensions; hence
they must, and will always preserve their influence in this great Empire. Were
it not for the drawbacks and the disadvantages, which the influence of their
popular opinions, on the subject of government, have on their army, they soon
might, and probably would, give law to it. If General Putnam had the talents of
Mr. S. Adams, or Mr. Adams had his, perhaps, even at this moment, this had not
been matter of conjecture. But, Putnam is a plain, blunt, undesigning old
fellow, whose views reach no farther than the duties of his profession. He is,
indeed, very ignorant; yet, I find him a useful ^fficer; and chiefly because he
neither plagues me not others, with wrangling claims of privileges. I owe him
too no small acknowledgments, for the fairness of his accounts. I could open to
you some strange scenes in this way. Some people seem to have gotten such a
habit of cheating government, that, the^ (...) suffi^^^en^ly conscientious in
other respects, the^ (...) far less scrupulous in their manner of charging
^han, I th^nk, becomes them. -- But, as I have often told you, General Mercer
is the man, on whom these states must rest their hopes. The character that one
of his countrymen g^ve to the Pretender, fits him exactly; "He is the most
cautious man I ever saw, not to be a coward; and the bravest not to be rash."
In my judgment, he is not inferior even to General Lee, in military knowledge;
and, in almost every thing else, he is, infinitely, his superior. Yet the
overbearing virtues of this last named gentleman are useful to us, especially
at our setting out: we wanted not the sober and slow deductions of argument and
reason: and Lee, like the author of Common Sense, has talents perfectly formed
to dazzle and confound.

I thank you for your care in making the remittances you mention to Messrs.
Carey and Co. I sincerely wish they may arrive safe; as I cert^inly owe it to
them, to take every step in my power to make them easy. There is a pleasure in
doing as one ought, in little as well as great affairs; but, in my present
circumstances, I should often want this pleasure, were it not for your
affectionate assiduity, and truly friendly attention. God bless you, my dear
friend, for every instance of your care and concern for me!

I am, etc. G. W.

June 24, 1776. To Mrs. Washington.
MY DEAREST LIFE AND LOVE,
YOU have hurt me, I know not how much by the insinuation in your last, that my
letters to you have lately been less frequent, because I have felt less concern
for you. The suspicion is most unjust; -- may I not add, it is most unkind?
Have we lived, now almost a score of years, in the closest and dearest congugal
intimacy to so little purpose that, on an appearance only of inattention to
you, and which you might have accounted for in a thousand ways more natural and
more probable, you should pitch upon that single motive which alone is
injurious to me? I have not, I own, wrote so often to you as I wished, and as I
ought. But think of my situation and then ask your heart, if I be WITHOUT
EXCUSE. We are not, my dearest in circumstances the most favorable to our
happiness: but let us not, I beseech you, idly make them worse, by indulging
suspicions and apprehensions which minds in distress are but too apt to give
way to. I never was, as you have often told me, even in my better and more
disengaged days, so attentive, to the little punctilio^ of friendship, as, it
may be, became me: but, my heart tells me, there never was a moment in my life
since I first knew you, in which it did not cleave and cling to you with the
warmest effection: and it must cease to beat, ere it can cease to wish for your
happiness, above any thing on earth.

I congratulate you most cordially on the fair prospect of recovery of your
amiable daughter-in-law; nor can I wonder, that this second loss of a little
one should affect you, I fear the fatigues of the journey, and the perpetual
agitations of a camp, were too much for her. They are, however, both young and
healthy; so that there can be little doubt of their soon repairing the loss.

And now will my dearest love permit me, a little more earnestly than I have
ever yet done, to press you to consent to that so necessary, so safe and so
easy, though so dreaded a thing -- the being innoculated? It was always
advisable; but at this juncture it seems to be almost absolutely necessary.

I am far from sure, that, that restless madman, our quondam Governor, from the
mere lust of doing mischief, will not soon be take himself to the carrying on a
praedatory war in our rivers. And as Potowmack will certainly be thought most
favorable for his purposes, as affording him scope to keep without the reach
of annoyance. I have little reason to flatter myself that it would not be
particularly pleasing to him, to vent his spite at my house. Let him; it would
affect me only as it might affect you; and, for this reason, among others, I
wish you out of his reach. Yet I think I would not have you quit your house,
professedly, from an apprehension of a visit from him* An appearance of
fearfulness and timidity, even in a woman of my family, might have a bad
effect; but, I must be something more or less than man, not to wish you out of
the way of a danger, which, to say the least, must be disagreeable to you, and
could do good to no one. All this makes for your going at Philadelphia, a place
of perfect security; and it would be almost worth while to be innoculated, if
it were only for the fair pretense it furnishes you with of qui^ting Virginia,
at a time when I could not but be exceedingly uneasy at your remaining in it.
But I flatter myself any further arguments will be unnecessary, when I shall
add, as I now do, that till you have had the smallpox* anxiously as else I
should wish for it, I never can think of consenting to your passing the winter
here in quarters with me.

I would have Lund Washington immediately remove all the unmarried and
suspicious of the slaves, to the quarters in Frederick. The harvesting must be
got in by hireling^. Let him not keep any large stock of grain trod out,
especially at the mill, or within the reach of water carriage: and in
particular, let as little as may be, be left at Clifton's quarters. It will not
be two late, even in the first week of July, to sow the additional supply of
hemp and flax seed which Mr. Mifflin has procured for me in Philadelphia; and
which I hope will be with you before this letter. For obvious reasons, you will
not sow it on the island, nor by the water side. But I hope you will have a
good account of your crop on the Ohio. If Bridgey continues refractory and
riotous, though I know you can ill spare him, let him by all mean be sent off,
as I hope Jack Custis's boy Joe already is, for his sau^^ness at Cambridge.

My attention is this moment called off to the discovery, (...) pretended
discovery, of a most wild and daring plot* It is impossi^^^ as yet, to develope
the mystery in which it either is, (...) supposed to be involved. Thus much
only (...) find (...) with certainty, that it will be a fine field for a war of
lies on both sides. No doubt it will make a good deal of noise in the country;
and there are who think it useful to have the minds of the people kept
constantly on the (...) by rumors of this sort. For my part, I who am said to
be the object principally aimed at in it, find myself perfectly at my ease, and
I have mentioned it to you only from an apprehension that, hearing it from
others and not from me, you might imagine I was in the midst of danger that I
knew not of.

The perpetual solicitude of your poor heart about me, is certainly highly
flattering to me, yet I should be happy to be able to quiet your fears. Why do
you complain of my reserves? Or, how could you imagine that I distrusted either
your prudence or your fidelity? I have the highest opinion of them both. But
why should I teaze you with tedious details of schemes and views which are
perpetually varying; and which therefore might, not improbably mislead, where I
meant to inform you? Suffice^^ that I say, what I have often before told you,
that, as far as I have the control of them, all our preparations of war aim
only at peace. Neither do I, at this moment, see the least likelihood of there
being any considerable military operations this season; and, if not in this
season certainly in no other. It is impossible to suppose, that, in the leisure
and quiet of winter quarters, men will not have the virtue to listen to the
dictates of plain common sense and sober reason. The only true interest of both
sides is reconciliation; nor can there be a point in the world clearer, than
that both sides must be losers by war, in a manner which even peace will not
soon compensate for. We must, at last, agree and be friends; for we cannot live
without them, and they will not without us; and a byestander might well be
puzzled to find out, why as good terms cannot be given and taken now, as when
we shall have well nigh ruined each other by the mutual madness of cutting one
another's throats. For all these reasons, which cannot but be as obvious to the
English commissioners, and ours, as they are to me, I am at a loss to imagine
how any thing can arise to obstruct a negotiation, and, of consequence, a
pacification. You, who know my heart, know that there is not a wish nearer to
it than this is; but I am prepared for every event, one only excepted -- I mean
a dishonorable peace. Rather than that, let me, though it be with the loss of
every thing else I hold dear, continue this horrid trade, and, by the most
unlikely means, be the unworthy instrument of preserving political security and
happiness to them, as well as to ourselves. -- Pity this cannot be
accomplished, without fixing on me that sad name, Rebel. I love my king; you
know I do: a soldier, a good man cannot but love him. How peculiarly hard then
is our fortune to be deemed traitors to so good a King! But, I am not without
hopes, that even he will yet see cause to do me justice: posterity, I am sure,
will. Mean while, I comfort myself with the reflection that this has been the
fate of the best and bravest men, even of the Barons who obtained Magna Charta,
whilst the dispute was depending. This, however, anxiously as I wish for it, it
is not m^ne to command: I see my duty, that of standing up for the liberties of
my country; and whatever difficulties and discouragements lie in my way, I dare
not shrink from it; and I rely on that Being, who has not left to us the choice
of duties, that whilst I consc^^^tiously discharge mine, I shall not finally
lose my reward. If I really am not a bad man, I shall not long be so set down.

Assure yourself. I will pay all possible attention to your recommendations.
But happy as I am in an opportunity of obliging you, even in the smallest
things, take it not amiss, that I use the freedom with you to whisper in your
ear, to be paring of them. You know how I am circumstanced: hardly the
promotion of a subaltern is left to me. And free and independent as I am, I
resolve to remain so. I owe the Congress no obligations for any personal
favors done to myself; nor will I run in debt to them for favors to others.
Besides, I am mortified to have to ask of them, what, in sound policy (if other
motives had been wanting) they ought to have granted to me, unasked. I cannot
describe to you the inconveniences this army suffers for want of this
consequence being given to its commander in chief. But, as these might be
increased, were my peculiar situation in this respect generally known, I
forbear; only enjoining you a cautious silence on this head* -- In a regular
army, our Virginia young men, would certainly, in general, make the best
officers; but I regret that they have not now put it in my power justly to pay
them this compliment They dislike their northern allies; and this dislike is
the source of infinite mischiefs and vexations, to me. In the many disputes and
quarrels of this fort which we have had, one thing has particularly struck me.
My countrymen are not inferior in understanding; and are certainly superior in
that distinguished spirit and h^gh sense of honor which should form the
char^cter of an officer. Yet, somehow or other, it forever happens, that in
every altercation, they are proved to be in the wrong; and they expect of me
attentions and partialities which it is not in my power to show them.

Let me rely that your answer to this will be dated to Philadelphia. I^ I am
not very busily engaged, (which I hope may not be the case) perhaps I may find
ways and means to pay you (...) of a day or two; but this I rather hin^^^ what
I wish* than what I dare h^d you expect. If you st^ll think the fragments of
the set o^ greys I bought o^ Lord Bo^etourt unequal to the journey, (...) Lund
Washington sell them, singly, or otherwise as he can, to the best advantage,
and purchase a new ^ot of bays I could as you desire, get them here, and
perhaps on better terms; but, I have a notion, whether well o^ ^ll founded I
know not, that they never answer well in Virginia. I beg to be affectionately
remembered to all our friends and relations; and that you will continue to
believe me to be

Your most faithful and tender Husband, G. W.

COPY of a Letter from the Reverend Mr. JACOB DUCHE, to General WASHINGTON.
October 8th, 1777. SIR,
IF this ^etter should find you in council or in the field before you read
another sentence I beg you to take the first opportunity of retiring and
weighing its important contents* -- You are perfectly acquain^ed with the part
I formerly took in the present unhappy contest. I was, indeed, among the first
to bear my public testimony against having any recourse to threats, or
indulging a thought of an armed opposition. The current, however, was too
strong for my feeble efforts to resist. I wished to follow my countrymen as far
only as virtue, and the righteousness of their cause, would permit me. I was,
however, prevailed on, among the rest of my clerical brethren in this city, to
gratify the pressing desires of my fell^w citizens, by preaching a sermon to
the second city battalion. I was pressed to publish this sermon, and
relunctantly co^^ented. -- From a personal attachment of n^ar twenty years
standing, and a high respect for your cha^^^ter in private as well as public
life, I took the liberty of dedicating this sermon to you. I had your
affectionate thanks for my performance, in a letter, wherein was expressed, in
the most delicate and ob^^ging terms, your regard for me, your wishes for a
continuance of my friendsh^p and approbation of your conduct. Farther than this
I intended not to proceed, My sermon speaks for itself, and wholly disclaims
the idea of independency. My sentiments were well known to my friends; I
communicated them, without reserve, to many respectable members of Congress,
who expressed their warm approbation of it then. I persisted, to the very last
moment, to use the prayers for my Sovereign, though threatened with insults
from the violence of a party. Upon the declaration of independency I called my
ve^try, and solemnly put the question to them, Whether they thought it best for
the peace and welfare of the congregation, to shut up the churches, or to
continue the service, without using the prayers for the Royal Family? This was
the sad alternative; I concluded to ab^de by their decision, as I could not
have time to consult my spiritual superiors in England. They determined it most
expedient, under such critical circumstance^ to keep open t^ (...), that the
congregations might not be dispersed, which we had great reason to apprehend. A
very few days after the fatal declaration o^ in^^pendency, I received a letter
from Mr. Hancock, sent by express to Germantown, where my family were for the
summer season, acquainting me I was appointed Chapl^^n to the Congress, and
desired my atendence next morning at 9 o'clock. Surprised, and distressed, as I
was, by an event I was not prepared to expect; obliged to give an immediate
attendance, without the opportunity of consulting my friends, I easily accepted
the appointment. I could have but one motive for tak^ng this step. I thought
the churches in danger, and hoped by this means, to have been instrumental in
preventing those ill^ I had so much reason to apprehend. I can, however, with
truth, declare, I then looked upon independency rather as an expedient, and
hazardou^, or, indeed, thrown out IN TERROREM, in order to procure some
favour^ble terms, than a measure that was s^riously p^ (...) events. My sudden
charge of conduct will clearly evince this to have been my idea of the matter
Upon the return of the committee of Congress, appointed to confer with Lord
How, I soon discerned their whole intentions. The different accounts which
each member gave of this conference, the time they took to make up the matter
for public view, and the amazing disagreement between the newspaper accounts
and the relation I myself had from the mouth of one of the committee, convinced
me there must have been some unfair and ungenerous procedure. This
determination, to treat on no other strain than that of independency, which put
it out of his Lordship's power to mention any terms at all, was sufficient
proof to me, that independency was the idol they had long wished to set up, and
that, rather than sacrifice this, they would deluge their country with blood.
From this moment I determined upon my resignation, and, in the beginning of
October 1776, sent it in form to Mr. Hancock, after having officiated only two
months and three weeks; and from that time, as far as my safety would permit, I
have been opposed to all their measures. This circumstantial account of my
conduct, I think due to the friendship you were so obliging as to express for
me, and I hope will be sufficient to justify any seeming inconsistencies in the
part I have acted. And now, dear Sir, suffer me, in the language of truth and
real affection, to address myself to you. All the world must be convinced you
are engaged in the service of your country from motives perfectly
disinterested. You risked every thing that was dear to you, abandoned the
sweets of domestic life, which your affluent fortune can give the uninterrupted
enjoyment of. But, had you, could you have had, the least idea of matters being
carried to such a dangerous extremity? Your most intimate friends shuddered at
the thought of a separation from the mother country, and I took it for granted
that your sentiments coincided with theirs. What then can be the consequence of
this rash and violent measure and degeneracy of representation, confusion of
council^ blunders without number? The most respectable characters have
withdrawn themselves, and are succeeded by a great majority of illiberal and
violent men. Take an impartial view of the present Congress, and what can you
expect from them? Your feelings must be greatly hurt by the representation of
your natural province. You have no longer a Randolph, a Bland, or a Braxton,
men whose names will ever be revered, whose demands never ran above the first
ground on which they set out, and whose truly glorious and virtuous sentiments
I have frequently heard with rapture from their own lips. -- Oh! my dear Sir,
what a sad contrast of characters now present -- others whose friends can never
mingle with your own. -- Your Harrison alone remains, and he disgusted with the
unworthy associates. As to those of my own province, some of them are so
obscure, that their very names were never in my ears before, and others have
only been distinguished for the weakness of their understanding, and the
violence of their tempers. One alone I except from the general charge, -- a man
of virtue, dragged reluctantly into their measures, and restrained by some
false ideas of honor, from retreating, after having gone too far. You cannot
be at a loss to discover whose name answers to this character.

From the N. England provinces, can you find one, that as a gentleman, you
could wish to associate with, unless the soft and mild address of Mr. Hancock,
can atone for his want of every other qualification necessary for the s^a^
which he fills. -- Banckrupts, attorneys, and men of desperate fortunes, are
his colleagues Maryland no longer sends a Tilghman and a protestant Carrol.
Carolina has lost its Lynch, and the elder Middleton has retired. -- Are the
dregs of Congres^^en (...) to influence a mind like yours? These are not the
men you engaged to serve; these are not the men that America has chosen to
represent her. Most of them were chosen by a little low faction (...) few
gentlemen that are among them no^ (...) known to lie on the balance, and
lookin^ (...) alone to turn the be^m: It Is (...) you only, that support the
present Congress; of this you must be fully sensible. Long before they left
Philadelphia, their dignity and consequence was gone; what must it be now since
their precipitate retreat? -- I write with freedom, but without invective; I
know these things to be true, and I write to one whose own observation must
have convinced him that it is so. -- After this view of the Congress, turn to
the army. -- The whole world knows that its only existence depends upon you;
that your death or captivity disperses it in a moment, and that there is not a
man on that side the question in America capable of succeeding you. -- As to
the army itself, what have you to expect from them. Have they not frequently
abandoned you yourself, in the hour of extremity? Can you, have you the least
confidence in a set of undisciplined men and officers, many of them have been
taken from the lowest of the people without principle, without courage; take
away them who surround your person, how very few are there you can ask to sit
at your table? -- As to your little navy, of that little, what is left? Of the
Delaware fleet part are taken, the rest must soon surrender: Of those in the
other provinces some are taken, one or two at sea, and others lying unmanned
and unrigged in your harbors; and now where are your resources? Oh! my dear
Sir, How sadly have you been abused by a faction void of truth, and void of
tenderness to you and your country? They have amused you with hopes of a
declaration of war on the part of France. Believe me, from the best authority,
it was a fiction from the first. -- Early in the year 1776, a French gentleman
was introduced to me, with whom I became intimately acquainted. His business to
all appearance, was to speculate in the mercantile way. But, I believe it will
be found, that in his country he moved in a higher spher^. -- He saw your
cause. -- He became acquainted with all your military preparations. He was
introduced to Congress, and engaged with them in a commercial contract. -- In
the course of our intimacy, he has frequently told me, that he hoped the
Americans would never think of independency; he gave me his reasons. --
Independency can never be supported unless France should declare war against
England. I well know the state of her finances, years to come will not put them
in a situation to enter upon a breach with England. -- At this moment there are
two parties in the court of Versailles; one inlisted under the Duke De
Choiseul, the other under Count Maurepas. Choiseul has no chance of succeeding,
though he is violent for war; Maurepas must get the better; he is for economy
and peace; this was his information, which I mentioned to several members of
Congress, they treated it as a fable, depending entirely on Doctor Franklin's
intelligence. The truth of the matter is this: Dr. Franklin built upon the
success of Choiseul. Upon his arrival in France he found him out of place, his
councils reprobated, and his party dwindled into an insignificant faction: This
you may depend upon to be the true state of affairs in France, or the court of
Dr. Franklin. And further, by vast numbers of letters found on board prizes
taken by the King's ships, it appears, that all commerce with the merchants,
through whom all your supplies have been conveyed, will be at an end; the
letters being full of complaints of no remittances from America, and many
individuals having generally suffered. -- From your friends in England you have
nothing to expect, their numbers have diminished to a cipher; the spirit of the
whole nation is in activity, a few sounding names among the nobility, though
perpetually ringing in your ears, are without character, without influence.
Disappointed ambition has made them desperate, and they only wish to make the
deluded Americans instruments of revenge. All orders and ranks of men in
Great Britain, are now unanimous and determined to risque their all with
content. Trade and manufactures are found to flourish, and new channels are
continually offering, that will perhaps more than supply the loss of the old.
In America your harbors are blocked up; your cities fall one after another;
fortress after fortress, battle after battle is lost. A British army after
having passed unmolested through a vast extent of country, have possessed
themselves of the capital of America. How unequal the contest! How fruitless
the expense of blood! Under so many discouraging circumstances, can virtue, can
honor, can the love of your country prompt you to succeed? Humanity itself,
and sure humanity is no stranger to your breast, calls upon you to desist. --
Your army must perish for want of common necessaries, or thousands of innocent
families must perish to support them; wherever they encamp, the country must be
impoverished; wherever they march, the troops of Britain will pursue, and must
complete the destruction which America herself has begun; perhaps it may be
said, it is better to die than to be made slaves. This indeed is a splendid
maxim in theory, and perhaps in some instances may be found experimentally
true; but when there is the least probability of an happy accommodation, surely
wisdom and humanity call for some sacrifices to be made, to prevent inevitable
destruction. You well know there is but one invincible bar to such an
accommodation, could this be removed, other obstacles might readily be removed.

It is to you, and you alone, your bleeding country looks and calls aloud for
this sacrifice, your arm alone has strength sufficient to remove this bar; may
heaven inspire you with this glorious resolution of exerting your strength at
this crisis, and immortalizing yourself as a friend and guardian to your
country; your penetrating eye needs not more explicit language to discern my
meaning; with that prudence and delicacy therefore, of which I know you
possessed, represent to Congress the indispensible necessity of rescinding the
hasty and ill-advised declaration of independency. Recommend, and you have an
undoubted right to recommend, an immediate cess^t^on of hostilities. Let the
controversy be taken on where that declaration left it, and where Lord How
certainly expected to find it. Let men of clear and impartial characters, in or
out of Congress, liberal in their sentiments, heretofore independen^, in their
fortunes; and some such may be found in America be appointed to confer with his
Majesty's comm^ss^^^^rs. Let them, if they please, prepare, some well digested
constitutional plan, to lay before them at the commencement of the negotiation,
when they have gone thus far, I am confident the usual happy consequences will
ensue; unanimity will immediately take place through the different provinces,
thousands who are now ardently wishing and praying for such a measure will step
forth, and declare themselves the zealous advocates, for constitutional
liberty, and millions will bless the hero that left the field of war, to decide
this most important contest with the weapons of wisdom and humanity. Oh! Sir,
let not false ideas of worldly honor deter you from engaging in so glorious a
task, wha^ever censures may be thrown out, by mean illiberal mind^, your
character will rise in the estimation of the virtuous and noble: It will appear
with luster in the annals of history, and form a glorious contrast, to that of
those, who have fought to obtain conquest, and gratify their own ambition by
the destruction of their species, and the ruin of their country.

Be assured, Sir, that I write not this under the eye of any British officer,
or person connected with the British army, or m^nistry. The sentiments I
express, are the real sentiments of my own heart, such as I have long held, and
which I should have made known to you by letter before, had I not fully
expected an opportunity of a private conference. When you passed through
Philadelphia on your way to Wilmington, I was confined by a severe fit of the
gravel, to my chamber; I have since continued so much indisposed, and times
have been so very d^stressing, that I had neither spirit to write a letter, nor
an opportunity to convey it when written, nor do I yet know by what means, I
shall get these sheets to your hands; I would fain hope that I have said
nothing by which your de^^cacy can be in the least hurt; if I have, I assure
you it has been without the least intention, and therefore your candor will
lead you to forgive me. I have spoke freely of Congress, and of the army, but
what I have sa^d, is partly from my own knowledge, and partly from the
information of some respectable members of the former, and some of the best
officers in the latter; I would not offend the meanest person upon earth; what
I say to you, I say in confidence, to answer what I cannot but deem a most
valuable purpose. I love my country, I love you; but to the love of truth, the
love of peace, and the love of God, I hope I should be enabled, it called upon
to the trial, to sacrifice every other inferior love. If the arguments made use
of in this letter should have so much influence as to engage you in the
glorious work, which I have warmly recommended, I shall ever deem my success
the (...) tempor^l favor that Providence could grant me. Your interposition
and advice, I am confident would meet with a favorable reception from the
authority under which you a^^, if it should not, you have an infallible
recourse still left, negociate for your country at the head of your army. After
all, it may appear presumption as an individual to address himself to you on a
subject of such magnitude, or to say what measures would best secure the
interest and welf^re of a whole continent. The fri^^^ly and favorable opinion
you have always expressed for me, emboldens me to undertake it, and which has
greatly added to the weight of this motive; I have been strongly impressed with
a sense of duty upon the occasion, which left my conscience uneasy, and my
heart afflicted till I fully discharged it. I am no enthusiast; the cause is
new and singular to me, but I could not enjoy one moment's peace till this
letter was written. With most ardent prayers for your spiritual, as well as
temporal welfare,

I am your most obedient, And humble Friend and Servant. JACOB DUCHE.

His Excellency General Washington.
TO THE REVEREND JACOB DUCHE.
SIR,
LEST the poison of your precepts should mislead the ignorant and credulous, or
corrupt the honest, I have ventured, with much deference to able^ pens, to make
a few observations on some of the most remarkable passages in your celebrated
letter to his excellency the commander in chief.

Great pains and many words have been used to palliate your former conduct, and
reconcile it with the part you now act; -- you have found it an Herculean
labor, and it still rests in the same place where you began. That the grass is
green, is self-evident; that the sun shines, needs no demonstration; and that
you have acted the most base and treacherous part, is a truth that wants no
proof. As well might you attempt to reconcile jarring elements, is to d^pe us
into a belief of the integrity of your heart. "You wished to follow your
countrymen as far ONLY as VIRTUE and the RIGHTEOUSNESS of their cause would
permit you;" that is to say, as far as your interest and safety were concerned,
then you was their man: But by forsaking us at this time, it would lead us to
infer, that with you, every principle of virtue and humanity have likewise
abandoned us. You shudder at the idea of an in^ependency, and yet suffered Mr.
Hancock, "who has nothing but a soft (...) address to atone for h^s want of
every other qual^fication necessary for the station he fills." -- Redemptum
nulla virtute a vitris -- I say you suffered this cipher of a man to attack you
by surpr^ze with a commission and dub you a chapla^n. It Is true* you say you
was much distressed, but, quaerenda pecunia primum est, virtus post nummos --
your conscience afterward beco^^ (...), and you^ pockets were lined: At the
SAM^ (...) you insi^uate that you utterly deprecated SUCH (...); being
inconsistent with your new-adopted faith of a^^olute submission and
non-resistance. The danger of the episcopal church, lest it should fall into
anarchy, by absurd^y praying for the -- we oppose, is one specious reason for
your lapsus; and, to prevent that misfortune, you adopted a conduct which you
NOW confess your sentiments reprobated at THAT very time. But perhaps you may
be one of thos^ who believe, "that it is lawful to do EVIL, that GOOD may come
of it"

How often, with pleasure, have I heard you declaim on the blessings of
liberty, the horrors of a despotic government, and exhorting us to firmness and
unanimity! But, alas! little did I then think you "spoke a language foreign to
your heart," and that your soul was all deceit and treachery. Your good sense
and sound judgment were not proof against the popular torrent and the violence
of party, so as a lamb to the slaughter you were borne down by the general
voice.

Like all young sinners, you soon became familiar with vice, and RELUNCTANTLY
preached a sermon to one of the city battalions, encouraging them to stand fast
in their opposition. You afterward became well acquainted with that MONSTER
independency, and seem never to have discovered i^s Gorgon head till we had
been defeated on Long Island, lost the city of New York, and our aff^irs in
that State wore a melancholy aspect* These circumstances, I say, (truly
terrifying to little minds) determined you at once to get out of the SUPPOSED
scrape as well as you could; you were conscious at the same time, how fatal
such an inconsistent step would be to your character as a man of virtue, as a
man of honor, and therefore cautiously concealed the reasons of your
resignation from the candid public, till, like a (...) poit^oon, you sheltered
yourself under the arm of that very power which from the SACRED pulpit, you
exhorted us to oppose. It is needless to prove the necessity of that DEFINITIVE
measure, which you hold forth as the chief cause of your defection, it having
been often and wisely demonstrated, but only to mention it as far as it
interferes with your apology. You consider it as a bugbear, "held up in
terrorem to frighten our oppressors into SOME terms, but not as a measure to be
persisted in at all events;" that is to say, if military parade and threats
were not sufficient to intimidate the foe, to concede those privileges which
you have often acknowledged to be our just and natural rights, and which no
powers ought to divest us of -- then to sit down patiently, bow the neck to the
yoke, and bare the shoulders to the lash. "This, indeed, is a splendid maxim in
theory," but the experiment applies so strongly to the senses, that even you,
Sir, have not Stoicism to reduce it to practice.

I pass by your remarks on the result of the conference between Lord How, his
Britannick Majesty's Commissioner, and the Committee of Congress, not being
conclusive arguments against the necessity of independency.

"All the world," you say, "are convinced that the illustrious personage to
whom you write, is engaged in the Service of his country from motives perfectly
disinterested." It is a catholic faith, that no action can be praiseworthy,
whose principles are unjust and cruel, and which is not only MALUM IN (...),
but practiced to obtain the most villainous and pernicious ends. On the other
hand, it is acknowledged by you, for yourself and the whole world, that he is
engaged to serve his country, and that from the most laudable motives; how then
can you be so inconsistent, after such declaration, to dissuade from that
honorable service? To bring ruin and destruction on our country, or to suffer
others to do it, cannot certainly be called SAVING IT; but an opposite conduct
implies benefits, favors, and every good gift that can be conferred, and which
at this very time you amply confess, are the motives of action in the Personage
to whom you write.

"But," you again say, "could you have had the least idea of matters being
carried to such a dangerous extremity as they are now? Or in words tantamount,
Had you any prospect of the hardships of war, of marching and counter-marching,
cold and heat, wet and dry, hunger and thirst; but above all, of coming to
battle? I myself, one of your most intimate acquaintance, who have known you
near twenty years, could not believe you would have persisted. And now to
prove, that from the measure of independency, has flowed a degeneracy of
representation, confusion of councils and numberless blunders; that the most
worthy characters have withdrawn, and are succeeded by fools and madmen, we
have your ample testimony: And who had a better opportunity of knowing the
characters of those Gentlemen, than their own Chaplain, after preaching up
Liberty for two months and three weeks to them?

No candid person can discern, from the general tenor of your letter, you ever
meant it should have the effect proposed, otherwise you would not have begun
with such illiberal, false, ungentleman-like aspersions on the greatest body
politic in America, the only power which could bring about that important
change for which you solicit. The first who met the fire of your pen, are the
Delegates from Virginia. You recapitulate the virtues of the deceased and
superanuated, or persons who, after long and faithful services, had retired to
manage their private affairs, which had suffered by their absence, or to be
more immediately aiding the public business of their own States: I say, some of
these aforesaid causes affect every Gentleman whom you have thought proper to
discriminate from the rest, and daub with fulsome adulation. Even the members
of your own State, or the catholic Carroll, do not hold you in a more
contemtible view than those very men who have been the subjects of your
flattery. In the New England states, it is well known, even by our enemies,
that the general voice is for supporting our independency at all events; those
people being unanimous, their elections cannot be called the result of a low
faction. Certainly then, under such circumstances, men of virtue and property,
men of wisdom and experience would be chosen to represent them -- men, who
having the real interests of their country at heart, would be the properest
guardians of their rights and privileg^^. That the Congress have lost their
influence the following circumstance will prove to be false -- The paper
currency circulates freely under their credit, the camp is stored with every
necessary; their troops have taken one powerful army, and strongly blockaded
the other -- These are facts among thousands, that give the lie to your
assertions.

Notwithstanding our illustrious General is the idol of his army, and though by
his death or captivity we should experience a most heavy and sensible loss, yet
the principles upon which we have taken up arms, are such as indissolubly
cement our interests and consequently our powers. The merits of our cause are
the same now as at first, only our opposition is more confirmed by accumulated
injuries and aggravated insults. Be assured, we never mean to quit the field,
to expose our country to the ravages of a foe, whose tender mercies are death
and cruelty. Happy for America we have officers amongst us, who, by imitating
the conduct of our great General, (if under the circumstances you mention)
would arrive at such a military perfection, as might in a great measure supply
so capital a loss.

To your bitter sarcasms on our army, I reply -- That some of our men are, and
all have been undisciplined, is a truth that needs no controverting, only that
our opposition thereby becomes more glorious. True it also is, that we have
sometimes given way before superior numbers and advantageous attacks; but our
misfortunes, therefore, are not to be imputed to cowardice. No, Sir, every
gentleman of candor in the British army must acknowledge that we are not
cowards: Mr. Duche himself, was he not under the influence of fear, must
acknowledge it. And though many of our officers and men who heretofore never
sho^e in private life, more than in the character of honest citizens, or
farmers; yet we have numbers who have held the most considerable posts in
government, and are highly respected as private Gentlemen, such whose names
have often reached your ears, and whom you have not been ashamed to profess a
friendship for, exclusive of those Gentlemen who surrounded his Excellency's
person.

As to our little fleet, which you have already annihilated in idea; believe
me, that does not form the nerves of our opposition. Your arguments against the
probability of a French war, and the fine-spun anecdote of a certain
speculative French trader, I purposely omit, leaving the event in the hands of
all-revealing time, which doubtless we shall have no cause to be dissatisfied
with. We do not court the friendship of England, its inhabitants have never
done us any material services; on the contrary, they have voted ample supplies
to hire foreigners to spill our blood unjustly: they never exerted themselves
to effect; it was once in their power to have spared the lives of our butchered
countrymen, -- to have prevented the tears of many widows and orphans, now
deprived of their dearest connections by a band of hireling Scotch and German
ruffians. We know that the spirit of the whole nation is in full activity
against us, and we have already experienced the effects of that humane spirit,
which you say is united and determined. Some few noble patriotic souls are yet
left in both Houses of Parliament, though you have the consummate assurance to
say they are without character, and without influence, whose steady opposition
has no other motive than despair, vengeance, and disappointment. -- But America
will ever have a grateful sense of their merits, in spite of the calumny of
their and our enemies.

Since the Declaration of Independency, the ground of our contest is materially
changed; and it is not rights and privileges for which we now fight, but
dominion and empire are the objects of both parties. Britain is endeavoring to
reduce us to conquered provinces, and again to monopolize our trade. Why then
this immense expense of blood and treasure? when you tell us that "new channels
are continually opening, that will perhaps more than supply the loss of the
old." -- It is only changing the navigation from America to Europe, and the
loss of our trade and ^^nafactures will never be felt by England.

The whole navy of Great Britain is not sufficient to block up all our
harbors; and though fortresses are taken, and battles lost, the victors have
ever reason to lament the conquest. Every day their army moulders away, whilst
ours, like the Hydra, increases twofold; and notwithstanding they now possess
our unfortunate capital, I may justly cry out with you, "How unequal the
contest! how fruitless the expense of blood!"

After recapitulating every discouragement calculated to terrify weak minds,
like an able logician, you draw an inference as foreign from the premises as
probably you and I will be, before this letter reaches you. Ergo, "Under so
many discouraging circumstances, can virtue, can honor, or the love of your
country, prompt you to persevere? Humanity itself, (and then a stroke of
flattery) calls you to desist." The very idea of virtue implies difficulties
and disappointments; was it not so, patriotism would degenerate into
licentiousness, and liberty be of no real value.

True it is, that wherever our army encamps, it becomes somewhat burdensome
to the inhabitants of the vicinage: But observe the progress of the British
spoiler -- murder, rape, robbery, and burning, mark their footsteps. And though
sometimes they may pursue, they as often shamefully retreat, and continue the
devastation which they (not we) have begun.

Wisdom dictates a glorious and happy peace, and humanity wishes for it, but
accommodation seems to imply dependence: A sacrifice which I am confident
America will never make. You call upon his Excellency in the name of the whole
Continent, to make this destructive sacrifice, and to become "the friend and
guardian of his country" -- by withdrawing his protection.

As a full and conclusive answer to the two following paragraphs, I refer you
to a serious perusal of Lord Chatham's speech in the House of Lord's* June
third, 1777.

That you did not write this letter under the eye, or immediate inspection of
any British officer, or any person connected with the British army or ministry,
is the only assertion in your whole performance which is believed; but that you
wrote it at the instigation of some, and for the perusal and eclat of all such
persons, appears very evident. This is a master piece of casuistry, and would
do honor to the eldest son of St. Ignatius himself.

After casting he foulest aspersions on Congress, scandalizing the officers and
the army, and affronting his Excellency with the most villainous propositions,
you say, "I would fain hope, that I have said nothing by which your delicacy
can in the least be hurt, if so, 'twas without intentention, and your candor
will lead you to forgive me." O most consummate assurance! You would not offend
the meanest person on earth; I believe you, Sir -- you cannot offend, your
obscurity hides you, and your insignificance renders harmless the shafts of
your malice.

I never before saw a discrimination between the love of truth, of peace, of
our God, and the love of our country. The end of war is peace -- it is for that
we are now contending. Peace promotes truth and Religion; your principles would
annihilate both. It Is for our country we fight, for her we dare bleed --
Religion and justice approve to conflict.

In fine, your whole performance is a rhapsody, without pathos to soften, or
arguments to convince; and your last proposition is of such a horrid, villainous
nature, that I blush to think o^ it.

Indeed, Sir, I sincerely lament your departure from virtue, from honor, from
your country which, alas! you have for-ever sold. This, perhaps, may be said in
your excuse, -- Incenditque Animum Famoe venientis Amore.

But can riches, can fame, or clerical preferment repay you for a lost
character and prostituted conscience? These shores, as well as your own
reflections, will be forever hostile to you. You are now going to a country
where you must flatter for a subsistence, and exist upon the smiles of the
great. A miserable state of dependence and servility is the only prospect
before you; and this is the eligible exchange you have made -- O Tempora! O
Mores! -- Your talents will perhaps be exercised there to as little purpose as
her^: You will ever be the contempt of honest men, and the tool of highpriests
and knaves in power.

I leave you in the hands of Heaven and a guilty conscience, and am your humble
servant,

JOHN PARK, Lieut. Colonel.
N. B. Mr. Duche's letter is published in the Philadelphia papers with many
alterations and amendments, which were not in the original sent out.



FINIS.

