JESUS CHRIST the true King and Head of GOVERNMENT.

A SERMON PEACHED BEFORE THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF VERMONT, ON THE
DAY OF THEIR FIRST ELECTION, MARCH 12, 1778, AT WINDSOR.

By PETER POWERS, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN NEWBURY.

NEWBURY-PORT: PRINTED BY JOHN M^CALL. 1778.

State of Vermont. IN GENERAL ASSEMBLY. WINDSOR, March 13, 1778.
THIS Assembly have this day appointed Col. John Barret, and Capt. John G.
Bayley, a Committee to wait on the Rev. Mr. Peter Powers with the Thanks of
this House for his Sermon delivered them yesterday, at the opening of this
Session, and to request a Copy thereof for the Press.

By Order of Assembly. THOMAS CHANDLER JUN. Clerk.

AN ELECTION SERMON.
Matthew XXVIII. 18. And Jesus came and spoke unto them saying, All power is
given unto me in Heaven and in Earth.
THE King of Kings and Lord of Lords is the divine speaker in these great
words. And how august and glorious he appears, as the anointed of the Father,
on his mediatorial Throne! His unlimitted sovereignty and absolute dominion, in
and over all things, is clearly asserted.

HE, who was by nature the supreme and mighty God, was pleased to take the form
of a servant and the fashion of a man, that he might suffer the demerit of our
sins. He humbled himself and became obedient unto death, even the death of the
Cross; for which God the Father has highly exalted him, and given him a name
above every name, that at the name of Jesus every kne^ should bow -- and that
every tongue should confess that Jesus Christ is Lord. Phil. 2.6. -- 11.


ACCORDINGLY, our Lord, after his resurrection, appeared in the clearer and
more bright effulgence of his Deity. In his estare of humiliation he did not
lay aside his divinity, but shrouded the glorious appearance of it with the
weakness of human flesh. Yet, in the mean time, how frequently did the sun
break forth through those clouds, in the wonderful miracles he wrought?

BUT now, having finished transgression in his expiatory sacrifice, and risen
triumphant over death and hell; as the due reward of his sufferings, He has
power over all flesh, and all power in Heaven and Earth given unto him. In his
mediatorial commission, he has the grant of unlimitted dominion and government,
He only excepted who put all things under him.

HENCE we have this most natural observation from the Text, JESUS Christ is the
head and fountain of all power.

THIS, by divine Help, I shall endeavor to discuss by showing,

I. What is intended by power, and all power.

II. How Jesus Christ is the head and fountain of all power.

III. Make Application.

I. I am to show what may be here intended by power, or all power in heaven and
Earth.

POWER is a word of large and extensive sense, especially here, where our Lord
declares it to be all power in Heaven and in Earth. So that we may well
conceive that there is no kind of power, but it is, in some just sense, his.

POWER signifies both right and ability to perform any thing.

THERE is the power of strength, and the power of authority and dominion. And
there is divine power, and the power of creatures. Among men there is civil,
military and ecclesiastical power; but Jesus Christ is the great head and
fountain of all.

DIVINE power is infinite, and bounded by nothing but the absolute will and
pleasure of the great supreme. Hence this title is assumed by God, and
abundantly attributed to him with infinite propriety, The ALMIGHTY. I am the
Almighty God. Genesis 17.1.
I know, says Job, that thou can do every thing Job 42.2
Whatever God wills to do, he does with infinite pleasure. His almighty Fiat
gives immediate existence to things, and nothing can resist. It equally
creates, preserves and governs all things. How mavelous and surprising the
all-enlivening agency of the divine power, in every successive moment, in every
of the infinite variety and multiplicity of existencies in the wide extended
creation? And thus says our Lord, My Father works hitherto, and I work John
5.17
.

BUT divine power is not only manifested in the creation, conservation and
gubernation of all things, but most gloriously, in the redemption and salvation
of mankind sinners by Jesus Christ, who therefore says All power is given unto
me, in Heaven and in Earth. It was a work of almighty power, as well as of
infinite grace, to make satisfaction for our sins: and, at the same time, to
make a complete conquest of the rebellious powers of infernal darkness. On the
cross our great Lord spoiled principalities and powers.

THE work of effectual calling is a work of almighty power, when our Lord
raises the dead sinner from his long sleep and death in sin, to a new and
divine life, and strengthens him to faith and calling upon God. Therefore we
read, You has be quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins Ephos. 2.1.
The hour is coming, and now is, when the dead shall hear the voice of the son
of God; and they that hear shall live John 5.25.
Who believe according to the working of his mighty power, which be wrought in
Christ when he raised him from the dead. Ephos. 1.19, 20.


MOREOVER, the guardianship and protection of the Church, amidst all the
wickedness of their own hearts, men and devils; and of every danger, through
this world, to the heavenly kingdom, is a work of powerful grace.

BUT there is not only the power of almightiness in God, but also of Authority
and Dominion. Dominion and fear are with him. He is the great Lord and law
giver of the universe. Being God, creator and preserver, he has a most just
right to give law to, and govern all his creatures.

IN infinite wisdom, the creator fixed a law of nature to every species of
Beings animate and inanimate. And according to that law is the system governed.
Nature, or it is fixed laws, is nothing without him who is the God of nature. He
manages the ordinances of Heaven agreeably to his wise constitution. The wide
field of nature in this lower world, obeys his sovereign orders, and sets a
beautiful example of perfect submission to man, originally appointed it is
ruler, made but a little lower than the Angels, and crowned with glory and
honor.

LAW was given to man. The original law our Maker gave us, commonly called the
law of nature, was not a blind law of instinct, but the eternal rule of
righteousness, the moral law, agreeably to the nature of the divine
perfections. The spirit of this law was written on the heart of innocent man,
for in the image of God made he them; and the great Creator positively enjoined
his punctual obedience. Man is still bound by the same authority; and Heaven
and Earth shall sooner pass away than one jot or tittle of the law shall fail,
or be dispensed with. Jehovah will maintain his authority over his reasonable
creatures, be the consequence what it will to them,

HAD not man broken the law of his Creation, it would have been the security of
his happiness; but being broken, it is sanction must take place without an equal
reparation be made, for God is unchangeable. Blessed be his name for our divine
surety Jesus Christ.

GREAT is the authority of God. He reigns in Heaven above and governs the
myriads of angelic hosts and glorified saints at his pleasure. And unspeakably
happy are they under his government. He reigns upon Earth, and nothing makes
any subject unhappy or miserable under his dominion, but rebellion and high
treason against his majesty.

I proceed to say,

THERE is the power of creatures. Angels excel in strength, and they have
principality and dominion. Hence we read of thrones, dominions, principalities
and powers in Heavenly places Ephesians. iii, 10, Col. i, 16


AND there is power and authority among men. The strength of man is small and
limited, and so is his authority. But authority among mankind is absolutely
reasonable and necessary.

ALL men, indeed, are by nature equal: and all have, most certainly, an equal
right to freedom and liberty by the great law of nature. No man or number of
men, has or can have a right to infringe the natural rights, liberties or
privileges of others: or to dominion or government over any one, but by his
free consent personally, or by his legal representative, God having created the
human species upon a level.

BUT then, we are to consider that the alwise Creator has laid a foundation for
society in the creation of man. It was not good for man to be alone. God
therefore made, and instituted the society of man and wife, which laid the
foundation for larger societies from one degree and rise to another, until it
came to nations, kingdoms or common wealths. Therefore when men, after their
apostasy, multiplied upon the face of the earth, it was necessary to form into
political and civil society, and to have rules and laws for their protection
and safety; and to appoint guardians of the same, else the lives and properties
of men could not be safe from the outrages of the wicked, who paid no regard to
any law, but of sin and corrupt nature. So that the true original end of civil
government was, the safety and happiness of the people; that every man, so far
as possible, might enjoy his immunities and privileges in peaceable and quiet
possession.

WE read, The powers that be are ordained of God. But for what purpose? He,
namely the civil magistrate, is the minister of God to thee for good; but if
thou, do that which is evil, be afraid, for he bears not the sword in vain:
for he is the minister of God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that does
evil. Romans xiii. 1 -- 4
And again we are told, The law is not made for a righteous man, but for the
lawless and disobedient, for the ungodly and for sinners, for unholy and
profane, for murderers of fathers and murderers of mothers, for man-slayers,
for whoremongers, for them that defile themselves with mankind, for
menstealers, for liars, for perjured persons, and if there be any other thing
that is contrary to sound doctrinehi. 1. Tim. i.9, 10.


WHATEVER different forms of government have been set up, among all nations
since the flood, they have been, professedly, set up with these views. Even the
worst of tyrants have openly professed the same, although their practice has
been a palpable contradiction to them. And the most barbarous heathen nations
have found it necessary to have established rules and customary laws strictly
observed for the punishment of vice, and for the safety of life, and
preservation of property.

THE people, under God, are the fountain of all authority among men. Even in
the land of Palestine, where their government was a Theocracy, and their God
was their King, and raised up their Judges and Kings by an extraordinary call,
yet they did not enter upon government without the people's consent and
appointment. Saul and David were particularly pointed out by God, and anointed
by special direction to Samuel the prophet. Yet, without, and until the
people's acceptance, they meddled not with any affair of government. See 1.
Sam. ix. 15, 16.10 1.17.21.24.11.15. 16, 12, 13.2 Sam. 2.4.5.1.2.3.


THE people of any nation, country or community, have an undoubted right to set
up such form of government as they judge will most effectually secure their
safety, prosperity and happiness: and to change and alter it, as they shall
find requisite for the good ends of government. And

EVERY ruler is, or ought to be, appointed by the people, and accountable to
them. And for any officer to make his own private emolument, or personal honor
his aim, is at once to deviate from the design of his institution, and to enter
upon the first stages of tyranny. The public good should ever be the highest
aim, next to God and his own soul, of every one constituted to any office in
the State. But then,

IT is necessary that the constitution be well framed, and suitably adapted,
not only to the genius of the people, but agreeably to the great law of nature.
And divine revelation, which gives us the most perfect rules for the conduct of
mankind, in every station and condition of civil and religious life, should be
received, as a perfect standard, in the framing of all human laws. The law of
the Lord is perfect. Yet as we are never to look for another theocracy since
the Jewish is ceased, and their laws were fitted to such a state, it is
necessary that laws be made in every civil State, to answer the necessities and
conveniences of the subject.

AND not only is it necessary to the well-being and happiness of every State,
that there be a good constitution, and good laws agreeably thereto, but good
rulers, appointed by the people, for the due execution of them. In this case
Jethro's counsel to Moses is worthy our observation. Moreover thou shall choose
out of all the people, able men, such as fear God, men of truth, hating
covetousness, and place such over them. Exodus xviii.21.
Rulers are over the people in their office, but their power is limited by the
constitution and whenever they abuse it, the people have right to a redress of
their grievances; and to depose them from their offices.

OFFICERS should be faithful, and be supported by the people, for this is the
mind of God. Wherefore ye must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also
for conscience sake. For, for this cause pay ye tribute also: for they are
God's ministers attending continually upon this very thing. Romans xiii 5, 6.
Faithful rulers have, in proportion, a great weight, the weight of the State
lying upon them: and they need much wisdom and fortitude that they may do
worthily for God and his people.

EVERY one should be content with his place, and labor to fill his station with
honor to himself and constituents. When once men are uneasy to act within their
own spheres, and covet to rise to higher preferments of honor or profit; when
they are proud, haughty and hasty; when they treat their inferiors with scorn
and contempt; when they wink and connive at vice, or are vicious themselves,
they show plainly that they are unfit to be trusted by the freemen of the
State, and unworthy of their good regards. If such men are promoted, the
constitution is injured, and the laws violated with impunity. Oppression,
despotism and tyranny will soon get off their shackles, and presently begin to
lift up their Hydra heads, and, with wide strides, stalk, like hideous
monsters, over the extended country. Surely the people cannot well be too
cautious who they promote to offices. As good rulers are a great blessing to
people, and highly deserving of their respects; so, on the other hand, bad
rulers are a sore judgment, and deserve the frowns of the public.

AGAIN, military power is also of God, and ordained for the defense of the
civil, and must ever be subject to it, and regulated by it. But this I must
pass over.

ONCE more here, ecclesiastical power is wholly of a spiritual nature, and no
ways connected with either civil or military power. Christ's kingdom is not of
this world, not of a worldly nature. The constitution is spiritual, the
covenant of grace. The laws are spiritual, and the ordinances of a spiritual
nature, given us in the word of truth, the great statutes of heaven; and the
punishments are spiritual, being the sentences of Christ's mouth, who is the
only king, Lord and lawgiver of his church, and pronounced against offenders
in his name, by his ministers. Therefore the civil magistrate has nothing to do
with this government. Only the civil rights, privileges and properties of the
church are to be secured and defended by the civil powers.

PASSING other denominations of power, I proceed to the second general head of
our discourse.

2. To show how Jesus Christ is the head and fountain of all power. Here I
would say,

1. JESUS Christ is the head and fountain, the author and bestower or all
authority as he is by nature God. He is God over all, blessed forevermore. For,
let us consider,

He is the creator of all things, By him says St. Paul, were all things created
that art in heaven, and that are in earth, visible and invisible, whether they
be thrones, dominions, principalities, or powers, all things were created by
him and for him. Col. i.16.
The world was made by him. John i.10.
And the father says to him, Thou Lord in the beginning best laid the
foundations of the earth, and the heavens are the works of thine hands Heb.
i.10.


MOREOVER, Jesus Christ is the immediate upholder preserver and governor of all
worlds. And thus we read of him, And upholding all things by the word of his
powere. Heb. i.3.
And by him all things consist. Col. i.1 7.
Yea, he is head over all things Ephesians. i.22
The government is upon his shoulder, and he is the mighty God, the everlasting
Father, or the father of eternity. Isai. ix.
And when he tabernacled in flesh and dwelt among us he wrought many surprising
miracles by his own power and authority. -- The names and titles of Deity are
clearly ascribed to him, with all the divine attributes and perfections, as
Eternity, Immutability, Omniscience, Omnipresence, Omnipotence and absolute
supremacy.

DIVINE worship is given to him by the command of God who will not give his
glory to another: even the eternal Father says, Let all the Angels of God
worship him. Heb. i.6.


FINALLY our Lord will raise the dead, bring every (...) work into Judgment,
with every secret thing, and judge the quick and the dead according to their
works. Surely these things argue infinite Deity; so that we may, without doubt,
determine that our Lord is absolute God, and therefore the natural and original
head of all power and authority.

2. JESUS Christ is the head and fountain of all authority and power in his
mediatorial capacity. Jesus Christ, as mediator, has received a very extensive
commission. The Father has constituted him to be head over all things. He that
stood as a criminal at Pilate's bar, who was unjustly tried, condemned and
inhumanly executed by the treasonous Theocides, as the meritorious reward of
his sufferings, is advanced to the imperial crown of the universe. Angels,
principalities and powers are made subject unto him. All things are put under
him.

THIS is by a special appointment of the Father, so Saint Paul, Wherefore God
also has highly exalted him, and given him a name which is above every name.
Phil. ii.9.
And we see Jesus who was made a little lower than the Angels, for the
suffering of death, crowned with glory and honor. Heb. ii.9.
God has set him at his own right hand, exalted him in the highest degree,
with the highest honors. Therefore has he given all the Angels command to
worship and obey the Son as Mediator, being, in that capacity, exalted as head
over them.

ALL worlds were subject unto our Lord as God. Creator, but how they are
subject unto him in his mediatorial capacity, his commission or tending to
universal dominion. So he is Lord of heaven and earth, and has the keys of
death and hell, yea, and of heaven too; for the Father has given him power over
all flesh, that he should give eternal life to as many as he has given him John
xvii, 2.


THEREFORE, not only is Jesus Christ king of Angels, having the glorious hosts
of those morning Stars perfectly obsequious to his sovereign authority, but he
is the church's king. Not only is he the prophet and priest of his people, but
also their great sovereign. He is their only Lord and lawgiver, and they have
no other head. The church has no inferior and subordinate heads. Officers she
has to administer the word and sacraments to her, as also her censures and
admonitions to offenders, according to the mind of Christ. In the church there
is the authority of office for edification and assistance in government, but
Jesus Christ is head over all things unto the church Ephesians. i.22.
Agreeably the Father says I have set my king upon my holy hill of Zion. Ps.
ii.6.


AND our Lord not only exercises his kingly office in giving law to, and ruling
over his church, but also in conquering all her internal opposition to him,
subduing her corruptions, giving ruling and exercising grace, and in
restraining and conquering all her spiritual and temporal enemies, and in
effectually guarding and defending her through life and death, unto glory. Once
more,

JESUS Christ is king of all the Earth. He is the great prince of the kings of
the Earth. Therefore we read, God reigns over the heathen, and God is king of
all the Earth Ps. xlvii.7.8.
And he has this title, king of kings, and Lord of Lords. Rev. xix.16.
He is also represented as standing with one foot on the Earth and the other on
the Sea, denoting his dominion over Earth and Sea.

QUESTION, What sort of dominion has Christ; over the world?

I answer, PROVIDENTIAL. The government of Christ over the heathen, and so
also, over all mankind, is a providential government. Jesus Christ is exalted
to the seat of absolute and universal dominion in providence. He wisely and
secretly, according to his own sovereign pleasure, guides all the springs of
action, in all kingdoms and nations through the whole world. Thrones,
dominions, principalities and powers are made subject unto him in providence.

WICKED men universally oppose and resi^^ our Lord's revealed will, and refuse
submission to his laws, They break his bands asunder, and cast away his cords.
And all his grace, brought them in the gospel, is slighted, despised and
contemned by them. They will not have him reign in their hearts, but he reigns
over them in providence. He is king in providence ordering all events. It is by
his permissive will that Satan rages and triumphs among pagans, mahometans,
papists, jews and multitudes of professed protestants.

ALL the arbitrary tyranny and most barbarous cruelties exercised in all parts
of the world, are by his permission. All the different sorts and species of
governments in the world, and all the rulers, good and bad, are set up by his
providential will. Saul and David, Josiah and Nebuchadnezzar are witnesses of
both.

KINGS and princes receive their kingdoms and territories, and all their power
of jurisdiction from Christ, and so does every officer civil or military,
although it be through the hands of the people. Therefore says he, By me kings
reign and princes decree justice; by me princes rule and nobles, even all the
judges of the Earth. Pro. viii.15, 16.
But truly it may be said of many of them, as God did to Cyrus, I girded the^,
though thou have not known me. Is. xlv.5.


As all judgment is committed to the Son, in his mediatorial capacity, and the
Father judges no man, so he manages all the affairs of the world, ruling and
reigning over, and disposing of all nations and countries, and every person
among them, and every thing concerning them, according to his sovereign
pleasure. He is that God who stands in the congregation of the mighty, and
judges among the (...). The world of nature is in his hands. The natural and
moral system is by and under him. Therefore says he, I form the light, and
create darkness; I make peace, and create evil: I the Lord do all these things.
Is. xlv 7
Hence, it is evident that a great and infinite good shall be brought out of
all the evils, both moral and penal, permitted or suffered in the world. Jesus
reigns universal sovereign. I now proceed to the IMPROVEMENT

And this shall be affayed in two uses.

I. USE of information and instruction. And

FROM what we have heard of God's Almightiness we may infer,

1. THE safety and security of all that have taken sanctuary under the divine
wings. God is able to defend them, and will surely do it, for he has promised
saying, He shall cover thee with his feathers, and under his wings shall thou
trust; his truth shall be thy shield and buckler. Ps. xci.4 -- 16.
Chastisement they shall have, but this is not to be deemed evil, but good for
them. They shall have safety in all their troubles; safety in the greatest
dangers, and in death, itself. The almighty arm will defend them from the
powers of darkness, confront and subdue all opposition to their best good, and
guard them to glory, beyond the reach of all enemies.

2. We infer the inexpressible, infinite danger, and most exquisite misery of
God's enemies. Whatever their characters or stations, their danger is infinite.
Thine hand shall find out all thine enemies; thy right hand shall find out
those that hate thee. Thou shall make them as a fiery oven in the time of thine
anger. The Lord shall swallow them up in his wrath, and the fire shall devour
them. Ps. xxi. 8, 9.
They that oppose Christ's laws and government in the world, that refuse fealty
and allegiance to him; that break his laws and abuse his grace, and continue in
their groundless unbelief, let them be high or low, rich or poor. He shall
break them with a rod of iron, He shall dash them in pieces like a potter's
vessel. Ps. ii. 2, 9.
Surely the fallowing counsel is of infinite importance. Be wise now therefore,
O ye kings, be instructed ye judges of the Earth. Serve the Lord with fear, and
rejoice with trembling. Kiss the son, lest he be angry, and ye perish from the
way when his wrath is kindled but a little. Blessed are all they that put their
trust in him.

O what an Almighty arm is lifted up over the impious hardened rebels against
Heaven! And can thine heart endure, and can thy hands be strong in the day that
God shall deal with thee? You may go on a little while, perhaps, in your mad
defiance of your maker and your judge, and spurn at all the grace tendered you,
most freely and plentifully, in the blessed gospel, and take your course, but
in due time your foot shall slide. Me thinks I see crowns and scepters thrown
away as vile refuse; and all the glittering glory of titles, honors, riches and
Earthly profits contemned as the mire in the streets. The kings of the Earth,
and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty
men, and every bond man, and every free man biding themselves in the dens, and
in the rocks of the mounntains, saying to the mountains and rocks, fall on us
and bide us from the face of him that sittteth on the throne, and from the
wrath of the Lamb: for the great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be
able to stand? Can we now refrain thinking of those words of our blessed
Savior, what shall it profit a man if he shall gain the whole world, and loose
his own soul? A portion in Christ is worth more than all the world, O that
great men, and rich men would not look upon themselves above religion! Have
thou an arm like God? or can thou thunder with a voice like him? How very
absurd for a glittering worm to vaunt itself as above it is fellow worms when
it is nature is the same, and as liable and as easy to be crushed to death?

SECONDLY, from what has been offered on the divine authority, we infer,

1. THAT it is most reasonable and just. It is the authority of God our maker,
of Christ our God and Redeemer. And authority over all is a natural and
necessary prerogative of the Deity. Nothing can be more reasonable than that the
creator should be absolute proprietor of his creatures; and that he should give
them laws and govern them to the greatest and best end, his own glory. And
impossible it is for him to err. His will must be good in persection. And his
laws must be wise and good, for his will is not only good, but his
understanding infinite. Therefore his authority is most reasonable and just.

2. WE infer that submission to the divine government is our duty. And an
imperfect submission and obedience is far from the thing required. An imperfect
obedience to the laws of the state, would rather be termed rebellion, or
disobedience, by the rulers. Though a man should keep the laws of the state in
a thousand instances, and violate them wilfully in one, he would be deemed
guilty, and dealt with as a law-breaker. And so divine inspiration argues,
Whoseover shall keep the whole law, end yet offend in one point is guilty of
all; for he that said do not commit adultery, said also, do not kill. Now if
thou commit no adultery, yet if thou kill, thou art become a transgressor of
the law. James ii, 10.11


SURELY, if God be infinite and his law perfect and we read expressly that the
law of the Lord is perfect, Ps. xix.7.
then a perfect submission and obedience is our duty; and also a continuance
therein, for it is written, cursed is every one that continues not in all
things which are written in the book of the law to do them. Gal. iii.10.
Oh, if Christ had not most perfectly obeyed for us, the curse would have been
our portion for ever: But blessed be God, he has become obedient unto death for
us, that whosoever believes in him should receive remission of sins, and be
freely justified and saved. Yet the believer in Jesus must be careful to
maintain good works. Indeed the law is not a covenant of works for the
believer, but a perfect rule of all holy living unto God. But I pass on to say,

THIRDLY, from what we have heard of authority among men, we learn,

1. THAT that authority which is founded on the law of nature, and agreeably to
divine revelation, is the authority of God, and the only authority to be
obeyed, all other power and authority being tyranny. True, many nations have
set up a constitution of government, which has, in many things, been excellent,
and many of their laws have been well adapted to the necessities of the state.
The Romans seemed to have excelled most others, while they remained a Common
Wealth, But many encroachments were made upon the rights of the subject among
them; and finally that empire has undergone seven or eight different forms of
government. We indeed find that under one of the worst of those forms, namely,
their Emperors, Saint Paul directs christians to be subject. Romans xiii.1.
But we are not to suppose any are bound to be subject to any law or
government, in any article against the rights of conscience. The holy martyrs
of Jesus have ever submitted to the civil laws of the government they lived
under, acknowledging their bodies and estates belonged to the king, or emperor,
but their consciences they held free.

IT is observable, that toleration to thofe of a different religion from the
state-religion, was but little considered as a matter of right, in but few
countries; so that spiritual tyranny and intolerance generally prevailed in the
world from age to age,; And even in England, after they became professed
protestants, they were no less severe against dissenters than the old pagans
and papists. And, as to civil liberty in the best regulated states, kingdoms
and common wealths, there ever was a high degree of tyranny practiced against
the subject.

ENGLAND has been one of the most famous countries for civil liberty. The
people, in almost every age, seemed to have an abhorrence of despotilm, and
have shown an uncommon zeal to secure and establish their privileges. Yet,
notwithstanding their great Charter, and the established laws of the nation,
almost every reign has been stained with more or less acts of tyranny. And, in
many reigns, what scenes of the most savage barbarities have been carried on,
to the eternal infamy of the Henry and Stuart lines? In the mean time how have
the pulpite rung with the stupid doctrines of The Lord's anointed, and possive
obedience and nonresistance? The nation groaned under the weight of oppression
and arbitrary domination. Nothing could content the more than brutish tyrants
but the absolute destruction and waste of law, every privilege, and the lives
and fortunes of the subject. Happy revolution in 1688. But how has the old
tyranny risen out of it is grave, and made a most formidable attack upon the
subject in the present arbitrary reign? This country, sensible of the vast
importance of it is privileges, has thrown off the, yoke, and nobly taken up
arms in it is own defense, determined to be free, or die in the virtuous cause,
the great cause of Heaven and Earth. In dependence on the almighty Jehovah, we
may expect complete deliverance, and see this infant country a seat of justice,
religion and Liberty.

UNHAPPY it would be, if the bad government we have been under should be a
means of the people's neglecting a good government. Rather let it engage them
the more carefully to establish, maintain and submit to good government. But in
this sinful world, we cannot expect a permanent state of peace, Liberty and
prosperity. Such is the corruption, pride and avarice of fallen man's that it
makes him like the troubled Sea when it cannot rest. And the first temptation,
ye shall be as Gods, is very apt to prevail, especially in unsanctified men.
Internal disputes may embroil the whole land in a scene of disorder, confusion
and misery. Or sensuality luxury and dissipation swallow up all our virtue,
enervate all our fortitude, and bring on a meanness and servility of spirit, so
that we should easily become the dupes and abject slaves of despotism and
tyranny. Indeed every sort of vice leads the way to both temporal and eternal
slavery. But of all things ignorance opens the widest door to it; this paves
the way to every vice, and disables a people from knowing the things of their
temporal, as well as spiritual peace. How necessary therefore, to exert
ourseleves against all wickdness, and to promote all useful knowledge? But e're
I am aware I am carried too far here, and must return.

THIS Question may require an answer,

WHAT authority may be resisted?

I answer, Unlawful authority, and all lawful officers acting unlawfully. There
have been many officers, lawfully and well appointed, who have acted unlawfully
in their office: and when this is the case, they should not be obeyed, but
rather resisted in a due manner.

OFFICERS are no better by nature than other men, and often have been worse by
practice than those in a private sphere. I need not call in a Henry, a Stuart,
a George or a North to witness in the present case: we may find enough in this
country since a Sir Edmund Andross, to prove the point. Such authority should
be universally opposed with a manly firmnes, and an heroic virtue, until it be
ended, and good and lawful authority established. But such wicked men are the
first to plead law and authority, and to cry out rebellion and treason, even
when they are subverting the constitution, violating their solemn oaths, and
depriving the people, both of their civil and religious right. And if such men
are not resisted we must obey man rather than God. We must suffer all that is
dear and valuable for soul and body, for time and eternity, to be unjustly
taken from us: We must give up to lawless lust, ambition and tyranny; yea to
despots and devils both. And can we endure the thought? Let it rouse up every
man, and excite a noble ardor to blot the name of tyranny out of the land, and
to keep up a steady firmness and unshaken resolution to defend and support true
Liberty, and hand it down to posterity as the best legacy we can bestow on them.

2. WE infer the necessity of good rulers. If the foundations be destroyed,
what can the righteous do? A good constitution, good laws and good magistrates
are very necessary to the well-being of a people. A state of anarchy is ever a
state of disorder and confution. Injustice and every vice flourisnes with
impunity, and no man's life or property is safe. How sad were the times in
Israel when they were without government? When the Levite's concubine was
forced 'till she was dead, we read In those days there was no king in Israel;
every man did that which was right in his own eyes. Jud. xxi.25.
There was no Judge, or supreme magistrate to put the laws in execution, and
the people were lawless. It is therefore evident that good rulers are
nccessary. Magistracy is an ordinance of God, and of great importance to the
people.

FOURTHLY, is it as we have heard, that Jesus Christ is the head and fountain
of all authority? Hence we infer,

1. WHAT a glorious and wonderful head of government we have. Jesus Christ is
the prince of the kings of the Earth. When rulers have hearts after his own
heart; when they are sensible they derive their all from him; when they
heartily own him for their head and sovereign, pattern after him in their
lives, and copy his example in the execution of their offices, they are
blessings in their high stations, greatly useful to the State, and of vast
importance to the people. But when they forget the Lord's anointed, Christ
their king, and set up themselves in his feat, and usurp his throne, they
become oppressors and lawlefs tyrants, O, but we, of all people in the world,
have cause to own and acknowledge the prince of peace to be our sovereign. We
have renounced the tyrant of Britain, and declaimed loudly against monarchical
power; and have fet up to be a free people. We own no other prince or sovereign
but the prince often Heaven, the great sovereign of the universe. To him we swear
allegiance, and promise, through his abundant grace, to keep his laws.

THE ten moral precepts are a brief summary of the whole moral law, the great
law of nature. And the blessed bible gives us a perfect comment upon it. Hence
the scripture is so frequently called the law of the Lord. Jesus Christ is the
lawgiver, and the commentator. And hence, as he is our maker, our king and our
redeemer, we are bound to love, honor and obey him; to be subject to his law
and government. We should receive his law as out rule and guide both in
law-making and executing.

AND truly we can be subject to none that is equal to him. O, his greatness!
His transcenden^ excellence and glory! There is none like him for wisdom, for
he is the wisdom of the father; and in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge. He needs no counsel, for counsel is his and found wisdom. His
name is called wonderful, counselor. There is none like him for power, for he
is the mighty God. There is none like him for holiness, for he is The holy one
of lsrael. And concerning him the Seraphims cry one to another holy, holy, holy
is the Lord is Lord of hosts. See If. vi.1 -- 12, and compare it with John xii.
39 -- 41.
There is none like him for justice and righteousness, for Righteousness is the
girdle of his loins. There is none like him for goodness, for he is the good
shepherd. There is none like him for truth, for he is the verily, verily, the
Amen, the faithful and true witness. There is none like him for mercy and
kindness, for meekness and patience, for granting free access, for sympathy,
for rewarding his faithful servants. There is none like him for riches and
honors, for the multitude of subjects, and for (...) of territory and
extensiveness of dominion. Surely there is no king like the king of America who
lives and reigns forever and ever.

2. WHAT a beautiful and lovely example have all rulers, even Jesus Christ the
King of righteousness and peace! Jesus Christ is an example of impartial
justice, and all his administrations are wise, good and gracious. He never took
any bribe, nor turned away the poor from his right. The rich and the poor are
both alike unto him. And they who upon any pretense whatever, neglect or refuse
so noble a Precedent, will find him a severe Judge at the last, for to him all
are accountable.

I now proceed to my second end last use.

II. A use of address to this venerable Audience upon this pleasing and joyful
occasion.

OUR eyes now see the foundation of a new republican state, laid on the noblest
principles of true patriotism, religion and liberty, conspiring the temporal
and eternal weal of present and future generations. And may heaven smile upon
it appointing salvation for it is walls and buswarks!

IN some respects we have suffered difficulties which no part of the United
States of America have. We may therefore prize liberty the higher, and taste is
the sweeter.

FROM the beginning of our settling in this late howling wilderness, we have
groaned under British tyranny. How dark and gloomy that dismal day when these
infant plantations fell under the jurisdiction of New York, whose officers
being the tools of the crown, were no less arbitrary and cruel, in their
unrighteous oppressions of poor people, in the midst of all the natural and
necessary hardships of a new settlement, than the savage tyrant of England
their patron?

OUR legal Charters have been demanded of us, whereby our lawful possessions
have fallen into their unjust hands: and enormous sums demanded for their
patents. Honest and virtuous people sued out of their proper inheritance;
others driven to the last extremities by the force of their murderous arms, The
most infamous men, who neither feared God, or regarded man, have been placed
over us in the most important offices, from whom we could not expect mercy or
justice.

As to religion, it seems to have been a thing the least known or regarded in
their courts and assemblies. And through the State the Lord's day has been, by
a great part of rich and poor, a day of sports and recreations. No provision
was made for the support of religion, but ministers have been left to all the
hardships of a mission among Savages, except the charities of a small number of
more serious and good people whose lot fell among them. And truly such things
must be very disagreeable to a virtuous people, brought up in the religious
States of New England, as the present inhabitants of this new State were. Such,
and much more, have been our troubles under the crown officers of that State,
And the constitution and laws, since adopted by them, give the strongest
evidence of the same arbitrary principles yet remaining. Blessed be God who has
looked upon our affiction, and given us a happy deliverance from that iron yoke.

AND when the enemy General Burgoyne with about 10000 British troops, etc.
came in like a flood upon us, the last summer, and spread such scenes of
horror and devaslation, the spirit of the Lord lifted up a standard against
him: so that after all his proud boasts, and haughty insults, he is fallen like
Lucifer son of the morning.

ON this surprising and remarkable interposition of Heaven, I would
congratulate my country, the brave and worthy officers, and our valiant
soldiers, who showed a noble ardor and truly heroic spirit on the memorable
sixteenth of August last, and thence afterward to the remarkable seventeenth
of October, when British power and pride submitted to brave Americans. Then did
the Lord ride upon a cherub, and did fly; yea he did fly upon the wings of the
wind Ps. xviii, 10.
Let us join the Heavenly choir, Aleluia, for the Lord God omnipotent reigns
Rev. xix.6.
But this was a salvation especially for this infant State, which we should
record to the glory of our great deliverer.

AND now, after laboring through inexpressible distresses, divisions and
hardships, our joyful eyes see the foundation of a new State laid. O, may the
superstructure be equal to it, and the blessing of the Lord rest upon it from
generation to generation, that it may be a habitation of justice, a mountain of
holiness, and a dwelling of peace and truth forever.

I would therefore in the name of our great king Jesus, humbly offer a word to
our civil Fathers of this new State.

FIRST to the Legislative Authority,

Truly worthy, and much honored Gentlemen,

You have a most weighty and important part of government assigned you, by the
freemen at the State. Legislation requires great wisdom and skill. Laws should
be framed and suitably adapted to the constitution, the necessities and
conveniences of the people; very plain and explicit to prevent, as much as
possible, disputes, and that justice may be done in giving judgment.

AND, Sirs, it is a new business you are called to; work, which it is probable,
you have been unused to, not have had but little opportunity to consider. With
propriety therefore you may adopt the words of Solomon, and, in them, humbly
address your great Lord, I am but a little child, I know not how to go cut, or
come in -- Give therefore thy servant an understanding heart 1 Kings iii. 7.9.
And we read The speech pleased the Lord. Wisdom is necessary. And Christ our
King says Counsel is mine and found wisdom. In him are hid all tbe treasures of
wisdom and knowledge; you will, therefore, be entreated humbly and earnestly to
apply yourselves to him for guidance in the paths of judgment; that, by his
all-governing influence, he would furnish and assist you in the various
branches of the very important business lying before you, and enable you to go
through it, to the lasting good of the State, and your own honor and felicity.

AND as Christ is your Lord and King, you will pay a due regard to his laws.
You will be entreated to seek the true sense and spirit of them, heartily to
believe and obey them, and to set them always before you as an excellent guide
in the framing of every law tor the State.

AND how necessary is it, Sirs, that the best foundation be early laid for the
suppression of every vice, and the encouragement of every virtue? And as
ignorance is a great support of vice, and opens a wide door to temporal,
ecclesiastical, and spiritual tyranny, you will wisely consider on the best
means to promote the education of the rising generations in all useful
knowledge. As also the encouragement and support of the ambassadors of Christ
our King; that his religion and interest may be advanced, to the present and
future good of the people. Of what importance this?

WE heartily commend you, Sirs, to him that is able to keep you, and to guide
you by his unerring counsel in the great work before you; so that it may
hereafter be said of this State, in some good sense, as the inspired lawgiver
of lsrael, What nation is there so great, that has statutes and judgments so
righteous as all their law?

SECONDLY I would with all due deference address the Executive authority of the
State.

Worthy and honored Gentlemen,

You are God's ministers. Dread title! The sword you wear is the sword of the
Lord; the sword of justice to keep the peace of the State, and of each part
within your province. The eyes of all, within the State, look up to you for
justice. And may the supreme Executive power, and all our judges and justices
of the peace keep in view the infinitely great and supreme Judge by whom all
the judges of the Earth do rule, and ever shake their hands from holding bribes.

PERMIT me, Sirs, to say we expect, and, what is inconceivably greater, Christ
our sovereign expects that each of you be terror to evil doers, and a praise to
them that do well.

WE trust the honorable Legislature will furnish you with good and wholesome
laws, without which we cannot expect you can do much. And may we hope,
Gentlemen, that the general complaint, which has been long in England, and in
all parts of this, country, more or less, may never be heard among us, The want
of justice.

No man can number all the good and wholesome laws that have been made in
England and this country, against all sorts of vice, and that justice might be
done for the public, and between man and man; and yet how has vice appeared
with it is brazen face, in open effrontery of all law and justice? And what
multitudes have suffered for want of a speedy execution of justice? And the
public has suffered through a careless negligence, bribes, vicious rulers, or
the artifices of bribed and perjured attorneys.

MAY Heaven prevent such abuses among us! And may you, Gentlemen, and your
successors, nobly exert youselves to do justice and judgment How worthy the
practical observation of all rulers is the charge of good Jehoshaphat? And he
said to the judges, Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not for man, but for the
Lord who is with you in the judgment. Wherefore now, let the fear of the Lord
be upon you: take heed and do it; for there is no iniquity with the Lord our
God, nor respect of persons, not taking of gifts. -- Thus shall ye do in the
fear of the Lord faithfully, and with a perfect heart. 2 Chronicles. xix. 6 -- 1O.
We wish you much wisdom and fortitude, and heartily pray you may go on and
prosper in the impartial administration of justice and judgment, and that you
may have boldness in the day of Christ.

THIRDLY, I would, in the next place, address the freemen of the State.

GENTLEMEN, you are as free citizens, and the whole power of the State falls
yearly into your hands. Remember the solemn oath you have taken in the great
name of the ever living God, and be not swayed by interest, party or prejudice,
in giving your suffrages.

IF you have a proper sense of the great importance and worth of our
privileges, you will look for men of God, men of truth, able men, such as fear
God and hate covetousness, and give your votes for such from time to time.

A good constitution, all Liberty worth the name, and every thing dear and
sacred may soon be subverted by wicked designing men, who are ever gaping for
places of preferment and profit.

IT is a great deal you put into the hands of your representatives. And men of
no virtue, no principle or conscience cannot be trusted, but with the greatest
peril.

AND be entreated, Sirs, to seek the peace and prosperity of your towns, and of
the whole State: and labor to promote and encourage every virtue among
yourselves, and the suppression of every vice. And, of what importance is it to
yourselves and posterity, that your houses be nurseries of piety and devotion?
As also, that you spare not to educate your children in useful learning and the
principles of our holy religion? Like faithful Abraham, command your children
and your households after you to keep the way of the Lord, to do justice and
judgment. Genesis xviii.19.


AND how necessary is it, dear Sirs, that you settle able and faithful
ministers of Christ in your several towns; that you and your children may enjoy
a preached gospel, and all it is ordinances and institutions according to the
mind of Christ. And remember for your encouragement, that Blessed are the
people that know the joyful sound. Ps. 1xv. 15, 16, 17.


ONCE more, and above all. I beseech you to bow to our glorious sovereign
prince. And may Christ our King reign in our hearts, in his sweet and benign
influence! May he be crowned King upon the throne of your souls, and sway his
sweet and peaceful scepter there forever! Happy it would be to see his kingdom
of grace flourishing in this State; and many flocking round his standard.
Christ reigns in providence, and in grace: and he is almighty, he is lovely in
both. How glorious is that kingdom which consists in righteousness, peace and
joy in the Holy Ghost? How transcendently amiable and lovely the King of glory,
by whom kings reign, having all power in Heaven and in Earth! Thy kingdom come.

FOURTHLY, I would offer a word to my Reverend brethren in the ministry. John
xvii. 2.


Reverend and dear Sirs,

IT is a peculiarly sweet consideration to us, that our divine lord and master
has all power in Heaven and in Earth, and for this very purpose that be should
give eternal life to us many as the Father has given him. The Address to the
Ministers, omitted in the Delivery, by reason that none of the Ministers of the
State were present, takes it is place in the Publication.
This is the great end of his providential government. And as he is able, so he
will most certainly accomplish it. He will govern all things, all nations and
all occurrences in providence of every name and nature, so as to conduce to the
bringing home his people in a thorough conversion, and their final and complete
glorification.

WE have but little encouragement from visibility at present. All things
outward look dark. It is a dark day on account of the unnatural war: a darker
on account of the great wickedness of the country, Alas! the drunkenness,
profanity, uncleanness and Sabbath breaking through the land. O, what a
lamentable decay of vital piety, family religion and government! How seldom do
we find any enquiring the way to Zion! The spirit of conviction and conversion
seems apparently to have left the country almost universally. The wise virgins
are slumbering and sleeping with the foolish. Such an impenetrable hardness of
heart prevails, that no judgments of Heaven seem to make any impression on the
wicked; but everyday they grow more obdurate and insensible. The most
awakening, melting and alarming discourses from the sacred desk are rather
derided than regarded. Surely these things are heavy on the hearts of Christ's
ministers, But although Satan rages, the Lord reigns.

AND now my brethren how are we? What sense have we of these things? Have we
let down our watch with others? Can we content ourselves without the spirit and
energy of religion in our own souls, and to see it prevailing among the people?
O, why are we not up in good earnest? Why are we not importunate in our
prayers? Pungent and pressing in our applications? Unwearied in our labors
night and day? Surely there is enough in Christ, enough in his sweet promises
to encourage and strengthen our faith, Lo I am with you always, even to the end
of the world. I will not leave you comfortless, I will come unto you. I will
pour water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will
pour my spirit upon thy seed, and way blessing upon thine offspring. We may
therefore look for great things from our Lord. And in due time we shall reap if
we faint not.

ONE thing more I would observe, The laborers are few, very few in this infant
State, and at present but little prospect of many additions. Let us pray the
Lord of the harvest to send forth laborers into his harvest. And while there is
such a paucity of ministers in the State, are we not called in providence, to
double our labors among the people scattered in the wilderness as sheep without
a shepherd?

IT is indeed sadly true that many appear to have but little regard to the
ministry, having imbibed gross errors and corrupt opinions, contrary to the
doctrine which is according to Godliness. Yet in dependence upon our great Lord
and master, we may be instrumental of winning some to Christ, and of preventing
many more from following their perniciuos ways.

WE cannot prevent, diversity of opinions, or the grossest errors; neit^^^ can
the State. Our part is faithfully to deliver all the counsel of God in public
and in private, and to commit all to our sovereign Lord, in quiet resignation
to his will. He governs all things civil and religion.

We cannot reasonably desire but that every one (...) joy the free liberty of
(...) conscience. It is (...) evident that many abuse it. Yea they abuse both
that ^^vil and religious liberty; yet we should rejoice that three is such a
precious privilege granted us. And after useing our best endeavors they must
be left to their own masters, to whom they stand or fall. God is the judge.

IT is a very plain case that many people in the present day, have very absurd
notions of Liberty, as if it consisted ed in a right for every one to believe,
do, or act as he pleases in all things civil, and religious. This is a
Libertime principle. No man has any sight, before God, to believe or practice
contrary to scripture. And Liberty consists in a freedom to do that which is
right. The great law of nature, the moral law, is the rule of right action.
This is the rule of moral and civil Liberty. Man's fall has taken away his
freedom of right action; for whosoever commits sin is the servant of sin. In
the kingdom of providence Christ gives a civil freedom: in the kingdom of grace
he gives a spiritual freedom. The Gospel is the perfect Law of Liberty; and
this lays the foundation for a perfect moral freedom. It is the spiritual
freedom we are especially concerned to seek among the people. And for this we
should labor with the greatest painfulness.

How sorrowful, that a free people, in a civil sense should be the servants and
slaves of sin and satan? O that he who was anointed to proclaim liberty to the
captives and the opening of the prison to them, that are bound would speedily
accomplish this happy deliverance, and most glorious freedom! Let us pray for
the peace of Jerusalem. And may the blessing of many that are ready to perish
come upon us.

AMEN.

