Mr. PAYSON'S ELECTION-SERMON. MAY 27, 1778.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE HONORABLE COUNCIL, AND THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES, OF THE STATE of MASSACHUSETTS BAY, IN NEW ENGLAND, AT BOSTON,
MAY 27, 1778.

BEING THE ANNIVERSARY FOR THE ELECTION OF THE HONORABLE COUNCIL.

By PHILLIPS PAYSON, A. M. PASTOR OF A CHURCH IN CHELSEA.

BOSTON: N. E. PRINTED BY JOHN GILL, PRINTER TO THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY. M DCC
LXXVIII.

STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS BAY. COUNCIL CHAMGER, MAY 28, 1778.
ORDERED, That MOSES GILL, HENRY GARDNER, and TIMOTHY DANIELSON, Esq'rs; be a
Committee to wait on the Rev'd. Mr. SAMUEL-PHILLIPS PAYSON, and return him the
Thanks of the Board for his SERMON delivered Yesterday, before both Houses of
Assembly; and request a Copy thereof for the Press.

JOHN AVERY, D. Sec'y.

AN ELECTION-SERMON.
GAL. IV.26 and 31. But Jerusalem which is above is free, which is the mother
of us all. So then, Brethren, we are not children of the bond woman but of the
free.
IT is common for the inspired writers to speak of the gospel dispensation in
terms applicable to the present world, especially when they view it in
comparison with the law of Moses. In this light, they consider the church of
God, and good men upon earth, as members of the church and family of God above,
and liken the liberty of christians, to that of the citizens of the heavenly
Zion.

WE doubt not, but the Jerusalem above, the heavenly society, possesses the
noblest liberty to a degree of perfection, of which, the human mind can have no
adequate conception, in the present state. The want of that knowledge and
rectitude they are endowed with above, renders liberty and government so
imperfect here below.

NEXT to the liberty of Heaven, is that which the sons of God, the heirs of
glory possess in this life, in which they are freed from the bondage of
corruption, the tyranny of evil lusts and passions, described by the apostle,
by being made free from sin, and becoming the servants of God. These kinds of
liberty are so nearly related, that the latter is considered as a sure pledge
of the former, and therefore, all good men, all true believers, in a special
sense are children of the free woman, heirs of the promise. This religious or
spiritual liberty must be accounted the greatest happiness of man, considered
in a private capacity.

BUT considering ourselves here, as connected in civil society, and members one
of another, we must in this view, esteem civil liberty as the greatest of all
human blessings. This admits of different degrees, nearly proportioned to the
morals, capacity, and principles of a people, and the mode of government they
adopt. For like the enjoyment of other blessings, it supposes an aptitude, or
taste in the possessor. Hence, a people formed upon the morals and principles
of the gospel are capacitated to enjoy the highest degree of civil liberty, and
will really enjoy it, unless prevented by force or fraud.

MUCH depends upon the mode and administration of civil government, to complete
the blessing of liberty; for although the best possible plan of government, never
can give an ignorant and vicious people, the true enjoyment of liberty, yet a
State may be enslaved, though its inhabitants in general, may be knowing,
virtuous and heroic.

THE voice of reason, and the voice of God, both teach us, that the great
object, or end of government, is, the public good. Nor is there less certainty
in determining, that a free and righteous government originates from the people
and is under their direction and control, and therefore a free popular model
of government, of the republican kind, may be judged the most friendly to the
rights and liberties of the people, and the (...) conducive to the public
welfare.

ON account of the infinite diversity of opinions, and interests, as well as
for other weighty reasons, a government altogether popular, so as to have the
decision of cases by assemblies of the body of the people, cannot be thought so
eligible; nor yet, that a people should delegate their power and authority to
one single man, or to one body of men, or indeed to any hands whatever,
excepting for a short term of time.

A FORM of government may be so constituted, as to have useful checks in the
legislature, and yet capable of acting with union, vigor and dispatch, with a
representation equally proportioned, preserving the legislative and executive
branches distinct, and the great essentials of liberty be preserved and
secured. To adjust such a model, THE form or constitution of government, that
has been submitted to the people of this State, so amply secures the essentials
of liberty, places and keeps the power so entirely in the hands of the people,
is so concise and explicit, and makes such an easy step from the old to the new
form, that it may justly be considered as a high evidence of the abilities of
its compilers, and if it should not be complied with, it is very probable we
never shall obtain a better
is acknowledged to be a nice and difficult matter: and when adjusted, to
render it respectable, permanent and quiet, the circumstances of the State, and
the capacities and morals both of rulers and people, are not only of high
importance but of absolute necessity.

IT by no means becomes me to assume the airs of a dictator, by deliniating a
model of government; but shall ask the candid attention of this Assembly, to
some things respecting a State, its rulers and inhabitants, of high importance
and necessity to the being and continuance of such a free and righteous
government as we wish for ourselves and posterity, and hope by the blessing of
God to have ever long established.

IN this view, it is obvious to observe, that a spirit of liberty should in
general prevail among a people: Their minds should be possessed with a sense of
its worth and nature.

FACTS and observation abundantly teach us, that the minds of a community, as
well as of individuals, are subject to different and various casts and
impressions. The inhabitants of large and opulent empires and kingdoms, are
often entirely lost to a sense of liberty; in which case they become an easy
prey to usurpers and tyrants.

WHERE the spirit of liberty is found in its genuine vigor, it produces its
genuine effects, urging to the greatest vigilance and exertions, it will
surmount great difficulties; that it is no easy matter to deceive or conquer a
people determined to be free. The exertions and effects of this great spirit in
our land, have already been such as may well astonish the world. And so long as
it generally prevails, it will be quiet with no species of government, but what
befriends and protects it. Its jealousy for its safety, may sometimes appear as
if verging to faction; but it means well, and can never endanger a state,
unless its root and source is corrupted.

FREE republican governments have been objected to, as if exposed to factions
from an excess of liberty: The Grecian states are mentioned for a proof, and is
is allowed that the history of some of these commonwealths, is little else but
a narration of factions. But it is justly denied, that the true spirit of
liberty produced these effects.

VIOLENT and opposing parties shaking the pillars of the state, may arise under
the best forms of government. A government from various causes may be thrown
into convulsions, like the Roman state in its latter periods, and like that,
may die of the malady. But the evils which happen in a State, are not always to
be charged upon its government, much less upon one of the noblest principles
that can dwell in the human breast. There are diseases in government, like
sfome in the human body, that lay undiscovered 'till they become wholly
incurable.

THE baneful effects of exorbitant wealth, the lust of power, and other evil
passions, are so inimical to a free, righteous government, and find such an
casy access to the human mind, that it is difficult, if possible, to keep up
the spirit of good government, unless the spirit of liberty prevails in the
State. This spirit like other generous growths of nature, flourishes best in
its native soil. It has been ingrasted at one time and another in various
countries; in America, it shoots up and grows as in its natural soil.
Recollecting our pious ancestors, the first settlers of the country, nor shall
we look for ancestry beyond that period, and we may say in the most literal
sense, we are children, not of the bond woman, but of the free. It may hence
well be expected, that the exertions and effects of American liberty should be
more vigorous and complete. It has the most to fear from ignorance and avarice;
for it is no uncommon thing for a people to loose sight of their liberty, in
the eager pursuit of wealth, as the States of Holland have done. And it will
always be as easy to rob an ignorant people of their liberty, as to pick the
pockets of a blind man.

THE slavery of a people is generally founded in ignorance, of some kind or
another; and there are not wanting such facts as abundantly prove, the human
mind may be so sunk and debased through ignorance and its natural effects, as
even to adore its enslaver, and kiss its chains.

HENCE, knowledge and learning may well be considered, as most essentially
requisite to a free, righteous government. A republican government and science,
mutually promote and support each other.

GREAT literary acquirements are indeed the lot of but few, because but few in
a community have ability and opportunity to pursue the paths of science. But a
certain degree of knowledge is absolutely necessary to be diffused through a
state, for the preservation of its liberties and the quiet of government.

EVERY kind of useful knowledge will be carefully encouraged and promoted by
the rulers of a free State, unless they should happen to be men of ignorance
themselves; in which case they and the community will be in danger of sharing
the fate of blind guides, and their followers. The education of youth by
instructors properly qualified, The want of proper instructors and a proper
method of instructing, are the reasons that what we call common education, or
schoollearning, is generally so imperfect among us. Youth should always be
taught by strict rule, in reading, writing and speaking, and so in all parts of
their education. By this means, the advantages of their education will commonly
increase with their age; that by a little application in their riper years,
persons may raise a useful super structure from a small foundation that was
well laid at school, in their earlier days. It would be of eminent service, if
instructors would more generally end vour to fix in the minds of their
scholars, the rules of reading, of spelling, of writing, or of whatever branch
of knowledge they teach.
the establishment of societies for useful arts and sciences, the encouragement
of persons of superior abilities will always command the attention of wise
rulers.

The late times of our glorious struggle have not indeed been favorable to the
cause of education in general; though much useful knowledge of the geography of
our country, of the science of arms, of our abilities and strength, and of our
natural rights and liberties, has been acquired; great improvements and
discoveries have also been made in several kinds of manufactory. But our
security and the public welfare requires yet greater exertions, to promote
education and useful knowledge. Most of the internal difficulties of a State,
commonly arise from ignorance, that general source of error. The growls of
avarice and curses of clowns, will generally be heard, when the public liberty
and safety call for more generous and costly exertions. Indeed, we may never
expect to find the marks of public virtue, the efforts of heroism, or any kind
of nobleness, in a man who has no idea of glory and excellency, but what he
hoard^ up in his barn, or ties up in his purse.

IT is readily allowed there has not been wanting statesmen and heroes, of the
generous growth of nature; though instances of this sort are not so common. But
if these had been favored with the improvements of arts, they would have
appeared to much greater advantage, and with brighter luster.

Nothing within the compass of human ability, is of that real weight and
importance as the education of youth, the propagation of knowledge. Despotism
and tyranny want nothing but wealth and force; but liberty and order are
supported by knowledge and virtue.

I SHALL also mention the love of our country, or public virtue, as another
essential support of good government and the public liberties. No model of
government whatever can equal the importance of this principle, nor afford
proper safety and security to the State without it. Its object being the
approbation of conscience, and its motive to exertion being the public welfare;
hence it can only dwell in superior minds, elevated above private interest and
selfish views. It does that for the public which domestic affection does among
real friends; but like other excellencies is more frequently pretended to than
possessed.

IN the ancient Roman republic, it was the life and soul of the State which
raised it to all its glory, being always awake to the public defense and good:
And in every State it must under providence, be the support of government, the
guardian of liberty, or no human wisdom or policy can support and preserve
them. Civil society cannot be maintained without justice, benevolence, and the
social virtues. Even the government of the Jerusalem above, could not render a
vicious and abandoned people quiet and happy. The children of the bond woman,
slaves to vice, never can be free. If the reason of the mind, man's immediate
rule of conduct, is in bondage to corruption, he is verily the worst of slaves.

PUBLIC spirit, through human imperfection, is in danger of degenerating to
selfish passion, which has a malignant influence on public measures. This
danger is the greater, because the corruption is not commonly owned, nor soon
discerned. Such as are the most diseased with it, are apt to be the most
insensible to their error.

THE exorbitant wealth of individuals, has a most baneful influence on public
virtue; and therefore should be carefully guarded against. It is, however,
acknowledged to be a difficult mattter, to secure a State from evils and
mischiefs from this quarter; because as the world goes, and is like to go,
wealth and riches will have their commanding influence. The public interest
being a remoter object than that of self, hence persons in power, are so
generally disposed to turn it to their own advantage. A wicked rich man, we see
soon corrupts a whole neighborhood, and a few of them will poison the morals
of a whole community.

THIS sovereign power of interest, seems to have been much the source of modern
politics abroad, and has given birth to such maxims of policy as these, viz.
"that the wealth of a people is their truest honor," -- "that every man has his
price" -- "that the longest purse, and not the longest sword, will finally be
victorious". But we trust and hope that American virtue, will be sufficient to
convince the world, that such maxims are base, are ill-founded, and altogether
unfit and improper, to influence and lead in government.

IN the infancy of States, there is not commonly so much danger of these
mischiefs, because the love of liberty and public virtue, are then more general
and vigorous. But the danger is apt to increase, with the wealth of individuals.

THESE observations are founded upon such well-known facts, that the rulers of
a free state have sufficient warning to guard against the evils. The general
diffusion of knowledge is the best preservative against them, and the likeliest
method to beget and increase that public virtue, which, under God, will prove
like the promises of the gospel, an impregnable bulwark to the State.

I MUST not forget to mention religion both in rulers and people as of the
highest importance to the public. This is the most sacred principle that can
dwell in the human breast. It is of the highest importance to men; the most
perfective of the human soul. The truths of the gospel are the most pure; its
motives the most noble and animating, and its comforts the most supporting to
the mind.

THE importance of religion to civil society and government, is great indeed,
as it keeps alive the best sense of moral obligation, a matter of such
extensive utility, especially in respect to an oath, which is one of the
principal instruments of government. The fear and reverence of God, and the
terrors of eternity, are the most powerful restraints upon the minds of men.
And hence it is of special importance in a free government, the spirit of which
being always friendly to the sacred rights of conscience, it will hold up the
gospel as the great rule of faith and practice.

ESTABLISHED modes and usages in religion, more especially the stated public
worship of God, so generally form the principles, and manners of a people, that
changes, or alterations in these, especially, when nearly conformed to the
spirit and simplicity of the gospel, may well be esteemed very dangerous
experiments in government. For this, and other reasons, the thoughtful and wise
among us, trust that our civil fathers, from a regard to gospel worship, and
the constitution of these churches, will carefully preserve them; and at all
times, guard against every innovation, that might tend to overset the public
worship of God, though such innovations may be urged from the most foaming
zeal. Persons of a gloomy, ghostly and mystic cast, absorbed in visionary
scenes, deserve but little notice in matters, either of religion or government.
Let the restraints of religion, once be broken down, as they infallibly would
be, by leaving the subject of public worship, to the humors of the multitude,
and we might well defy all human wisdom and power, to support and preserve
order and government in the State. Human conduct and characters, can never be
better formed, than upon the principles of our holy religion; they give the
justest sense, the most adequate views of the duties between rulers and people,
and are the best principles in the world to carry the ruler through the duties
of his station. And in case a series of faithful services, should be followed
with popular censure, as may be the case, yet the religious ruler will find the
approbation of his conscience, a noble reward.

MANY other things might be mentioned, as circumstances much in favor of a free
government and public liberty, as, where the inhabitants of a State, can in
general give their suffrages in person; and men of abilities are dispersed in
the several parts of a State, capable of public office and station; especially,
if there is a general distribution of property, and the landed interest not
engrossed by a few, but possessed by the inhabitants in general through the State;
things of this nature wear a kind aspect. But for the preservation and
permanence of the State, it is of still higher importance that its internal
strength be supported upon the great pillars of capacity, defense and union.
The full liberty of the press, that eminent instrument of promoting knowledge,
and great palladium of the public liberty, being enjoyed; the learned
professions directed to the public good; the great principles of legislation
and government; the great examples and truths of history: the maxims of
generous and upright policy, and the severer truths of philosophy, investigated
and apprehended by a general application to books, and by observation and
experiment, are means by which the capacity of a state will be strong and
respectable, and the number of superior minds will be daily increasing.

STRENGTH, courage and military discipline, being, under God, the great defense
of a state, as these are cultivated and improved, the public defense will
increase: And, if there is added to these, a general union, a spirit of
harmony, the internal strength and beauty of the state will be great indeed.

THE variety and freedom of opinion is apt to check the union of a free state;
and in case the union be interrupted merely from the freedom of opinion,
contesting for real rights and privileges, the state and its government may
still be strong and secure, as was in fact the case in ancient Rome, in the
more disinterested periods of that republic. But if parties and factions
arising from false ambition, avarice or revenge, run high, they endanger the
state, which was the case in the latter periods of the republic of Rome. Hence,
the parties in a free state, if aimed at the public liberty and welfare, are
salutary; but if selfish interest and views are their source, they are both
dangerous and destructive.

THE language of just complaint, the voice of real grievance, in most cases,
may easily be distinguished from the mere clamor of selfish, turbulent and
disappointed men. The ear of a righteous government will always be open to the
former, its hand with wisdom and prudence will suppress the latter: And since
passion is as natural to men as reason, much discretion should be used to calm
and quiet disaffected minds. Coercives in government, should always be held as
very dangerous political physic; such as have gone into the practice have
commonly either killed or lost their patients.

A spirit of union is certainly a most happy omen in a state, and upon
righteous principles should be cultivated and improved with diligence. It
greatly strengthens public measures, and gives them vigor and dispatch; so that
but small states when united, have done wonders in defending their liberties
against powerful monarchs. Of this we have a memorable example in the little
state of Athens, whicn destroyed the fleet of Xerxes, consisting of a thousand
ships, and drove Darius with his army of three hundred thousand men out of
Greece.

IT must not be forgotten, that much, very much depends upon rulers, to render
a free government, quiet, permanent and respectful; they ought therefore in an
eminent degree to possess those virtues and abilities which are the source and
support of such a government.

THE modern maxims of policy abroad, the base arts of bribery and corruption,
of intrigue and dissimulation, will soon be productive of evils and mischiefs
in the state. And since a corruption of manners almost necessarily follows a
corruption of policy, the rulers of a free state ought to be influenced by the
most generous and righteous principles and views. Ignorant and designing men
should be kept from public offices in the state, as the former will be dupes to
the ambitious, and the latter will be likely to prove the instruments of
discord.

MEN upon their first promotion, commonly act and speak with an air of meekness
and diffidence, which however, may consist with firmness and resolution. The
practice of power is apt to dissipate these humble airs; for this and other
reasons, it may generally be best not to continue persons a long time in places
of honor and emolument.

THE qualities of a good ruler, may be estimated from the nature of a free
government. Power being a delegation, and all delegated power being in its
nature subordinate and limited, hence rulers are but trustees, and government a
trust; therefore fidelity is a prime qualification in a ruler; this joined with
good natural and acquired abilities, goes far to complete the character.

NATURAL disposition that is benevolent and kind, embellished with the graceful
modes of address, agreeably strike the mind, and hence in preference to greater
real abilities will commonly carry the votes of a people. It is however a truth
in fact, that persons of this cast are subject to a degree of indolence, from
which arises an aversion to those studies which form the great and active
patriot. It is also a temper liable to that flexibility which may prove
prejudicial to the state.

A GOOD acquaintance with mankind, a knowledge of the leading passions and
principles of the human mind, is of high importance in the character before us.
For common and well known truths and real facts, ought to determine us in human
matters. We should take mankind as they are, and not as they ought to be, or
would be, if they were perfect in wisdom and virtue. So, in our searches for
truth and knowledge, and in our labors for improvement, we should keep within
the ken or compass of the human mind. The welfare of the public, being the
great object of the rulers views they ought of consequence, to be discerning in
the times, always awake and watchful, to the public danger and defense.

AND in order that government may support a proper air of dignity, and command
respect, the ruler should engage in public matters, and perform the duties of
his office, with gravity and solemnity of spirit; with wisdom he will
deliberate upon public measures, and tenacious of a well formed purpose and
design, he will pursue it with an inflexible stability.

POLITICAL knowledge, a sense of honor, an open and generous mind, it is
confessed, will direct and urge a ruler to actions and exertions, beneficial to
the State. And, if added to these, he has a principle of religion, and the fear
of God, it will, in the best manner, fit him for the whole course or allotted
duty. The greatest restraints, the noblest motives, and the best supports arise
from our holy religion. The pious ruler, is by far, the most likely to promote
the public good. His example will have the most happy influence; his public
devotions will not only be acts of worship and homage to God, but also of
charity to men. Superior to base passions, and little resentments, undismayed
by danger, not awed by threatenings, he guides the helm in storm and tempest,
and is ready if called in providence, to sacrifice his life for his country's
good. Most of all concerned, to approve himself to his God, he avoids the
subtle arts of chicanery, which are productive of so much mischief in a State;
exercising a conscience void of offense, he has food to eat which the world
knows not of, and in the hour of his death, that solemn period, has a hope and
confidence in God, which is better than a thousand worlds.

A STATE, and its inhabitants thus circumstanced, in respect to government,
principle, morals, capacity, union and rulers, make up the most striking
portrait, the liveliest emblem of the Jerusalem that is above, that this world
can afford.

THAT this may be the condition of these free independent, and sovereign States
of America, we have the wishes and prayers of all good men. Indulgent heaven
seems to invite and urge us to accept the blessing. A kind and wonderful
providence has conducted us, by astonishing steps, as it were, within sight of
the promised land. We stand this day upon Pisgah's top, the children of the
free woman, the descendents of a pious race* who from the love of liberty, and
the fear of God, spent their treasure, and spilt their blood. Animated by the
same great spirit of liberty, and determine under God to be free, these states
have made one of the noblest stands against despotism and tyranny, that can be
met with, in the annals of history, either ancient or modern. One common cause,
one common danger, and one common interest has united and urged us to the most
vigorous exertions. From small beginnings, from great weakness, impelled from
necessity, and the tyrant's rod, but following the guidance of heaven, we have
gone through a course of noble and heroic actions, with minds superior to the
most virulent menaces, and to all the horrors of war, for we trusted in the God
of our forefathers. We have been all along the scorn and derision of our
enemies, but the care of heaven, the charge of God. And hence, our cause and
union, like the rising sun, have shone brigther and brighter. Thanks be to God,
we this day behold in the fullness of our spirit, the great object of our
wishes, of our toils, and wars, brightening in our view.

THE battles we have already fought, the victories The memorable and complete
victory obtained over Genesis Burgoyne, and his whole army, will not only
immortalize the character of the brav. Genesis Gates, and the officers and troops
under his command, but considering the immense expense Britain would be at, in
replacing such an army in America, together with other reasons, renders it
highly probable, it may prove one of the capital events that decides the war,
and establishes the independency of these states.
we have won, the pride of tyranny that must needs have been humbled, mark the
characters of the freemen of America with distinguished honor, and will be
read with astonishment by generations yet unborn.

THE lust of dominion is a base and detested principle, the desire of revenge,
is an infernal one, and the former if opposed, commonly produces the latter.
From these our enemies seem to have taken their measures, and hence have
treated us with the greatest indignities, reproaches, insults and cruelties,
that were ever heaped upon a people, when struggling for their all. The
remembrance of these things can never be lost. And although under God, American
wisdom and valor, have hitherto opposed and bassled both their force and fraud,
and we trust ever will; yet, justice to our cause, to ourselves, and to our
posterity, as well as a most righteous resentment, absolutely forbid, that any
thing should pacify our minds, short of a full and perfect independence. This,
supported by the wisdom, virtue and strength of the continent, must be our
great charter of liberty: nature has given us the claim, and the God of nature,
appears to be helping of us to assert and maintain it. I am led to speak upon
this point, with the greatest confidence, from the late measures and resolves,
of that august Assembly, the American Congress, which were so circumstanced,
and timed, as must with their general conduct, raise a monument to their same,
that will bid defiance, even to the devouring hand of time itself.

WE must be insidels, the worst of infidels, to disown, or disregard the hand
that has raised us up such benevolent and powerful assistants, in times of
great distress. How wonderful, that God, who in ancient times "girded Cyrus
with his might," should dispose his most Christian Majesty, the King of France,
to enter into the most open, and generous alliance, with these independent
states; an event in providence, which like the beams of the morning, cheer and
enliven this great continent. We must cherish the feelings of gratitude, to
such friends in our distress; we must hold our treaties sacred and binding.

Is it possible for us to behold the ashes the ruins of large and opulent
towns, that have been burnt in the most wanton manner; to view the graves of
our dear countrymen, whose blood has been most cruelly spilt; to hear the cries
and screaches of our ravished matrons and virgins, that had the misfortune to
fall into the enemies hands, and think of returning to that cruel and bloody
power which has done all these things? no! we are not to suppose such a thought
can dwell in the mind of a free sensible American. The same feelings in nature
that led a peruvian prince to choose the other place, must also teach us, to
prefer connections with any people on the globe, rather than with those from
whom we have experienced such unrighteous severities, and unparrelled cruelties.

IT seems as if a little more labor and exertion will bring us to reap the
harvest of all our toils; and certainly we must esteem the freedom and
independency of these states, a most ample reward for all our sufferings. In
preference to all human affairs, our cause still merits, and ever has done, the
most firm and manly support. In this, the greatest of all human causes, numbers
of the virtuous Americans have lost their all -- I recall my words, they have
not lost it; no, but from the purest principles have offered it up in sacrifice
upon the golden altar of liberty; the sweet persumes have ascended to heaven,
and shall be had in everlasting remembrance.

IN this stage of our struggle, we are by no means to indulge to a supine and
dilatory spirit, which might yet be fatal; nor have we to take our resolutions
from despair; far from this, we have the noblest. motives, the highest
encouragements. I know the ardor of the human mind is apt in time to abate,
though the subject be ever so important; but surely the blood of our friends and
countrymen still crying in our cars, like the souls of the martyrs under the
altar, must arouze and sire every nobler passion of the mind. Moreover,

To anticipate the future glory of America, from our present hopes and
prospects, is ravishing and transporting to the mind. In this light we behold
our country beyond the reach of all oppressors; under the great charter of
independence, enjoying the purest liberty; beautiful and strong in its union;
the envy of tyrants and devils, but the delight of God, and all good men; a
refuge to the oppressed; the joy of the earth: each state happy in a wise model
of government and abounding with wise men, patriots and heroes; the strength
and abilities of the whole continent, collected in a grave and venerable
council, at the head of all, seeking and promoting the good of the present and
future generations. Hail my happy country saved of the Lord! Happy land,
emerged from the deluges of the old world, drowned in luxury and lewd excess!
Hail happy posterity, that shall reap the peaceful fruits of our sufferings,
fateagues and wars! With such prospects, such transporting views, it is
difficult to keep the passions or the tongue within the bounds of christian
moderation. But far be it from us, to indulge vain glory, or return railing for
railing, or to insult our foes; we cultivate better principles of humanity and
bravery, and would much rather cherish the feelings of pity, especially to
those of our enemies of better minds, whose names with the baser may appear in
the pages of impartial history with indelible blemish. We wish from the
infatuation and wickedness, and fate of our enemies, the world would learn
lessons in wisdom and virtue; that princes would learn never to oppress their
subjects; That the vaughting Generals of Britain would learn never more to
despise and contemn their enemy, nor prove blasphemers of God and religion: We
wish the whole world may learn the worth of liberty; and may the inhabitants of
these states, when their independence and freedom shall be completed, bless
God for ever and ever, for thine O Lord is the power and the glory, and the
victory.

BUT under our raised expectations of seeing the good of God's chosen, let us
think soberly, let us act wisely. The public still calls aloud for the united
efforts, both of rulers and people; nor have we as yet put of the harness. We
have many things amiss among ourselves, that need to be reformed; many internal
diseases to cure, and secret internal enemies to watch against, who may aim a
fatal blow, while making the highest pretensions to our cause; for plausible
pretenses are common covers to the blackest designs. We wish we had more public
virtue, and that people would not be so greedy of cheating themselves and their
neighbors. We wish for much greater exertions to promote education and
knowledge, and virtue and piety. But in all states there will be such, as want
no learning, no government, no religion at all.

FOR the cure of our internal political diseases and to promote the health and
vigor, the defense and safety of the state, our eyes under God are directed to
our rulers; and from that wisdom and prudence with which they have conducted
our public affairs, in the most trying times, we have the highest encouragement
to look to them.

As a token of unseigned respect, the Honorable gentlemen of both houses of
Assembly present, will permit me by way of address, to observe; that the
freemen of this state, by deligating their powers to you, my civil fathers,
have reposed the greatest trust and confidence in you, from whence we doubt
not, but you are sensible arises the most sacred obligation to fidelity.
Preserving a constant sense of this, and keeping the public welfare as your
great object in view; we trust you will never be wanting in your best endeavors,
and most vigorous exertions, to defend and deliver your country. The matters of
the war, will undoubtedly at present, claim your first and principle attention,
always esteeming its great object, the liberty of your country of more
inestimable value than all the treasure of the world; and therefore, to obtain
and secure it, no necessary charges or costs are to be spared. The internal
matters of the state, that claim your attention, though they may pass a severe
scrutiny, will be noticed with all justice and impartiality. And in the choice
of a council, that important branch of our legislature, from which we have
experienced such eminent services, of which branch, or one nearly similar, we
hope this state will never be destitute; in this choice, persons of known
ability, of public virtue and religion, and possessed of the spirit of liberty,
will have the preference.

THE burdens of your station are always great, and in these times are much
increased, but you have the best of motives for exertion; you have the
consolation, which arises from the fullest assurance of the justice of our
cause; you have the unceasing prayers of good men, More than all these, you
have the countenance and smiles of Heaven, with unceasing ardor therefore, you
will strive to be laborers together with God.

As nothing will be omitted, that the good of the state calls for, we expect to
see greater exertions in promoting the means of education and knowledge, In
matters of science, we have a most ample field open for improvement, to
complete the geography of our country; to improve in the arts of agriculture
and manufacture, and of Physic, and other branches of science, are great
objects that demand our special attention, and to obtain which an uninterrupted
course of observation and experiment ought to be kept up. And if our General
Assembly would form and establish upon generous principles, a society of arts
and sciences, in this state, they would most certainly do great honor to
themselves, and most eminent service to the public.
than ever have yet been made among us; you will especially allow me, my
fathers, to recommend our college, so much the glory of our land, to your
special attention, and most generous encouragements. For every thing that is
excellent and good, that we hope and wish for in future, in a most important
and essential sense, is connected with, and depends upon exertions and
endeavors of this kind. I need not observe

THE leaders and rulers in our glorious cause, have a fair opportunity of
transmiting their names to posterity, with characters of immortal honor. With
my whole soul, I wish you the blessing of God and the presence and guidance of
his holy spirit.

My hearers:

LET us all hearken to the calls of our country, to the calls of God; and learn
those lessons in wisdom, which are so forceably inculcated upon us in these
times, and by such wonderful measures in Providence. From a sacred regard, both
to the goodness and severity of God, let us follow the guidance of his
providence, and in the way of duty, leave ourselves, and all events with God.

REMEMBERING, that Jerusalem which is above, is the mother of us all, that we
are children, no^ of the bond woman, but of the free. Let us stand fast in the
liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and be not entangled again with the
yoke of bondage. Imitating the virtue, the piety, the love of liberty, so
conspicuous in our pious ancestors, like them let us exert ourselves for the
good of posterity. With diligence, let us cultivate the spirit of liberty, of
public virtue, of union and religion; and thus strengthen the hands of
government, and the great pillars of the state. Our own consciences will
reproach us, and the world condemn us, if we do not properly respect, and obey,
and reverence the government of our own choosing. The eyes of the whole world
are upon us in these critical times, and what is yet more, the eyes of Almighty
God; let us act worthy of our prosessed principles, of our glorious cause, that
in some good measure, we may answer the expectations of God and of men.

LET us cultivate the heavenly temper, and sacredly regard the great motive of
the world to come. And God of his mercy grant, the blessings of peace may soon
succeed, to the horrors of war; and that from the enjoyment of the sweets of
liberty here, we may in our turn and order, go to the full enjoyment of the
nobler liberties above, in that new Jerusalem; that city of the living God,
that is enlightened by the glory of God and of the Lamb.

AMEN.
ERRATA.
In The order of Council, de^e Samuel.

PAge 5.13 for present r. h^ave 15. -- p. 8.1.14 for constituted r. constructed
-- p. 10.I.4 from the bottom, for these r. those -- p. 14.I.14. r. requ^^^. --
p. 15.I.6. r. art. -- p.17.I.5. r. matter.


