THE PUPIL OF PLEASURE; EXHIBITING, The Adventures of a Man of Birth, Rank,
Figure, Fortune, and Character, ardent in the Pursuit of Pleasure, much
delighted with, attracted by, and formed upon the CHESTERFIELDEAN SYSTEM.

TWO VOLUMES COMPLETE IN ONE.

BY COURTNEY MELMOTH.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY ROBERT BELL, IN THIRD-STREET. M.DCC.LXXVIII.

THE PUPIL OF PLEASURE. IN A SERIES OF LETTERS.

BY COURTNEY MELMOTH.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOLUME THE FIRST.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY ROBERT BELL, IN THIRD-STREET.

M.DCC.LXXVIII.

PREFACE
SINCE the first publication of the late Earl of Chesterfield's Letters, to the
present time, the arrows of Censure have been levelled at the doctrine they
inculcate, from every quarter: the wit has had his joke, the versifier his
parody, the moralist his opposing sentiment, and the divine his grave
dissertation. Very ingenious men have taken the pen in hand to confront his
Lordship: his Graces have been smartly ridiculed; his etiquette humorously
exposed; and Mr. Hunter, Author of some much admired Remarks on Lord
Bolingbroke's posthumous Writings.
with an elegance and profundity far beyond the rest of his remarkers, has
penetrated into the very bottom of his maxims, traversed him through every
double, and examined his whole system with an analytical acuteness.

It is matter of real amazement that amongst all those who have expressed
themselves loudly and diametrically against the doctrine of Lord Chesterfield's
correspondence, none should have yet thought of the only method that was most
likely to manifest their tendency. The general stigma upon these Letters has
been, that they are calculated to recommend deceit, and to conceal the most
destructive hypocrisy, under the smiling aspect, plausible exterior,
fair-seeming sentiments, and a complacent flexibility.

In an age of voluptuousness, it is most obvious to apprehension, that maxims,
like these, would have most weight with the young and dissipated. The man of
fashion would find them so consistent with his plan of security, that there
would be little doubt but he would adopt them; and the man of expedient and
broken fortunes would as eagerly catch at a mode of conduct which, without
either danger of his neck, or character, might repair his purse, promote his
pleasures, and save him from a thousand shocks that poverty is heir to.

The essence of my Lord Chesterfield's system seems to be neither more nor less
than this: Secure yourself from being blasted, as he terms it, and do whatever
you think proper; whatever fancy, passion, whim, or wickedness, suggest, only
command your countenance, check your temper, and throw before your heart and
bosom the shield of Dissimulation, and snatch it -- seize it -- enjoy it.

In regard to women -- never surely issued from the press a collection of hints
so capable of being turned to their destruction: and the sex ought to be more
alarmed at this publication (which, however, one of their own sex has ushered
into the world) than at any thing that ever was pointed at their peace of mind,
or purity of character.

How, then, has it happened, that no person has yet put the volumes of the
Earl of Chesterfield into the hand of a hero, who, with a natural aptitude to
enjoy every thing within his observation, might increase his felicity very
considerably, by the assistance of sentiments so admirably suited to multiply
mischief, and to ensure his victory over that simplicity, that beauty, and that
softness, which would, thence, be, so much the more easily, thrown off their
guard.

As nothing of this kind, however, has appeared, I have ventured to present to
the public, the adventures of a man of birth, rank, figure, and character,
ardent in the pursuit of pleasures, and much delighted with, and attracted by,
the theory of Lord Chesterfield. He purchases the books, finds them agreeable
to his palate, studies them paragraph by paragraph, thrives under his
application, piques himself upon his progress; and in the end, a master of his
science, invokes the genius of his noble preceptor, puts money in his purse,
the inestimable volumes in his portmanteau, and sallies into the gay world,
armed at all points, the PUPIL OF PLEASURE.

Every ingenious precept laid down by the noble Lord, this high-bred young
gentleman reduces to practice, who, taking the summer before him, makes his
attacks at a place of fashionable resort; where (fixing with commendable and
pre-instructed acuteness upon proper objects) he begins to exemplify, and is as
successful as the politest casuist could possibly wish.

In the course of this historical illustration -- this biographical commentary
on the text of Chesterfield -- ample scope has been allowed for the display of
various characters, and particularly such as more immediately promoted the main
design of the work, which is, to show the aggravated evils in society arising
from the practice of such perniciously-pleasing precepts.

To this end, I have made great use of the noble Lord's maxims, rules, and
admonitions, upon various subjects. The incidents, it is conceived, arise,
naturally, out of the principles that produce them; the contrast in the
characters, especially of HOMESPUN, SEDLEY, THORNTON, Lieutenant VERNON, and
Sir HENRY DELMORT, I have endeavored to render eminent and conspicuous; and
although, some may think the catastrophe, and a few of the circumstances,
carried too far into the pathetic, yet, I am persuaded, those who weigh deeply
the precepts of Lord Chesterfield will agree with me in thinking, that, if
pushed into practice by an adventurer, like that which his Lordship would have
formed out of Mr. Stanhope, similar or even greater sorrows, and vices, would
invade the community. In short, this history is calculated strongly to prove
the truth of Lord Chesterfield's own observation, namely, "That the adoption of
vice is likely to ruin ten times more young men, than natural inclination."

THE PUPIL OF PLEASURE.
LETTER I. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
Buxton.
THE whirl of wheels, a fine flow of spirits, the elysium of expectation, and
the vigor of fresh horses at ever stage, brought me, in less than twenty
hours, from Cavendishsquare to the place of date. Having no unnecessary luggage
to retard me, no trifling petitmaitre, who, at two miles distance from the
shifting place, drives back for his gloves, his cane, his snuff box, or his
white handkerchief; I rolled, THORNTON, on the springs of expedition; and I sit
down, unsubdued by fatigue, to tell thee of my safety.

Richardson's a child, Grandison is a monster, Lovelace a bungler: -- since the
days of Adam, Nature has produced but one man of pleasure; and that wonder was
reserved to adorn the age before us.

Oh, CHESTERFIELD! CHESTERFIELD! THOU, only thou, knew the science of joy;
thou only had the skill to cover the ruggednesses of life with roses, that
bloom from being pressed. Deign then, immortal shade! To look with a gentle eye
upon THY PUPIL; teach me emulate thy genius, to practice thy precepts, to hit,
with a felicity like thine, the true spirit of dissimulation -- soften my
features to the blandishments of delight -- attune my tongue to the thrillings
of persuasion -- enrich my sentiments with so versatile a ductility, that I may
obey the occasions of the minute -- endue me with perseverance of soul, and
condescend to guide me (with all thy attendant graces, assiduities, and elegant
attentions,) into the bosom of voluptuousness, my Friend, my Mentor, my Genius,
and my God!

THORNTON, I am inspired! The rhapsody of my invocation is throbbing already at
my heart -- it is working its way to the very marrow in the bones. The divine
Letters of OUR EARL are this instant brought in by the postilion, who is
unconscious of the treasure, with which he is freighted. But soft! I dare not
proceed till I have unlocked my hoard, and then, with a more than Persian
prostration, paid to maxims by which I am to be conducted, the incense of my
idolatry.

Adieu, adieu. PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER II. Mr. THORNTON to Mr. SEDLEY.
TAKE care: it is easier to advise, than to act. I wish you joy of your system,
and I approve it: let it not, however, appear to be imitation; be thyself, and
the deities of bliss throw objects in thy way!

Farewell. JAMES THORNTON.
P. S. Be explicit.



LETTER III. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
DULL THORNTON! -- circumspect citizen! at what art thou alarmed, and
"wherefore is thy spirit troubled within thee?" How can thou entertain so
contemptible a notion of thy SEDLEY? Imitation! Curse thee for the thought.
Have thou -- illiberal asperser -- have thou, in the course of seven
enterprizing years, ever known me deign to stoop from the originality of self
to the slavery of another? It Is true, I admire the Lord of CHESTERFIELD: his
epistles are, in the reading hour, always in my hand; they repose at night
behind my pillow, and they at present constitute my traveling library. But I
scorn to be fettered, either in body or soul, Imitation indeed! Let me echo the
dictates of my rage -- curse thee for the thought! The liberty of the
understanding is as dear to me, as the liberty of the person; and I have too
much pride, too much dignity, to become a plagiary. THORNTON, no; the Earl is,
as it were, my tutor; his sentiments are such, as I have long felt, but such
as, till now, I was cautious to avow. The idle modes of the world stood as a
bar, betwixt the precept and the practice. Hitherto, I have been restrained in
my actions, and lost half the joy of voluptuousness, because, forsooth, nobody
had either reputation, ingenuity, or taste enough to keep me in countenance. I
swam the common current of pleasure, but was always afraid of going out of my
depth. The herd are contented to be libertines in the ordinary, shallow,
shadowy way, and, before the appearance of these enchanting Letters, which,
like the sun, broke out upon our grossness, we wanted the imprimatur of a man
of celebrity, -- of such a soul as Chesterfield's, to give credit and eclat to
the efforts of an enterprizing spirit. But now the impediment is removed, --
the avenue is opened, -- the ice that custom had frozen about the heart is
thawed, and the prospect of pleasure is palpable. The repository of STANHOPE,
the cabinet of CHESTERFIELD, the Earl's arcanum, are all disclosed: -- EUGENIA
-- bear, bear the name, ye rosywing'd deities of joy, in gratitude to heaven!
-- EUGENIA has given to mankind the invaluable remains of her father, --
remains which -- (Oh, THORNTON, echo EUGENIA!) -- have discovered, to every
elegant character, flesh roads to the temple of felicity; virgin resources of
personal extacy; and treasuries of bliss as yet untasted, and unexplored.

My design then, is to indulge my principles, by improving upon those maxims
which his polished pen has made fashionable. Let duller souls content
themselves with vulgar happiness; with yielding beauty, entrapt simplicity, and
the mere defloration of female youth. -- I cannot be circumscribed by such
common, animal sensations: no, James! -- give me delicacy, difficulty,
refinement, -- give me innovation, -- or take from me existence.

"To beat the beaten track, -- to taste the tasted." -- Oh, shocking! --
insupportable! I am above it. I scorn it.

In a word then, THORNTON, what our GARRICK is to SHAKESPEARE, I am resolved to
be to CHESTERFIELD, -- the living comment, upon the dead text. The youth to
whom the Earl's Letters were originally addressed, thou know, is dead; and
he wanted a soul to relish, and a taste to improve, had he continued amongst
us. Such a cool creature is better in its coffin. Peace to his uncongenial
manes! But shall STANHOPE be therefore without an heir? No, -- I claim the
inheritance, THORNTON, and desire you will henceforth consider me as his son,
by the adoption of his sentiment. Nay, had these veins been filled with the
rich stream that fed the heart of STANHOPE, I could not have been more like
himself -- God forgive me! but, were it not said, and said solemnly, that my
mother was the Diana of her day, I should suspect she played my father the
Alderman false, and threw herself into the conquering and accomplished arms of
CHESTERFIELD. -- Earth and skies! Mr. THORNTON, can thou think I was the
product of a plethoric Alderman, and that that Alderman could be a dealer I
hops? -- Bastardize me, dear friend, in pity to my feelings; and rather than
suppose me the offspring of such a conjunction, make me the by-blow of some
deity in disguise, and let me catch a ray of comfort from illegitimacy.

So much for the introduction to our correspondence. Of preface no more --
Prepare for immediate action -- Ha! A face passes my window that throws
attractions worth pursuing. I press the wafer with my seal, that I may rise to
reconnoitre. Hurry sets its mark on my last sentence.

Adieu. PHILIP SEDLEY

LETTER IV. From the SAME to the SAME.
THE Earl's absent man has already exhibited himself. He is of the name of
HOMESPUN, and is the butt of the bath. His soul is contemplative, and his body
pedantic. Never saw I so perpendicular, or profound a figure: a very walking
soliloquy; a moving meditation! and his wife, or, at least, the beautiful She
who hangs upon his arm as such -- O THORNTON! THORNTON! -- I have an object
before me already, young, elegant, graceful, and (I warmly hope) a wife -- If
she should prove indeed the property of this pedant -- if the stars should have
thrown a hoop of gold in my way, my fortune is made. -- Soft a little -- enter
my landlord; I like the lines of his face -- his eye looks communication --
intelligence plays the gossip in every feature. He will prove the Daily
Advertiser of the bath. In half an hour the budget of Buxton will be open.

Pray, Mr. -- I forgot your name -- ('it was an awkward oversight, not to have
learned his name, James) -- Mr. -- Wyngood is my name, Sir. -- Pray, Mr.
Wyngood, what fine young lady is that now walking with the straight, well made
gentleman in raven-grey?

[Always describe favorably when you question a stranger!]

She is wise to the gentleman, Sir, whose name is Mr. HORACE HOMESPUN, a
minister come to bathe for the Dissenters disorder. There Is a vast deal of
company, Sir, in town, and I think you are extremely lucky in taking my
lodgings. My lodgings are the best lodgings in all BUXTON, and some of the best
people lodge in my lodgings at this moment. Why now, Sir, you would not think
it, but I can show you such things as will surprise you -- Here he set off, and
I followed him into a bedchamber, where, without any ceremony, opening the
drawers of his lodgers, he took out a riding-hat with a blue feather and a
spangled button. -- "Lookee, Sir, did you ever see the like? These are the
things of the gentry who lodge at my lodgings. -- Then here is silks upon
sattins, and sattins upon silks; and they are the kindest people in the world.
They live as cheap as possible. Why I don't suppose, now, one day with another,
they spend a guinea: there is reason in every thing: they pay only eight-pence
a-piece for the breakfast, a shilling a head for dinner, eight-pence for tea in
the afternoon, a shilling for supper, and fourteen shillings for lodging;
besides washing, coals, candles, and wines, -- a mere nothing, a wet of the
little finger, as I may say, for a watering-place. I presume, Sir, you would
choose to join them, and live in the same manner, I see you are a very worthy
gentleman, and I will go mention you under the name of -- of -- pray, what name
must I say, Sir?" -- I looked a mild negative to his question -- Very true,
very true, no matter, no matter; I will tell Mr. HOMESPUN that a new lodger
wishes to do as he does. Sir your servant; I will be with you again presently.
I see you are a worthy gentleman plain enough.

The fellow had it all his own way, THORNTON. I interrupted him not, and am
this very night to sup with Master Minister HOMESPUN. I have walked down to the
Well, and drank a glass at this Helicon of health. I was to be, in this ramble,
the man of fashion, just stepped out of the chaise, and elegantly disordered in
my dress. Exteriors, as they always should, corresponded. My hair was tied with
negligence, my curls loose, in the ton of confusion, and my frock discovered a
genteel shape, and the cut of a capital tailor.

A miscellaneous group were passing away the intermediate hours betwixt
tea-time and supper: the lame and the lazy, the merry and the mortified, were
all upon the saunter: HOMESPUN was fondly ruminating with his angelic consort
in the shade; and something, that had the appearance of a fop -- I mean of the
common kind -- was saying smart things to a pretty Well-woman.

Nothing, however, could induce me to stay a moment at so dull a place, but the
practice of precepts which will convert all places into paradise, and make even
a watering place delicious. -- The supper-bell summons me. -- Mrs. HOMESPUN --
Oh! what a name for such a creature! -- Mrs. HOMESPUN is tripping it, toward
the sound, and HOMESPUN himself seems to forget his primitive uprightness of
back, and steps briskly forward.

Now for it, -- art thou not all curiosity?

Farewell. PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER V. From the SAME to the SAME.
CHESTERFIELD is right: attention annihilates learning, and carries away all
before it. I am in the road to rapture. Time allows only to give you the hint.
Another opportunity of being assiduous offers itself; the moment must not be
lost: a moment decides, sometimes, the fate of a whole life.

Adieu. PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER VI. From the SAME to the SAME.
EVERY hour brings its improvement. -- Oh! why did not the Earl sanctify the
paths of dissimulation, that I might have lived to pleasure, many years ago! It
is now, only now, that I begin to live. I have had, my dear THORNTON, in the
course of a few hours, a conquest superior to ALEXANDER'S. I have made an
ordinary coxcomb pleased with himself, and yet caused him to be discarded by
his mistress. I have seen a learned husband detestible in the eyes of his wife,
for the first time; and I find him enraptured with the very man by whom he is
made ridiculous: and all this from the practice of a single precept -- STUDY TO
PLEASE.

I will go through every sentiment in the Earl's correspondence, before I quit
BUXTON! All the books in all the languages are barren, and deserve to be burnt,
but the epistles of STANHOPE. But stop -- I hear Mrs. HOMESPUN express her
aversion to cheese; and (though I like it myself) I must hasten to order it may
never appear again to offend her. Nothing is immaterial that pleases. If you
would be pleased yourself, first please others. No matter in what the pleasure
consists: the more contradictory to thy own satisfaction, the better -- In all
events, PLEASE.

Adieu. PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER VII. THORNTON to SEDLEY.
THOU might as well send folded to me a sheet of blank paper. Much is
written, without any thing to the purpose being said -- Thy heart is engaged in
the ardour of some pursuit, and thy pen denotes bustle, and contrivance, and
agitation; but thou speak, only generally. I prithee, SEDLEY, reduce thy
extravagant genius into order, and let me understand, by the post, the meaning
of sentiments I perceive not at present the drift of. If any thing starts that
demands assistance, or if thou meetest more adventure than thou can thyself
manage, tell me so, and I will order my horse to the door, and go snacks in thy
enterprises.

Farewell. JAMES THORNTON.

LETTER VIII. From the Reverend HORACE HOMESPUN to Doctor DIGGORY.
Dear Sir,
YOU remember, I presume, the jaunt I took in the last year to SOUTHAMPTON, the
particulars of which, at the request of some friends, I suffered to be printed
in the WESTMINSTER MAGAZINE, in two several letters addressed to the publisher,
Mr. THOMAS WRIGHT, of Essex-street, in the Strand, London. I there told you,
that I was not quite so highly interested in, or entertained by, the scenes in
a hurry before me, as my then patron, the Baronet, would flatter my imagination
with upon the road; and (as I find those letters from the Westminster Magazine
were reprinted into various other monthly publications) I have reason to
suppose my excursion afforded some amusement to a certain class of readers.

Albeit, having, since then, been yoked to a damsel who has a passion for
these watering places, and who (bringing along with her a decent dower) has a
right to indulge herself in such amusements as seem best unto her, I have now a
second opportunity to survey the customs and manners of water-drinkers and
duckers; and can give you, my friend, many curious particulars by way of
supplement to the accounts I have already published.

As my present cure is situated about thirtyseven post miles and a quarter,
more or less (one cannot be classically correct to a yard) from the waters of
BUXTON, amidst the wonders of the Peake, Mrs. HOMESPUN chose to pass a week at
that place, for the benefit of a pain in the ancle, which pain became grievous
about six minutes before she suggested to me the necessity of such an
excursion. Very sudden, to be sure. But humanity is frail; and women are
whimsical.

That the cure of her ancle might be perfectly completed, I contrived it so,
as to persuade the curate of a neighboring parish, to do duty at home in my
absence, and resolved to tarry a fortnight. Of this fortnight, only four days
are yet expired; and though I never underwent the same degree of parade, of
fatigue, and of impertinence, in any former fourteen years of my life, -- not
even when I preached thrice on the Sunday, and fairly footed it to two of the
cures, -- yet HARRIET seems so happy in doing as others do, and finds such real
felicity in the dullest spot I ever beheld, because, she says, it is the Ton,
that I am in doubt whether even the long residue of the fortnight will satisfy
her; or whether she will by that time have had Ton enough to return home to
peace, privacy and the parsonage-house, without murmurings and repinings.

Oh! Doctor, see the outlines of my situation, and pity me. I am amongst a
number of both sexes whose pleasures are my aversions, and whose amusements I
cannot relish. Quietude and the shade of life emparadise me, and yet the house,
wherein I lodge, is as public as an inn at a fair. I admire rural ornaments,
and scenes of summer verdure beyond imagination; I rejoice to see the bud
broaden, and the blossoms expand before the sun, yet the mountains of Arabia
Deserta exhibit not a prospect more barren and unblooming, than that by which
this BUXTON is bounded. I love moreover to stroll into the shop of an
intelligent bookseller, and there converse with him upon the topic of recent
publications; -- alas! the bookseller of BUXTON has nothing in his shop but the
trash that circulates at a watering-place amongst the women. I ran my eye over
his catalogue, and never did I see such a collection: Clelia, Cassandra,
Pamela, the Adventures of Cleopatra, Amusements at the German Spa, and the
History of an Actress, were the best in this bad bundle. But though I saw
folly, I made bold to ask for sense: at least, what passes as such.

I mentioned the Reviews -- nobody called for them. It is not the Ton to be
critical. I talked of the Magazines -- none were ordered; Magazines are too
multiplied, and too common to be the Ton. I rummaged every row for philosophy
-- nobody reads philosophy at a watering-place. The Philosophy of Fools might
surely have found a place. I criticized the shelves for morals, but found them
not. I ventured to ask, but with some little hesitation, for Secker's Lectures
-- I seemed to have taken away the bookseller's breath: he never heard of them.
I took a turn round the shop, and (having forgot to bring any books with me,
although very bookish) would have taken up with almost any thing approximating
to the rational; but, in my progress, I had well-nigh overset a glass-case of
toothpicks, gold hussies, embroidered pincushions, and embossed snuffboxes.

And now it appeared, that this harlequin trader was rather a haberdasher, than
a bookseller; or rather an ambiguous multiform merchant, who dealt in the
apparatus both of the soul and the body.

On casting my eyes toward a person at the other end of the shop, I saw her
bending wire, to form, what is, in this merry age, facetiously called, a cap;
over this person's head in fair arrangement, was to be seen a goodly show of
bandboxes; and across the window near which she sat, were ribbons variously and
ridiculously twisted, with several specimens of her skill in decorating that
part of the human body, which is now more preposterous than any other. Seeing
such preparations for the outside of the head, I gave up the idea of finding
any internal furniture; so walking out of the shop, I asked pardon for having
so grossly mistaken a milliner's and toyman's for a vender of matters in the
literary way. -- Just as I got to the door, a party of mighty pretty women, and
my wife amongst the rest (not the least amiable, and who, already knew every
body) came rustling into the shop, and in a lisping accent (it is not tonish to
speak plain, or do the vowels justice) attuned to the articulation of a
watering-place, desired the haberdashery-millinery bookseller to look for JULIA
MANDEVILLE -- Julia Mandeville was not to be had, being, as said the dealer,
very much run upon. Then let us have SIDNEY BIDDULPH, said the ladies -- Sidney
Biddulph was out, being likewise a lady in constant request. I Am for, THE
MISTAKES OF THE HEART, cried a very grave-looking woman; who surely made a
small mistake in the choice of her reading. I wish, my dear, (said my wife to
me, with a very well-bred civility, taking less notice of me than usual -- it
is quite out of the Ton to be tender, Doctor,) you had brought JOSEPH ANDREWS
along with you -- Oh la! Ma'am, replied another, how can you possibly read such
low stuff -- the adventures of a footman, a kitchen-wench, and a strolling
parson -- Nay, Madam, said HARRIET, don't say any thing against the parsons,
pray; remember I Am a clergyman's wife, and there he stands -- an ABRAHAM ADAMS
every inch of him -- a'nt you, my dear?

This was too much; I attempted to go forth, but HARRIET caught me by the coat
(it is precisely the Ton to tease a husband, Doctor.) The poor ladies were in
great anxiety to find THESE MISTAKES OF THE HEART had been carried off last
season, by a person who took the road to GRETNA GREEN -- the Scotch marrying
village -- with her footman, in her way to London; though some (said the
haberdasher archly) may think that was going a round-about way too. If we cannot
get THE MISTAKES, suppose, rejoined the ladies, we have a flight to the
PARADISE OF FOOLS? or suppose we make a shift, till we can get something
better, with TOM JONES? -- Aye, TOM JONES is tolerable enough, (said a pale
languid lady) if he would but say more about the seraphic SOPHIA, and give us
less nonsense about the old vulgar father, the fusty aunt, and those
unertertaining horrid creatures THWACKUM and SQUARE. He is shockingly tedious
about those fellows. As to his Introductory Chapters, as he calls them, I
always skip'em. Aye, Madam, said another, and if he was a little plainer in
telling us what we were really to expect, at the top of his chapters, it would
be as well; in which case I really think it would be a goodish, prettyish sort
of a novel, to read once. Tom Jones, it seems, was now in reading by Lady
Sallow's coachman. -- The haberdasher recommended FILIAL PIETY -- the ladies
were satisfied that it was a dull, serious, sermonizing thing, from the title.
FILIAL PIETY indeed! -- send it to Miss Dorothy Desolate, who is come to dip
for the dismals; or lady Bab Bluebutter, who wants to drink away her
frog-freckled complexion. -- Ha! ha! ha! -- he! he! he! -- he! he! he! -- ha!
ha! ha!

The laugh was now more violent than the wit was brilliant by which it was
occasioned, and my dear HARRIET joined in it, most cordially.

They were about to depart without any books at all, when the haberdasher
mentioned some old volumes of the Spectator. They asked what he meant by
talking about such old things, which they had been obliged to read over and
over again, when they were at their boarding-schools. Lord! (cried one of the
damsels) here is DELICATE EMBARRASSMENTS -- Oh! the very thing -- worth all the
Spectators that ever were wrote. Aye, take it, and let us go read it directly
-- It don't end well, I think, objected another; I had rather read EACH SEX IN
THEIR HUMOR. -- Here is Something New, ladies, said the haberdasher -- As old
as the poles, said the fair ones. -- What say you to ELOISA? -- Oh! by all
means -- Have you got ELOISA? -- reach it this moment -- Oh, the dear book! --
there are three letters in the first volume of that book, worth all the world.
-- Come, it is a nasty evening, and not fit for walking, let us hurry away; and
so send them, Mr. TRASHLEY, to The Hall this instant. Come, Mr. HOMESPUN
(turning to me) come, you shall 'squire us -- [It is perfectly the Ton, my dear
Doctor, for ladies at a wateringplace, to use a husband, by the way of
walking-stick.]

You shall 'squire us, said my wife, believing that she did me infinite honor.

They fluttered out, caught me by the arm, and carried me off, in high triumph,
ten times faster than I should have walked, had I been permitted to do as I
thought proper. Indeed I was forced into a kind of trot: but it is a matter by
no means allowable, to please yourself at a watering-place. Even now I am
summoned by a messenger, who says, the party (of which I never heard a syllable
before) are waiting for me, to go into the walks. I dare not stay to finish my
letter, lest I should become ridiculous; for nothing in the world is so tonish
as to be ridiculous: so you must wait till I can next steal a moment from folly
for friendship.

I am, dear Doctor, Your most humble servant, and, without the least tincture
of Ton, your old firm friend, HORACE HOMESPUN.

LETTER IX. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
OH! for the genius of old HORATIUS FLACCUS, to compress a volume of facts
within the foldings of a single sheet of paper! -- Hear, -- see, -- be
convinced, -- congratulate me, and sing a Te Deum to thy friend, and to the
immortal memory of STANHOPE.

The party, of which I was made one, consisted of master minister HOMESPUN, his
lady, an animal who burlesqued the coxcomb, and a fourth person who departed
before the entrance of supper, so that of him I shall say nothing at present.
-- HOMESPUN and his wife are opposites, and therefore the better suited to the
trial of skill. At first, I said no more than just to show my breeding, and
inclination to be happy in their society. I let them show off themselves as
much as possible, that I might accurately learn their tempers, before I
ventured to attack them. This is one of the very first elementary principles of
my system. HOMESPUN soon discovered himself to be a grubber in books, and his
lady a grubber in the fashions; in her temper, gay, giddy, good-natured,
unsuspicious and uninformed. The coxcomb was of the neutral kind, but wished to
be flattered, for his taste in personal ornaments; and of course, was
flattered. Never was there a more curious trio. The conversation turned at
first, as it usually does among the English, upon weather, then upon books,
then upon dress, then upon the virtue of certain characters of the books, and
last, upon the virtue of the BUXTON waters. I accommodated myself to the
several changes with tolerable felicity. You must consider me, however, but as
a beginner; -- note my progress.

And, first, to touch the tender part of our book-worm, I observed, that the
public sustained a great loss in the death of several literary ornaments of the
age. I spoke critically, as to the satiric powers of CHARLES CHURCHIL; and
poetically, as to the Pindaric flights of GRAY. I entered into the intricacies
of the epic, and drew the line betwixt the original HOMER and the imitator
VIRGIL. I spoke of ease, in the style of TILLOTSON, of grace in ADDISON, and of
the pathetic, in the periods of YORICK. I affected even to discountenance the
inuendo of TRISTRAM SHANDY, and I compared his licentious spirit with the
voluptuous OVID. I pretended to discover an ostentatious display of talents in
the Orations and Epistles of CICERO; and I took care to suit every opinion to
the taste of the person I addressed, who had his share in the conversation too,
and who (as I have since heard) mentions me to his friends as a paragon of
learning. Take this, THORNTON, as a receipt to make a scholar a simpleton!

I must not forget to tell thee, that, when I was talking upon books, and
mentioned the ELEMENTS OF CRITICISM Mrs. HOMESPUN (though no simpleton) asked
me, with great simplicity, if that same criticism was a novel; to which the fop
answered, Yes, it came out last year, and was written by an intimate friend of
his; but that, though he pushed it with all his interest, it did not take, and
was now totally buried in oblivion.

I contradicted this with all possible politeness -- I imagined he might be
mistaken; (never appear assured, THORNTON) that work, I believed, was
attributed to Lord KAIMES -- a writer, with whom I did not doubt but he was
acquainted, Possibly he might confound the title a little, with others similar
to it; which might very easily be done. I had caught myself in such errors a
thousand times. Mr. HOMESPUN chuckled at my candor. Mrs. HOMESPUN (I know by
her eyes, I read every body's eyes) said something to her husband, in a low
voice, in my favor; and the fop himself, with a smile of complacence, but
without any confusion at detected ignorance, -- he wants the taste to blush --
(such, THORNTON, is the force of manner!) -- said, it was very likely he might
be misled by the title; that there were three or four elements, and he was most
superlatively obliged to me for setting him right.

Upon the topic of dress, a fruitful theme, I took care to agree with Mrs.
HOMESPUN in every particular; except that, now and then, I affected, in a
gentle tone of voice, and submissive smile of countenance, to differ from her,
on purpose to throw the triumph on her side, make her happy in an ideal
superiority, the better to impress her with a proper notion of my good manners,
in yielding to conviction.

About twelve o'clock, the fop hopped out, and took me by the hand in token of
satisfaction. Honest HORACE (that is his right classical and Christian name)
considers me as his comforter, and declares, that, he hopes for some happiness
now, even in a watering place; while Mrs. HOMESPUN, or, as I shall call her
hereafter, (to use as little as possible that vulgar name) HARRIET, makes no
scruple of saying, I am the most chatty, agreeable man at the bath.

I caught her, THRONTON, twice measuring me from top to bottom, and then she
gave HORACE a survey. -- By the soft, half-suppressed sigh she gave at the end
of it, it is easy to see -- whose dimensions she likes best.

"Thus far we run before the wind."
Oh! THORNTON, if I can once bring her to be discontented with her situation,
-- if she once begins to repent of her bargain, the day is my own! I never saw
a pair of eyes more likely to fail in love than hers; they turn with a cast of
concupiscence to the azure corners. The eyes of HORACE are gray, and without
luster. She has the right lips of invitation: the vulgar HORACE smackt them at
something she said, but methinks the impression he made, was only skin deep.
She is in full health, and in the hey-day of female youth!

Oh! THORNTON! THORNTON! Pray earnestly, that she may be miserable, and that
the despair of her heart may be removed, only by thy friend.

PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER X. THORNTON to SEDLEY.
HORACE HOMESPUN will, I perceive, have, in due time, a horn upon his head; and
yet, I feel a pang for the poor pedant. -- Hang it, SEDLEY, why should thou
pluck the rose from the matrimonial pillow? Why plant a thorn in its stead? --
But -- but -- I beg pardon: 'twas a tug of conscience. I am ashamed of the
sensation. I half blush at the impoliteness. Go on, and prosper. I am all
expectation, till I hear of the downfall of the bewitching HARRIET.

Farewell. JAMES THORNTON.

LETTER XI. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
THE horrors of the gout, and the tremblings of the palsy, seize thee, for
throwing a thought across me, that had well nigh torn a leaf of CHESTERFIELD
from my heart! -- The matrimonial rose! -- Oh, thou barbarian! Would thou
ruin my principles, and have me act in repugnance to my Preceptor already! --
Infidel, avaunt! My creed is established. Dare not, on thy life, THORNTON, dare
not again attempt to make me an apostate to PLEASURE. Half-bred man, be silent
and attentive. I have a scene to paint to thee that might shaw the frigid
feelings of an Anchorite.

About one o'clock in the morning, the eyes of HORACE began to twinkle -- what
was before dull became duller, till at last the four eyelashes met together,
and covered the balls of sight. HARRIET continued loquacious and lively, and
resolved not to go to bed till it was a more modish hour, insisting, that I
should keep her company. I humoured her vivacity till HORACE began to snore,
and then shifted the conversation to something less spirited, but to something
more attaching.

Sentiment, THORNTON, when enforced at a proper crisis, is a better weapon for
a man of pleasure, than downright licentiousness. I began to sing forth the
happiness of Mr. HOMESPUN; said many things in praise of his learning, honesty,
and hospitable turn of thinking -- then shifted again, told a tale of
disappointed passion -- descanted on the difficulties often attending
reciprocal attractions -- placed two young people in several affecting
situations. I altered the tone of my voice, and suited it to the stillness of
the night -- sighed in whisper -- corrected myself -- hemmed -- hesitated --
called a tear into my eye -- assumed a softened felxibility of feature -- and,
now and then, took my eye from viewing her, as if sensibly struck with my
danger.

Part of the flowers with which she had been some time playing, fell on the
floor -- I took them up with a trembling hand, and put them into hers, with a
pressure scarcely perceptible. A sudden blush came over her face in a moment. I
took no notice of it; but, catching up a myrtle sprig, kept it, sportingly, as
if to conceal a new sigh -- presented it to her as the freshest on the table,
and rose to take my leave.

It was the exact moment of departure. She was visibly agitated, and I would
not see it. She took the sprig, and the leaves shook. I went softly to the door
-- left with her the compliments of the night, in a gentleness of the tones
perfectly pathetic -- lingered at the door a moment -- complained that I could
not open it hastily for fear of disturbing her husband -- at last, I almost
shut it -- half opened it again -- played with the handle -- stood the third of
a minute, in a finely-dissembled state of embarrassment -- once more bade her
farewell, and indeed departed.

Adieu. Another word would spoil the scene. PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER XII. From the SAME to the SAME.
A POST-CHAISE and four this instant stopped at the door of mine host, in which
were three new visitants. The fore-glass was let down by a female hand, so
exquisitely white, and so full of promise, that I was induced to examine the
other parts of the person to which it belonged.

THORNTON, she is a cherubim! a mixture of beauty and breeding!

As she stepped from the chaise, she discovered an ancle formed by harmony, and
polished by the Graces. Her shape is admirable. I only scribble this to
announce her arrival at the bath. Thou know the rest.

Adieu. PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER XIII. THORNTON to SEDLEY.
THE letter is just brought by the postman. A cursed circumstance, that
requires my attendance in town till next Wednesday, prevents my present
happiness. But my horse shall be at the door of Thursday's dawn, and I will
order relays, by which means I shall reach BUXTON at dinner. Take care of the
Cherubim for thy friend.

Farewell. JAMES THORNTON.

LETTER XIV. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
ORDER not thy horse to be bitted -- put not thy presumptuous foot in the
stirrup. Invade not the sacred prospects of a friend's felicity. There are only
two forms in BUXTON worth undoing -- HARRIET HOMESPUN, and the Cherubim! Sit
quiet, and saddle not thy steed, if thou wishest the continued affection of thy*

PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER XV. Miss DELIA DELMORE to Lady LUCY SAXBY.
THIS journey has already had a good effect, my dear LUCY, upon poor FANNY. We
traveled by easy stages, and I hope much from the alteration of air, even if
the waters should want virtue to restore her. The poor thing has been to all
the baths in the kingdom, you know, except those of BUXTON. Alas! I fear her
disorder has got too near her heart for medicine; the God that afflicts, can
only, I believe, remove the affliction. Never was known so gradual a decline,
and yet no application could stop its progress -- What a pity, Lucy, that such
a form should be daily decaying, before the eyes of the most tender relations!
Company, conversation, the simplicity of her diet, the wholesomeness of the
situation, are all that can be expected from a short residence here, as the
waters of BUXTON are not strongly recommended in consumptive complaints. She is
always best in society, and I am happy to tell you, the place is tolerably
full. Her poor fond husband hangs over her fading form, with more tenderness
than when it was in its bloom. Pray Heaven these assiduities may prove
successful! I will write again soon.

DELIA DELMORE.

LETTER XVI. Miss DELIA DELMORE, in Continuation.
SOFTNESS to the sick, is better than a cordial! FANNY ventured yesterday to
breakfast in public: her delicate form, beautiful in dress, instantly
attracted, and claimed, what it received, -- the attention of the whole
company. She was dressed with her usual simplicity, and suited her ornaments to
her situation. In my life, I never saw any body, in the luxuriancy of health,
half so interesting. After the first dish of tea, the flush, which was formerly
a constant resident, revisited her cheek, -- the disorder has not, in any
degree, tinged her complexion -- her forehead is, as it ever was, alabaster
white; and the veins, that meander round the temples, are so transparently
blue, and the circulation seems to be performed so parcifically, one might
almost envy the delicacy, which a cruel disorder has bestowed upon her. In the
eyes of several young ladies, who, by their florid appearance, came hither
merely for amusement, I saw the glistening drop of sympathy -- and the men, who
were laughing at our entrance, soon softened their voices, and spoke almost in
a whisper, in compliment to the lovely invalid, who appeared to want such
attention.

FANNY was sensible to their indulgence, and smiled acknowledgment. At last, in
came a stranger, elegant and easy beyond description -- How, my LUCY, shall I
proceed? -- FANNY sunk upon my arm, complained that she was worse on a sudden,
and rose to go out -- the stranger assisted, with a gentleness not to be
described, and she tottered down stairs, under these supports, to her apartment.

I am so affected at present, that I can write no more.

LETTER XVII. Mrs. MORTIMER to Miss SIDNEY.
HEAVEN scarce allows me strength to tell you that I am come to a place, of all
others, in the habitable world, the most miserable to me. -- The only person
open earth that I would have avoided, is at the bath. God protect me, what am I
to do! Pity and pray for, the dying

FANNY MORTIMER.

LETTER XVIII. From the Reverend HORACE HOMESPUN to Doctor DIGGORY.
Dear Friend.
I REALLY begin to think, I shall find some satisfaction at BUXTON bath, amidst
a cluster of insignificant characters, one gentleman has distinguished himself
so much above the rest, that I have at once gratified my pride, and curiosity,
in obtaining his acquaintance.

He is intimately skilled in polite and elegant learning; perfectly well
mannered, and not above conversing upon subjects of divinity, and ethics, even
at a watering-place. My wife says, he understands to a nicety, what, some of
the waterers call, the ETIQUETTE of dress; so that, with the arts of a scholar,
he has, it seems, the invention and taste of a courtier, without any thing of
courtly insincerity.

In truth, I am apt to think very favorably of him, especially, as his
exterior does not seem more frank and open, than his interior is ingenuous and
undisguised. One such character will atone for the stupidity of the rest. As I
am fond of, now and then, what I call a woodwalk, or a ramble by myself, I can
now take this without a breach of good manners; for I can leave this
accomplished gentleman with HARRIET, who is fond enough of his company to
accept of him in my absence.

I am half inclined to forgive watering-places, because they have, in the end,
after much prior disappointment, produced a companion, whose sentiments, of
life, and maxims of moral conduct, do credit to himself, and honor to the
species.

I am, dear Doctor, Your faithful servant, HORACE HOMESPUN.

LETTER XIX. Mrs. HOMESPUN to Mrs. LA MOTTE.
OH! that I could live to BUXTON for ever! -- We have, since I last wrote to
you, got acquainted with the handsomest man in the world; and though he is as
good a scholar as HORACE, yet he understands as well as I do, all the
prettinesses of dress, of which, you know, HORACE is entirely ignorant. Then he
is so polite, so unaffected, he contradicts with such gentleness -- he is so
open to conviction! -- You know my aversion to filthy cheese. I happened only
to hint this, and he ordered it never to be brought again to the table, while I
was at the bath; though Mr. HOMESPUN said, I ought to suffer what was offensive
to myself, out of good manners to the company.

It Is hardly worth attending to, and perhaps you will laugh at my noticing such a
trifle, but he sits in a chair, eats his victuals, cuts it into slices, and
holds his knife and fork as different from HORACE as possible, who, you know,
sometimes seems so over head and years in thought, that he forgets the dinner
is before him, picks his teeth, and sits silent, till the cloth is ready to be
taken away. Then again, as to carving, HORACE can no more do the honors of the
table than a baby: he misses the joint, and sometimes scatters the sauce in
ones face; -- whereas this gentleman hits the mark as dexterously as a surgeon,
helps the ladies to the gratest delicacies, with such a gentle manner, and with
a countenance so smiling, that it is impossible to refuse what he offers.

At supper last night, HORACE was in one of his thoughtful moods, and disgusted
me horridly.

There was a roasted fowl; and HORACE, perceiving my plate empty, must needs
fill it with one of the wings, which he made shift to mangle off with the knife
with which he had been eating, though another for the purpose was lying on the
other side the dish. Then he must needs make my wing swim with the gravy, and,
in awkwardly tilting the dish, several drops flew upon the gentleman's
waistcoat. Mr. SEDLEY -- that is his name -- said, it was no matter; it was not
easy to help such accidents; and begged he would consider it as of no sort of
consequence. -- Sweet fellow! -- Oh, that HORACE would imitate him! He is now
walking toward our lodgings, and HORACE slouching by the side of him. HORACE
is, to be sure, upright enough, but then he looks as stiff and uncomfortable as
an over-starched shirt. -- SEDLEY moves as if he was quite happy: Mr. HOMESPUN
struts as if he was in misery. They are both at the door.

Adieu, adieu. HARRIET HOMESPUN.

LETTER XX. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
THE proverb is verified: It cannot rain, but it pours! -- Pardon the vulgarity
of a proverb, which is too a-propos to omit -- The Cheribim I mentioned to thee
in my last, is a cherub of an inferior order, when compared with the SERAPH who
came with her. She was at that time, muffled up and close hooded; but when, on
the next day, the veil was withdrawn, judge of my surprise, on beholding the
very She, the charming She, whom last season I met with her father, Sir HENRY
DELM^RE, at SCARBOROUGH, at the period when the letters of my divine Earl
became popular, and I had just bought a copy of them. We lodged in the same
house, and I became agreeable to Sir HENRY. The very first trial I made to
reduce my favorite precepts to practice, was upon the heart of this very girl,
then glowing with all the graces of health, and endowed with all the
enchantments of a pathetic temper. I soon pretended to lose my vivacity, and
became the softest son of sentiment that ever was born. The net of silk, which
I had diligently woven, became successful; and I had certainly caught in it the
fairest prize in the creation, had not a cruel necessity called me from the
bath.

Several transient tete-a-tetes I had with her there, gave me the opportunities
I wished. Her passion was imaginary, but pleasing -- she fixed high the
standard of domestic felicity, and unreasonably loved to refine.

To accommodate myself to this, was, at first, not easy; but before I quitted
SCARBOROUGH, I was so distinguished for the penseroso, that even Sir HENRY
himself began to think I was falling into a hypochondriac disorder, and used
every effort to divert me.

Though I was then but a novice in the theory of joy, I had read enough of
CHESTERFIELD to know the potency of dissimulation; and, had it been in my power
to have staid another week, should have, even then, added an illustrious
example, to corroborate that glorious precept, which advises, "to adopt the
character and conversation to the company."

Since these transactions, she is altered, THORNTON, -- altered in every part
of her situation: she is married, and in a consumption; and yet, like certain
fruits, she is delicious in decay. I was pleased to see her disordered at the
first interview; the little blood that painted her cheek, disappeared, her
knees shook, and her hands trembled, at the recollection. And this, too, was in
a public breakfasting room. Judge how her agitation must alarm the company, and
operate amongst the women in my favor. Who knows, THORNTON, but the beautiful
invalid may have brought herself to this state, upon my account? If so, ought
not I to pity her? -- and ought not she to thank the gods, that I again "am
come to comfort her?" At all events, you ought to congratulate me, and once
again sing Io Paeon, to the canonized bones of CHESTERFIELD.

Adieu. PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER XXI. From the SAME to the SAME.
THE HOMESPUNS are secured; I have them by the heart, and enjoy, in an equal
degree, the confidence of the wife and husband.

HORACE has many oddities, of which his wife is lately become sensible; and it
has been my business to excuse them to her. He is addicted to catch hold of the
button, and, in the ardour of philosophical and systematic conversation, tugs
at it most immoderately. Last night, in supporting a favorite opinion, which
was opposed stoutly by the fopling, he seized the wrought button, and tore his
fingers against the raised work on the surface, till the blood fairly gushed
cut in a stream, and spotted his sables. The fop swore, -- I checked him with
temper: the parson cooled in his argument, -- and I applied an handkerchief to
the wound, and thus saved them both from looking silly.

HORACE'S nails are not quite so accurately clean as they might be; and, as I
observed Mrs. HOMESPUN comparing them with mine, I suddenly closed my hand, as
if out of tenderness, lest the comparison should turn to HORACE'S disadvantage;
yet this very tenderness, so managed, answered the design completely; and I can
see plainly, HARRIET thinks hardly of HORACE for neglecting to pick the dirt
from under his nails: while, on the other hand, when he and I are together, we
laugh at the sopperies of the times, and seem mutually to despise all its
DELICATESSE.

Adieu. PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER XXI. THORNTON to SEDLEY.
CORMORANT in pleasure! insatiate conqueror! What, is not one object sufficient
at a time? Must thy bow have seven strings to it? and can thou not be
satisfied with the victory thou will soon gain over the buxom HARRIET, but thou
must plot captivity for the Cherubim, and hope to carry all before thee? This
is illustrating thy favorite Lord's maxims with a witness! And will thou not
bestow a single beauty to thy friend? Be this as it may, spare -- I conjure
thee, spare, the delicate distressed -- harm not the gentle FANNY; but suffer
her to live the short remainder of her days in the purity of conjugal caresses
-- spot not the ermine of expiring chastity, but let her spirit ascend,
immaculate, to heaven.

Do this, if thou art a man! The high in health may admit, and return thy
revels; but pity the sick sister, and let not the maxims of the Preceptor be
made subservient to sanctify barbarity. If thou triest to ensnare the sinking
soul of FANNY MORTIMER, thou art a fiend, and unworthy the friendship of thy

J. THORNTON.
P. S.
Is it not said, in the volume of thine Oracle, "A man is fit neither for
business or pleasure who either does not, or cannot command and direct his
attention to the present object, and in some degree banish for that time, all
other objects from his thoughts."

How is this admonition consistent with the scheme of three at a time? Study to
be consistent, or all is over.



LETTER XXII. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
THE very worst reasoner in the dominions of GEORGE, is JAMES THORNTON, Esquire.

And so, because I have an eye upon three, thou supposest I must needs be
inconsistent and irregular! Do thou not know, that the same Oracle advises, a
quickness of attention, an unobserved observation, the art of seeing all the
people in the room without appearing to look critically? Is there not,
according to that Oracle, pretty nearly the same degree of deception in every
character; and are we not to turn all this hypocrisy to our advantage, even
while we seem to think every body honest?

The great nicety, in my present situation, thou do not see; nor will I be at
the pains to develop it to so awkward an arguer.

What a conclusion have thou drawn, indeed, from my having three objects in
view! not considering, that I am as cool and collected as if I had but one; and
that I have a capacity, equal to the conquest of thirty times three.

Learn to know me better.

I am too well disciplined in my system, to be precipitate, or to hazard the
mortification of being disappointed, by rashly seizing that which I perceive
can only be obtained gradually, by the successful efforts of resistless
insinuation

The Master of my art says, very truly, -- Little minds are in a hurry, when
the object proves too big for them: they run, they puzzle, confound, and
perplex themselves; they want to do every thing at once, and never do it at
all. But a man of sense takes the time for doing the thing he is about, well;
and his haste to dispatch a business, only appears by the continuity of his
application to it: he pursues it with a cool steadiness, and finishes it before
he begins any other.

This last sentence, THORNTON, thou may think, clashes with my present attack
upon the three beauties of BUXTON.

Thou art again mistaken.

I am not in a hurry to be happy, as to the ultimatum of female favors. Like a
man of resolution, I can watch the progress of a favorite pursuit, and see it
prosper under my eye, without seizing the final recompense of my labor, till
it is the proper crisis of fruition.

To bring these arguments home to the points in question, thou must understand,
that, had only HARRIET HOMESPUN been at the bath, I should have been contented
till her finishing; but, as the Fates have thrown two sisters in my way, of
which one happens to be an old acquaintance, but whom accident permitted to
slip through my fingers unconquered, or, at least, without bestowing upon her
victor the rewards of conquest, I must suit myself to the triple tie, that
chance has laid upon me, with as much adroitness as I am able. And this is the
delicacy in my situation, to which, in the beginning of this letter, I alluded.

One great part of my system is, to make people, who are to give me happiness,
happy in themselves. I must, to this end, take care to avoid making any of
these dear creatures rivals to each other: -- to boast of amors, thou know,
is utterly repugnant to the STANHOPEAN principle. Press for the favor, read
the eyes, six the heart, and revel over the yielded person, ad eternitatem; but
keep the joy to thyself; nor ever, with rascal loquacity, betray the infirmity
of her, whose indulgence has given thee the first of felicities.

To one friend I have ventured to disclose myself in the very confidence of my
soul. If thou betrayest me, though but in the hour of ebriety -- it does not
admit of an if, -- thou art a guarded, honorable character.

No more, I pr'ythee, as to plurality of objects.

The CHESTERFIELD system admits not the fearful and filthy intercourse of venal
women. He could not allow the horrid and vulgar hazards of c -- s and p -- s.
"Avoid," says he, (in his caelestial chapter on pleasures) the fate of the
promiscuous fornicator: what a wretch is a rake with half a nose, crippled by
coarse and infamous debauches!

Hence, THORNTON, it is evident, that a man is justified (provided he keeps the
secret) to search the circle of the earth for those favors, and elevated
connexions, that bring along with them the honey without the sting. It is
beneath a gentleman to beat round the bagnios, or criticize the brothel. Leave
such to the appetites of apprentices, whose vulgar palates can digest any
thing. Be it the business of those who are governed by the laws of good
breeding, to enlist themselves under the white banner of apparent modesty, and
envite embraces unallayed by terrors and suspicions.

The constitution of a man of fashion, demands, in these cases, the utmost
circumspection: the wife, the virgin, and the FRIEND, only, promise this
blissful security. To them, then, let us direct ourselves in self-defence, and
thus procure the personal paradise, in which the roses of beauty bloom without
a thorn.

I have said thus much to silence thee, once for all, as to the nature of my
favorite principle; which thou now perceivest to be, not more pleasing than
rational. No more, then, of thy whining passages about pity, and virtue, and
all the etcaetera of parsonly cant.

The man of taste and fashion moves above it.

Adieu. PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER XXIII. The Reverend HORACE HOMESPUN to Doctor DIGGORY.
Dear Doctor,
WE are all wrong again! -- The head of poor HARRIET is certainly turned; and,
instead of a cure being performed, she is certainly distracted, by these same
waters of BUXTON. This day we drank tea in private, and never heard I such a
train of conversation as she fell into. Why, Doctor, she is gone -- her
intellects I mean -- past redemption.

For the first time in her life, she found fault with every thing I did. She
insisted upon it, I drank my tea too hot, which was not only, she said,
injurious to the coat of the stomach, but shockingly indelicate.

The tea-spoon was not managed to her satisfaction. I sipped too loud from the
saucer, when it would, I find, have been genteeler to apply a silent lip to the
cup. Nay, what is worse than all this, I had the misfortune to fold the bread
and butter inelegantly; and it would have been better there too, if I had put
the end, rather than the side of it, to my mouth first.

But that which most astonished me, was her objection to the good old custom of
turning down my cup, which she said was out of the TON, and that it would give
her great pleasure, if, in future, I would lay the spoon across the cup.

I was perfectly petrified, and yet held my tongue, and spoke nothing. -- She
proposed walking, and, as I really thought the air might do the poor creature's
head good, I drew on my gloves, and attended her toward the well-walk. --
Alas! Doctor, nothing, I fear, can bring her about; for she grew ten times
worse than ever, and if I was astonished before, I was now almost struck dead
with the hugeness of my amazement.

I had not the happiness to hit her fancy even in my walk, which she very
fairly told me, was ridiculous; and that I held up my head too high, turned in
my toes too much, and wanted the Graces in my arms.

She actually made an objection to the manner in which my wig was powdered,
said it was all patches, and had not the regular sprinkling of a man of fashion.

Upon this, I ventured gently to tell her, that I was but a country curate,
that I had no pretensions to fashion -- that I had, for my own part, nothing to
do at a watering-place, but to oblige her -- that I was very sorry for the
loftiness of my head, which, for the time to come, should be carried with more
humility -- that, if it would give her any pleasure, I would take care to stoop
till I bent neck and shoulders together -- that, as to inversion of the toes, I
would learn to dance, late in the day as it was for me, and inconsistent as
such a part might be thought to the clerical character -- in regard to my arms,
that I had hitherto only used them in the ordinary offices of life, and found
they performed very well for a plain man; but that, if she had any favorite
attitudes, or wished me to exhibit in any postures to which she was
particularly partial, I would practice vigilantly at the looking-glass, and,
rather than want the Graces she spoke of, would absolutely learn the exercise,
and go through all the forms and ceremonies of legs, arms, head, and hands,
like a young recruit. At the same time I begged her to consider that, as we
had, sicne the day of our union, lived harmoniously, I warmly hoped we should
not be put of tune by trifles, which are in themselves insignificant, even if
we admitted them to be essential to the etiquette of a watering-place. I,
moreover, told her to remember, that I was at least a faithful husband, and
made her happiness the study, practice, and contrivance, of my whole life; and
that, surely, where the cardinal duties were observed, it mattered little,
whether the toes were the breadth of a barley corn too much in or out, or the
head half an inch too lofty, or half an inch too low. I would have proceeded in
my defense, but that my good friend Mr. SEDLEY at that instant came to my
relief, told us, as he advanced with warmth, vivacity, and a cheerful
countenance, that, if we did justice to his attachment to us, we might judge of
the joy he felt in seeing us so frequently choose a private path, which was to
him a certain indication of matrimonial felicity.

There was something so pretty in his speech, that it made an impression on my
memory, and I have copied it verbatim. In less than half an hour Mrs. HOMESPUN
recovered her reason; her late lunacy was never hinted at, and hopeing to
continue her goodnature, I invited this most agreeable gentleman to take
another bit of supper with us.

The manner in which he accepted the invitation trebled the sense of the favor
he did me by his company. What a gratification it is to have so sensible and
entertaining a friend at a watering-place!

Dear Doctor, I am yours truly, HORACE HOMESPUN.

LETTER XXIV. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
A MAN, THORNTON, who is true to the relish of pleasure, can extract extacy
even from disappointment. The bliss of blisses alone could have made me happier
than I was an hour ago.

Hear the story.

Since the first moment I cast my eye upon the bewitching HARRIET, I marked her
for my own; and she has since been the grand point of all my insinuation and
ingenuity. Not a single article has been neglected that could touch her
imagination, move her heart, and catch her favorite weaknesses. I paid court
to her fancy, to her feelings, to her foibles. Constant attendance has done
the business I expected it would, and I have but one effort more, to be master
of all that the finest woman in the world has to bestow.

Last night, my THORNTON, was the conscious period that yielded up every
transport but the one. HORACE was requested to perform the funeral-service over
the corpse of a fellow who died by a dropsy; (as the parson of the parish was
indisposed;) and, it seems, he was to be buried at a town a mile distant from
our lodgings.

He went. -- The opportunity was not to be omitted. I exerted myself. I
sparkled in the luster of STANHOPEAN sentiments -- I became eloquent, and soon
communicated a part of my ardour to the troubled bosom of HARRIET. I hit her,
soft upon the heart. Our eyes met -- they confirmed our sentiments -- our
voices grew soft as the summer breezes -- there was no intruder -- I laid my
cheek close to hers -- they were both upon the glow -- for the first time in my
life, I kissed her lips -- I repeated the pressure -- she repulsed me -- I
dropped upon my knee, and in that attitude repeated the offense -- Nature was
stirred to the uttermost -- I continued to suck the delicious poison, and
unawares she returned the salutation. The dalliance was no longer to be borne;
she begged me, for God's sake, to desist. The flush of desire and modesty were
at war in her cheek -- her bosom palpitated -- I plied her with my precious
maxims in a whisper, that gave them additional graces -- I laid my hand upon
her heart: the throb was violent; and, as I caught her eagerly in my arms, her
head sunk in unresisting softness on my shoulder, and, worked to the extreme
betwixt sentiment and sensation, she burst into tears.

I composed her cheek -- drew her handkerchief gently over her eye, fixed her
again without offering to distress her, in her chair; and to this moment she
thinks I sacrificed, to love, respect, delicacy, and friendship, a passion that
is tearing me to pieces.

In a few minutes HOMESPUN returned; he is no reader of looks, and I took my
leave for the night with that easy intrepid assurance, which belongs to the
great character I have adopted.

And now, THORNTON, am I not a tolerable proficient in the science of
dissimulation? Does anything come amiss to me? Can I not assume with ease, and
wear with cheerfulness, every shape? Are not heat, cold, luxury, abstinence,
gravity, gaiety, ceremony, easiness, learning, trifling, business, and
pleasure, modes which, according to my Preceptor's advice, I am able to take,
lay aside, or change occasionally, with as much ease as I would take and lay
aside my hat. -- But you may expect nobler illustrations of this hereafter. I
am yet in the outset of my adventures -- sporting (by way of trial) with jejune
experiments. The next time I can send THEE out of the way, HORACE HOMESPUN,
beware! Thou have just escaped a fore evil. A little while ago, thou were
within an inch of cuckoldom.

THORNTON, adieu. PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER XXV. The Reverend HORACE HOMESPUN to Doctor DIGGORY.
Dear Doctor,
SUCH a night as the last, I never passed. My poor wife has had a relapse,
Doctor. It returned at midnight upon her, and raged with the most frightful
violence for above two hours. She is absolutely delirious, and I am the most
wretched of men.

About an hour after we were in bed, she complained that there was no bearing
the heat; though, in truth, this is one of the coldest places in England, and
it had rained all the preceding evening. I felt her pulse, and it was
immoderately full, tumultuous, and rapid. I kissed her with all the tenderness
of a sympathising husband; -- she asked me, how I could possibly be so cruel? I
offered to lay her dear head upon my bosom, as upon the pillow of affection,
judging that she would be pleased with my assiduities. Her eyes were streaming
in tears -- her face was on fire -- the sighs came from her, palpably against
her consent. I pressed to know the cause of this; at least, to what she
attributed it; and offered to throw on my clothes, and procure a Doctor. Her
cure, she told me, was out of the reach of a Doctor; but that, if I would not
suffer her to be quiet without fretting her by my officiousness, she should be
under the necessity of getting out of bed, and sit till the morning in a chair.
A little time after this, she changed her manner, and with a kinder tone of the
voice, asked me, if I would consent to return home as soon as it was light. She
caught my hand, begged my pardon, wetted it with her tears, and begged I would
excuse her infirmity. I drew her, fond and close to my heart; and I felt hers,
at that moment, leap with agony. In the next moment she requested me to leave
her, covered herself hastily head over ears with the bedcloaths, and, saying
that she wished I was wrapping her in the shroud, sunk sobbing upon her pillow.
Oh! Doctor, what shall I do? What can be the matter? I am really unconscious of
offense. She is now in bed -- perhaps, sleep may alleviate her disorder. The
worst of it is, she will not allow me to speak to any third person; and, as I
myself know nothing of either maladies, or their proper medicines, I am
dreadfully alarmed, and tremble for the consequence.

Dear Doctor, I am your unhappy friend, HORACE HOMESPUN.

LETTER XXVI. From the SAME to the SAME.
Dear Doctor,
CERTAINLY, Mr. SEDLEY is the best young man in England. When he came to pay me
the compliments of the morning, he found me in a very dejected situation; and
though he was far from inquisitive, yet I could not conceal from his asking eye
the nature of my calamity. Poor young Gentleman! it was evident that he felt
for me: his countenance lost, in a moment, all that fine glow that is natural
to it; and, if my fancy does not deceive me, he had some difficulty to prevent
a tear from starting. He assured me, that words were never made to do justice
to the feelings of wounded friendship; that he was more interested in
everything that concerned me and my wife, than he could express; and that, if
I would suggest some little pretense, either of business or of invitation, to
leave him with Mrs. HOMESPUN in the evening, he would certainly either comfort
her by every ministration of the sincerest friendship, or, at worst, he would
find out the reasons for her anxiety, and the nature of her complaint; after
which, he very well observed, the remedy would be easy; At this generous
proposal, in which his worthy disposition was manifest, I was ready to weep;
and, as we embraced each other at parting, our voices became of no use to us,
and we could only show, by our sympathising enfoldings, that we had a sincere
and Christian regard for each other.

I am, Dear Doctor, Your most faithful servant, HORACE HOMESPUN.

LETTER XXVII. Mrs. HOMESPUN to Mrs. LA MOTTE.
OH, CHARLOTTE! CHARLOTTE! what a perplexity am I thrown into, by this scheme
of pleasure! Accursed be the hour in which I set my soot upon the confines of
BUXTON! Unconscious of any violent partialities, I was contented while I was
ignorant. In the dreary village, where our parsonage is a palace, I was
sufficiently happy, because I saw nobody superior to Mr. HOMESPUN. I was the
Minister's lady, and the wives and daughters of the neighborhood paid me the
compliment of their best curtsey. My HORACE really looked handsome in his
Sunday canonicals, and I viewed him in the pulpit with pleasure.

But, alas! my CHARLOTTE, the scene is changed. I have been several days in a
place of politeness, where HORACE is the most awkward of the circle. My eyes
are now opened to his imperfections -- I see them, I feel them, I detest them.
He is a lump of learning, without ductility, without softness, without -- what
Mr. SEDLEY calls, the Graces. I am sometimes obliged to ask several times
before I can obtain an answer to the most ordinary question, and then, at last,
he bursts from his reverie, and pretends not to have heard me speak to him. Can
any thing be so disgusting? His conversation is unlike that of the rest of the
company; and, instead of bearing a part, in little, social, and endearing
chit-chat, he talks eternally about Lock, and Livy, and Cicero, the Elements
of Criticism, the Problems of Euclid, and such fellows -- and many a time, when
I have wanted him to put a pin in my handkerchief, or such little offices of
endearment, he has been wrapped up in meditation, and then stared me full in the
face without knowing I was in the room.

Then, he actually has a strange shy manner of treating me as a wife. There is
no delicacy in his air, when he takes my hand: he shakes it indeed HEARTILY,
but then he has the fat fist of a grasier, even, though in other respects he is
disagreeably thin. He kisses, with a ceremony perfectly classical, as Mr.
SEDLEY calls it. There is a pretty method, methinks, even in the management of
the lips. By accident, Mr. SEDLEY stole a kiss the other day, and he placed it,
so directly, so gently, and so pathetically in the center, that I never felt
such a sensation! I protest, CHARLOTTE, it ran thrilling through every vein of
me, warmed my very heart, and almost took away my breath.

We were, I remember, playing at questions and commands, the day being showery,
so that we could not stir out. The forfeit came round at last to HORACE, and he
smackt me, as usual, in his round-about manner. Heaven pardon me, CHARLOTTE,
but I was obliged to draw my pocket-handkerchief across my mouth, and had some
difficulty to avoid making a wry face. If you was once in the company of Mr.
SEDLEY -- he is called the handsome SEDLEY here -- you would never forget --
gentle, graceful, elegant, soft, genteel, and eloquent. -- Heigho! -- Why,
CHARLOTTE, why did I marry, before I had seen something of the world? Or,
rather, Why, after I was married, why did I ever stray from carts and cottages,
to the delightful dangers of a watering place? -- But I must hide my letter;
Mr. HOMESPUN is coming toward the house, as erect as a walking-stick.

Adieu, HARRIET HOMESPUN.

LETTER XXVIII. Miss DELIA DELMORE to Lady LUCY SAXBY.
FANNY is much disordered, my dear LUCY; the fainting with which she was seized
at the breakfast-rooms, has preyed on her ever since. Her spirits are greatly
agitated. Her husband attends her, with the diligence of a nurse, and cannot be
persuaded to leave her chamber. The poor girl often drops the tear of
gratitude, but speaks less than usual, as, she says, talking exhausts her. She
has twice hinted her wishes to be removed from hence, either to my father's, or
to SCARBOROUGH, as we thought proper: and begs her removal may be pretty late
at night, for company, she says, rather disturbs her, sicne her last accident.
Poor MORTIMER, her husband, sees her dying by inches before his face, and his
unavailing officiousness appears now and then, to go too near the heart of the
sinking FANNY. She is too indisposed to remove at present: for my part, I have
not been able to set my foot yet in the street: I love my sister too tenderly,
to leave her with a strange woman, in a strange place, especially with one, who
is merely paid for her attention, and who, consequently, can have none of those
charming thoughts that enter into to the heart of a tender relation. Sometimes,
my dear, the changing a posture, sometimes he shifting a pillow, or fixing a
chair, does more by the method of doing it, than all the elaborate efforts of
an avowed nurse. A Mr. SEDLEY -- who is said to be the beauty of the bath, and
was the person that handed FANNY down stairs, and was very obliging during her
illness, -- sends every day, very respectfully, to know how the sick lady
improves in her health. As many of both sexes were witness to poor FANNY's
distress, and as people should have a fellow-feeling, in places of general
resort for cures, as well as fashions, I wonder others have not paid this sweet
girl the same compliment.

The manner in which this gentleman makes the enquiry, is pretty: he does not
presume upon the privilege of a public place, and send a blundering footboy
with a message, nor does he come, intruding, himself, but he usually writes a
little billet, (every day varied, and containing a new turn,) in which his
expressions discover at once accomplishment and highbreeding; and, what puts it
out of any body's power to misconstrue it into design, he always addresses his
cards to Mr. MORTIMER. -- As my brother was reading one of these this morning
to his wife, she desired to look at the hand, but had scarce held it to her
eye, before she dropped the paper, and, letting her arm fall languidly on the
pillow, said, very softly, that she could not manage it, and was weaker than
she imagined.

She is now in a gentle dose, and I took the opportunity it gave, to inform my
dear LUCY of our present melancholy situation. Sir HENRY, and my mother are
expected hourly. If FANNY really dies, my mother will certainly go distracted.
Heaven bless you, and yours.

DELIA DELMORE.

LETTER XXIX. Mrs. LA MOTTE to Mrs. HOMESPUN.
IN the name of Heaven, HARRIET, what are you about? Your letters alarm me
beyond imagination. You are in the road to ruin: I see you upon the very verge
of perpetual infamy. You can now mark the little imperfections of a husband:
you are blind to his many virtues. You have cast your eye on a man, whose
person and manners you like better: with this man, you have been already left
alone; you may by left alone again. The next step is too apparent to be
mentioned; you are very gay, very young, very inexperienced: there is but one
way left to prevent your destruction, and that is, to return home directly, and
make any excuse to HORACE for the abruptness of your departure. I know nothing
of the SEDLEY you mention, nor do I wish to know him. Better had it been, on
all hands, if you were as ignorant of him as I am. It is plain he has pleased
you too well; since the pleasure is bought at the dear price of hatred to the
best of husbands. Yes, HARRIET, your HORACE is the best of husbands. He is an
honest man, if he is not a brilliant man; and, if he does not shine in society,
he has an excellent heart, and a simplicity of manners, truly amiable. The
little points of objection you have made, are, when weighed against his various
virtues, light, and of no account; while, on the other hand SEDLEY has, very
probably, nothing but an elegance in trifling to set him off.

Waving, however, these points, my dear, let us come to others more startling.
You are a wife, you are pregnant, you are advanced far in that pregnancy, you
have a clear character, you have the love of an innocent neighborhood -- Away!
-- Away: Order your chaise this instant to the door. The matter does not admit
of a moment's debate. I hasten to seal up my letter, and I beg, for God's sake,
for your own sake, and for that of all that love you, or that you love, that
you will delvier your answer by word of mouth.

I shall catch you to my breast, as a dear friend, just escaped from a
precipice, -- as a treasure I have luckily rescued, in the minute of despair,
from the surrounding flames. Adieu: Adieu. I enjoin you to be expeditious!

CHARLOTTE LA MOTTE.

LETTER XXX. Mrs. HOMESPUN to Mrs. LA MOTTE.
(Before the receipt of the above.)
YOUR HARRIET is something happier than when she last sat down to address you.
Mr. SEDLEY has pleaded the cause of poor HORACE so persuasively, and that
behind his back, (there is a generous man for you!) that I have been induced to
ask his pardon, and I am resolved to treat him with more politeness, which I
find is indispensible in the conduct of a married woman to her husband, even
though he were indifferent to her.

We have passed together a very happy afternoon; and though I do not find any
greater degree of tenderness for HORACE, yet, as I know how to make him happy,
by merely suppressing those sentiments in his disfavour, which can do me no
service to discover, I feel the sweets of disguising the truth upon some
occasions. I have restored HORACE to perfect serenity, and I as sincerely thank
Mr. SEDLEY, for taking me to task. Adieu.

I am, Dear CHARLOTTE, Your affectionate HARRIET HOMESPUN.

LETTER XXXI. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
THE first blow is not yet finally given. Opportunity has not sufficiently
favored temptation. My system, not only demands that I should preserve the
charming fact, private, but the reputation of both the man and the woman,
unsuspected. I am not to be a harum-scarum rake, who, brutishly as boyishly,
boasts of his successes, but a polished man of pleasure; one, who is to bathe
the senses in bliss, and revel in the richest luxuries of enjoyment, with
consenting elegance under the rose, while (in public) he is to sustain a fair
character, and pass upon men (who only look upon the surface) as a pattern of
purity, and a model for morals.

HARRIET is a bewitching, illiterate, sweet piece of unpractised Nature. Her
passions are ardent, and I have sufficiently set them afloat; but I must take
care to guard against working up my own passions. All the power of conquering
dissimulation is over, when once DESIRE seizes the helm from the cautious hand
of cool and deliberate REASON. "Vigor and spirit" are mere madnesses, without
versatility and complacence. Upon this principle, I must walk without
deviation, like a faithful pupil, in the path that is chalkt out for me. It is
my business to lead right reason in the triumphant fetters and shackles of the
heart and the passions. In order to accomplish this, THORNTON, I must keep
myself collected, and never strike, till I have fully thrown every body about
me off their guard, and till I can, then, gratify, conquer, triumph, and enjoy
in full security. My blood, THORNTON, shall seem more cool and complacent than
a turtle's. HARRIET'S, I see, is upon the boil: yet she has beauty enough to
stir me; and when the secure moment offers itself, fear not her disappointment.
Her wishes, however warm, shall not be vain.

Adieu. PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER XXXII. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
I HAVE appeared in public. I dined this day at the ordinary. Ordinary indeed!
such a room full of emptiness I never beheld: citizens apeing the men of mode,
women of fallow countenances, and frippery fops, who would be thought witty and
elegant, when they are merely saucy, dull, and affected. Alas! THORNTON, what a
pity, what a mortification! I have not a single competitor, -- I mean not in
point of gallantry, for that militates against my system of pleasure, -- but,
horrid to tell, there is no one of my sex from whom I can gain any real honor
in the comparison. However, as even blockheads are worth gaining, and their
hearts worth misleading; as they have all foibles to flatter, and weaknesses
that may be for our interest to work upon; I began to show off, and brought the
whole company over, as my admirers. I practiced all the charming conversation
rules of DORMER, with as much facility as if I had been their authors and,
indeed, they are so suited to my own natural sentiments, that I only consider
him as having written, what I long ago thought, and what, indeed, I will hence
forward invariably practice, till I am incapable of further enjoyment. I had
the happiness to sit parallel to the very fop, already recorded in my
correspondence; and he was over-dressed to all the extravagance of the Ton;
while I, had the advantage, of not in any sort, invading the modesty of Nature.
The fool looked as if he piqued himself upon his gaudiness; he stroked his
ruffles, displayed the baubles of his watch, perkt up his head to gaze in the
pier-glasses, pulled his decorated watch in and out of his fob several times,
eyed himself askance, and figited up and down in his chair, with all the
insignificant whiffling agility of the monkey in the fable, who had seen the
world.

Close to the side of this powdered popinjay, sat an unwieldly animal, who, to
the ill manners of a bear, united the uncouthness of an elephant, without half
its sagacity; and who, in feeding, scattered his offals around, to the utter
dismay of the coxcomb, who, fearful of complaining, and alarmed at the size of
the antagonist, took shelter at a small table, or rather side-board, and
fluttered himself clean, while the monster enjoyed his embarrassment. I am
happy to tell thee, that, though this piece of pleasantry set the unpolished
table in a roar, I commanded my features, and did not give way to ridicule.
Hitherto I have never laughed out since I came to BUXTON, and I solemnly hope
(with the grace of THE Lord before my eyes) I shall never be boorish, or
boisterous enough to laugh out again, while I have being.

Know, moreover, THORNTON, that I ate elegantly, and drank discreetly. I smiled
at a thousand dull stories, and only told one myself, and that inconceivably
a-propos. I heard long talkers, without appearing to be tired, and I looked
every person whom I addressed full in the face. I dressed my countenance in
softness, and gave the douceur to all my motions. I interrupted no man,
contradicted cautiously, palliated tenderly, decided a dispute betwixt the fop
and the glutton with a good-humoured pleasantry, caught the habits of the
company, swore not at all, and adapted my conversation to every speaker. The
consequence was, THORNTON, that I was immediately known to be somebody, and
rose in my consequence till I was the admiration of every body: my company was
cherished, my absence was regretted, and at my going out of the room, a buz of
universal approbation -- Oh the exquisite murmur! -- followed me down stairs.
In a word, THORNTON, the fops were annihilated, the prattlers silenced; every
crest was fallen; and I went off in the compleatest triumph of uncontested
elegance. SEDLEY -- only SEDLEY was the burden of the song.

And thus, having settled my reputation, and established myself PUBLICLY, it
only remains that I enjoy my popularity by appearing to deserve it; and then I
may bid defiance to censure, and then -- WELCOME VOLUPTUOUSNESS!

Adieu, PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER XXXIII. THOMAS at the Bath, to TIMOTHY in Town.
Buxton.
RECEIVE, TIMOTHY, the greeting of THOMAS.

I, and my master -- we never dispute the point of precedence -- arrived on the
evening of the day we set out, at this execrable place, where I have, as yet,
done little more than stick a pin in SEDLEY'S hair, and peruse a page of his
CHESTERFIELD after dinner.

Of these books we are, both, excessively fond, and, as he always leaves them
in the chamberwindow -- a little careless that, -- I take them up when he lays
them down; by which means, we make pretty nearly the same progress. If
anything, I believe, I am half a volume before hand with him, and, in the
opinion of the judicious, am the finer gentleman of the two. But, you know, all
men are not born with natural genius alike.

Not that my master, like your common coxcombs, ever mentions his amors, or
his studies, to his servant, any more than I discover mine to him; we are both
better bred; but I have heard too much of the charming CHESTERFIELD, at table,
at tea, and every where else, not to have had, long ago, a relish for his
writings; and I scruple not to tell thee, TIMOTHY, that I have formed myself,
what you now know me to be, entirely on his Lordship's model.

He had, beyond comparison, the prettiest pen, at an epistle, in Europe, and is
at once so neat, so polished, and so plain, that it is impossible to
misunderstand him. I once -- with shame be it spoken, -- was as vulgar a dog my
choice of books and beauties, as any in the kingdom; -- I had no more taste,
TIMOTHY, than thyself; no more Ton than a teacher of the table of
multiplication. I thought -- simpleton that I was -- the luscious love-(...) of
ROCHESTER delicious, and had a mighty hankering after the memoirs of CLELAND;
but heaven defend me from such barefaced trash. The bawdry brutes! -- Shut --
shut the book.

"They show too much, to raise desire."
No, TIM. Stanhope has brought me round; he teaches, that "the very shoe has
power to "wound;" and I am by God's grace, and his Lordship's graces, as
gracefully graceless a rascal, and as pretty a fellow, as any in Britain.

I expect, by the Earl's assistance, to do an infinite deal of mischief at this
watering-place; -- my eye (though no settler) points at a bath-maid, who
attracted me in the handing a tumbler of Spa water. Nauseous, as all minerals
are, I took it, and tossed it off, without skrewing up a muscle, because, I find,
to refuse is ungenteel. I shall subdue this damsel, at my leisure, having, for
my more serious simulations, as his Lordship calls them, a nobler object in
view; of whom you will hear more explicitly in my next.

SEDLEY is upon some project, but as I scorn to be guilty of impertinent
curiosity, so he is as much above making either a confident or a pimp of his
servant (I should with more propriety have said his gentleman) as his gentleman
is of wearing a livery of worsted lace. God and the Graces speed him in all his
undertakings! Every man has a right in this world to follow the bent of his
fancy, to strew the way over with flowers, as the song says; aye, and to be as
happy, both up and a-bed, as he possibly can.

Vale -- as I see your scholars conclude, Vale -- Adio -- Adieu -- THOMAS
P. S. I expect soon to have all the languages, living and dead, under my thumb.



LETTER XXXIV. Mrs. HOMESPUN to Mrs. LA MOTTE. (After receiving Mrs. LA MOTTE'S
letter.)
YOUR letter came too late. -- The hour of circumspection is past, and I am in
utter despair.

HARRIET HOMESPUN.

LETTER XXXV. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
ADD to the list of my conquests, or rather place at the top of the
CHESTERFIELD catalogue, the ruin of HARRIET HOMESPUN. Ruin, THORNTON, and why
ruin? In my system, the name should be softened. The fame of the she who grants
the favor, is pure and inviolate as ever. Where then the ruin? HORACE will
sleep as sound this night as he slept the last --

"He finds not Sedley's kisses on her lips;
"He saw not, thinks it not:
"He that is robbed, not wonting what is stolen,
"Let him not know it, and he is not robbed at all.
Well said WILL. SHAKESPEARE! By the some rule, master minister HOMESPUN, thou,
being ignorant, art not robbed at all. However, robbed, or not robbed, I must
pay another visit or two, to thy treasure, before I take my leave of it for
ever: for thy HARRIET is a most voluptuous banquet, and increases the appetite
while she indulges it. -- By the next post, THORNTON, I shall dispatch another
letter; mean time, I am,

Thine, in transport, and in haste, PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER XXXVI. Mrs. LA MOTTE to Mrs. HOMESPUN.
AND so the dreadful prophecy in my last is fulfilled! As an unhappy woman, I
pity you; as an unchaste one, I can only keep your secret, pray for your
repentance, and take my everlasting leave of you.

Farewell. C. LA MOTTE.

LETTER XXXVII. Mrs. HOMESPUN to Mrs. LA MOTTE.
PUNCTILIOUS, prudish CHARLOTTE! that mistakest a slip of the heart, for an
error in principle. Two days ago I entertained sentiments like yours. Novels
and vulgar notions ruin half our sex: I have begun, and am still privately
engaged in reading a BOOK, that sets all to rights in my own heart, and
reconciles my conduct to my own conscience. As to matrimonial shackles, I say
with ELOISA, "Curse on all laws but those which Love has made!" Had I read the
dear BOOK, now in my box under lock and key, a few months ago, take my word for
it, CHARLOTTE, I had never been a HOMESPUN, and would have died, rather than
have given my hand to a looby of a bookworm, unacquainted with the Beau Monde,
and unfavoured by the Graces. My mind is perfectly at rest; and the only mad
thing that flies in my face, is, having thrown away my charms upon a country
curate, that does not know how to behave in company -- who is unable to carve a
chicken, or lead his wife into a ball-room, without hanging down his head, and
biting his nails.

I am, HARRIET HOMESPUN.

LETTER XXXVIII. Mrs. LA MOTTE to Mrs. HOMESPUN.
UPON my word! -- Oh brave! -- Why, you have made a rapid progress, and are an
apt scholar, that is certain. A young creature scarce two-and-twenty, bred upon
a barren mountain, little read in the ways of any part of the world, but the
ways of a circumscribed village -- a farmer to your father, and an honest
wholesome dairy-woman for your mother -- a little modicum of money to the tune
of five hundred pounds, the savings of twenty painstaking years of your poor
grandam -- and, and -- to turn fine lady all of sudden! -- to trip to BUXTON
bath, in the height of the season, forget all your country friends, and country
feelings -- all in a week -- a little week! Upon my honor, you are no common
character, and I congratulate you on reconciling all this, to your capacious
conscience. Down to the very earth, I drop my curtesey, fashionable Mrs.
HOMESPUN!

But, gracious God! can it be possible? Is not the last letter, marked with
your name, a forgery? Can the character be Mrs. HOMESPUN'S? Can it be written
by her, whom I have so often distinguished for innocence in the midst of
gaiety, and modesty in the very bosom of amusement?

Is it practicable, in so short a space of time, to lose all that is valuable,
all that is feminine, all that is truly endearing; and to substitute the most
despicable, detested contraries? Ah! HARRIET, HARRIET, how art thou fallen!
Thoughtless, ungrateful creature! Poor HORACE, what is become of him? If he is
yet in ignorance, in mercy to his merit, keep him so: At least, have the
generosity -- the humanity, to keep from his knowledge, that, which would cut
his honest heart to atoms.

But what is the BOOK you allude to, as the panacea, of a person polluted, and
a heart set against the venerable maxims of morality? Alas! Madam, be not every
way deluded: nor books, nor tongues, nor casuistry, nor all the chicane of
eloquence misapplied, can possibly overturn the sober single system of
unentangled innocence. I yet hope you are not in that wretched state, which,
despairing of forgiveness, hunts about for apology, nor, rather than seem
destitute, condescend to take up with one, that, in effect, plunges you deeper
in criminality. A drowning creature catches at the slightest twig: and a guilty
woman is fain to support herself from falling in her own esteem, against a
tottering pillar.

Books, HARRIET! -- find a refuge from the keenness of your own reflections in
BOOKS! Perish the volume, and may the name of its author descend ignominiously
to posterity, in which the error that you have, under your pathetic
circumstances, been guilty of, is not palpably discountenanced!

Mention, however, the name of that book from which you receive comfort, and,
woman as I am, I will undertake to baffle its boasted system, and show, that
the only way to genuine pleasure, is through the paths of purity, integrity,
and singleness. I am, and have continued a widow five years upon principle: the
man I have lost, was even less splendid than Mr. HOMESPUN, nor had his person
any peculiar attractions. What of that? He was good, he was great, and he was
tender as Heaven. I wanted not temptation, while he was living, to indulge
indelicacies, but I valued both his honor and my own; and though I pretend to
no gifts of preternatural continency, I defy either books or men to make me act
in diametrical opposition to common sense and Christianity.

But, just at the present crisis, you are, of all women in the world, the most
inexcuseable! Oh, heavens! HARRIET, reflect a moment, More than three parts
gone with child -- that child your firstborn -- the father an honor to his
profession -- his profession the Church! -- I will say no more, for if you had
my heart, enough has been said already to move you to add to your present
errors, the crime of suicide.

Adieu. C. LA MOTTE.

LETTER XXXIX. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
ALL goes on to the utmost content of my heart. Oh, THORNTON! STANHOPE is
infallible. His maxims are perfect anodynes against disappointment, and I shall
(I do really think) render him more celebrated than ever, by practically
illustration every precept in every period! -- I have played the second part of
the same tune with HARRIET, and I half believe I shall make her a proselyte;
for she has got volume the first, and I have taken care to pencil the places
at which I would have her stop: a mark in the margin always attracts. HORACE
and I, too, are hand and glove, and a very worthy priest he is, for an
HOMESPUN, I Will assure thee.

I will give thee, however, an instance or two of my proficiency in the arts of
pleasing. When all was over, I paid my respects to HARRIET and her Lord, at the
accustomed hour, without the least visible embarrassment, or alteration of
countenance. The poor woman, indeed, made but a bungling piece of work of it,
blushed, stammered, and stopped shrot; while I took care to preserve every muscle
and lineament steady and unmoved. I see the efficacy of this most materially,
for, had I not practiced this presence of mind, I do verily believe even the
unsagacious HOMESPUN would have suspected what had happened. I took him by the
hand, with the usual cordiality, and we walked to FAIRFIELD, a neighboring
village, (whither by the bye he was walking while the deed was doing) like
inseparable friends. So that there is, as thou perceivest, fresh reason for thy
congratulation.

But I have other business in hand, and must leave thee, THORNTON.

Adieu. PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER XL. THOMAS at the Bath, to TIMOTHY in Town.
CURSE upon it, TIMOTHY! SEDLEY has caught me in the fact -- the very fact of
consulting his oracle. He came home accidentally, when I thought him safe for
at least an hour, and I was just enjoying the sweet sentiment, and had delv'd
into the pith and marrow of the dear Earl's epistle upon dress; when this
indiscreet master of mine, absolutely forgetting his good-breeding, kicked me
on the breech, took the book out of my hand, and led me down stairs by the
nose: for which, if I forgive him,

"May the shame I mean to brand his name with
"Stick on me!
No matter: I know my cue, "smile at present, and strike hereafter."

Since this affair, the cruel youth keeps the Earl all to himself: but I see,
by the newspapers which come down here, his Lordship's good things are all
collected together, in a little snug volume, that a man, upon any exigences,
may pop either into his pocket, his bosom, his breeches, or elsewhere, as
occasion requires This little essence of the Earl I desire you will procure me,
TIMOTHY, forthwith, and send it down by the Fly: I shall not rest till I get
it, for I comprehend every syllable he says, and I have as great a right to do
roguish things with a good grace as my master. So no more at present from thy
friend,

THOMAS
Postscript.
The book will be bought under the title of "Lord CHESTERFIELD'S Advice to his
Son," printed, as the papers say, for RICHARDSON and URQUHART, under the Royal
Exchange.



LETTER XLI. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
I BLUSH as I put my hand to the paper: I feel the severity of self-reproach: I
have deviated from the maxims of my Preceptor, by making a man feel his
inferiority. In a word, THORNTON, I have struck my servant. I caught the fellow
reading in the sacred page of my religion, even in the page of the divine
DORMER, never meant to be polluted by the eye of a footman, and I condescended
to give him a blow. This is amongst the list of unpardonable crimes, and I must
make it up with the lad before I sleep, or I shall scorn myself too heartily. A
man of fashion us his fist, and against his footman! -- Shame -- Shame --
SHAME! -- I have a thought to bring all even again.

Adieu. PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER XLII. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
I COULD sing -- I could dance; for alienation is no more. THORNTON, I have
atoned for my meanness; ask me now what I have given, what I have said, what I
have done! Whatever it was, be assured there was manner in it, and manner is
every thing every where, and to every body.

Farewell. PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER XLIII. The Reverend HORACE HOMESPUN to Doctor DIGGORY.
Dear Doctor,
THINGS are so pleasingly altered, that I have been overruled as to my design
of going away even at the end of the fortnight, and I have contrived to procure
another week's recess, in order to extend my HARRIET'S happiness, and enjoy
myself the spirited, yet moral and engaging conduct of Mr. SEDLEY, who, every
day, becomes more agreeable, and who, I do truly believe, has been not a little
instrumental in bringing about my poor wife to a proper sense of her duty and
right reason. If anything, she is more cordial to me than before my departure
from the curacy, and is at once lively and obliging.

I take it for granted, the strange conduct I transmitted you an account of in
my late letters, was only a transient giddiness, not very infrequent, as I have
observed. Doctor, to the fair sex, about HARRIET'S age, which is very well
called, in one of Shakespeare's tragedies that I read formerly, the "heyday of
youthful blood." We grave folks, you know, my dear DIGGORY, ought to allow for
all this. Poor thing, I pity her, and am half angry with myself that I should
have treated the overflowing, effervescent emanations, as I may style them, of
a juvenile mind, as a serious delirium.

But, thank God, it is not gone abroad to any person who is capable of
circulating the whisper of the day to the detriment of a fellowcreature. Mr.
SEDLEY, who, I can easily see, is to be trusted with every thing, and my old
friend, and brother-collegian, Doctor DIGGORY, are the only persons informed of
the matter, and so all is well. But do not, I charge you think too hardly of
her for what has been said. It was all a misrepresentation, and you should
admire your heavenly HARRIET, as you used to call her, the more for having been
injured. I can assure you, I am at present more satisfied with her than I am
with myself: and, indeed, she has the advantage of me; for she appears in the
light of a person calumniated, and I am only one in a state of conscious error,
and probation.

However, a short time will, I do not doubt, set us all as happy again as our
hearts can wish. -- But why, my worthy DIGGORY, do you not write: how is it
that so scrupulous a man in point of equity is so unexact a correspondent? You
are deep in my debt, and though I am now rich in the inestimable treasures of
reconciliation, yet a line from you would add materially to my fortune, and I
should have to thank Heaven for as full a measure of felicity, as it is,
perhaps, either proper or possible to taste on this side of it.

I am, dear Doctor, Your most happy and faithful HORACE HOMESPUN.

LETTER XLIV. Mrs. HOMESPUN to Mrs. LA MOTTE.
Madam,
THE severity and rudeness in your letter I can pardon, because they find an
apology in your want of breeding; but the liberty you take with me and my
character cannot so readily be past over.

"I am myself the guardian of my honor,
"And will not brook so insolent a monitor."
I am your deeply-injured, HARRIET HOMESPUN.

LETTER XLV. From the Same to the Same.
I WOULD give ten thousand worlds to stop the postman, and take out my last mad
and ungrateful letter, even though I were to incur the punishment of robbing
the mail.

Excuse me, I beseech you -- excuse the rashness of an enraged woman, cut to
the quick by just reproaches! Instead of resenting, I beg of you to
compassionate me. My penitence is sincere, and you must -- you will, unite your
prayers to mine, that it may be at the same time perfect and efficient.

Adieu. HARRIET HOMESPUN;

LETTER XLVI. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
HA! ha! ha! Three is no law against laughing in a letter, as there is neither
a vulgar noise nor a ghastly gain attending it: take, then, the silent written
mirth of my soul, and let me pour out on paper some part of the exultation that
at this moment swells upon my heart!

What a superficial animal is man! "as easily led by the nose as asses are!"
the dupe of the senses, the idiot of mere exterior, and the very fool of a
well-managed set of muscles! -- Is this the heir of immortality? -- this (...)
-- this booby -- this butterfly -- Ha! ha! ha!

It is usual with women, when the affair is over, THORNTON, to whimper, lament
the loss of reputation, the destruction of their eternal peace of mind, and
grow stubbornly refractory, or else sullenly repining. This was, formerly, a
most vile piece of business, and was a sore drawback upon the felicity of
fruition; but the converts of CHESTERFIELD have no trouble of this sort to
apprehend. As the confessor can make the consent of a good-natured nun not more
a point of piety and religion than of pleasure; so a man of manner, dress,
address, and dissimulation, may, manifestly prove, to either maid, wife, or
widow, that the shortest, as well as the softest conveyance to heaven, is upon
a feather bed.

Without any sort of hum, haugh, stammer, or hesitation, I have convinced
HORACE that he has been notoriously in the wrong; in consequence of which, he
is to kneel oftener than his professional bendings require -- I have firmly
persuaded HARRIET, too, that all our future pleasure depends on her behaving
ten times better than ever to HORACE, and lastly, I have prevailed on the
curate to indulge his wife a few days longer at the bath, as a first instance
of his repentance. In the rashness of her heart, however, she has told all to
a Mrs. LA MOTTE, who has written a chiding epistle in the old scolding
puritanical way; and to this I find, she (HARRIET) has replied (in the old way
also) in justification of herself. Here I was obliged to set her right, and
have taken care to see her dispatch a penitential piece of paper policy, which
will bring all round again. This same Mrs. LA MOTTE is, I find, in a state of
widowhood, and much in love with her weeds -- a great beauty -- and, I see by
one of her letters, (which I dissimulated out of HARRIET) a great boaster. I
furthermore understand, that she is a constant church-goer, has a deliciously
demure set of muscles, very proper for a chapel -- a sort of cathedral
countenance -- a pair of elevated eyes -- folds the fair palm, and holds long
conversations betwixt GOD and her conscience. Humph --

NOW THORNTON, if, by setting all my master-maxims in motion -- if, by the aids
either of genius, stratagem, and every exorted OMNIPOTENCY of the head, heart,
hand, and voice, I could but lower the loftiness of this proud-hearted,
psalm-chaunting cottager, my soul would be satisfied, and I should sacrifice to
the shade of the invincible DORMER, such a victim as might sooth his spirit,
and elevate his extacy in elysium. -- At present, this is only in embryo,
unformed, uningendered. -- In all events, I am determined, as King Lear says,

-- "To do something!
"What it is yet I know not,
"But it shall strike the world," etc.
Genius of STANHOPE, god of my actions, whose paths are pleasantness, assist
me! -- breathe, oh breathe into thy Pupil instant inspiration! -- exalt my
thought! -- animate me! -- list me to the summit of successful dissimulation,
and give me to bend the imperious heart of the confident LA MOTTE!

Adieu, PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER XLVII. From the Same to the Same.
I HAVE only a minute to spare, and that is to tell thee, I am the dullest dolt
that nature ever produced.

That nobody might perceive my agitation of mind, by my countenance, and its
treacherous changings, I have rambled amongst the rocks, and over the heathy
hills of this execrable country, to meditate upon the means of bringing LA
MOTTE within the reach of my machinations. -- It is not to be done, and in the
perfect stupidity, in the very shame of my soul, I am compelled to suspend the
pursuit.

Adieu. PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER XLVIII. Mrs. HOMESPUN to Mrs. LA MOTTE.
WRITE to me, my dear LA MOTTE, though it be but to say -- HARRIET, I do not
hate you: you have my pity, and my prayers.

HARRIET HOMESPUN.

LETTER XLIX. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
THE matter of LA MOTTE must rest: I cannot hit it off; and have, indeed, other
affairs to mind. This HARRIET answers all my joyous purposes most delightfully
while I am heating the fire for the tender FANNY; who, I understand, is much
better, and is to be seen (if the sun is not afraid of being outshone
tomorrow) to examine the bath. Accident will, no doubt, contrive, for me to be
in view, about the moment of her first appearance. Her husband -- but of him
hereafter.

Postscript.
HARRIET HOMESPUN wants capacity; I am obliged to dictate her letters to this
Mrs. LA MOTTE, who must be kept in with, now she is in the secret.


Adieu, PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER L. From the Same to the Same.
THERE is nothing, says my creed, so delicate as a man's moral character, and
nothing which it is so much his interest to preserve pure. -- I have been at
church, THORNTON, where HOMESPUN officiated as teacher. He has a snuffle in
his nose; his voice is destitute of that harmonious variety, essential to all
sorts of eloquence; and his organs of articulation appear considerably
obstructed.

However, like a true Pupil of Pleasure, I took him by the hand, upon his
descending from the pulpit; returned him my sincere thanks, in a well invented
compliment, for the elegance of his discourse; applauded his delivery; lamented
that I had not often been made so happy; and almost brought the tears of
virtuous vanity, into the good man's eyes, at the pathos of my conclusion.

"A little flattery sometimes does well."

"There is no living in the world," you know, THORNTON, without a complaisant
indulgence for peoples weaknesses. In a short time, I expect to reach the
summit; for, after only an hour's practice, I found myself able to call out a
palpable tear, only by placing a chair before my face, and, by the force of
imagination, representing it, poor thing! as a certain person in distress,
which I had an interest in relieving. Yes -- THORNTON -- I am to be
complimented on the faculty of weeping at will.

And now I am talking upon the subject of sympathy, I must tell thee, that I
have made myself still more popular than ever, in this little place, by several
acts of unostentatious ostentation -- I have given occasional small sums to
people, who make it utterly unnecessary for me to be my own trumpeter. There
are, luckily, a set of characters, that will raise a benefactor's reputation,
without any drudgery on his side: these people have tongue enough, however poor
they may be in other respects; and all the good you do, though silent and
secret as the noon of night, shall shine like the light that shines unto the
perfect day, by means of those same grateful gossips.

Adieu. PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER LI. From the Same to the Same.
ONCE more, receive an account of a tender transaction, which I cannot conceal
from thee. Relating upon paper, to the friend of one's heart, (for such thou
art to me) any business, or event, that has afforded transport, is an office
of a pleasing kind.

HARRIET is as richly formed by Nature for rapture, as ever was woman; and
will, I am in hopes, soon be an adept in the science of pleasing. Her person is
voluptuous, beyond painting, and the joys it yields are only to be felt; and
yet, I am almost reduced again to childishness, and am almost ready to fall
again into my leading-string notions by a very puerile accident -- even,
THORNTON, by the love-tale of a green, uninformed girl, whose whole history I
purchased for a single sixpence. She has been ruined and undone, as she terms
it, by the basest of men. -- And who do thou think that man is, THORNTON! --
Neither more nor less than my fellow THOMAS, who is, I Will assure thee, a
would-be STANHOPEAN: but, trusting merely to picked-up precepts -- the very
crumbs that have fallen from his master's table -- he stumbles in the effort,
and discovers his livery, his dependency, and his education, even in his
amors. All this, I enjoy, thou know. -- The forsaken nymph came to complain
of my Mr. THOMAS. She is very pretty, and very loquacious; but hear the story
in her own words.

The Story of the Pretty Bath-Maid.
AN'T please your Honor, I am but a servant, and live, by handing my water to
gentryfolks. I have tended the well-side, since BUXTON has became famush; and
nobody's tumbler was oftener filled than mine. Till the week before last, I was
the happiest waterwench that ever dipped her glass in the well: all the qallety
knew me, all the ladies loved me, and all the gentlemen quarrelled which should
drink first; but matters are now altered, and I am asheamed to take my stand at
the place, because of the baseness of your Honor's unhonest Mr. THOMAS.

The arts he has used to tangle me, and take away my wartue, are monstrous, and
such as would make the stoutest she in the country stumble. I am sure, for my
part, I stood it till I could stand it no longer. If your Honor will hear me
out, and do me justis, seeing as my character is gone, and therewithal my
water, and with that my bread, so that I have now neither bread nor water, I
will unfold every thing, and let your Goodness see the affair from top to
bottom.

Poor girl, sit down, sit down: I am sorry for the loss of your water, with all
my heart, and shall very cheerfully see as much of the affair as you think
proper to show me -- Sit down, therefore, child, and show away.

You must know, Sir, as how, when bathing and drinking the waters is over, and
your Honor and suchlike fine folk are all busy adancing; we servant-people,
sometimes get together to a lesserrer room, and have a little hop of our own.
This happened the very first night I saw Mr. THOMAS, who I observed, soon after
he came into town, walk round the well, and then backwards and forwards; and to
be sure, there was something in his putting his foot to the ground, taking it
off again, swinging his arm, flourishing his switch, and saluting the
fellow servants, that made him look a king to the rest.

Well, Sir, he chus'd me for his partner; and, though I say it, I can shake a
foot with my betters; nay, at a country-dance, I Will turn my back neither to
gentle nor simple.

If your Honor had heard the highflyers he crammed my poor head with, all the
while we were at it -- the soft things he said while we led out -- the wows he
made, as we handed up the middle -- and the tender oaths and rodermuntadoes he
swore, while we right and lefthanded it or cast off, and joined hands again --
while at the same time the music struck up enough to melt one's heart -- with
candles lighted, and in the summer-season -- your Honor would not blame me so
much for giving away my soul and body to the most artfullest of his sect.

In short, Sir, he talked me over so finely about this and that, that before I
left the room, and we broke up, I did not know whether I stood upon my head or
my heels.

After dancing was over, and Mr. THOMAS and I had made ourselves all of a heat,
or, as I remember he called it, all of an ardor, we took a walk in the grove by
the hall, to cool ourselves. And there he began to flourish it again --
overpowered me with such an ocean of love sayings, and, in short, talked so
differently from my old sweetheart ROGER DOUSIT, who is all dull and downright,
as I may say, that I declares to your Honor, he at last made me think it would
be a sin to refuse him; and so -- God forgive me! -- and so --

And so -- you did not refuse him, hey? -- Is that it?

Here the poor girl drew out her handkerchief, and had sincerely a very great
occasion for it.

She told me, in a tone, THORNTON, that touched me, that if, notwithstanding
what THOMAS said, she had been wicked, she was a ruined woman, that was all --
that it might do very well for gentlefolks to play false with one another,
because they had got wherewithal to wash all white again; but that a black spot
in a poor woman, who pended on her water -- was never to be rubbed out: --
that, moreover, the news had some-how got air, and she was pointed at by all
the ill-natured fingers in the place. She said, with astonishing simplicity,
that the man fairly overset her with his newfangled gibberish -- but that she
found 'twas all over with her. She added, that, for her own part, she did not
so much mind it, as she could turn her hand to any thing, and would leave the
town in a twinkle; but that she had an old mother that had been bedridden these
eight months, who lived at FAIRFIELD, and who must now want bread as well as
herself. Nay, for that matter, said the girl, she will soon be provided for, if
she hears of my slip, without troubling the parish; for I shall soon break her
heart: I shall soon send my poor old mother out of the world; for she is a good
woman, Sir, and would sooner bury me than see me what I am now. DOUSIT will
turn up his nose at me now; and without your Honor makes Mr. THOMAS do me
justis, so as that I may become honest again, and do it in the lawful way, --
God only knows what course I must take?

She now dropped her tears, THORNTON, as fast, to use the language of Shakespeare,

"As the Arabian tree
"Its medicinal gum.
At this very moment THOMAS came in with a message on which he had been
dispatched.

What is it, THORNTON, what cursed troublesome thing is it, at once invisible,
and audacious, that lodges in our bosoms beyond reach of our revenge, to make
the stoutest of us children and cowards?

Never did GARRICK exhibit, or SHAKESPEARE describe, such a look and attitude,
as that of poor TOM at his entrance, on observing so unexpected an object.

He stammered, he staggered, he turned white, and attempted to retreat.

I commanded him to stay; and, taking my sword from the hook, gave him his
choice, and one that might have puzzled a much wiser man -- either to die or
marry. Fear operated even so strong as to make him choose the latter.

He fell on his knees, and would have entered into explanations. I would not
hear them. -- The ceremony that HAMLET uses with his quondam friends now passed
between us, and I made them both swear upon my sword.

I promised them a dower -- the woman was in extacy, and paid me by such a look
of gratitude, that, had REYNOLDS been there, he would have made the water-wench
immortal by drawing it.

I am above altercation: of this THOMAS is aware. Nay, I believe he likes the
girl. -- They shall be united as soon as possible: and what the devil can be
the reason that I am more happy in putting these two people together, than all
the joys I ever tasted with the exquisite and yielding HARRIET, I cannot tell.

Were it not that I have contrived, as usual, to get HORACE out of the way, and
that I never break an assignation, I should certainly avoid seeing her, or any
body else, this evening. -- Is not this unaccountable? But so it is.

Adieu. PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER LII. THORNTON to SEDLEY.
THE story of thy bath-maid, though dashed with double meanings, interested me
strangely; and I have felt the more pleasure in giving it a tear, because, I
perceive, it has penetrated even the almost invulnerable PHILIP SEDLEY.

But how thou art able to stand the shock of so many radiant eyes, and yielded
charms, -- wrapped round and round as thou art in the elysium of voluntary and
voluptuous embraces -- a young fellow of spirit too -- is, to me, most
unaccountably mysterious. -- In defiance of all the cautionary precepts of thy
divine DORMER -- in defiance of all empiricism in gallantry, I should certainly
break out, and even at the risque of overturning the whole well-woven web of
intrigue, dwindle into a downright inamorato, and sigh away subtle distinction
betwixt simulation and laudable insincerity. But thou art not a perfect Pupil
of Pleasure -- Thou art but half converted. -- Had thou not the supreme of
transport, in uniting the faithless footman to the beautiful bath-maid!

I Will tell thee what, SEDLEY, -- thou art -- (if thou will allow me for once
the coinage of a new word) -- thou art but half CHESTERFIELDIZ'D -- The
impression made upon thee by the pale face of the conscious THOMAS -- the
pleasure thou have at wiping away the drops of penitence and perturbation from
the cherry cheek of simplicity -- and thy wishing to soliloquise, and be
excused, even from the arms of the tempting and married HARRIET -- are all
symptoms totally unstanhopean, (there is another word for thee.)

Take care, SEDLEY: thou art upon the eve of a relapse -- a relapse in favor,
not of DORMER, but of a downright DOUSIT'S singledealing.

And yet, my friend, shall I once again confess to you my infirmity -- my
unestablishment in the maxims of thy preceptor? -- I cannot blame thy
weaknesses, nor can I -- however destructive they may be to thy system -- avoid
wishing thou may continue thy present tendencies, especially as, by thy own
honest confession, thou have found more gratification in them, than in
supporting the toilsome task of disingenuity.

Nor ought I, indeed, to call this a weakness. If to be happy is the ultimatum
of all earthly pursuits -- if it is equally the effort of every different order
of men, it assuredly follows, that that conduct is the most rational by which
the greatest share of felicity is procured. The closest application of human
wit and wisdom can do no more than point out to thee the most solid degree of
joy, and it matters not whether the joy is obtained by the practice of one
system or another.

The last action thou have recorded (I allude to the promised nuptials of thy
bath-maid) was evidently agreeable to the sentiments of SENECA, SOCRATES, and
all the wise and good men both of the East and West; and since the precepts of
STANHOPE have been unable to give thee a superior, or even an equal felicity,
how proper and consistent with right reason is it in me, to advise thee to walk
in that path wherein thou have found the most pleasure? Laugh not -- ridicule
not, I beseech thee; thou art not, I hope, so much a tool to the taste of the
times -- so much a dupe to prejudiced opinions -- as to dislike even the
balance of bliss which is now in thy favor, merely because the scale has been
turned by a worthy action -- that would be insanity.

To love duplicity, and certain sophistical distinctions, merely for the sake
of double-dealing, and when plain, clear, clean, uncrooked honesty will answer
thy purpose much better, is at once ridiculous and diabolical.

On the whole, therefore, I advise thee, in the deliberation of my heart, to
substitute the aforesaid SENECA, or some other systematical moralist, instead
of STANHOPE; and to lay him quickly aside in a corner of thy trunk, as
unqualified to confer the comfort he professes to administer.

And, indeed, SEDLEY, to open thy whole soul to thee, I must own to thee, that
I very much suspect his Lordship's sentiments. Even in my occasional dealings
here in town, since thy departure, I have not been able to make them bear the
test quite to my satisfaction; such, especially, as relate to the seduction of
the tender sex. I made a slight experiment, no longer ago than last night, of
his most favorite maxim, namely, to taste the joys of security, mingled in
embraces; and yet, though I do not think I conducted myself unadroitly, it did
not altogether answer the satisfaction he predicted to result from it.

Thou art not a stranger to the elegancies of SOPHIA VERNON, the new-married
wife of the man whose promotion from ensign to lieutenant it was our joint
endeavor, some time ago, to effect it: his gratitude is still -- trembling
alive all over; and, by a natural consequence, he is without the least tincture
of suspicion, and esteems every instance of particular enquiry after his wife,
or friend, as a mark of generosity in his benefactor.

This leaves the way to an intimacy with his SOPHIA fair and unobstructed; and
she has already caught so much of the Lieutenant's enthusiasm, that she pays me
the tribute of a rosy-red blush of acknowledgment as often as I approach her.
They have lately purchased a pretty cottage, amidst the vernal beauties of
SURRY: it is surrounded by gardens, not cittish, but genteel; there are no
nudities, no monstrous urns, no fantastical fountains, no chubby cherubims, no
tip-toed Mercuries, smirking Venusses, nor spruce holly-hedges; it is all "true
Nature to advantage dressed;" the verdure is voluptuous, the flower-beds well
weeded, the shrubbery gratefully shaded, and the alcove smiles upon the Thames.

Within this alcove I yesterday took the tea that was prepared by the hand of
SOPHIA, whose husband had invited me pressingly; to make the solitude of his
lady more social by my company, as he was himself under the necessity of taking
a journey into SUSSEX.

As you love brooks and books, hills and rills, my dear Mr. THORNTON, said he,
smilingly, you and SOPHY will be able to pass away your time to your mutual
satisfaction, till the return of your friend.

Poor unsuspicious pair!

They united their entreaties, and prevailed: Lieutenant VERNON set out, and
left to thy friend (in trust) the most beautiful property upon the Thames. In a
word, he began his journey in the fragrant coolness of yesterday's evening, and
I was left at full liberty to abuse the confidence he placed in my integrity,
and, in return for his hospitality, do my utmost to destroy the chastity of
her, whom he doats upon with the sincerest tenderness.

The tear which she dropped upon his hand as she kissed it, at parting, drew from
him another, accompanied by such a look, as defies either tongue, pen, or
pencil, and went at the time so close to my heart, that I could not but imagine
the passion betwixt two, was more exquisite than if it were divided betwixt
two-and-twenty. One man and one woman, thought I, may certainly be happier than
a Sultan; and I had rather possess the real, undissimulated love of a SOPHIA
VERNON, than command the keys of the seraglio.

SOPHIA remained pensive, and sighed after the traveling Lieutenant.

I examined the little library for a book to entertain her. CHESTERFIELD was
there, but I did not think it a proper book to read, as I would wish to keep
the maxims as far out of the sight of a female as possible: for when a woman is
told the secret of her seduction, she will naturally be upon her guard against
the seducer; and, really, STANHOPE unfolds the art with such perspicuity, that
she who runs may read; nay, even thy footman comprehends the whole system, and
has, according to account, ruined his woman with a very tolerable address.

By the bye, SEDLEY, I have to accuse thee of two weak pieces of conduct. The
first is, thy rashness in trusting the epistles of thy preceptor to the flighty
HARRIET, who might have heedlessly shown them to HORACE, by which means (as
thou art a very striking commentary upon the chapters of CHESTERFIELD) he would
have had a clue to the original sources of thy present conduct; and a detection
of this kind would have been totally insupportable. Thy other fault is, thy
carelessness, and, I might say, want of policy, in exposing the volumes which
thou so pretendest to venerate, to the plebeian eyes of thy valet. Lock them
up, I pray thee, for the time to come; and if thou art resolved to proceed in
reducing them to practice, do it privately.

In regard to SOPHIA, my endeavors to divert her thoughts from the beloved
subject of their contemplation, were in vain: the Lieutenant mingled in every
idea, and she had passions, sighs, sentiments, and sensations, only for Mr.
VERNON. I recited to her an elegy from HAMMOND, and she wept, in the sincerity
of her heart, over images so amiable, and so similar to those now suggested by
her own situation. I wished to divert her, by reading to her the oddities of
corporal Trim, and uncle Toby; but she was in no disposition to be delighted
with the whimsical strokes of a fine but irregular wit. I even adverted to the
irresistible sallies of HARRY FIELDING, and displayed to her the masterpiece
of narrative, in the laughable scene of Parson ADAMS pursued by the hounds and
hunters. She was proof even against this, and afforded it only a faint smile.
She then tried what a walk in the garden would do: she criticized the colors
of the tulips, and descanted with moral delicacy on the pleasing progress of
vegetable Nature; but, alas! even here a sigh would break in upon her remark,
and very evidently convince me, that Pope was not so romantic in the pastoral
sentiment, which observes, Absence is surely death to those who love. In short,
SEDLEY, whatever might be the temptation before me, and however assiduous I was
to gratify it, it was not now the moment to begin the attack; and every thing I
said, only served to show me more plainly, that, if I would wish to please her,
it must be by warmly talking of a man, whom it was my interest to wean from her
affections. Perceiving this, I gave way to sympathy, and most cordially united
my tears to hers, and joined in the most animated encomiums on her happy
Lieutenant. These tears, however, SEDLEY, and those praises, gave me a soothing
softness not to be described, and made me feel a thousand times more agreeable
than while I repressed them, in the hope of turning my thoughts to the
husband's dishonor, and the wife's destruction. Is not this, SEDLEY, a
parallel case to that of thine? If thou were more happy at doing a just action
to thy bath-maid, than an unjust one, by undoing the lively HARRIET; I am more
happy at having conquered an inclination, which would have tormented my own
fancy, tortured a "generous, trusting friend," and agonized the bosom of a
woman, whose reputation is at present unsuspected, and unpolluted.

Hence then, my dear SEDLEY, it appears, that we are now both exulting in the
triumph of a similar sensation -- a sensation created by the social virtues,
and derived purely from the felicity of others. Upon this subject I have but
one point to observe: it is, to continue the triumph. Let us even cherish a
transport, which is superior to any that dissimulation can give: let us throw
away the perplexing mask of the casuistical CHESTERFIELD: let us walk in the
right way: and, since it has already rewarded us so well, let us prefer truth
to falsehood, and honesty to hypocrisy: for, believe me, my dear, dear SEDLEY,
under whatever name we may distinguish vice and virtue, they remain eternally
the same; and neither sophistry, nor subtlety, nor fashion, nor the sanctified
follies of the mode, can possibly palliate the atrociousness of the one, or
detract from the native excellence of the other. PENMEN may puzzle,
PHILOSOPHERS may refine, POETS may color, and visionaries may suggest as they
please, but, while the traces of Nature remain, virtue will be fair, and vice
deformed; and, in my opinion, that man's maxims are extremely contradictory and
fallible, who, in the same volume, nay, sometimes in the same epistle,
inculcates a delicate regard to moral character, and an attack upon those human
weaknesses, from the humouring of which (assisted by a proper mixture of well
applied flattery) we are to prey upon each other, to prepare ourselves for
deceit, and, if the system were general, introduce, by these means, even while
we sanctify the most dangerous delusions. For my part, SEDLEY, I tell thee
again, and again, that I find a flaw in thy STANPHOPE, and shall read him, for
the future, with the eye of a severe critic, and not an idolater -- not a
PHILIP SEDLEY.

Farewell. J. THORNTON.

LETTER LIII. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
(Prior to his Receipt of the last Letter.)
THE ceremony has been performed. I insisted on its being done in the face of
the congregation: I gave THOMAS a purse for his wedding dinner, and so the poor
wench is again made a mighty honest woman.

Never heard I panegyrics more warm, or better circulated than those
reverberated from lip to lip upon this occasion; and I could almost bless the
fellow for a debauch, that has added such luster to my character. I am the
very heroic ballad of the bath; and the negligence, which I seem to pay to the
praises, only serves to increase, and make me appear more deserving of them.
But what a simpleton I was, to yield to the baby sensation which seized me,
unawares, in my last. To do good is, indeed pleasing, and I will on that
principle continue to do it, as occasion invites; but is there not an higher
motive, thou will say, than this? Is there not religion? Pshaw! --

Yes, pious THORNTON, there is a higher motive. I am determined to do as much
good as is necessary. It flatters the senses, it gratifies vanity, it procures
eclat, it promotes conquest, it extends our triumph over a sex that was born
for our amusement. -- The trifling action just recorded, backed by a few more
that I have not patience to recite, has made me so popular amongst all ranks
of people in this village, from my Lady in her bathing-shift, to her tawdry
attendants of the towel, that defy anything but my own folly, to mark me down
an object of suspicion.

I have established my reputation, THORNTON, upon the solid basis of virtuous
actions; I have decorated the superstructure, with the graces of conduct; and
now, no man will dare to imagine this goodly edifice is but a whitened
sepulcher. If he does, men, women, and children, shall defend me. Possibly thou
may imagine, that I have earned my pleasures by difficult adoption of the
STANHOPEAN system. No, THORNTON, I have a taste for them. I do not inflict
excesses upon myself, because I think them genteel, but I find these pursuits
"guard me against frivolousness," and prevent me from throwing away upon
trifles, that time, which only important things, deserve. In a word, I tell
thee once more, I view the Lord of my idolatry only as a man earlier skilled
than myself, in the arts of being truly and triumphantly happy: and in this
light he deserves my everlasting gratitude; for he has taught me to make every
place I go to, the scene of quick and lively transports; to let every company I
frequent, gratify my passions; to know the true value of time; and to snatch,
to seize, and to enjoy, every moment.

Of this enough: the remainder of my letter shall be dedicated to the delicious
purpose of recording several events, which have fallen out, by the joint effort
of destiny and contrivance, since my last.

I have had a second glance at the delicate but decaying features of FANNY.
Tempted by the cheerfulness of the morning, she ventured, under the supporting
arms of a husband, and sister, -- fair, fragile creature, -- to walk from her
lodgings to the bathing-house. She saw me, but drew away her eye, and never
directed it toward me again. Her husband bowed to me, as to the polite
stranger, who had interested himself so in the welfare of his beloved: the
sister inclined her head, and curtsey'd more than civilly -- it was the bend,
rather of attention, than ceremony. It was, altogether, a short, soft, silent
scene, fit for a Deity to behold. But it was interrupted; for at this moment,
many a lank-haired swain, yet humid with the bath, and a cluster of women,
still glowing from the immersion, appeared in view. They were instantly
attracted by the passing meteor, gazed, envied, and went on. Well, indeed,
might they gaze -- well might they envy, THORNTON: the rose again emulates the
lilly, in her cheek: the blue is like the blue of the elements: her arm, is
animated alabaster; and the hand, to which it belongs, is shaped, by the
Divinity of woman, to inspire, by its appearance, and ENFEVER by its touch.

[I defy Dictionaries, and will create words when I think proper -- I say again
-- enfever.]

After this, as she was preparing to return, a servant came hastily to inform
Mr. MORTIMER, that Sir HENRY DELMORE was arrived. They quickened their pace a
little; the nerves of surprise were shaken; FANNY attempted to step briskly;
but failed in the effort. The good Baronet, impatient, and eager to behold his
children, came forward in his boots to meet them. They met. My heart bounded --
I know not the reason.

Oh, THORNTON, what a figure is the Knight! how noble! -- how venerable! -- how
fashionable! -- But, alas! all surprises, even those of the most pleasing kind,
are too much for the feeble situation of FANNY. Her father soon saw her
confusion, softened it by a paternal kiss, and assisted in conducting her
gently to her lodgings. In something less than an hour, I received the
enclosed; which is the luckiest incident in the world to me, and which, by the
time this reaches you, I hope to improve to some pleasurable purpose.

Listen, now, to ill-luck -- HARRIET HOMESPUN is fonder of me, and better bred
to Horace than ever. She has a wonderful aptitude to learn, and will in time
be, no doubt, a female STANHOPE. Yet she must not be too fond -- Passion,
overmuch, is treacherous. But what a lucky thing it is for us, that Horace
has so great an appetite for a long walk by himself after dinner! and how
infinitely is he, and indeed ought he to be, obliged to me, for administering
so much consolation to his wife in his absence! But -- I am determined to do
all the good I possibly can.

Surely, THORNTON, there is nothing so grateful as serving a friend. You see, I
am uncommonly serious today.

Adieu. PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER LIVE. Sir HENRY DELMORE to PHILIP SEDLEY, Esquire (Enclosed in the above)
SIR,
I AM made truly happy, at least as much so as the present situation of my
family will admit, to hear that I am again likely to be honored by the company
of a gentleman, to whose society I am already indebted for so much pleasure. It
is no small addition, Sir, to this pleasing expectation, to find that the many
friendly enquiries that have from time to time been made, concerning the health
of my poor FANNY, proceeded from the very man to whom the father of that
beautiful invalid owed so many agreeable hours at SCARBOROUGH.

But how ceremonious was it, Mr. SEDLEY, that you should all this while have
estranged yourself, and appeared only in the light of a person interested in
the fate of the sick, but not allied to the parent of that dear unfortunate, by
any closer or warmer reciprocations of a former friendship?

I know, for my part, of but one way to excuse this punctilious behavior, and
that is, your embracing the first hour of your leisure to join your hand with
that of, Sir,

Your most obedient, and most humble servant, H. DELMORE.

LETTER LV. The Reverend HORACE HOMESPUN to Doctor DIGGORY.
Dear Doctor,
WHAT can possibly be the reason of your so long silence? I now want your
advice on a momentous subject.

The time of my sojourning at thi^ wateringplace is expired, my curacy can no
longer be deserted, and I must return to it at all events on Saturday, or the
duty of the Sabbath must be neglected.

Notwithstanding this, Mrs. HOMESPUN again complains of her ankle, and says the
anguish of it is now got higher than her knee; and she is, therefore, resolved
to undergo the operation of pumping upon the part affected, by which means I
shall be obliged to leave her behind, or else bring her away much against her
own choice; which, notwithstanding my want of faith as to the knee and ankle, I
do not think myself entitled to do, seeing that she has demeaned herself most
cordially. -- The fact is, she is quite in love with the frivolous pleasures of
this puerile place, in which, were it not for the instructive and entertaining
conversations of my friend SEDLEY, I should not be able to support its customs.
As my wife, however, seems resolved, I have thought of an expedient to supply
my absence for a few days longer. HARRIET has a friend in our neighborhood --
a Mrs. LA MOTTE -- who is a very discreet, sensible, and judicious widow-woman,
and who, I am persuaded, will not only do me the service of passing a few days
at the bath, but likewise urge all the arguments of which she is mistress, to
wean the affections of her friend from this circle of vanity, and reduce her
once more to the standard of commonsense, and the serene pleasures of a
countryvillage.

I want your council, my dear Doctor, on the following subject. Mr. SEDLEY has
applied in my favor to the Bishop of --, respecting the living of --, which is
worth neat 2001. Per annum. Mr. SEDLEY is in hourly expectation of a reply to
this, and I am already so overwhelmed with the kindnesses of this worthy
gentleman, (who has done them in a manner peculiar to his character) that I am
in doubt whether I ought to increase a debt it will be ever beyond my ability
to discharge. HARRIET'S little fortunes, united to the profits of my curacy,
are sufficient to the purposes of a contented mind. My parsonage, you know,
Doctor, is in the very bosom of a beautiful wood, through which I have been
accustomed to ramble with a social classic in my hand; my parishioners love me;
the little garden is of my own cultivation; I turned the arch, and twisted the
woodbines around my bower with my own fingers; the birds are protected, and
nest with me in perfect security; and if I could but once make HARRIET in love
with it again, I believe I should not quit it without a sigh. But one
circumstance weighs with me. I have the dear prospect of a successor: to it I
owe an interest I should not feel for myself. HARRIET is very far advanced in
her pregnancy. A child, my dear friend, enlarges the wishes of a father; a tear
is ready to fall on my letter, as I think upon the increase of my family. To
his offspring a man owes every thing. -- Tell me, then, dear DIGGORY, what I
must do.

Farewell. I am yours, HORACE HOMESPUN.

LETTER LVI. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
THE plot begins to thicken, and the catastrophe only demands good contrivance
to be made delightful. HORACE HOMESPUN goes away from the bath today, in order
to mount the rostrum, and preach up the good old cause tomorrow; HARRIET will
be all this evening with me alone, left wholly to my kindness; and, to crown
the whole, the scheme is at last laid to bring the haughty-hearted LA MOTTE
within the reach of my machinations. If there needs any further addition to
these felicities, know, THORNTON, that I am hand and glove with Sir HENRY
DELMORE, and hand and heart, I shall soon be, with FANNY MORTIMER; the
enchanting DELIA looks not with eye inverted, and MORTIMER himself has made
advances to intimacy. Under these circumstances thou will not expect that I can
attend to thy long epistolary sermon, which I herewith re-inclose thee for thee
for a present to the parson of thy parish, against the death of Mrs. ARABELLA,
thy grandam, when it will afford many admirable hints for the funeral oration
of that pious and puritanical old lady.

Whenever thou sendest such a string of commonplace proverbs, depend upon
receiving them again, and always with the charge of double postage. So take the
hint, and thank me for the warning.

Adieu. PHILIP SEDLEY.

LETTER LVII. Miss DELIA DELMORE, to Lady LUCY SAXB^.
WHAT an additional degree of happiness do I feel, since I last wrote to my
beloved Lady LUCY! My father is arrived, my sister is recovering, and we are
become acquainted with a man whose company is at once pleasing, instructive,
and various. The very gentleman, my dear LUCY, who has so frequently sent his
polite cards of enquiry concerning FANNY, proves to be a man of birth, rank,
and character, and well known both to Sir HENRY, and Mr. MORTIMER, when they
were last season at the bath of SCARBOROUGH. He is the most well bred and
complaisant character in the world, and has, at the first interview, all the
ease, firmness, and unembarrassed air of an old acquaintance. The assured, yet
modest manner with which he presents himself to a company, shows plainly that
he has been long accustomed to fashionable societies, and would charm you. If
FANNY continues to recover, we shall be once more a joyful family -- my mother
is also down with us.

We have taken part of a very elegant house, only a short ride from the
company, about three miles distant from BUXTON, and it stands upon a spot
infinitely less bleak and barren than the uncomfortable looking mountains that
surround the bath. I received the welcome epistle, dear LUCY, in which you
enjoin me to fill up the interval of absence, in a correspondence of wisdom,
wit, sentiment, and affection; but does not my fair friend forget that the
requisites to form and to continue such an intercourse, are not at the command
of every scribbler, though the partiality of nature, and the polish of
highbreeding, may confer them on herself? However, since you are so earnest
with me, I will pour out my soul imperfectly upon paper; and though I may be
wanting in point of elegance or accuracy, the deficiencies will be compensated
by a frankness of mind, and an undisguise of sentiment, that will pay a better
compliment to my LUCY'S candor, than all that could possibly be bestowed by
the flowers of rhetoric, or colorings of the imagination.

I the more readily yield to your urgencies, my LUCY, as my pen, at this
period, can only be the intelligencer of a felicity at once virtuous and
endearing.

It is said, indeed, that mankind have always some fantastical and visionary
scheme in view. I declare to you, Lady SAXBY, that the perfect restoration of
FANNY'S health is the only drop that could now be added to the cup of our
domestic joy. Judge yourself! for the visible alteration of Mrs. MORTIMER for
the better, has put me into such spirits, that I cannot restrain my gratitude
to the dear personage by which those spirits are inspired. Take then, my
beloved LUCY, the sketch of a familypicture, drawn (and yet not partially) by
the pencil of a relation.

The first, and principal figure in this group is, a father, whose mind is the
repository of every virtue -- a repository in which he has been, from hour to
hour in the career of almost threescore years, laying up something valuable,
till he has at length stored it with every excellence; with all, LUCY, that
can give worth to the husband, softness to the parent, solidity to the friend,
benevolence to the neighbor, and humanity to the man: to which is added, a
universal attention to the wants and complaints, the fortunes, and morals of
that prodigious body of men to which he is related only by sameness of (...)
and the conscious ties of the christian and fellow creature.

The second leading object in the piece is a mother, the model of her husband;
and differing only, by adapting the manly virtues to a delicacy more consistent
with the refinement and gentleness of the female character, and nature.

The third figure, to which I would direct your observation, is, the still
lovely FANNY MORTIMER, -- a woman whom even the depredations of four lingering
months, passed in the languors of sickness, have not rendered unattracting. To
a spirit at once wise and worthy, she superadds the finest politeness,
gentleness uncommon, and meekness peculiar to her: and to these, again, are
joined a taste elegant and simple -- an understanding enlarged and cultivated,
-- and a face, in defiance of distemper, in which Heaven seems to have painted
an attribute in every feature: her eyes sparkles benignity, her lips are the
temples of truth, her cheeks are the emblems of modesty veiled in roses, and
her hands were formed by the Graces to the best of purposes -- to charm, by
their liberality, the wretched into peace, and to be (consistently with their
color) the pure and beautiful stewards of a heart tender as a turtle's, yet
solid as a sage's.

The husband of this enchanting creature, is the brother of Lady SAXBY, the
very counterpart of his sister, and the very youth whom Sir HENRY DELMORE
adopted as the child of his affection, undertook for several years the
direction of his education, supplied the loss of a father, trained him up for
his own, and at last gave him, all-accomplished, to the only woman that could
deserve him -- his daughter. His character is recorded in most of the European
courts; and it is but a mere reverberation of a familiar echo for me to say,
that he has been every where distinguished, for bravery without rashness,
honor without ancestral pride, elegance without vanity, affection without
interestedness, and generosity without ostentation.

Such, LUCY, are the outlines of a picture now under the eye of your friend.
Your absence, however, and FANNY's uncertain state of health, are the two dark
clouds that overcast my otherwise radiant horizon.

In some measure, however, to atone for these indispensible draw backs, I can
now promise an often-repeated intercourse, in which, through the kind medium of
the post, our pleasures, with those of our families, shall be reciprocated --
But -- in the name of extravagance, where am I a rambling -- and what a
metaphorical rhapsody am I going to send? Let me hasten then to assure you,
that, in all dispositions of mind,. I am, with a tenderness, peculiar to the
truth of my attachment,

Your affectionate, DELIA DELMORE.

LETTER LVIII. SEDLEY to THORNTON.
THE fates, surely, are busied in contriving matters precisely as I would have
them.

The DELMORES are removed at some distance from BUXTON, by which means, I shall
be able to prevent opposite interests from clashing with each other.

I prithee, THORNTON, mark my policy, to which I have, even at the age of
thirty, sacrificed my passion -- passion which is equally destructive of
pleasure and business -- I have put myself in training, and am as temperate as
a saint -- You shall judge. Knowing the little fugitive scandals and whispers
of a wateringplace, I practiced upon myself the STANHOPEAN self-denial, and
have not been a single minute alone with HARRIET since the departure of HORACE.
To prevent this I contrive to call in, either the loquacious landlord, or
chattering landlady; and have only conversed in their own way, upon topics,
which, though important at the moment, are yet too trivial to send thee one
hundred and sixty miles: they answered very well my purpose -- I say well: for
strange as it may seem to thee, I hold it not good policy, or right reason, nor
consonant to CHESTERFIELDISM, to have tete-a-tetes with a wife, when the
husband is known to have left the town; nor am I -- mark the stroke -- very
well pleased with the incautious HARRIET, for suffering herself to be deserted,
and exposed to the report, and murder of the moment. In these places detraction
is a necessary filler-up of the vacuum;

"At every word a reputation dies."
The death of reputation is the death of my sort of gallantry. I would not be
thought a libertine, either in thought, word, or deed, for the universe. It Is
expressly, and flagrantly against my SYSTEM, which places, thou know, the
very perfection of human nature, and the height of human abilities, in "being
upon our own guard, and yet, by a seeming natural openness, to put people off
theirs." Oh, exquisite, exquisite arguer! -- "A second DANIEL, THORNTON; a
second DANIEL!"

Now, in cases of amor, it is, in conformity to this principle, absolutely
necessary, that, a husband should be upon the premises, though not upon the
spot; otherwise there is no possibility of avoiding mystery; beware of that:
mystery occasions suspicion, suspicion opens a door to detection, and detection
ruins me forever. The ordinary rake, indeed, piques himself upon this, nay,
circulates it at the expense of truth: that is villainous.

"He talks of transports that he never knew,
"And fancies raptures that he never felt."
But the pupils of CHESTERFIELD are not such "rude, vainglorious, boasters."
They are to preserve their moral sanctity, even in the midst of (what gownsmen
call) violation: they are to be, not only of good report, but, like the purity
of Caesar's wife, unsuspected. He who designs to be the worst man in the world,
must seem to be the best* Probatum est. I am considered as an apostle.

Oh! may this ingenuity and well-acted dissimulation ever keep me, THORNTON,
from being blown upon; and, to this end, may I never withdraw the deep and dear
veil that keeps me apparently pure, one moment from my heart! May I ever
possess the ingenuous exterior, with the reserved interior; may I never reject,
as troublesome, or useless, the mastery of my temper; and, above all other
things, may I always possess myself enough to hear, and see, every thing,
however anxious, however agonizing, without any visible, change of countenance!
(The countenance is often the forest enemy a man has.) May no man living ever
be able to decypher the hieroglyphics of my heart; and yet, may I keep the key
of every other heart in the universe, and, to conclude my prayer, which I here
fervently address to the spirit of STANHOPE, let hypocrisy place before me her
shield, of beautiful deception, under which I may fight my foolish antagonist,
for ever guarded, and for ever victorious!

These little effusions that burst spontaneously from the soul, thou must
pardon, THORNTON: they are the fiats of the God -- But I descend again to the
mortal correspondent.

I perceive the adroitest practice of the several points suggested by the
matchless DORMER, will be shortly necessary; for never did I enter so
sagacious, or so uniformly amiable a family as that of the DELMORES. I must
muster all my forces. The whole family is a fortification against a Pupil of
Pleasure.

The principal of it (Sir HENRY) is so acute, so adorned, so read, and so
experienced, that he must, I perceive, be deceived with a delicacy beyond the
deceptions of Belial: and much wonder I opened not myself to his penetrating
discovery when at SCARBOROUGH; at a time too, when I was a novice in the ways
of STANHOPE, and could not be supposed to copy him liberally. But, my good
genius preserved me, and I engaged, even in the nonage of my experiments, the
hand of the father, while I struck hard upon the tender heart of his daughter!

Lay down the paper a moment to bow in reverence to my greatness! Do thou not
shrink in the comparison? To proceed -- There Is a formidable husband too in my
way -- no HORACE HOMESPUN -- but a man of travel, experience, taste, -- a
second sister too -- the lively DELIA -- a wit, a corresponder, a perfect
pen-woman; ready, rapid, an asker of whys and wherefores: and to close the
list, a venerable matron -- wise -- virtuous -- sedato -- penetrating -- the
lady president of this bewitching association.

All these are in battle array against me -- my single self -- formidable
PHALANX! Give me joy! If they are not versed (as I believe they are not) in my
maxims, I may be a match for all them; pass like a meteor, through this
difficult hemisphere -- kindle as I go -- and dread no radiant competitor. But
if thou fallest, SEDLEY? Insolent interrupter! -- If I fall -- What of that?
Admitting the possibility -- it will be like a fall from Heaven. I shall be
glorious in ruins; and CHESTERFIELD -- for I will not survive detection --
should not blush to acknowledge me in elysium. Oblivion to your Ifs, for ever!

As to HARRIET -- the affair is over: nothing is left even for the exercise of
my talents: the precept by which I obtained her, has been successful in
practice: all that remains, is ITERATION. Passion has not a single
provocative, to keep the pulse a-beating. Her fondness grows luxuriant, and she
may betray me. She must be checked. To confess the truth, THORNTON -- I am
indifferent to her, and I wish HORACE had her, locked in his arms to eternity,
with all my soul.

Am not I the most generous man existing?

At all events, she must not entertain such ardent expectations -- for -- I am
summoned elsewhere -- a scene of greater difficulty, greater delicacy, and,
therefore, of greater delight, expands itself before me. -- The half-conquered
-- half-expiring FANNY MORTIMER, who must not descend, unenjoyed by SEDLEY, to
the earth -- The worm, THORNTON, must not be suffered to riot in her beauties:
'twould be a pity -- a profanation! The exquisite and vivacious DELIA, also,
attracts my notice. I am called to the combat -- a combat, where the laurels
will be trebly precious, since I perceive they must be earned with all the
artillery of manner, address, assurance, and CHESTERFIELDISM.

Every nerve must be exerted!

In pursuance of these objects, however, I shall probably, be often so animated
as to wish enjoyments, that, it may be impolitic, to push too far: every thing
is ripe for the coup de grace.

In such exigencies, it is difficult to keep the tight rein in my hand: the
warmth of imagination, -- that enemy to all political decorum, -- and an
acquaintance with objects, and situations, calculated to set it on fire, seem
inconsistent with the necessary coolness, collection, and command of one's
temper. To provide, therefore, against these moments of ardour, I shall, if LA
MOTTE comes down, retain the enamoured HARRIET in my suit, as the agreeable
resource from agitations into which, it is likely, I shall be thrown by the
charms, delays, or delicious impediments, of the DELMORES.

Possibly, too, something may fall out to reduce LA MOTTE, which, be her
personal endowments what they may, is desirable; because she is prepared to
suspect my principles, and, therefore, will engage my more serious attention,
till she shall have little reason to ridicule; or laugh at her friend. That
woman is worth subduing, THORNTON, though she were a JEZEBEL. Thy friend is an
admirable leveller. I hate pride.

But, on the other hand, if this LA MOTTE does not move, at the injunction of
HORACE, nor at the pretended penitence of the letterloving HARRIET; and, by
those means, HARRIET should be left to herself, she must absolutely return to
the bosom of the poor pedant, and I will assuredly sacrifice the possession of
her person, to the unblemished security of my character, which, I am aware,
must inevitably suffer, by being avowedly the cicisbeo of a wife, little
distinguished amongst the bathers and bibbers of fashion. Yes, my friend, she
must be, in that case, turned over to the priest, though, I were to famish for
the blessings of beauty.

If, indeed, she had been blessed with a fallow damsel for a sister, or
pale-faced prudent gentlewoman for her aunt, it might have been another matter:
but I again repeat it to you, that in a place like this, in such a sneaking,
inquisitive country as that of Britain, it is, to all intents and purposes,
requisite, for the security of my SYSTEM, that there should be some third
person in a family, by the way of screen; and rather than have our mistresses
alone, that is, unprotected by some ostensible he, or she, that may be, or
appear to be, answerable for them in the parish where they visit, or where they
reside, it is better for our plan of action, that we be sheltered, under the
withered wing of a maiden cousin of a century's standing, or even of the great
grandmother herself.

And now, THORNTON, for a word or two on thy own affairs. If thou have not, by
this time, surmounted the ticklings of thy conscience, and taken possession of
that tender tenement, which thy friend the Lieutenant left to thee, then
deservest thou to be for ever discarded. A coward in love! -- Oh, abominable!
-- Retrieve thyself, I charge thee!

What! Have thou an angel in "earth's mould?" Is she in a wilderness of sweets?
Art thou invited by a bed of roses? Art thou neither in fear of being blasted
by detection, nor of incurring the prattle of a single gossip of either sex,
(seeing that thou art in a retirement perfectly shaded by a shrubbery of
persumes, and apart from a second house) and is the good man of the house gone
a long journey into a far country? -- Is all this in the way of propitiating
thy advances, masked, as I presume they would, or at least as they ought to be,
in the fine veil of modesty, manner, and firmness, each (like copartners,
whose interest it is, to promote common right in the same business) assisting
the other? and do thou, after all, boggle at a shadow -- a maukin -- at
conscience?

Admitting even all thy wishes crowned with success? -- where is the mischief?
Thou do not despoil her: the Lieutenant is ignorant of what is granted, as of
what was never attempted. The STANHOPE scheme of fruition suffers us not to do
any real injury to individuals singly, or to the community collectively; (note
me nicely, for I am about to argue) we are neither to betray the wife, nor
brand the husband as the cuckold we have had the pleasure to make him; we are
not to breathe an accent that may lead to the remotest suspicion. In some
cases, THORNTON, this system is of the utmost service (under the STANHOPEAN
restrictions, I mean) both to our King and country. Do thou start? Oh, short
of sight! Purblind, pusillanimous JAMES! -- Proceed to the proof -- It Is at the
end of my pen.

How many puny striplings are there who cannot do the common rights of nuptial
justice to the unhappy creatures whom either interest, or folly, or both, have
chained them to, for life? In those instances, it is ours to bestow as a
favor, what the husbands cannot discharge as a duty. There is one illustration.

On the other hand, how many miserable pairs are there, sighing for an heir to
an unwieldy estate, which estate must, in default of issue, devolve to the next
fool or driveller in descent? There, again, we are patriots of the first order:
We provide a successor, and create a being to inherit all the luxuries of life.
It is beyond dispute, CHESTERFIELDISM makes a man not more an ornamental, than
a supporting pillar to his country.

Nay, even supposing the husband enabled to provide for himself: while our
system dictates so inviolable a secrecy, while the joys of it are not invaded
by distemper (and they can never be granted without the prior consent of the
wife -- mark that -- and such consent implies such variety necessary to her
happiness) -- no injury can, in effect, be incurred. His own offspring we
cannot destroy; and ours will be considered as legitimate; he will have the
credit, we shall have the pleasure, and they, pretty souls, will not be
exposed, like the by blows of the rake, to the scorn, desertion and
ill-fortunes of bastardy. So that, view the system of our exquisite Earl on
which side soever you will, it is a system of policy, prudence, pleasure,
good-fellowship, and right reason.

Art thou either poor-spirited or obstinate enough to cavil, or hesitate,
another moment?

Great length of paper, and much time, have I stolen from more agreeable
pursuits, to illustrate this to thee -- and if it move thee not, thou art
altogether impenetrable, and not deserving so sublime a friend as the immaculate

PHILIP SEDLEY.

END of the FIRST VOLUME.
THE PUPIL OF PLEASURE. IN A SERIES OF LETTERS.

BY COURTNEY MELMOTH.

IN TWO VOLUMES.

VOLUME THE SECOND.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY ROBERT BELL, IN THIRD-STREET.

M.DCC.LXXVIII.

THE PUPIL OF PLEASURE.
LETTER LIX. Mrs. La Motte to Mrs. Homespun.
Madam,
I AM sorry to refuse the worthy Mr. Homespun (who has, I perceive, been
obliged to return without his wife) a request, which I very plainly see was
made to me in the tenderness of his heart.

You do me but justice in supposing that I will keep your unhappy secret, as
you very properly call it; for it is no small infelicity to make a secret of
any sort necessary to the fame of a woman, and the peace of a whole family,
whose connections would all be dishonored by a disclosure.

As far, therefore, as my silence can contribute to your domestic tranquillity,
you may depend upon me; though I cannot but think, she who has confidence
enough to abuse her husband, should have policy enough to conceal the
particulars of her crime from a confidant; and I know not whether the very
knowledge of such circumstances, is not an insult to her virtue.

Your poor husband gave us, yesterday, as usual, an admirable discourse. There
was in it some softening sentiments relating to the pure pleasures of married
felicity, which I could not but imagine were suggested by his own situation: he
loves you, Harriet, most fondly, and I could not avoid giving to sentiments,
which I connected with certain others, the tribute of a tender tear. All the
parishioners, and especially the talkative part of them, express their
astonishment, some by whispers, others by winks, and all by looks, or other
expressive gestures, that Mrs. Homespun should continue where she has neither
relations nor acquaintances. It is easy to see that Mr. Homespun is the only
unsuspicious person in the village; while he, wrapped up in the integrity of his
soul, and guarded by his good opinion of you, supposes you will soon regret his
absence, and return to him.

After service he drank tea with me, and with tears in his eyes, first urged my
going to Buxton; then, (finding my refusal established) begged I should, at
least, try the effect of my entreaties to invite you back: he even went so far
as to hint, with all a father's glow upon his cheek, at the little necessary
preparations against the day in which you are expected to present him with a
testimoy of your truth and tenderness. There are various maternal cautions,
said he, you know, my dear Mrs. La Motte, to be taken in such interesting
situations; and, perhaps, the constant bustles of that watering place, may for
a while, lull to sleep, or rather agitate her into forgetfulness of those cares
that generally alarm the provident apprehension of her, who is in a very few
weeks to be a mother.

The painting was too powerful. I rose to conceal my sympathy, he pressed me by
the hand, in visible disorder, and protesting that he left his fate to my
management, saluted me, in his honest way, and went to perform the last offices
to a poor woman, (Alice Weldon) who died last Wednesday in childbed of the
babe, whose father is not yet acknowledged. I told your husband, Harriet, I
would exert my power, without telling him that I had long lost my influence.

As you were not touched by my former letters, particularly one of them, I
despair of moving you by the present, having no new arguments to offer: nor
should I, indeed, have troubled you at all, but that I did it, in compliance to
your much injured, and my ever esteemed friend, Mr. Homespun, whom I admire,
chiefly, for the very simplicity, to which you made an objection. By the ardour
with which he speaks of that Mr. Sedley, upon all occasions, I perceive you
have not been seduced by a novice, and yet, I cannot possibly imagine how he
has contrived to make the husband his friend, at the very time that he has
betrayed the wife into the thorny paths of personal impurity. Be this at it
may, he must be a very artful creature, and, exclusive of my not going into the
same lodging with the polluted Harriet, I do not choose to lay myself liable to
the insult of being even the ridicule of a man, who, doubtless, asperses, even
more than he destroys.

It may not, however, be amiss to observe, in conclusion, that, if your return
to this place is not speedy, it will probably be attended with consequences,
for which no after-penitence can possibly atone.

I am, Madam, Your humble Servant, C. La Motte.

LETTER LX. From the Same to the Same.
Dear Madam,
MR. Homespun is extremely ill, and much distressed by your refusal to return.
I have turned the affair in my mind, and I see, if you come on receipt of this
letter, very probably excuses may yet be made, and all may be again happy.

You are still dear to me, Harriet; I wish for nothing so warmly as to embrace
you, and to go with you to our accustomed walk in the meadow, opposite your
paradise of a cottage. I miss you more and more every day, every hour. Come
then, my dear, name the time, Mr. Homespun and I will both meet you at the
halfway hut, where we were so happy in a party last summer; he desires you
will take a chaise (after you have acquainted us) to that place.

I can no longer be without you; I want you to sit by my side, near your
favorite window, round which the jessamine clambers. It is now in full blow; I
want you to work with me, while Horace reads, as he used to do, some agreeable
author. We have made alterations in my garden: there is a new summer house,
actually surrounded with roses, sweet-briar, and eglantine; I want you to
approve. In short, I wish for you, on all accounts, moral and entertaining.
Hasten then, dear Harriet, to your

C. La Motte.

LETTER LXI. From the Same to the Same.
Mrs. Homespun,
YOUR husband is in his bed; brought thither by the evident indifference of a
wife, on whom he doats. What course this illness may take, or where it may end,
I know not: the people, however, do not scruple to attribute it to the absence
and strange conduct of Mrs. Homespun. Since his sickness, which I do assure you
is real, I have considered well the part I am to take in this affair; and, in
the hope of restoring a worthy member to the community, by opening his eyes to
the demerit of the object for which he sighs, I am not certain, whether I shall
not be justified in disclosing to him that which will induce him to change his
anxiety into contempt.

I beg you will think of this, and (as I shall wait your answer before I
resolve) allow yourself to prevent what must make your infamy public. As to
your equivocations, they have now eight with me, and are really too transparent
to cheat a child. It is evident you dote on your seducer.

Farewell, C. La Motte.

LETTER LXII. Miss Delia Delmore to Lady Lucy Saxby.
FANNY is not worse, and therefore my spirits, which always rise and fall with
the pains and pleasures of my friends, are equal to the delightful task of
corresponding with my dear Lady Lucy.

In my last I only slightly, and in general terms, mentioned the patrons of my
happiness: let me now be more particular. My father has formed himself by such
a standard, that his excellencies have a dignity peculiar to the dignity of his
manners. He has ever thought proper to include the friendly in the paternal
character; and he inculcates, even to the lowest domestics, a certain sense of
independency; a principle, he says, necessary to be maintained even amongst the
lowest, and from which branches forth a thousand virtues. In society, says Sir
Henry, subordination is certainly indispensible, according to the present
system; but then, it should be considered, that the balance, of human affairs
is oftener, if not always, much more level than we imagine. If we feed the
poor, their labor accommodates us: if we pay them for their toil, to that very
toil we are indebted for all the softnesses of prosperity: if we provide them
with a defense against the severity of seasons, and a chamber so the
convenience of repose, (after they have wearied out their vigor in our
service,) let it be remembered, that, in gratitude for our attention, to them
we owe every thing which distinguishes riches from poverty: under their hands
prosper the delicacies of the garden, and the treasures of the field, the
decorations of the mansion, and the table of plenty, the robe of luxury, and
the bed of down.

Actuated by motives so singularly noble, Sir Henry, at a proper crisis, makes
each of his children, in some sort, independent, that is, my dear, he allots to
each of us such a share of fortune in our own hands as is sufficient to the
display and shew-off of the natural disposition. He esteems it necessary to
know the operation of the temper, when it has power to play; this, says he, is
not to be known by the common mode of contracting, but of extending; it is
impossible to discover any natural propensity, until opportunity gives liberty
to all the little passions of the stripling, and indulgence gives way to
unshackled inclination.

Educated under such advantages, and the finer polishes of the school given by
a father so venerable and superior; the youthful independent will not turn to
his honors, and the precious deposit entrusted to him, to abuse; and, if he
does, even then there are many ways which Sir Henry has discovered to turn his
deviating conduct into the proper channel. From kindness like this, Lady Lucy,
we are enabled to do nameless occasional little services for the unfortunate;
and by such means learn, early, to form ourselves into habits of sympathy and
tenderness of heart. I do not, said he, put gold into your purses, children,
like some parents, who promise to double the sum, if you show it unbroken and
undiminished, at a future period: I do not give it you to board up like misers,
nor to dissipate like little spendthrifts; but I give it you on purpose to
change into small silver; it is my desire that you should taste early the first
of pleasures: look about you: it is a world of misery, as well as imposition:
mark your object to the best of your abilities, be deceived as little as
possible, and double your treasure by decreasing it; six-penny worth of silver
may gain sixty moments of fair reflection: for the banquet at so cheap a rate,
provided to another, the bread and water of gratitude, take in exchange the
richer feast of a kind heart: and in this case, my dear children, which is the
greatest gainer? If you must be usurers, put your money out to such interest;
be ambitious of laying it wisely out in the purchase of virtue, and I will
supply you cheerfully with the means.

We were all walking, Lucy, the other morning, by the side of the bath, when a
short, bold, sturdy fellow accosted us for charity. We looked at Sir Henry for
our cue: Come along, children, said he, that man is both impudent and able. As
we passed by, the fellow drew up his mouth, and shaking a little dirty bag that
he drew from his pouch, gingled it over his head, and triumphantly snapt his
fingers. When we were at some distance: Take care, dea children, of such
impostors: bestow not the moment you are supplicated: try the temper of the
petitioner: he whom indigence, and the strokes of ill fortune, have not at
least hamiliated, is not yet an object of your generosity. As we were going to
our carriage, a decayed veteran, in tattered regimentals, reduced to the knees
by the perils of his profession, was endeavoring to sweep our way with his
hat: little Charles ran, without the least hesitation, and gave his bounty.
Yes, said Sir Henry, there, my dear lad, you could not be deceived: by whatever
means brought about, such a poor wretch must be the mark of liberality.

Opposite, Lucy, to the maxims of the present age, thus do our parents
encourage us in proportion, as we have conduced to the happiness of others; and
for every trifle well bestowed, we are rewarded with a present fourfold its
value, and that, again, enriched by a smile, that shows how strongly the
goodness of the child vibrates on the sensibility of the relation.

It is another happiness peculiar to the retreat of Sir Henry Delmore, that
none of its residents are fired by the envy of opposition, or the meannesses of
jealousy: so far the reverse of this, that one is studious to compliment the
other on some excellence fresh acquired, or more perfected: some display of the
heart, newly discovered, or some additional grace of the person that blooms in
the blush, sparkles in the eye, or dimples in the smile.

What, my dear Lucy, can we say to those whose hearts, repugnant to such
principles, turn a deaf ear to the music of domestic concord? Earthly,
grovelling creatures, how I pity them! Warm, however, and alive to this sweetest
harmony, is my elegant Lady Saxby; she feels the soft impression that is made
in every finer bosom by the hand of a divinity. Long, very long, may this
charming sensation continue! As long may we remain, in serious principle, the
friends, the admirers, the improvers of one another!

I am, My dear Lucy's inviolable Delia Delmore.

LETTER LXIII. Lady Lucy Saxby to Miss Delia Delmore.
I SHOULD ill deserve the kindnesses you have been pleased to confer upon me,
did I refuse the earliest acknowledgment. I am truly glad to hear Mrs. Mortimer
is likely to recover, and that you have found such a retreat as is agreeable to
your family, contiguous to the bath.

Ah! Miss Delmore, what pictures have you drawn, happy friend, enviable Delia!
and yet, still, methinks, is there wanting one article, one principal figure,
to complete your fine and high-colored family-piece. Why, my dear girl, so
forgetful of yourself? Great, as are your present felicities, I am persuaded
they admit addition. There is a passion, my Delia, that gives the last fine
finish to the bliss of an innocent life: it is the animator of every other
happiness; and I am surprised that a heart so gentle as Miss Delmore's should
so long remain unpossessed of it. The pleasures of a pure and mutual passion
would not be unworthy her attention.

Amongst the various characters in your train of slaves, Delia, is there not
one can attract you? Hard-hearted girl, how shall we contrive to captivate you?
Surely, you terrify the tribe of humble servants! A modern lover, who has
studied only his rotine of rhapsody, and who depends on the repetition and
arrangement of a certain number of warm words, his flames and fires, hearts and
darts, thrills and hills, groves and loves, Cupids and stupids, had no sort of
chance; but when he has run the changes and chimes, till he can do nothing but
ring them over again, he is quite at a stand, can go no further, and is lost in
his own absurdity, feels feels his own insignificance, and makes his ridiculous
exit. Will you, however, never be caught?

If the rocks of Buxton are too barren, pray hasten to your Worcestershire
paradise: your gardens there, the ancient seat of the Delmores, contain
everything auspicious to the belle passion. You have thickets of roses, which
may furnish your sighers with similies, and abundance of bowers, where Cupid
may repose on violets: you have beds of primroses to entertain the Silphids,
velvet verdure for the dancing fairies, and lucid water, wherein Venus may
bathe herself in brooks. But I am mistaken, if you now need this poetical
Arcadia. Buxton rocks have their beauties, pray, my dear, let me hear more of
this gentleman of birth, rank and character, this distinguished he, whose
conversation is so pleasing, instructive, and various: who, at first sight,
has all the ease, firmness, and unembarrassed air of an old acquaintance, and
who presents himself so engaging to a company! Ah! Delia, Delia! my prophecy
will yet come to pass; and, if he proves as valuable as you wish to find him, I
know you wish it, and so don't deny it, Delia; the most animated prayer of my
heart is, that it may be speedily necessary to alter my superscription,
whenever I address my fair, and at present, unestablished correspondent. I am a
very happy wife myself, and therefore have the better right and reason to
desire you may be in the same situation. However, be this as it may, in all
states, changes, and transitions,

I am, truly, Your real friend, Lucy Saxby.

LETTER LXIV. Mrs. La Motte to Mrs. Homespun
Madam,
YOUR attachment to Mr. Sedley, is only an aggravation. Your declaring that you
love him, and could sooner die than leave him, is really the cant of a runaway
romp of fifteen, who deserves for her naughtiness to be whipped. I have done
both writing and arguing you, and have only to give you notice, that, as Mr.
Homespun is now really incapable of his duty, through actual, undissembled
grief, I have come to a resolution (since neither entreaties, nor any humanity
can weigh with you) to acquaint him with every circumstance, nay, to make him a
present of all your letters to me, if you do not arrive at the Parsonage by
Thursday next, which is four days from the date of this. I have hitherto fondly
attempted to soothe your husband's impatience, by making apologies; he desires
me to put a letter, written with his own weak hand, into the post: he gave it
to me sealed, and I enclose it.

Madam, I am, Your most obedient servant, C. La Motte.

LETTER LXV. The Reverend Horace Homespun to Mrs. Homespun. (Enclosed in the
above.)
My dear Wife,
BY some means or other, I have caught, as I think it is, a cold, and that has
produced a fever; so that I am obliged (and that must excuse the badness of it)
to write this as I sit up in my bed, that bed, my dear, of which an equal part
is your property. Though I am not, God be thanked, ill enough to alarm you, yet
I cannot but believe your valuable society would materially accelerate my
return to health and contribute to my re-establishment. Mrs. La Motte, who
always speaks of you with inconceivable tenderness, has been prevented, as she
says, on account of a sore throat, from being with you; and therefore as your
company here would be quite a cordial, and as Buxton is not, perhaps, the
proper place to be in, without a relation, (even though that tie is almost
supplied by the civilities of Mr. Sedley, to which worthy gentleman pray tender
my hearty respects) I could wish you would set off as early after your receipt
of this, as can be made convenient. But I conjure you, nevertheless, not to put
yourself into any hurries, and by all means come in a post-chaise, and by easy
stages; and charge the driver to go easily, and pray reward him for his care.
Never mind the cost of the journey: consider your present delicate situation,
and all the charming hopes, (part of which now bring the water into my eyes)
depending upon it. Therefore come leisurely, and it is very likely, as I don't
indulge fretting under every slight affliction, you may find me considerably
amended on your arrival at our little retreat, which, though I am just at
present, not able to enjoy it, is, me thinks, prettier this summer than I
imagined it would be: for all the woodbines I have planted have thriven
wonderfully; the laylocks, particularly the purple ones, are leafy and
blossomed most luxuriantly; and, what I esteem an addition, an innocent little
wren has, even in this, the first season of my residence, built her nest in the
very center of my arbor, between two honeysuckles. I declare I would protect
the poor thing, and preserve to it all the rights of hospitality and good
faith, even at the hazard of my life.

But where am I wandering? You will smile, when I tell you, that though I began
in great pain, I now feel little or nothing, except a weariness from the
uncouthness of my posture. Surely the very reflection upon a beloved object is
a charm against misery! What then, and how powerful, must be the reality? I
need not pursue the hint: my best Harriet is not destitute of sensibility.

I am, her very faithful and affectionate husband, Horace Homespun,
P. S. I have a melancholy postscript for my dear Harriet. Poor Doctor Diggory
has been long confined to his bed, and employed by the last post an amanuensis,
to acquaint me that he is incapable of using a pen. Poor, good man, how I love
and pity him!



LETTER LXVI. Sedley to Thornton.
OH! Thorton, I wished for difficulties, and they are come pouring upon me with
a vengeance. I am absolutely hemmed in by embarrassments: at this moment I am
between a Scylla and a Charybdis, and uncommonly skilful must be my pilotism,
or I must split upon the rocks, and be wrecked for ever. Never was I, since I
set out a knight errant to fight the world behind my more than seven-folded
shield of dissimulation, so truly in danger of being discovered; and thou
know it is with me, as with what the world calls a much better man.

"He that filches from me my good name,
"Robs me of that which not enriches him,
"And makes me poor indeed."
But, to come to the point, Thornton, I am almost at the end of my wits. Horace
Homespun pines for his absent mate. Mrs. La Motte refuses to come down: and
urges Harriet to return, upon peril of instant discovery. This very hour did I
see such a packet as astonished even me, who am not startled at trifles. La
Motte has written with the pen of a Sappho, dipped in the ink of Juvenal. Such
asperity, such acumen, such a sting in the tail of every sentence! Horace, too,
has written; written, Thornton, though bed-ridden, full of endearment, full of
care, full of the husband. I called in upon Harriet, in the very crisis of my
fate; she had the whole packet spread upon the table before her, and had just
put the finishing to an epistle that would have completely ruined me for ever,
had it been sent. I caught it from her with the eagerness of a lion, and I
enclose it for thy inspection, that thou may judge of my situation, which is
not at all amended by Harriet's violent declaration of ungovernable passion and
wish to live with me for ever. Oh! that women could learn like me, to gratify
the passion of the hour, and think no more of it: but there is no seducing a
woman into pleasure, but she is so cursedly ungrateful, as to hug the seducer
for ever after, without any regard to time or to place. I have dined too at
Delmore's, and thrice caught the eye of Fanny. By my soul, the old fire is yet
alive in her. I see it will only be necessary to nurse the embers, and add
fresh fuel. How the duce came she to marry? and how is it, that being married,
she does not admire her husband, who is one of the finest figures in the
creation! As for Harriet, she must be sent home to the pedant: there is no
enduring either her fondness, or the perils arising from it. That damned La
Motte, forgive my ill-breeding, Thornton; but that confounded woman will be my
destruction. Adieu! Adieu! I must cast about for an expedient.

Yours, Philip Sedley.

LETTER LXVII. Mrs. Homespun to Mrs. La Motte. (Enclosed by Sedley in the
above.)
BY all the agonies and injuries of a desperate woman, driven to extreme by the
pangs of conscience and the violences of love, if you dare to betray me, I will
make you rue the consequence, though I were to expire in the moment succeeding
my revenge. You know my spirit, then fear it, dread it, tremble before it. I
will not be discovered, without making the discoverer pay for her treachery,
even with the blood of her heart. I have not closed my eyes since the beginning
of the week: am in a fever: I twice fell against the wainscot this afternoon.
Sedley looks colder than he did, but I love him better than either same,
fortune, food, or existence: his manner, his address, his figure, his
obligingness, even yet charm me. I pity Horace, I love you, indeed I do, I
could do any thing for either of you, but leave the sight of Mr. Sedley: I own
it. Take care then, do not sport with me: do not abuse the trust I have put in
you: for once again, I do most solemnly vow a resentment that shall exchange
your life for the loss of my fame.

Farewell, Harriet Homespun.

LETTER LXVIII. Thornton to Sedley.
CHESTERFIELD is a cheat; I am now sure of it, Mr. Sedley. His system is not
productive of bosom felicity: it cannot procure the best of all applauses, or
the approbation that results from a congratulating conscience, however it may
deceive the world into encomium. Alas! Sir, what are the successes of hypocrisy
or policy, or whatever else you please to call it, when, after all, the incense
and enjoyment you receive from the public is paid to our conduct not as it
really is, but as it appears to be; and when even after the luckiest efforts of
our delusions; when we have put the happiest of his precepts in practice, we
are condemned to that reflecting hour, which, at some time or another, will
seize us, and which, in despite of manner and pretense, will have it is full
measure of recriminating asperity. In the shame of my heart, Sedley, let me own
to thee, that I have been laboring to throw even the guarded virtue of Mrs.
Vernon, off its bias. I startled her for the moment, but she recollected
herself time enough to prevent her misfortune, and I have had address enough to
turn the accident to my advantage: she believes me honest, and she shall find
me so. I have not now time to relate the particulars of this; nor is it,
perhaps, necessary, but I seriously wish I could inspire you with any degree of
those feelings, I at this moment enjoy, from having totally discarded Stanhope,
and listened to the voice of Virtue.

Farewell. James Thornton.

LETTER LXIX.
Sir,
YOUR eternal reverberation of musty maxims becomes troublesome. I did not
adopt the plan of Dormer Stanhope, without sufficiently considering every part
of it; and if you can find no other subject than the old, ragged, threadbare,
commonplace topics of Vice and Virtue, I must beg that our correspondence be
brought to a period. As to what is past, if I did not know your sense of
friendship, it would be necessary to cut your throat; as it is, I wish you
happy in your pursuits.

I am yours, Philip Sedley.

LETTER LXX. Mrs. Homespun to Mrs. La Motte.
I WILL at all events be with you tomorrow: the torment that sat brooding over
my pillow last night, the horrors of my dream, the situation and trembling that
seizes me as I write this, the poor little wretch that seems troubled within
me; all, all conjoin to draw me home; I can stay no longer here: Tell Horace of
my design, and depend on its being put in execution, by

Your Harriet Homespun.

LETTER LXXI. Philip Sedley, Esquire, to the Reverend Horace Homespun.
Dear and Reverend Sir,
I HAVE with infinite pleasure obeyed the injunctions suggested by Mrs. La
Motte, in hinting to Mrs. Homespun your anxiety for her return. She heard me
with great patience, and very readily consented to go to a husband, whom she so
tenderly esteems. I design to see her properly provided with a chaise, and
every thing necessary to the delicacy of her situation; and I most heartily
pray for your returning health. I hope you will forgive my having sent your
lady, my fair, charge, home, without my attending her; but you will reflect on
the world's aptitude to asperse and censure, and on that account, forgive: for
the same reason, I have advised Mrs. Homespun to go in the middle of the day,
that even a color might not be given to the ready tongue of detraction. Though
Mrs. Homespun will be with you in a few hours after this, I could not forbear
anticipating your felicity, though it should even be but for a moment.

I am, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, Philip Sedley.

LETTER LXXII. The Reverend Horace Homespun to Philip Sedley, Esquire.
Sir,
THOUGH I am every minute looking out for Harriet, and have sent my servant to
the corner of the town to welcome her, and tell her, I am made better by the
expectation, yet I cannot, in duty, refuse dispatching to you my thanks for
your most generous and affectionate arguments and care. No words are equal to
such subjects. I can only say to you, that you have made a sick man well, and a
husband happy, and that I pay you the acknowledgment of a tear. As to your
reward, that, Sir, is placed far beyond me: it is above, and must be given to
you only by the Father of all recompense.

I am, Sir, With a grateful heart, Your most humble Servant, Horace Homespun.

LETTER LXXIII. Thornton to Sedley.
CRUEL Sedley, how could thou treat me so harshly? But I will neither quit
urging to thee the subject of Virtue, nor painting to thee the horrors of Vice;
nor will I bring my epistolary correspondence to a period. What! have I myself
escaped from the snare, and shall I see the foot of a friend ready to be
entrapped, yet not endeavor to rescue him! Forbid it, fidelity; forbid it,
honor! Yes, Sedley, I must continue to love, and will persevere in admonishing
thee; for, in earnest repetition, I declare to thee, that Chesterfield is
unable to purchase the delightful and soothing pleasures resulting from my
present and newadopted system, which I am not ashamed to tell thee, (although
it is repugnant to thine) is borrowed from the Scriptures: it runs thus,
Sedley: Do, as thou would wish others should do unto thee, This is most
palpably the sentiment of true policy as well as true honesty; and I am every
day more and more persuaded, that nothing but this will, in the end, prevail.
There is a moment, my dear, dissipated Sedley, in which, though thou were to
wear the mask of a forty years success, thou must per force lay it aside, and
appear in all the nakedness of Nature. And can there, I ask thee, can there
possibly be a more hideous sight than a hypocrite unveiled, where every
deformity can no longer hide itself from observation, when fraud shall be
traversed through all its meandering intricacies, even to its soul and polluted
source, and when the very heart shall be displayed, without subterfuge, without
concealments, and without a possibility of either being on its own guard, or
throwing others off theirs. By the bye, Sedley, that sentiment, borrowed (as I
perceive many of thine are) from the pernicious volumes of thy darling
theorist, is subversive of all fair dealing in business, true affection in a
connection with the other sex, and ingenuousness of manners in all human
situations.

The Lieutenant is not yet returned, but he has sent two letters, of which,
for certain reasons, I have procured the favor of copies, to enclose you. If
thou have a single minute to spare from the prosecution of thy ruinous system,
read them; and if after that, thou art not made better, if they want efficiency
to check thee in the pursuit of pleasure, through the bounds both of law and
humanity, farewell to every hope of feeling, farewell to all that ornaments the
real gentleman, farewell to manhood. The first is addressed to me, the second to
Mrs. Vernon. On the receipt of mine, which was the very day of my trial to ruin
the fair subject of it, judge what I felt: you know my sensibility, and can
imagine thy Thornton's situation, when it is poignantly wounded.

LETTER LXXIV. Lieutenant Vernon to Mr. Thornton.
My dear Benefactor,
GUESS how easily your former favor sat upon my heart, by my readiness to
receive from you another! I had more reasons than you yet know of for inviting
you to my villa, and it was those reasons that prevented me from inviting my
Sophia to partake of the excursion. To tell you the plain truth, my friend, I
have more policy than business in this excursion. I have lately had offers of
preferment: To speak openly, I can have the command of a company, upon joining
General --, in America. The half-pay of a Lieutenant, you know, Sir, is not
sufficient to, even a man of moderation: my wife's private fortune I have very
strickly settled upon herself, as a sort of comfortable security against
unfortunate contingencies: I think myself no more entitled to touch the
interest of this, than I would touch upon a property in trust, which, after my
decease, was to be the only certain resource of the person under my
guardianship. Another point is my own thirst of glory. I was trained very early
to the exercise of arms, and although I continued to starve upon my ensigncy
near twenty years, (I weep with joy, Sir, when I think upon the generous means
by which I became a Lieutenant) yet the ardours of military ambition are by no
means extinguished. I declare to you, Mr. Thornton, even blessed as I now am in a
competent income, presented to me with the hand of Sophia, in the full
possession too, of Sophia herself, I cannot, even at this time, hear the beat
of a drum, without feeling my heart bound at the alarm. In a word, I design to
go to the field, and accept the promotion. I am one of those who side with that
party which considers the dignity of Britain insulted by America. I was bred a
soldier, and taught even from my cradle (for my father had won his laurels) to
feel all the delicacies of martial majesty. In my opinion, Sir, the Sovereign
of these realms is injured: his injuries are mine: it is enough for a soldier,
to believe his cause is just. I perceive many of my old comrades have
voluntarily drawn the sword, while mine is gathering rust in its sheath. I drew
it, Mr. Thornton, last night, out of the scabbard, and upon examining the blade
I saw a spot, a lazy spot of inactivity, destroying the keenness of its edge.
By my soul, I felt myself blush at it; nor can I be ever easy, ever forgive
myself, till I have at once wiped away the shame, and the spot, as it becomes
my station. Now then, Mr. Thornton, we are come to the point, a point of all
others in the world the most delicate. Sophia, my poor Sophia, must, must --
Excuse me, dear Thornton -- excuse a blot, which my weakness has, I see, made
upon the paper: a tender woman will, at any time, unsoldier the boldest of us.
But, fie upon it! fie upon it! it was the infirmity but of a moment: "I am a
man again." In short, Sir, my wife knows nothing of my intention, and I do not
know how to break the matter with her. She has peculiar gentleness of heart,
and will, I am convinced, feel the severest pangs at parting. This is the first
time since our marriage that I have slept from her side, and I wish much to
know how she has supported it: if tolerably well, she may, perhaps, be brought
to bear the thoughts of a longer absence; and, in that case, I would have you
gradually open the design to her, of which, indeed, I distantly hint in my
letter to her. The worst of it is, Mr. Thornton, women are so apt to associate
with the duty of a soldier, such horrid ideas of death, broken bones, groans,
and cannon balls, that they give a man over the moment he marches from their
embraces to front the enemies of their country: however, let us not blame the
softness that was designed to soothe us, to soften us, to polish our
ruggedness, and harmonize our natures. The drift of my letter is evident to
you, Sophia must know it: the summer is advancing: many of our troops are
midway betwixt the contending countries: some of them are arrived at the
theater of the war. I have but a few days to spare. Dalliances must in no wise
be indulged: they are too effeminating: I dare not trust myself with them. My
absence is propitious to the disclosure. You are not unskilled in argument: you
want not the advantages of persuasive eloquence: to you, therefore, I trust the
tranquillity of a wife's bosom. Inspire her, if possible, my worthy Mr.
Thornton with the duty she owes to my character, which longer idleness would
utterly obliviate. Awake in her those sparks which I hope even a female nature
sometimes experiences; the sparks of patriotism. But if you find this
impracticable, at least obtain her consent to my departure, and support her
sinking spirits with the hopes of my return, and with the expectation of the
honors, rewards, and various distinctions which will then attend me. These are
the points I leave to my good Thornton, and I am his

Most faithful servant, Caesar Vernon.

LETTER LXXV. Lieutenant Vernon to Mrs. Vernon.
Dear Sophy,
I FIND business will engage me from pleasure (that is, from your society)
longer than I at first believed: but you are I know, too well established in
the moral duties, to repine at what is necessary to be done, even though your
acquiescence is to be attended with some inconveniences. Nay, I am not sure,
whether, if at any time my country should require me in the way of my
profession, you are not heroine enough to lend those arms to your King, which,
were they in such an exigence reluctant, would be wholly unworthy to incircle
yours. I shall never forget the glorious week we passed together soon after our
union, when we made a purchase of Mr. Pope's version of Homer, and employed our
long delightful evenings in reading him through. Do you recollect with what
earnestness we attended every hero in his progress? How we joined in the
resentment of Achilles, detested the injustice of Agamemnon, and pleaded the
cause of the good old father of the fair Chrissis? Pray call to mind, with how
much ardour we followed Hector to the field; how he despised the pusillanimous,
hare-hearted Paris; and though we pitied the drooping Andromache, though we
wept over her woes, yet we should have felt for her still more, had she not
endeavored to detain the warrior from his duty. Nor can you help recollecting
with how much pleasure, a pleasure that was radiant in your dear eyes, Sophia,
you heard of the various victories achieved and related by the narrative
Nestor: of his triumphant returns to his native country after the laurels of
conquest were waving in his helmet, while the patriotic virgins were scattering
in his path the incense of the Spring, and the emulous youths bowed to the
victor, and sang the song of success before him. Before we had reached the
twelfth book, you was half a hero, and with the shield and buckler of Minerva
(her wisdom is already in your possession) you would now be sit to take the
field, arrange the file, and inspirit at once, by your courage and beauty, the
soldiers of your own Caesar. Do you know, Sophia, that I am child enough to be
vain of the name that was given me by my godfathers and godmothers. There is
conquest in the sound, and I have a soul that pants, I must confess, to be
ranked amongst the Roman Caesar's. But ah! Sophia, I am only a disbanded,
unemployed Lieutenant, and the little glory I gained in the field in the days
of my youth, is now entirely faded: and, without one mark of the sword, without
one apologizing scar, by which might be seen the necessity of retreat, I am
withering in the eye of my King and country, and shall, after a few years, fall
into an inglorious grave, and be no more remembered.

At a villa in Sussex, through which I passed, and where I stopped to dine, I
was told of a mansion, which strangers usually went to survey, the property of
a veteran officer, whom I fought with, side by side, in the first battle that
fleshed my arm: I have a thousand times mentioned him to you, under the well
known name of Fraser. The old man has left two of his limbs in different parts
of the globe; France has the honor of his arm, and his right leg adorns the
plains of Minden: but the trunk is whole, and seems to have acquired fresh
vigor from lopping the branches. Hardihood has settled the rose of high
health in his cheek; the sun has seasoned his complexion to the heat of the
Torrid Zone; and the hair of his head is like the whiteness of a hermit's
beard, that spreads itself beyond the girdle. He knew me at the first sight,
and pressed my hand with an honest roughness that denoted sincerity: but on
seeing me still able, and in the force of youth, at least of middle age, he
contracted his brow, and seemed to ask me, by his look, what I did basking here
at home? In the enthusiasm of his martial veneration, which rises to every
thing but idolatry, he has at his own expense, erected in his garden little
monumental ornaments to the memory of his favorite heroes. Britannia was on
one side, weeping over Wolf; and on the other, the figure of Public
Tranquillity offering the olive branch to Cumberland. Not a warrior of any
celebrity, but had at least a bust, a pedestal, or an inscription. And upon my
taking notice of a vacant nich in the center of the garden, the Major struck it
with his cane, and exclaimed, "In the name of honor, Vernon, why will thou not
give an old friend an opportunity to fill this gap of glory with another of the
Caesar's?" I felt at this instant, Sophy, a flush in my cheeks, and, as we
returned together into his house (which is in the taste of fortifications) to
drink his Majesty's health, I perceived the tear of repressed ambition
descending, and my old friend pronounced it a drop of promise.

I am, my dear Sophy, Your own, Caesar Vernon.

Mr. Thornton, in Continuation.
I WILL now suppose, Sedley, that thou have read these letters. Are they not
indications of a mind busied in schemes superior to thine? While Mr. Vernon is
anxious to serve his country, thou art exerting thyself to disgrace it: while
he is desirous to obtain the consent of a beloved and beautiful wife, to suffer
his absence, in consideration of his glory, thou art Chesterfielding it, how
thou may dishonor beauty, without admitting the very ideas of love. What
measures are taken, in consequence of these epistles, thou shall know in my
next. In the interim, may Caesar's example fire thy imitation; and, if thou will copy, may thou copy so worthy an original, at least in the nobleness of
his sentiments.

Farewell.
LETTER LXXVI. Sedley to Thornton. (Before the Receipt of the above.)
I FIND it impossible to conquer the habits of loving, and communicating to
thee my sentiments. There is a philtre in an old friendship that cannot easily
be destroyed. Pardon my rash sayings, therefore. Preach till thou art weary,
and only allow me the liberty of reposing with thee all my enterprises.

What course I am to take in the present crisis, Heaven only can tell. Such an
accident has happened as totally confounds me. In conformity to my promise, I
dispatched Harriet to the languishing pedant; but she had scarce got, as I
understand, five miles on her way, when the cursed postillion, willing to show
his dexterity, (according to their villainous custom) by driving like a devil
through the village, at a short turn, or rather angle in the road, overturned
the chaise, fell himself from the saddle, and set the horses a-going, while the
poor Harriet was dragged along the earth, with her body half out of the
chaise-window, till a countryman caught the off-horse by the bridle, and put a
stop to the career. She was carried into a little dirty-looking inn, almost
speechless; and, as she informs me, with an arm torn by the glass, which was
unfortunately drawn up, scribbled an almost unintelligible line to request I
would hasten to see her before she died. The post-boy brought me the note, and,
trembling like a leaf, and white as a shirt, protesting most fervently that he
could not help the accident. I knew not what to do: I hesitated, dreaded the
consequence; wrote a hurried line to poor Horace, without feeling either pen or
paper; called for a taper, without thinking that I wanted wax; sent it to the
post by the boy; and then ordered my horses. The cursed landlord, who is ever
alarmed at the sound of a hoof, in the expectation of fresh prey, now detected
my disorder, and set every wheel at work to find out the cause: "He was sorely
sorry to see me uneasy; would do any thing in his power; hoped nothing material
was the matter. Could he do any thing? he was concerned to see me in such
confusion; would do a great deal to serve so worthy a gentleman, mayhap I was
taken ill; mayhap my friends was taken sick in London; my wife, my aunt, my
uncle. Some lawsuit, may be, had gone wrong, or sommut or other was most
fartinly the matter." My servant came with my horses to the door, and the
persecutor began again: "Good lack, good lack, what can be the 'casion of this!
Was I going away? Was I obliged to leave Buxton? Martha, where is the
gentleman's little account? How sorry he was again!"

In short, Thornton, I was obliged to escape him and my rising rage, by rushing
into a little slip of ground behind his house, where, under pretense of picking
a few pinks that straggled, poverty-struck, about the beds, I cast about what
was to be done. In this manner I argued with myself: If I go to Harriet, the
affair will certainly be suspected: for how came I so interested in this lady's
misfortune! If I do not go, it will be barbarous; but then I have sent to her
husband, and home is the best and fittest place for a sick woman. Upon the
whole, I thought it not proper or political to go; and, as to writing, I dare
not give way to my sentiments, for a discovered letter is irrecoverable
perdition. Upon my return into the house, I found the rascally landlord
tampering for intelligence with the postboy, who had come upon the saddle-horse
with the tangled traces still about his back: I had well nigh broke out again.
Thomas, who stays with me, although married, till I can suit myself, looked as
if he suspected the matter. The landlord muttered forth a million pities, and
talked of our being all mortal, and liable to accidents; the postboy said his
horses were cut, as I saw, all to pieces, and his chaise shattered in the
pannels.

I could Stanhope it no longer: Curse your horses, chaise and pannels, all
together, said I: get out of my sight, and leave me to myself: a lady is dying,
and you are prating about your damned pannels. Tom, take away the horses. You
postboy, stop till I write a note to the lady, to let her know that I have
written to her husband.

I would have gone in to write.

The landlord again struck up: "Had not the lady better come back to my house,
Sir? The journey to Mr. Homespun's will be too far in her present condition."
Pray, Mr. Wyngood, said I, suffer me to do as I please. The man was piqued at
the slight, See CHESTERFIELD.
and I verily believe will never forgive me. However, I wrote a note to Harriet
to the following purport, and ordered the postboy to carry it as fast as
possible.

To Mrs. Homespun.
Madam,
I AM unfeignedly sorry at your misfortune: the moment I became acquainted with
it, I sent to Mr. Homespun, who will be with you, no doubt, the moment he is
able to ride there. I hope most sincerely no ill effects will ensue from this
distressing accident; and I have some little consolation in understanding, by
the messenger, that an apothecary resides in the village where it happened, and
that the art of a surgeon is not necessary. With the warmest wishes for your
speedy recovery, I am,

Madam, your most humble servant, Philip Sedley.

I had two reasons, Thornton, for showing this, prior to my sending it, to the
landlord: in the first place, I wanted to regain his friendship, that is, you
know, according to my system his good word, by an act of confidence; and, in
the next, as this was, upon the whole, a mysterious affair, and I could not
tell the issue of it, such a letter (written, as thou perceivest it is, even in
the midst of hurry, with a pen of policy,) might do me good, should the matter
be hereafter canvassed at the bath; WYNGOOD being, as I before told thee, the
greatest gossip of the country.

By this time, I conjecture, my messenger has delivered the note. Unluckily I
have to sup this evening at the Delmores, Sir Henry being never happy without
me. Very, very unfit am I, at present, to figure or sustain myself in company;
for, not to disguise matters with you, I am not insensible to this misfortune
of poor Harriet, nor could I see the injury done to her bewitching form without
sigh. But, however, I am equal to all events, and must carry on with vigor
what I have begun with spirit: otherwise, I should retreat with disgrace, and
for aught I can tell, take refuge from the horrors of despair by the aid of a
trigger. Pray, my dear Thornton, against these horrible resources.

I am, Yours, Philip Sedley.

LETTER LXXVII. Sedley to Thornton.
IF thou were surprised at the contents of my last, prepare, ere thou perusest
the present, for fresh wonder. I was just set down to the card-table at the
Delmores, to pass the interval betwixt the tea and the supper, when Thomas,
upon the full gallop, and with tokens of terror in his countenance, delivered
me the enclosed billet, which, had it been delivered in the presence of the
company, would have betrayed me for ever to the eyes of this piercing family:
but luckily the footman came to say that my servant waited my orders. Pray read
the billet, before thou go any farther.

The enclosed Billet. To Mr. Sedley.
Most inhuman Sedley.
I HAVE ordered myself, on the receipt of your letter, to be taken out of my
bed, and brought hither, in defiance of the Doctor, and at the risk of my life,
chiefly, indeed, because I would see, before the last event, and once more kiss
the hand of the still dear, but most barbarous Philip Sedley. I write in agony,
but am still

Your Harriet Homespun.

It was with a difficulty equal to the struggles betwixt life and death, that I
supported myself from sinking under this intelligence: I had, however,
sufficient presence of mind to return to the company, and make excuses with
some degree of coherence; after which I mounted the reeking horse, and ordering
Tom to follow me, went upon the full stretch to my lodgings. At my entrance
into the parlour I found Harriet in a strong hysteric: and upon her recovery,
we had her put into a warm bed. She is pefectly mangled, Thornton: her fine
face is gashed with wounds; and the landlady tells me, that other parts of her
person have sustained their share of bruises. To mend the matter, I have
received a long epistle from Fanny Mortimer, which was delivered with as much
peculiarity as thou will find in the sentiments. After dinner, the whole family
rambled into the garden, and as I was passing near Mrs. Mortimer, along the
shade of a small shrubbery, that affected to serpentine, she, with her own
hand, bade me look at that paper: I folded it in my bosom, and bowed; and, just
as she desired, no one perceived it. I have not attempted to answer it, nor can
I show myself decently till I have the reply in my pocket. This cursed affair
of Harriet unfits me for adventure: however, I send you the letter, and must
think what is to be done. Harriet is, I find by the landlady, in a doze. I
rather think agony closes the eye, and that she is unable to speak: The Doctor
is preparing his plasters, and a physician who attends the bath is sent for.
What measure can I possibly take with respect to Horace? and I am not without
fears for myself. 'Sdeath, Thornton, is there never a case in point? I must
consult my AUTHOR. Adieu!

LETTER LXXVIII. Mrs. Mortimer to Mr. Sedley.
Sir,
AN address from me, under my peculiar situation, will no doubt alarm you: but
forms and ceremonies must all yield to irresistible exigencies. I find it
necessary to the peace of my mind to write to you. The accident, Sir, that
brought us together at Scarborough, when your visits to me were very frequent,
and, as a single woman, I confess not disagreeable, is recollected with some
anxiety. You were then at some pains to convince me I had made an impression on
your sensibility, and certain sentiments were interchanged, which it would be,
at this period, highly improper to repeat. It may not be amiss, however, to
observe that, prior to your quitting Scarborough, you did not omit exerting
your utmost talents (and they are not inconsiderable Mr. Sedley) to engage my
heart. How far you succeeded, it is not now material to enquire. Be that as it
may, my health has been gradually upon the decline from that hour to this. It
is now some months since I gave my hand to Mr. Mortimer, than whom their never
lived a better character, or a tenderer husband. He was educated under the eye
of my father, who seemed so wrapped up in the ideas of making him still nearer to
his family, that as he thought proper to address me, I could not deny to duty,
what possibly I should have refused to every thing else. In a word, Sir, my
worthy father's heart was in the match, and it is impossible for a child to
disappoint the wishes of such a parent. The softness, delicacy, and gentleness
of Mr. Mortimer's behavior has ever been uniform and exact: and although it
has pleased Heaven to continue my indisposition, and indeed rather to increase
than abate it, yet he has not suffered my languor to relax his animated
assiduities, but has acted, both by day and by night, the double part of nurse
and husband. Peculiarly unlucky do I account the destiny by which you and I,
Sir, meet again: not that I have the least traces of affection for your person,
being really attached to Mr. Mortimer by duty, and upon principle. At the same
time, Sir, I cannot but own your presence gives me uneasiness, and uneasiness
of any kind I am not now equal to. You have, I see, recommended yourself to my
father more warmly than ever; my sister thinks very highly of you: Mr. Mortimer
is loud in your praises; and even my mother, who is not easily attracted,
speaks of you with ardour. As my situation is sufficiently sacred to exclude
every possible hope, nay, as I dare presume your own connections have, by this
time, led your inclinations into a more proper channel, I will venture to talk
to you with the freedom of a friend. To speak plainly, then, Mr. Sedley, there
is a point in which you may still oblige me, it is this: that you would enter
as seldom into this house as is consistent with a resolution, which I earnestly
beg you will take, of withdrawing yourself from this family. Do it leisurely:
but at all events, let it be done. Ah! Mr. Sedley, pity the perturbation of an
uneasy mind. Before you came, I could at least conceal agitation, and submit to
the silent depredations of my distemper. Every tear I then shed, every sigh
that then stole from me, was attributed to the unavoidable risings and sinkings
of a comsumptive habit. But within these few days I have had some conflicts,
and every one of them adds to my weakness, to hide -- a something that preys
upon my heart. To account to you for this is needless. If you have the least
suggestion that it is occasioned by your appearance, let it interest your
humanity, your honor, your compassion, in my cause; and do not, Mr. Sedley,
render more exquisitely wretched the last hours of a fate at the best
unenviable, and not sustained without a sorrow that is hastening its object to
the tomb. Go then, I conjure you. Leave me to the protection of a generous
family, of a dear sister, of a fond husband. It is not, I feel it is not
possible, that I should long live amongst them. Let me not show Mr. Mortimer
that I gave myself to him as to the friend and darling youth of my father. Let
not -- Alas! Mr. Sedley, what have I said! Pardon me, pity me, oblige me, leave
me. As your stay at the bath cannot be of consequence: as the floridness of
your complexion, the luster of your eyes, the ease of your air, all assure me,
your pursuit is mere amusement; I entreat you to change your route, fix it at
Scarborough, Bath, Margate, any where, so as you will but leave this place. I
look at you with anguish, I know your rap at the door, I distinguish your step,
and, though I feel the impropriety, the crime, the shame, of being disturbed, I
cannot bear it. Contrive, therefore, and that instantly, to begin your task of
dissolving the connection here. Permit me to enjoy the little serenity that a
wasting sickness admits. The poor pittance of ease, which that allows, do not
you destroy. As I saw the intimacy betwixt you and my family daily increasing,
nay, as you have been almost constantly at this house for the last week, I
could contrive no other way of addressing you, but by writing an honest
explicit letter, which I have now done, with many interruptions both from pain,
fatigue, and the fear of being seen, but chance has favored me, and I have
unbosomed the secret of my soul undiscovered. Think not, however, that I mean
to enter into a correspondence. Take a week to withdraw with the elegance
becoming your character: during which time I will, as hitherto, endeavor to
support myself as an acquaintance, although it is sufficiently shocking that I
should be reduced, even to a moment's disguise. If you are not disengaged from
us by that period, I have no other refuge than a constant retreat to my sick
chamber, whenever you visit us: and, if this should, in the end, occasion
suspicion, and the cruel, unconquerable prepossession I entertain be ever
discovered, you will remember that, to your injustice must be imputed the
consequences, even though the best of parents should be made miserable, the
worthiest sister partake their anxiety, and the kindest of husbands fall a
victim to the apparent ingratitude of

Frances Mortimer.

LETTER LXXIX. Thornton to Sedley.
GOD of Heaven. Sedley! what a wretch of adamant art thou! The disaster of the
poor Harriet, and the pleadings of the pathetic Fanny, have almost exhausted
the source of my tears. Consult thy Author, indeed! Consult thy heart, consult
thy conscience. If thou have the least touch of Nature in thee; of Nature yet
undebauched by the treacherous Dormer; consult that, listen to it, admit it is
oratory, obey it. What shall thou do? Art thou at a loss what to do? Do what is
right. Quit this instant any farther invasions of Fanny's quiet; search the
wide earth for medicine and medicinal people for the hapless Harriet; comfort
the sad soul of the agonized Horace; watch the dawn of his wife's recovery;
throw Chesterfield and all his works into the fire; execrate the name of
Eugenia, and return, return upon the spur of speed, to London and thy Thornton.
But as I shall probably touch thee more by example than precept, take the
continuation of my transactions in the worthy Lieutenant's family, and consider
well a scene which may be held up in blessed contrast to thine.

Scarce had Sophia read her husband's letter, but she wrote an answer, of which
I present you a faithful copy.

To Lieutenant Vernon.
My dear, ambitious Caesar,
THOUGH I am no friend to the devastations of war, I am warmly so to the
dignity of my husband's character; nor can I bear to see his laurels withered,
by the childish and emasculating fears of a wife. Yes, my dear Caesar, you are,
I feel that you are, only a disbanded Lieutenant. I am not insensible to the
reproach in that observation. But why, cruel Vernon why is our little fortune
locked up so, as to deny us the pleasure of making a purchase so infinitely to
our credit. May Heaven long keep you from the perils of battle! but you are
mistaken, if you think there are not some women who can be tender, without
being weak. Our sex is disgraced by the general affectation of it. We are
flattered into the notion that we are prettiest in our delicate pretenses, and
most lovely in distress. But our minds are not all formed or cultured alike;
and for my part, I had not married a soldier, if I had not designed that he
should sustain the duties of his station: and you will recollect, that Capt.
Blessington, my father, in point of martial prowess, yields not the palm even
to yours. Mr. Thornton and I, both wish your business may soon permit your
return to the pleasures of Surry; and we both also concur to venerate the name
of Frazer: but whatever honors may be in store for my Caesar, may the nich of
the Major be many, many years unoccupied, if it is kept sacred to the memory of
my ever dear Lieutenant Vernon. Thus prays zealously

His affectionate wife, Sophia Vernon.

There, Sedley, there is a woman! the intrepidity of a man, blended with all the
virtues and elegancies of her sex, and yet may I perish if I ever again attempt
her destruction! On the contrary, I derive joy, real joy, from hearing her sing
forth the praises of Caesar: I join in the panegyric. I improve by her superior
capacity, and though all the graces are in her train, and she seems formed to
every purpose of extacy; has black eyes, and inviting shape, an air of
breeding, and features perfectly symmetrical yet I can now be contented to
admire her beauty, and hear the sallies of her wit, without a single endeavor
to make her pay for pleasing me, at the expense of her chastity.

Adieu, P. S. Act like a man and God prosper thee!



LETTER LXXX. Sedley to Thornton.
HORROR upon horrors, Thornton! Horace is come! He arrived at midnight. My
letter found him in bed. He hurried on his clothes, took his pad from the
stable, and has traveled thirty miles through the rain to see his Harriet. I
was up and musing in my chamber, as he came, I unbarred the door, he hugged me,
thanked me, kissed me, kneeled down to me, and with an air and look of
distraction, desired to be directed to his wife. I showed him her chamber, and
let the consequence be what it will, I must stand it out.

As to Fanny Mortimer, not the whole congregated world should save her from my
embraces. Oh, earth and Heaven! Thornton, she is the most attracting form that
ever died a death of gentleness. Then she is such a contrast to the full-formed
Harriet, so slim, so soft of spirit, and eye so borne down by modesty to the
earth, her eye-lashes so silken, so curved, the bow of the Heaven's cannot
match the archings of her brow, her hair is so glossy, so abundant, such a
luxury in it is various folds, her very languors are delicious, and as she put
the letter into my hand, her palm struck mine upon the tremble; the murmur of
love was in the sigh that then broke from her bosom, and the teeth through
which it passed were purer than snow.

Away then with melancholy ideas! I pity Harriet: but I must, I will possess
Fanny Mortimer, though I were to die in the effort.

Adieu, Philip Sedley.

LETTER LXXXI. The Reverend Horace Homespun to Mrs. La Motte.
My dear Madam,
OUR poor Harriet is sorely hurt, but she received me kindly: the tear that she
let fall upon my hand, I have suffered to dry, without wiping it away. The
physician is to be here tomorrow, and then you shall know more. Harriet asked
me several times, if I was well; I told her, I was; and yet, Heaven knows, I am
in a fever at this moment, for I have not been able to close my eyes, and I was
wetted through the shirt in my journey. My wife seems to have chiefly suffered
in the face and arms. I therefore hope the less danger.

Adieu, I am your real friend, Horace Homespun.

LETTER LXXXII. Miss Delia Delmore, to Lady Lucy Saxby.
EVERY moment in the day affords some fresh and beautiful instance of my noble
father's wisdom and affection. About an hour after tea this evening, while Sir
Henry was enjoying his serene summer-walk, as he calls it, William brought a
pencilled card, and delivered it to me. It was to advise with him (Sir Henry)
about some concerns essential to the general welfare. Even my little brother
and sister, Charles and Caroline, (who are down with us) were mentioned in this
invitation: the card requested the company of all the family, adding, that as
the evening was delightful, his mind composed, and nobody but ourselves, at
present, in the house, he much desired that we might all have our share in the
general serenity. How prettily, my dear Lucy, how persuasively, this exalted
parent proposes, as a pleasure, what his authority might command as a duty! But
it is among the number of his excellent maxims, that none but froward spirits
do well with compulsion, and that a frank and ingenuous tenderness has in it
equal weight and satisfaction.

The conversation passed in the garden, under the shade of hawthorns, laurels,
and filberts: there is a white bench under it; and a sort of natural arching,
bower-fashion, made by the mixture of thick leaves and branches interwoven
above. Hither we came in obedience to the summons: a group of relations, loving
and beloved. Fanny who had been amusing herself with the pen, (not having had
strength for the pleasures of writing for some time) came forward, delicate as
angel meekness, with her younger brother in one hand, and her little sister in
the other. Venus, with two of her attendant Graces, could not be more lovely,
even though the distress of ill health threw somewhat of languor into her air:
but then it was a languor so soft, and a distress so gentle, that it only
served the more to feminine, (if you will allow the word), and to recommend her
to the spectator, as a more pathetic, interesting figure.

Sir Henry was at first sitting somewhat pensively, with an opened letter in
his hand, my mother by his side, leaning her arm on one of the corners of the
bench, and reposing her cheek within her hand, the true posture of meditation.
They both rose at our approach. Mr. Mortimer and I went up first; then Fanny,
and her twin-cherubs: we were a little alarmed, but this was soon dissipated by
Sir Henry, who seating us all on the bench, drew a green garden-chair from an
adjoining shade, placing himself opposite to us, and, with a smile of ineffable
benignity, in which the parent and the friend shone beautifully blended, he
paid each of us a varied compliment, on our obedience to his wishes, and
addressed us to this effect:

"I have requested your company, my dear and worthy children, to engage your
filial attention on several of the most important events of human life: I have,
indeed, for some time, had a design to summon you together on this subject, but
care, company, and amusement, have thrown their attractions or interruptions
hitherto in the way of my wishes. I have, however, fixed upon this evening of
leisure to deliver to you the secrets of my heart, and in mine are included
those of the best of wives, and tenderest of mothers."

Lady Delmore drew her spread fingers across her face, and Sir Henry repeating
his panegyric, went on:

"I am happy, my dear relatives, to tell you, in the first place, and let that
serve as an encouragement to you, that I can look back upon a life of more than
threescore years, with a tranquillity of retrospect, at the same time sincere,
christian, and philosophic. The serenity of my soul is in no degree wounded by
the criticism with which I review it is conduct through the perilous voyage of my
life, in which, by the care of Heaven, I have escaped those quicksands that
endanger our youth, and those rocks which alarm us in age. But that which I
account far the richest indulgence of Providence, is that dear prospect which I
now behold in the persons of this beauteous circle, a circle filled with the
pledges of this generous creature's invariable fidelity, and the testimonies of
my constant attachment to excellences so distinguished."

My mother rose, Lucy gave her hand to Sir Henry, looked at him a moment,
looked at him blooming even in age, sighed softly, and returned to her seat.

Sir Henry proceeded:

"The season of infancy is past with most of you; and it is pleasures are
succeeded by reflections of a higher nature. Even this sweet pair (here he
pointed to my young brother and sister) are at the age of distinguishing, and
the test are mature. The blossoms of youth promise a generous fruitage. You,
Delia, have not yet been rewarded by the tenderness of such a man as my
Mortimer: yet the color of your life will depend on the exchange of your name.
Your mother's expectations, like mine, are sanguine, and extensive: our eyes
are turned on your every action. We hope to see you all the supports of our
declining age: our sun is about to set, and we wish it is departure may be
gilded by your virtues and indulgencies.

"The father of a family is at once a sublime and venerable character. My full
heart dilates as I see myself encompassed by these charming portraits of
ourselves."

Here Lady Delmore melted into tears of transport, but endeavored to conceal
them.

"I can form to myself (continued my father) no ideas beyond it, nor many
equal. Our family is at present the seat of integrity, unanimity, and mutual
confidence. Our pleasures are reflected upon each other, and we reciprocally
give and receive inimitable complacence. Yet we must be alarmed for those we
love. Though the tenor of your conduct, and the gratitude of your tempers, make
us less fearful of deviation, and though the maxims we have ever been
industrious to inculcate make us more secure and inapprehensive, yet certain
tremors will inevitably touch the bosom of a parent: be not displeased
therefore, my children, if I give you a few general precepts, for your
establishment and adoption. They come sanctified to you with the venerable
imprimatur of more than fifty years experience. The maxims which are necessary
to regulate an ingenuous mind are neither multiplied nor intricate. The very
cornerstone of a great character is a clear conscience: if you feel well, you
will act well: and if you do not, all the talents in the world will only serve
to torment you. Never wear a mask before your motives, but when it is
absolutely necessary to the felicity of life, such as deceiving, or rather
bewitching, the unprincipled into virtue* some tempers cannot bear the plain
truth; she is too awful for them: be it then, in such particular cases, your
parts, to lead them to her sacred temple by the most pleasing paths. Alleviate
the apparent ruggedness, and length of the way, by such meanders as, though
they seem to deviate, may assuredly bring you, by the fairest prospects, to the
shrine of the Goddess. I have no objection to your adorning yourselves with all
the attraction of exterior, such I mean as are reflected upon the character
from dignity of manner, persuasion of voice, splendour of address, and elegance
of air:

"Where virtue is, these are most virtuous."
They will act like magic, and make the innocence both of your sentiment and
example, perfectly irresistible; and I beseech you to exert them in the cause
of that truth and sobriety of heart I have recommended. Make use of them to
conciliate differences, to inspirit society, to embellish conversation, to
soften the harshness of dispute, to animate attention; to please, to instruct,
to entertain. To all these purposes they will be excellent and ornamental. But
beware of what a licentious and artful indulgence of them may possibly lead to;
beware of Duplicity; of that duplicity, which, so accoutered, it is destructive
sword sheathed in politeness, it is heart shielded by the impenetrable mail of
gilded hypocrisy, is equal to the siege of a city, and might do more real
mischief than all the efforts of a legion of avowed villainies. Of all earthly
things, therefore, most detest, what is most to be dreaded, the system of a
well-bred, high-polished, elegant deceiver: no eye can see him; no
understanding detect him; no policy escape him. He comes in the form of a
Seraph, and those who are themselves honest, cannot imagine that he is a Siren.

"At your time of life it is hard, extremely hard, to master the predominant
inclination: yet virtuous exercise will habituate the soul to the practice of
uniform honor. To you, Delia, I am now going to speak more particularly. There
is a passion, which, rightly directed, is the source of every noble and genuine
greatness. Fanny and Mr. Mortimer, I trust, are not insensible to it. May it
affect you, Delia, in the manner it has affected your mother. This excellent
woman, whose regard for me was founded on principles that sustain the first of
connections in it is due elevation, and adorn the heart, by the dictate of
which, the hand is presented, with all that can give either spirit, elegance,
or real transport, to conjugal engagements.

"Unadulterated as yet by the smallest commerce with dexterous dissimulation,
pardon my alarms, lest your innocence and simplicity should be the means of
your misfortune. -- That Dissimulation, which under the fair disguise of
attracting elegance, led forward by the Graces, cannot be detected, even at
noonday, is for ever on the watch; and I know nothing so dangerous as yielding
too easily to the tenderness of a newborn passion. Do not, however, mistake
me: my system is not rigid; it is not inconsistent with the natural feelings of
a delicate disposition. I have given Fanny to one, in whose education and
culture, I myself had a share; and that my show you, Delia, that I am no foe to
the feelings of love."

Here a sigh heaved gently the bosom of Fanny. I dare presume it was the sigh
of love, Lady Lucy.

"I wish, continued Sir Henry, to see each of my children, a wife, a husband,
or a parent, and at the head of an infant society. I wish Delia to have the man
of her heart. Perhaps she has lately seen that man. Perhaps the accomplished
Mr. Sedley."

In this place Fanny began to complain she sat too long, and I was glad of the
interruption, for you cannot imagine how my cheek began to crimson: certainly
you was taking of me, or, or, or, What was it, Lucy?

Sir Henry went on:

"I will not, Delia, distress you. I see nothing at present objectible. I will
not enquire into this matter, till you judge it for your happiness to consult
me; and till then particular enquiries would be premature, perhaps improper.
Only, be circumspect: look well at the ground, before you build on it the
foundation of your happiness or misery. To adopt the language of Shakespeare,
"Wear your eye thus," neither vacant nor suspicious. In any case of emergency,
while we live, (though that cannot in common course of terrestrial decays be
now long) honor me, or your mother, with your confidence: and when we are no
more, I beg all of you will trust to the affection of this worthy young man,
our dear Mortimer, who, having seen more of life, and the transactions of men,
is the better able to promote happiness and avert misery. With these
sentiments, I trust you to your understandings, virtues, and tempers: with
these precepts, which I have a particular reason now to urge, I trust you to
discretion, economy, and fair dealing. If I have been tedious, confider I am
an old man: If I have dealt in repetitions, or if I have digressed, confider I
am a father: Go, then, my children, cherish each other; avoid the path of
Deceit, walk steadily in the road of Truth, even though the roses may not
always be in bloom: satisfy the feelings of your own conscience; be merciful,
be moderate and be happy."

As he ended, my dear Lady Lucy, he rose, while the big paternal tear was in
his eye, embraced us round, and taking my mother by the hand, walked with her,
arm in arm, into the house.

Oh! my friend, had ever children such parents! My heart is at this time so
full of gratitude, wonder, and the daughter, that I can only add the esteemed
name of

Your happy, and highly-honoured Delia Delmore.

LETTER LXXXIII. Thornton to Sedley. (Before the Receipt of Sedley's last.)
AS thou have not taken notice of any parts of my letters relating to the
family of Mr. Vernon, I am in hopes thou art not quite unmoved by the generous
virtues that are reciprocated between the worthiest pair I ever knew, and who
have made me quite in love with matrimony. Yes, Sedley, do not start; I say,
sober matrimony; and could I get a certain young lady in the mind, who is now a
visitant to Mrs. Vernon, and just arrived, I believe I should enter into the
holy estate without hesitation, for I begin to believe, whatever thy Preceptor
may say, that wedded love is, after all, the most elevated of human
connections; nay, I have had several reasons, since my residence here, to adopt
the language of the poet, and pronounce that state the most delightful wherein

"Thought meets thought, ere from the lips it part,
"And each warm wish springs mutual from the heart."
Never were souls more exactly in unison than those of the Vernons. I present,
for your emulation, another instance of it. Upon my unfolding the Lieutenant's
design to his lady, she dispatched a letter into Suffix, which produced the
following reply:

Lieutenant Vernon to his Lady.
Most dear Sophia,
THAT you was superior to the feebleness of the modish female, who affects to
lisp, to shudder at the shower, and tremble at the breeze, I knew before: but
that your soul was so nicely attuned to the pains and pleasures of mine, I was
not so aware of, till the receipt of your last kind favor.

You will spare me to your King, you will lend him my services against the foes
of Britain: noble woman, generous wife! I am again at Major Fraser's, in my way
home, and upon my arrival at our peaceful villa, I will pay you my warmest
acknowledgments by my embraces. I put your letter, with a sparkling eye, into
the hand of my old friend: he read it, and burst forth into extacies, peculiar
to the manly violence of his nature. "'Sdeath, Vernon, said he, ten such wives
as thine would restore the female character from the ignominy of the rest of
the sex. Such were the Spartan, such were the Roman women: I do not wish our
wives to fight, Lieutenant: I do not wish them to wield the battle-axe, nor to
eject the bomb, but in the name of honor, let them suffer their husbands to
behave like men, and permit those who wear beards to deserve them. I love
softness, Vernon, and consider it as the female characteristic, but still I
would have some distinction made betwixt women and children, exclusive of the
mere difference of bodily size: and I do declare to thee, Lieutenant, though I
have seen many women that I could have liked, that I could love, yet I never
dared venture upon matrimony; lest my wife should stand betwixt me and my duty
as a soldier; but could I, like thee, have met with a Sophia, I had long since
taken to myself a brave spirited wench, who should have spread the triumphal
roses under my feet, and wove her garland of welcome against my return: But you
are the happy hero: you are more than a general in the affections of Sophia. Go
on then, embark, exert yourself, to merit so illustrious a girl: fail not, I
charge you, to visit me with Sophy under your arm, on your coming again to the
country you have honored." I was preparing to give him the farewell embrace;
but he held me by the hand, and surveying his figure in a glass that was
opposite. shook his head, and burst into tears. "Thou see, said he, still
looking into the mirror, I do not counterfeit; my best arm, and my most
serviceable leg, have left me: my soul wishes for the field; but my body, this
useless load of an old fellow, of whom the one half is timber, would but shame
the troops and disgrace his Majesty." Then turning to the other end of the
room, he took from the mantle-piece a sword, cautiously guarded from the rust
by a scarlet case; "There, (continued the Major, after he had taken it from the
covering) there, Vernon, is the blade that attended me in all my fortunes, for
more than thirty years: examine it, take notice of the marks of prowess: it is
no maiden, I Will assure thee:

"A better never did a belt sustain
"Upon a soldier's thigh."
Take it, Lieutenant. The hand which used to manage it, is gone, and with it
the occupation of poor Fraser: it is a shame that so excellent a friend should
be converted into a piece of lazy houshold-furniture. Take it then, I say, and
when thou art in the front of the battle, remember whose token thou have in
hand, and do it justice."

There are other traits, my dear Sophia, of this brave invalid's character,
which I shall reserve for the opportunity of domestic endearment. As to your
saying that you see less beauty, and smell less fragrance, in the flowers of
our garden, since my absence; and then artfully urging that as a reason why you
should accompany me to America, makes me pleased with the compliment, though I
am not convinced by the argument. The Colonies are now in too much confusion,
to afford a lady accommodation; and your residence would be with me, always
precarious, and, for the most part, unfit for you. The scene of bloodshed would
be too near your eye; and the attention I should pay to you, would make me less
attentive to my own professional advantages. Satisfy yourself, therefore, with
the friendship of the good Mr. Thornton, with the exactest correspondence, and
with the unalterable love of

Your tender Caesar Vernon.
P. S.
I am glad you are at last joined by Miss Sidney. Tell her I salute her.



Thornton, in Continuation.
THERE, Sedley, is, thou see, fresh reason to animate thy amendments. But the
postman brings me a packet: I perceive it is superscribed by thy character, and
impressed by thy seal. Happily I shall find, by the contents, that thy reformation
is begun. In this hope, I break thy wax, and bid thee farewell.



LETTER LXXXIV. Sedley to Thornton.
THORNTON, give me joy! My insinuations have extorted from Fanny "her slow
leave," and as soon as I can contrive an interview with her, I am to have it.
Hear, by what a display of my art, I won her consent to see me alone. In reply
to her epistle (that which I sent thee) I wrote, though I like not trusting
myself to the mercy of ink and paper, another, in which I exerted and exhausted
all the delicacy of dissembled passion. I struck the string most likely to work
upon a woman in her situation; and, as a proof of my address and eloquence, I
tell thee again, that I prevailed. For once she will see me. Read her card.

Mrs. Mortimer to Mr. Sedley.
FOR once, as you urge it with such vehemence, and as you promise to quit
Buxton immediately afterward, I will see you. When you see an opportunity,
either in the garden or elsewhere, you may employ it in communicating what you
tell me is of so much consequence to my fame and felicity.

F. M.

Now then, Thornton, must I call to my aid Dormer's "unobserved observation,"
and banish all but the present object from my thoughts: now must I discover
"the true marks of a superior genius," and show "a steady, undissipated
attention," until I have ultimately succeeded in this great, glorious
particular. Nothing shall seduce me a single moment from -- 'Sdeath, Thornton,
the passing bell tolls. Surely Harriet is not dead. No matter; I will not, dare
not enquire. I will command myself this once; and when this scheme is
completed, I care not how soon I descend to Elysium and to Chesterfield.

Philip Sedley.

LETTER LXXXV. The Reverend Horace Homespun to Mrs. La Motte.
OH, Mrs. La Motte! the measure of my miseries is not completed. I have every
thing to apprehend from both the looks and words of the physician. Just as he
had entered, she called out, without looking at him, that he was the cruellest
of men, and then, upon drawing the curtains, begged his pardon, and said she
was mistaken. I have not even yet had my clothes off. I can eat nothing; and
when I drink, it is only to allay the thirstings of a slow fever, that is still
lurking about me. Mr. Sedley came yesterday kindly to enquire, and just as he
had said, Well, my good Mr. Homespun, and how does our poor Harriet now, she
screamed out with inconceivable violence, bade us shut the door, and then
remained weeping and fainting alternately, for about an hour. My fate is really
a hard one, Mrs. La Motte; but my conscience is void of offense, and the wisdom
of the Almighty shall not even now, be questioned by

Horace Homespun.

LETTER LXXXVI. Miss Delia Delmore to Lady Lucy Saxby.
I Confess it, Lucy, he has pleased me; and I am above concealing from my
friend, that I admire his manner even more than his person. His, words, his
looks, his motions, are truly irresistible; and if you knew half the noble
things he has done since he came to the bath, you would the less wonder at my
being caught. I will only mention to you one or two points of his conduct,
which will help you, by such specimens, to conjecture the rest. His servant had
played the libertine with an innocent wench, who depended upon the bounty of
the bathers for her attendance at the pump and well: the fellow seduced her,
the poor deluded wretch lost her virtue, and her means of livelihood at the
same time. Common masters would have cuffed the footman, and called the injured
girl a simpleton. Mr. Sedley insisted upon the deceiver's marrying the
deceived; the ceremony has actually been celebrated, and it is said, not by
him, for he never speaks of himself, that he designs to fee them well settled
before he leaves Buxton.

There is, you must know, a lady, who on her return from the bath to her house,
was hurt by the overturning of a carriage, and the husband, who is a worthy
clergyman, would have been quite distracted, had it not been for the cares, the
tendernesses, and attention of this obliging man, who has the art of
propitiating every body to him, and making every body around him happy, by
those nice and minute, yet truly engaging offices, which (being in general
considered as unimportant, though in reality I find they are but too pleasing)
are too often neglected. He is now very frequently in our family, and I rejoice
to see him so much in the confidence and good graces of my father, mother, and
brother. As to poor dear Fanny, she seldom talks, when she can avoid it: and
one may see Mr. Sedley's good breeding, and even the feelings of his heart, in
the manner with which he adapts himself to the person he addresses: when his
sentiments are directed to Sir Henry, they are acute, correct, classical,
penetrating, learned: when to my brother, they are elegant, noble, dignified,
and animating: when to my mother, they are grave, condescending, cautious: when
to my sister, gentle, in an under-tone of voice, softened, as it were, to the
situation of a sick person, and that person a woman: his subjects of Fanny are
such as might soothe a spirit much nearer its end than I hope that dear
creature is. He colors beautifully the ideas of hope: he talks of returning
health: he paints to her imagination, and he gives such touches to the scene of
her expected recovery, that our dear invalid smiles when she is too exhausted
to speak, and her husband thanks him, with overflowing eyes, for the
entertainment and ease he has produced to Mrs. Mortimer. In short, Lucy, he is
a divine fellow, and I know not what will be the consequence of my trip to
Buxton. Let what will be the event,

I am always yours, Delia Delmore.
P. S.
I had almost forgot to tell you that I am half teazed to death with the fine
surfeiting sayings of a beau, who has offered me knick-knacks without number,
and has made serious and tempting overtures to my father. So that you see
Sedley has got a rival. Oh, Heavens! that Providence should into the same
world, send two creatures so uniformly different.


Adieu.
LETTER LXXXVII. Sedley to Thornton.
THE Gods have been auspicious. The interview is past, and the stratagem by
which it was obtained is worthy of myself. Thou must understand that the sister
of Fanny, the lady I mean with the pastoral appellation, Miss Delia Delmore, is
such an object as cannot possibly be passed over by the eye of a man who is
taught to annihilate the very idea of criminality, and is only intent upon the
possession of as much beauty (without the vulgar consideration of "to whom
related, or by whom begot") as he can possibly find, and the more to be found
in one family the better, so as that secrecy which saves all mischief can be
procured. -- This Delia, I say, Thornton, being in the maiden state, and to all
intents and purposes in a marriageable situation, must be addressed in the way
of wedlock. To this end, I have so managed the point, as to make one sister
(...) me in a design upon the other, while, in the mean time, I have so
contrived it, that both shall be plotting their own personal pleasure: nay, I
will make even the husband, father, mother, and the very coxcomb I before told
thee of, who is my rival, the ostensible puppets on this occasion, while I, in
the supremacy of my wit, and pushed forward by my great Preceptor, will make
the whole family subservient to the gratification of thy

Philip Sedley.

LETTER LXXXVIII. Thornton to Sedley.
THY letter, this moment come to hand convinces me of my mistake in supposing
thou were to be wrought upon by scenes of tenderness and generosity, and proves
that it is not in the language and good deeds of either man or woman, to turn
thy heart. That Janus of an Earl has, I see, enfolded himself round thee: his
maxims have penetrated into thy very marrow. Nay, thou even go beyond him:
he did but point at the benefits of duplicity in a private letter, at least not
by his consent made public, but thou art duplicity itself. Thou, wish an
insidiousness unparalleled, engraved his horrid precepts on thine heart,
enterest the temple of domestic joy, and under the appearance of an angel,
(while the cloven foot of the fiend is delicately concealed) art in sober
truth, could thy real form be seen, the very demon of destruction. Call not
thyself my Sedley: I own thee not. Thou art the Devil's Sedley, and I begin to
shudder that I am connected with such a monster. Yet I beseech thee, once again
in the still, serene, but pathetic voice of friendship, I beseech thee to
desist. Bring not the gray hairs of the venerable Delmores to the grave.
Pollute not the weak, defenseless Fanny; catch not in thy treacherous toils the
heart of Delia, who deserves a better fate. Hasten, I conjure thee, to the
metropolis. There thy appetite for women may have it is full play. Our streets
are crowded with chastity destroyed, beauty in ruins, and simplicity seduced.
Dissipate, at least, with less mischief, part of thy large fortune upon these.
-- From thy present pursuits, I again repeat it, thou can gain nothing but
infamy: and if I could but transfer to thee my feelings, thou would hug them
to thy heart for ever, and discard all others with horror. I have the happiness
to please the visitor of Mrs. Vernon, the charming Araminta Sidney; she is the
friend of Fanny Mortimer; they correspond: she describes her as thou have done.
Oh! for GOD'S sake, Sedley, do not harm her; do not push thy cruelties to the
dishonor, disgrace, and very probably the death of, a sick woman. Mr. Vernon
is returned: the affection, the happiness of this pair, might soften a panther
into tenderness, and subdue the veriest rake into continence. No wonder it has
touched the gentle bosom of Araminta. I find a rapture in her smiles: I
anticipate every change of her countenance. I am so far from desiring to ruin
her reputation, that I tremble as I approach her: I have not assurance enough
to kiss her beautiful lips: the slightest touch of her hand disorders me: I
detect myself looking at her, and withdraw my eyes, for fear of offending. I am
a very young man, Mr. Sedley, and thou and Chesterfield, with your united
councils, had nearly led me to every thing odious: but I saw the precipice time
enough to escape it: the society of virtuous people, the friendship of the
Lieutenant and his lady, the esteem, and, oh! that I might be allowed to say,
the love, the pure love of Araminta, will, I hope, again restore me to what I
formerly was. As to your secrets, Sedley, I shall not betray them: and you will
judge how true I must be to the point of confidence, when I dare not violate
it, even though, by so pious a treachery, I could probably save a noble family,
and involved in the fate of that, the friend of Araminta Sidney.

I am, With prayers for your change of heart, Yours, James Thornton.

LETTER LXXXIX. The Reverend Horace Homespun to Mrs. La Motte.
PITY, Mrs. La Motte, the distraction of a husband and a father. I have lost my
child, and my wife is in the agonies of death. The babe that was to have
blessed me, and crowned my nine months expectation, appeared only to weep, and
to die. The mother could nourish it no longer: her agonizing fits have produced
an untimely labor, and, lifeless as it is, she will not part with the infant;
she hugs it in her arms: cradles it in her bosom, insists upon its being laid
upon her pillow, and will not suffer any hand but hers and mine to touch it.
Oh! Mrs. La Motte! what shall I do, and whither must I fly. There is but one
resource, and I will seek it before I finish my letter.

Blessed is the power of prayer! I retired, Madam, into my own bed-room, and
upon the bended knee of humility sought for comfort to the only hand that, in
an exigence like mine, can bestow it. I rise easier, Mrs. La Motte, indeed I
do: He that corrects has not utterly forsaken me. I have softly opened
Harriet's apartment, and by the nurse's waving me to withdraw again, I judge
that my poor patient is asleep. The GOD, who alone can effectually give
medicine to a mind diseased, protect and prosper her moment of awaking.

Horace Homespun.

LETTER XC. Sedley to Thornton.
MY master-wheels are in motion: I sent brother Mortimer upon a love-message
made to the lady Delia's eyebrow, saw the old Baronet and his Dame set out for
an eveningride to Buxton bath, and had the fair Fanny Mortimer all to myself.
Oh! ye Deities of Design! ye spirits congenial to Stanhopes! what an hour of
whisper and insinuation have I passed! Oh! Thornton, for a second interview! It
was all done in the very key-note of seduction.

Conscious of the prepossessing idea, I availed myself of her partiality. I did
not kneel, I did not whine, I did not smack the palms, nor squeeze the
handkerchief, but I hit her on the only chord of the soul that could make a
vibration in my favor; I pitied her want of health, I praised the sacrifice
she had made to paternal quietude. I was all refinement, all assiduity, all
Chesterfield. The features were obedient, and every atom of irresistible art
was levelled against her. I called the color into her face by one sentiment; I
sent it away by another: one look brought the tear; a second dried it up. Now
the rose, now the lilly, prevailed in her cheeks. Cordials became necessary. I
ordered my hand to shake as I presented the hartshorn, the water, the drops.
The lovely object of my battery began to yield. Nature tugged at her heart; her
frame became weaker; her passion stronger: every finger tottered: her breath
became difficult: she rocked herself in her chair; her eyes were full; her
voice faultered out an -- Oh! Mr. Sedley! the snare I had laid for her entered
into her soul, and she fainted upon my bosom.

The assiduous talents that reduced and funk her, could not even by a different
application of them bring her to herself; and when I perceived this, and found
it impossible to quiet her increased agitations, I went into the summerhouse,
where my cause was pleading, and with a decent degree of trepidation told Mr.
Mortimer (after bowing to Delia with as decent a confusion) that his Fanny was
rather more indisposed than she found herself before tea.

I am thy, And, in spite of old proverbs, and all cross sayings, will be thy
Philip Sedley.

LETTER XCI. Thornton to Sedley.
YOUR letter found me at tea in this innocent family. I begged leave to break
the seal. I read as far as the fainting of Fanny, and the cup fell from my
hand! Oh! thou hard of heart! Thou insensible, thou incorrigible! But she is
yet pure. She fell upon thy bosom. Thy horrid purpose is not yet perpetrated:
nor shall it be: for, by the GOD of Truth, Mr. Sedley, if thou do not write
me word that thou will give over the destruction of this most pitiable girl, I
will, at the risk of all consequences, take the proper steps to put her out of
thy power. No idle punctilio shall sway me in a case like this. When Innocence
is in danger, to break Faith with a bad man, is not Fraud, but Virtue.

James Thornton.

LETTER XCII. Sedley to Thornton.
TRAITOR and tatler as thou art, I have the start of thee. Yes, Thornton, she
did fall upon my bosom; and I reaped the rewards of my insinuations and my
address, in her arms. It Is true, she returned not the embrace. What of that? I
was wrought up to the crisis, and her strugglings only answered the ends, and
served as the sweet succedaneum of writhing the limbs in the transports of
taste.

Philip Sedley.

LETTER XCIII. The Reverend Horace Homespun to Mrs. La Motte.
MY unhappy wife is worse than ever: but as her strength decays, her affection
seems to increase for me, and this only serves to agonize me the more. I sat up
with her all the last night, part of which she passed without her senses. In
the intervals of her delirium she treated me with a tenderness that penetrated
my soul: she called me by every name that could express her fondness; she
kissed me; suffered the poor clay-cold corse of our little one to be taken from
her. It must not be, said she, serenely. Let it be given to the grave; bury it
decently; be sure you do not close up the earth; leave a small space for it is
mother, and all shall be well. About midnight she mentioned Mrs. La Motte, her
dear, kind, noble, virtuous Mrs. La Motte, several times. About an hour after
this she started up wildly, caught hold of the curtains, threw them aside with
some violence, and enquired of the nurse for ink and paper; she said, she was
resolved to write to him; then, without naming any body, melted into tears,
sunk quietly down upon her pillow, and said, he was not worth it, and it did
not signify. I dare not tell you how my own health is, but while I have any
health at all, I am*

Your Horace Homespun.

LETTER XCIV. Mrs. Mortimer to Miss Sidney.
VILLAINY, too big to express; and which, though I am dying under it, I know
not how to punish, without involving innocent people, has been practiced upon
me. I foresee, I feel, it will be impossible you should ever see again your*

Fanny Mortimer.

LETTER XCV. The Reverend Horace Homespun to Mrs. La Motte.
THE last hope is extinguished, and I can only hold the pen to tell you, that
my wife is -- in Heaven; and that the last words which came from her quivering
lips, convinced me there is a wretch somewhere upon earth, to whom I am
indebted for her death. I can say no more.

Horace Homespun.

LETTER XCVI. Miss Delia Delmore to Lady Lucy Saxby.
WHAT a dreadful change; my dear Lucy, since I last wrote to you! There is an
unusual degree of uneasiness on the countenances of my ever-honoured parents:
my brother, Mr. Mortimer, is pensive: Fanny was seized with an hysteric
disorder, while her husband was communicating to me the discourse that passed
between him and Mr. Sedley, who has never been at our house since. Mrs.
Mortimer, it seems, knew not that Mr. Sedley had interested her husband in the
declaration made, by that medium, to me: she remains exceedingly ill: has
actually refused to suffer Mr. Mortimer to sleep with her: says, she has strong
reasons for it, which he shall know at a proper time. At our coming into the
drawing room, after we were summoned to her assistance by Sedley, (who in his
confusion and hurry to fetch us, ran down our long garden unbraced and without
his hat) we found the poor dear creature just recovering from a swoon: her eyes
closed, her teeth shut, her clenched hands locked in each other, and her dress
in the utmost disorder, I suppose from the violent changes of posture
occasioned by the fits. I have no heart now, Lady Lucy, to talk of my own
affairs; and yet, as you have a right to know every thing that concerns me, I
just send you a sketch of my brother's conversation in the summer house,
previous to these alarming circumstances. My almost constant attendance on my
sister will not permit me to transcribe it fair; and you must be contented with
a loose paper, on which I have been able to scribble only at intervals.

[The Paper, enclosing Mr. Mortimer's Address to his Sister, upon Mr. Sedley's
Subject.]

Mr. Mortimer, having led me by the hand through the garden into the
summer house, began, as usual, with a pretty compliment, told me, that he found
I had already done execution; that I had made a wound which all the waters of
Buxton were not able to cure, and then proceeded (you know, Lucy, what an able
advocate he is) to open the design of his calling me aside. I will own to you,
said he, my dear Delia, that I summon your attention in behalf of Mr. Sedley;
but I will, as nearly as I am able, to recollect his own words, and, without
the least endeavor to sway you, leave the result to your own determination. I
lately had a particular conversation with Mr. Sedley, wherein he addressed me,
to the best of my remembrance, as follows:

"The motive of this visit, Mr. Mortimer, is in confidence to enquire of you,
from whom I have reason to believe she conceals nothing, whether your sister
Delia is under any present engagement of heart, or in the least respect partial
to any one in the disposal of her affections; for I should shudder to be the
cause of even a negative pain to so amiable a woman: and I forbore to ask this
question of Sir Henry, lest that regard which he is pleased to entertain of me
might incline him to something that might be contradictory to the private
prospects of his daughter. I know, Mr. Mortimer, the fraternal affection your
sister bears you, and I am no stranger, young as I am in your acquaintance, to
the all-souled intimacy subsisting between you as happy relations: hence I
imagined it more for the general peace to direct myself to you rather than any
other: for as my enquiries are answered by you, Mr. Mortimer, I will either
bury my ambitious wishes in my own and your bosom, or, should they meet an
encouraging reply, I will proceed to take such measures as seem to you most
conducive to the happiness I aspire to."

Here, Delia, he paused a little, and then, with inimitable grace, pursued his
overtures:

"Although, Mr. Mortimer, said he, I have of late often had the honor of Sir
Henry's company, whose nearest secrets of heart I am beginning to share, I
never found that he had any view of uniting Miss Delmore to any particular
family. But why do I talk thus? Sir Henry spurns the bare idea of compulsitory
connections, and his noble nature can never stoop to barter the felicity of a
child to interested prospects. And yet, Sir, may it not be reasonably
apprehended, that a soul so delicate, a heart so susceptible, feelings so fine,
and a bosom so alive to every nicer alarm, as Miss Delmore's, may have made
some wise and favorite choice of her own? If so, tell me of it, frankly, and I
promise, dear Mortimer, to join you in promoting, rather than opposing, the
happiness she hopes for. After what I have now said, you will be quite
explicit, ingenuous, and unreserved."

He waited my reply: his fine eyes shone with expectation: I told him, that I
believed my sister Delia had not yet, amongst the various pretensions made to
her hand, seen the object she could approve in the intimate light he alluded
to; that I had often heard her express a proper regard to the excellencies,
manners, and address of Mr. Sedley: that, as a very young friend, introduced
into the family by the hand of so reverend and sagacious a father, she had an
elegant opinion of his merit: and that, though I had not observed the least
intimation of her entertaining any sensibility of heart as to his person,
(here, Delia, he bowed and blushed) yet that (be not displeased, Delia) I knew
her naturally soft, sensible, and a nice distinguisher of superior endowments.
I concluded with saying, that for the short time I could boast the honor of
his acquaintance, I knew none more likely to inspire Miss Delmore; and that, as
a proof of my good wishes, I would take the opportunity given me of Sir Henry
and Lady Delmore's evening ride, from which I would excuse us young folks, to
inform you of the conversation previous to any farther procedure.

His cheeks colored to their full bloom (and you know what a complexion he
has, Delia) at this proposal: he begged, with great delicacy, that, till I was
pre-acquainted with your proposals, wishes, and views, I would preserve the
whole matter a secret, not only from your mother and Sir Henry, but even from
my wife, the angelic Mrs. Mortimer, as he was pleased to call her: adding, that
he could not bear to occasion, by an ill-timed petition, one moment's
uneasiness in a family so harmonized, innocent, and affectionate, as Sir Henry
Delmore's; and that, rather than be cruelly instrumental in the subversion of
this, although his heart was in the cause, he would stifle the pleadings of it
to eternity. I easily prevailed, Delia, on Sir Henry and your mother, to excuse
us, and, as soon as their chariot rolled from the door, I took Mr. Sedley by
the arm, and told him I was going to be his advocate. He pressed my hand, and,
in a whisper, said he would have the honor to keep Mrs. Mortimer company in
the saloon, while I pleaded for him in the summer house.

And now, my dear Delia, continued my brother, may not I congratulate you on
the conquest of a man, who, if there is any faith in the fairest appearances,
is equally adorned in mind and body, and who will, I dare say, instantly
proceed to acquaint us with his circumstances and fortunes, if he receives your
sanction to be more explicit. I must own I never was so truly attracted by any
man, and he really seems born for an alliance with a woman as enchanting as
himself. Tell me truly, tell me like a sister, Did you ever see so manly, yet
so decorated an address? such splendid sentiments, so elevated an air? Or did
you ever before meet with any gentleman so easy, or so engaging, in that sort
of behavior which is the result of a brilliant capacity, ornamented breeding,
and unaffected complaisance.

When you have read the enclosed, Lucy, give me the sentiment of your heart
upon it: for my own part, flattering as it is, I am too disordered, and too
much interested in the sudden, gloom that hangs over our house, to find
satisfaction in any thing. Yet I am always

Your Delia Delmore.

LETTER XCVII. The Reverend Horace Homespun to Mrs. La Motte.
I AM obliged, my good friend, to summon, not philosophy only, but all the
force of christianity to my aid; and even that sustains itself with difficulty
against the agitated powers of Nature. My child is scarce cold in the earth: my
wife is tomorrow to be enclosed within her coffin: my duty at my parish is
precariously performed, and my strength absolutely fails me. Yet the last
solemn testimonies of a husband's affection shall not be neglected, Mrs. La
Motte. I have caused the dear dimensions of her dead body to be taken, my
friend. Her shroud is upon the table before me: and I have sent to bespeak the
hearse that shall convey her from hence to my own church, where I am resolved
her dear remains shall be deposited. I will not leave her in a strange land: I
will not suffer her to lie where I cannot often visit her grave, often reflect
upon her virtues, and always protect the consecrated spot which she occupies,
from all insult and sacrilegious indecency. Nay, my friend, I will do more than
this: the child that I trusted but on Tuesday last to the tomb, shall be raised
again from the earth. Little did I think the commands of my wife would be so
soon necessary to be obeyed: but her dying words shall not be forgotten. The
mother and the son, for ah! Mrs. La Motte, my infant was a boy, shall be buried
in the embraces of each other. Nay, I will, however the custom of the world may
pronounce against it, I will read over them the awful service with my own
mouth: the funeral oration shall be composed by myself: in my own churchyard
shall they be deposited, and I will have the fortitude to see the last spadeful
of earth cover their beloved ashes before I retire to the agony of my solitude.
That this is an uncommon proceeding, I am not to be told, but it is,
nevertheless, consistent with my notions of piety, tenderness and duty, and
shall be done.

I am obliged to lay down the pen, but will not fold up my letter; for though I
shall be with you some time tomorrow night, scarcely till the middle of it, I
know I shall be incapable of relating to you (what yet you will be anxious to
understand) the manner of my poor Harriet's death, and therefore I will try to
set it down, as I think I can with less misery to myself, upon paper.

In Continuation.

About an hour before she died, she desired the nurse to withdraw, and, taking
me gently by the hand, she looked at me for some time, was almost drowned with
her tears, and hid her face within the pillow. Then, having somewhat relieved
herself, she rose again upon her arm, and with a voice scarcely audible, but
piercingly tender, she addressed me thus: -- Oh, my best Horace! I have injured
thee: I die a victim to the arts of the seducer; a seducer under the fairest
form of irresistible virtue. Inquire not who or where he is; resentment would,
perhaps, ruin you both, and GOD can tell, I would not have any mischief befall
either. I have long --

Mrs. La Motte, she could not finish her sentence. A second effort gave her
just the power to say, Put the child in my bosom, that we may sleep together:
after which her eyes became fixed full upon mine: I fell upon the bed in
excessive grief: she struggled hard to give the kiss which exhausted nature
denied her power to impress, and then, half turning upon her side, the sigh
came forth that wafted her soul to it is Creator, and she expired upon my cheek.

Oh, Mrs. La Motte, that I could find the seducer! Oh, that I could discover
the dark complotter of all this mischief! Clergyman as I am, I would make him
feel the vengeance of a husband's arm. I have enquired in vain; not a clue is
left me in her pocketbook; the landlord, to whom I applied, without telling
him the drift of my application, assures me, that since my departure from
Buxton, none but his wife and himself were in her company, not even Mr. Sedley,
who has been constantly, of late, at a family's out of town; but of him,
indeed, I have not the least suspicion. Perhaps the horrid circumstance
happened before our coming to the bath; perhaps the infant is the offspring of
some other parent; perhaps -- Oh, Mrs. La Motte! Mrs. La Motte! I am
bewildered, and wild with a thousand apprehensions. But why do I rage thus for
revenge? Is that consistent with my holy character? Is not the poor object of
seduction punished sufficiently? Are not the child and the parent both dead?
Ah, my unhappy Harriet! I injure thee, I wrong thee! I have just kissed the
clay-cold lip, Mrs. La Motte. I will thirst no more for the blood of the wretch
that has despoiled me. I leave him to the justice of his Maker. Let me go on in
the straight path, let me still walk in the way of my duty. The coffin is come;
the hearse rolls it is sound in the wind. I hear the beat of the melancholy hoof
at the door. My new-buried babe is bringing into the room. It is the deep of
night; there is no moon. I will have no torches.

The child is raised; the mother is in her shroud, and placed in her last
mansion; the horse waits to carry me home, and I have given orders to have both
the bodies carried carefully down stairs. GOD keep your heart from a scene like
this, prays the unfortunate

Horace Homespun.

LETTER XCVIII. Thornton to Sedley.
I HAVE changed my condition, and by so doing enlarged the circle of my
felicity. -- The chaste and honorable connection I have now made, with the
sacred and rational pursuits attending it, render it very improper for me to
hold farther correspondence with a man who professes to seduce the wife, and
may very probably, one time or another, throw from his guard even one who is
armed against him, by a knowledge of the basest system that ever was adopted.

I only write this to acquaint you that it is the last letter you will ever
receive from

Sir, Your most humble servant, James Thornton.
P. S.
Mrs. Thornton, late Miss Sidney has received such a card from Fanny Mortimer,
as pronounces you the most abandoned hypocrite upon earth. You guess the
contents of it.



LETTER XCIX. Lady Lucy Saxby to Miss Delia Delmore.
HOW shall I be able to write a proper answer to so interesting a letter as
your last, in which two subjects so immediately opposite are touched upon? As
to poor Mrs. Mortimer's health, I anxiously hope, she is by this time, again
restored to a more tolerable degree of it; and yet how much are you all to be
pitied in being necessarily made the spectators of a disposition so full of
fears, hopes, wishes, and apprehensions! But, as Joseph says, I dreamed a dream
last night, and I shall relate it to my Delia, my fair oracle, for
interpretation. Methought I was on a sudden (these things are all done
suddenly) transported from the city of London to the realms of Heaven, where a
Seraph, in the form of my departed sister, (whom you and I used so much to
admire) immediately acknowledged me, and addressed me thus: Upon what account
is my dear Lucy come, uncalled, to Elysium? or How got she hither without a
guide! "I come," said I, in behalf of a dying friend, on the preservation of
whose life depends the felicity of mine. Lead me, my sister, to the Angel of
Health, and I will kneel down and worship him.

If that is the purport of your errand to Elysium, I fear you are come here in
vain, said Clarissa: there can be no partialities, and yon old, grey-headed,
frowning personage, you see with a scythe in his hand, would be very angry if
he was but to imagine what you want. Death is above a bribe, sister, you may
depend on it.

At this instant I beheld a most beautiful cherub, with golden plumage
expanded, fluttering over my head, and alight by the sight of me. I trembled
and bowed. "Stranger," said the celestial figure, I know your business! put the
name of your friend into that little lattice; it leads to the palace of the
Angel of Pity; approach reverently.

Soon after I had obeyed these commands, a door opened, out of which came the
most elegant appearance of the female sex that can possibly be imagined, and
with her a second form, whose face was shaded by a snowy veil. -- "Mortal,"
said the first splendid figure, the prayer of the affectionate shall not be
offered in vain; thy friend shall live, and lo! here she is in the bloom of
beauty, and in the height of health. Saying this, the veil was thrown aside,
and in the second form I immediately recognized the features of Fanny, more
animated and animating than ever. I ran to embrace the sister of my friend; but
the Angel of Pity interposed, and after bidding me depart in peace, she waved a
golden wand, and then the different emotions occasioned by the vision awaked me.

And yet, Delia, I am persuaded this dream will be propitious. How truly happy
shall I be, if you send me word that I have made a trip to Elysium to some
purpose. Nor will I, at any rate, suffer you to call me superstitious; for the
thing is very probable: surely, in recovering such a woman, where such a family
and such a husband are concerned, the Angels of Pity and Health may very
probably be interested. I will not excuse you, if you do not acquaint me with
the success of my dream immediately.

As to the conduct and conversation of Mr. Sedley in the summer house, I cannot
but admire his address and ingenuity. His making a confidante of your brother
was such a stroke of policy as shows him to be no ordinary lover; and I can
see, from the delicate turn of his compliments, and his management of those
nameless delicacies, (which though called minute, are amongst the points of
importance) that he is no novice in those matters. You ask for my sentiments
upon the subject: What can I say? Have you not sent me the most amiable
specimen of his attachment? Was not this attachment discovered in a mode
peculiar to the elegance of his character? Has he not person, manner, fortune,
wit, sense? Do you not know what a complexion he has, my dear, when he blushes?
Has he not, by your own confession, the most decorated address, the most
splendid sentiments, the most elevated air? and, Is it not the opinion of your
brother, that he never met with any gentleman so easy, or so engaging, in that
sort of behavior which is the result of a brilliant capacity, ornamented
breeding, and unaffected complaisance?

Thus recommended, then, my dear, on all sides, how is it possible that my
sentiments should not be greatly in his favor? How is it possible that I
should not wish to alter the superscription of my letters, and direct them for
Mrs. Sedley?

After all, suppose I was to change my note: you ask me for my sentiments:
suppose you see them in the following letter:

To Miss Delmore.
Dear Delia,
I OBEY your desire in regard to the offers of Mr. Sedley, and here send you
the secret of my heart upon them.

In the first place, I would have you to consider, men are generally false, and
can assume any shape that forwards and facilitates their purpose.

In the next place, you are most likely so partial to him, that you call those
actions elegant which are only ordinary; and his manners, which are in your eye
so enchanting, may only be a pretty method he has got of playing upon the
surface of common subjects, just to gain his ends, after which he will,
perhaps, become as insipid, or as impertinent, as the sop whom you, in your
former letters, have ridiculed. Ten to one but this polite lover will be a very
rude husband; and when the magic of the marriage-circle is drawn in his favor,
alas, poor lady wife, how will thine eyes be open to the delusion? Putting all
these points together, therefore, my advice is fairly this; forbid him your
house, banish him from your company, blot him from your memory, and, to cut the
matter short, have nothing more to say to him. These are the councils of your

Lucy Saxby.

Should I send this laconic epistle, formally signed and sealed, what would be
the consequence? Methinks I see the whole scene? The angry Delia has finished
the letter, and lays it down; she hems twice or thrice, attempting, but in
vain, to swallow the affront. Surely, says she, (beautifully bridling) surely
Lady Saxby might have softened the matter a little; she is very explicit; but
how should she be a judge of a man she never saw? I am not much delighted with
her letter, I can tell her that? She believes all men are alike. What! does she
compare the divine Sedley to that atom of a fop, that "bug with gilded wings?"
Upon my word, a smart comparison, very agreeable truly. I Will drop my
correspondence with her censorious Ladyship, however.

Ah, Delia! Delia! have I not shown off the sex faithfully? Do I not know what
agreeable inconsistencies we are in love affairs? How ready we are to ask the
advice of another, when we are predetermined to take our own! Now, are you not,
my dear correspondent, are you not a little hypocrite? Have you not resolved to
encourage Sedley, and would not every dissuasive be ineffectual. But I rejoice
to think you are under no necessity to answer that question. I do not see any
suspicious part in Sedley's behavior, and I expect that you will distinguish
yourself from the rest of your sex, even by the elegance and ingenuousness with
which you meet his advances. That the event may be happiness to both, is most
unfeignedly the wish of your

Lucy Saxby.

LETTER C. Mrs. La Motte to the Reverend Horace Homespun.
(Prior to the Receipt of the last.)
IS then the veil rent, my good Mr. Homespun? Is the bruised reed shaken to
pieces? Language was never made equal to such a heartrending subject. Remember,
however, even in the midst of affliction, remember the character of a christian
pastor. Make haste, Oh, my unhappy friend! to your own cottage. -- Take no
vengeance on an unworthy rake, even should you find him. The thorn is in his
heart, the flaming sword is in his bosom. My feeble consolations, my hopes, my
attentions, and my prayers, will be for ever at your service. Delay not then,
longer than it is necessary, your journey to the parsonage, and your real
sympathizing,

C. La Motte.

LETTER CI. The Reverend Horace Homespun to Mrs. La Motte.
YES, Mrs. La Motte, I will remember what is due to the character of a
Christian clergyman, and I am returning, as I ought, to my solitary cottage:
but let me enjoin you, though your own prudence will render that injunction
superfluous, not to satisfy curiosity of any kind, whether it comes in the
shape of condolence, sympathy, or surprise, as to the true cause of my
unfortunate Harriet's departure. Let her memory escape the censure even of an
ill suggestion. I write this upon the road at our resting place, while the
horses are baited, and the men refreshed. Ah, my dear Mrs. La Motte, what a
mechanical creature is man! People who are hired for their attendance at a
funeral are so familiarized to the last ceremonies, that they smile in their
sables; and, while they are conveying youth and beauty to the tomb, can enjoy
the ordinary, every-day events of life with as much glee and inconsideration as
if they were carrying the gayest bride and bridegroom to the altar. The
mourners who came with me, are at this instant carousing in the next room,
while she who used heretofore to be the companion of my journeys, and made
every place a home to me by the enchantments of her presence and society, is
waiting their leisure, and lying in a gloomy vehicle, without any refreshment
whatever.

Without refreshment! What have I said, and how does my present practice
contradict my former precepts? Do I forget the rewards of an innocent soul, and
are all my tears shed over the breathless body; which, being no longer animated
by that soul, is nothing? Surely, I have lost my wonted sense of religion, and
Providence --

No, Mrs. La Motte, no, I have not. To religion, and to Providence, be every
event committed; but neither have robbed me of my sensibility, and while that
remains I cannot "but remember such things were, and were most precious to me."
Even memory assists in drawing a picture to distress me.

She who is there emboxed was one whom I chose from the rest of the world. She
was indeed my world. I have seen her walk. Her now clay-cold hand, has been a
thousand times joined in that which is now employed in describing her fate.

She increased every day in sense, and discretion, and beauty. I think not of
her last offenses, for how should village simplicity be a match for town maxims:

-- "Neither man nor angel can discern
"Hypocrisy, the only evil that walks
"Invisible through earth;
"And often, though Wisdom wakes, Suspicion sleeps
"At Wisdom' gate, while Goodness thinks no ill,
"Where no ill seems."
It begins to rain, Mrs. La Motte. The drops patter upon the roof of the
hearse. I put my face to the casement, and hear them. The poor little infant
too, my boy, my darling! my heir, my firstborn!

Oh, Mrs. La Motte, forgive, forgive me! Though I know the independency of soul
and body in such a situation, though reason points out to me their separate
state, yet I cannot, all at once, disunite them. Human Nature, powerful,
pathetic Nature, puts in her plea, and you have too much tenderness not to
admit it. Do not, therefore, reproach me for ordering another covering to be
thrown over the hearse.

More weakness, Mrs. La Motte. I have walked forth, and am a little relieved;
the shower is over. Do not argue with me, dear friend; while the earth contains
the beloved remains of Mrs. Homespun, I must consider her as claiming from, me
respect and tenderness: the duties even of the husband, do not terminate till
she is in the grave.

But the sable train have finished their repast. We are preparing to proceed in
our journey. The postman is blowing, his horn close beside me: he says this
letter will reach you some hours before the wretched writer of it. He waits,
while I beg of you to be at the Parsonage against our arrival: your presence
will be then necessary to prevent me from running the gauntlet, through starers
and condolers. Such pity is, at such periods, insupportable. The hearse is
moving awfully on. I must not leave it without one real mourner.

Farewell! Farewell! Horace Homespun.

LETTER CII. Mrs. La Motte to Philip Sedley, Esquire at Buxton. (After the Return
of Mr. Homespun.)
I Congratulate you, Sir, on your victory over every feeling that should
distinguish the human species from the brutal: or rather I salute you upon your
notable transmigration! The system of the philosopher, who contended for such a
change, you have adopted, even in this world, with success. Yes, Mr. Sedley,
you are most completely brutalized indeed. Although I have not the dishonor to
know you personally, I make bold to address a few sentiments to you, chiefly to
acquaint you with what you might otherwise be for some time ignorant. Your
principal victims were buried last night, and the survivor is in a fair way of
soon following them.

I could have wished, however, for the sake of your amusement, as it seems you
are gratified upon such occasions, that you had been a spectator of this
funeral. Though I can easily conceive you do not love preaching, yet, in the
discourse of last night, there were such remarks as might have highly diverted
so elevated a mind as yours!

But, to drop this ineffectual part of my subject, and proceed to another, more
likely to excite your curiosity, Do you know, most assiduous and yet most
negligent Sir, that a part of your treasures are now in my possession? To speak
plainer: you must know that, amongst the now useless clothes, and other late
necessaries of the entombed Harriet, was found a Book, very thickly marked,
both by marginal notes, crosses of the nail, points of the pen, and strokes of
the pencil; and in the fair leaf, next the title, there is written what
distinguishes it to be Mr. Sedley's property.

Now, it plainly appears, Sir, from the several parts referred to, that you
purposely pillaged the volume for the pernicious, and rejected the instructive.
This would have been very proper, had you contented yourself, like other
commentators, with reprobating what is wrong, in order to set it apart from
what is right: but how could such ordinary methods be expected from a person so
very extraordinary! You, Sir, have even improved upon your original, and have
ingeniously labored to annihilate it is merit, while you perpetuate it is infamy.

As an instance of this, I select the subsequent well-illustrated passages, out
of a multitude of others equally amiable. I shall place both the Commentator
and his Author in a seemly, orderly manner, and, as you will easily recollect,
act the part of a faithful transcriber.

Chesterfield. "Avoid seeing an affront, if possible."


Sedley. What though L -- has sorely stung me. I must please her, and be
revenged at a proper time. At present, my cue is blindness.


Chesterfield. "If a man of sense perseveres, he will prevail at last."


Sedley. Oh, Dormer, Dormer! thou dear encourager. How do thou give me
spirits to go on? H. H. is an angel of the first order.


Chesterfield. "Read faces."


Sedley. What a Right Reverend face, and how delightfully legible is that of
Master Minister H. Not a trait of suspicion about it. I like his honest broad
brow; his gray eye, which looks at every thing, and into nothing. The very man.
Oh divine H. H.!


Chesterfield. "Don't yield to fits of rage."


Sedley. I am cursedly addicted to passion. Will curb myself. Coolness carries
all before it. Saucy L. thou shall suffer, for I will oblige thee; and instead
of contempt, show thee a kindness. Then, then, Mum!

How could the sagacious Mr. Sedley trust his serious views with the very woman
he meant to destroy? But that is easily accounted for. In another part of the
book we find a clue to this mystery.


Chesterfield. "Be, like Caesar's wife, unsuspected.


Sedley. Yes, dear enchanting Harriet, if it should ever be my fortune to
please thee, how would I consult the security of thy situation; how guard thy
fame, even with my life, from the breath of detraction. Ah, could thou but
surmount the vulgar prejudices of the world, could thou but read in my
countenance the attentive, ardent, eternal friend; the, the, Oh! Harriet,
Harriet, I will not swear to the truth of my passion, lest you should suspect
me; but if I might be permitted to ask a favor with all imaginable softness.
In a word, Harriet, This is the true Volume of Delight. The world is full of
masks, and if you and I put ours delicately on, so as to talk not of our own
affairs, never show Master Minister H. any contempt, flatter his little
oratorical and classical vanity, and assume the proper flexibility, what joys
may we not taste, what treasures of tenderness may we not allow one another!

Ah, dear arbitress, keep this sacred volume from every eye but your own: read,
and return it to the fondest and most faithful of men!

Here break we off, Mr. Sedley, to make way for a reflection; I have always
taken notice that your great schemers counteract their fondest purposes. In the
very depth of their conspiracy, they discover a little which serves as a clue
to the discovery of a great deal; nor did I ever know any man who had a bad
secret to keep, and a difficult hand of cards to play, that did not, by too
much caution in some points, and too much carelessness in others, lose the
honors of the game:

"You, under fair pretense of friendly ends,
"And well placed words of glossing courtesy.
"Baited with reasons not unplausible,
"Wind into the easy, human heart,
"And hug it into snares."
And yet, Sir, to apply one more poetical line to you, what, after all, can be
said of you better than this?

"Oh, what a goodly outside falsehood has!"
These expostulations, however, Sir, are foreign from the purpose of my
address, which is to intimate to you my design of publishing this odd volume of
the great Lord Chesterfield, with the Remarks of the splendid Philip Sedley,
Esquire Such annotations will, no doubt, give fresh vigor to the sale, and add
exceedingly to the popularity both of the Original and the Commentary. It will
at least show how the Man of Fashion may improve upon celebrated precepts, and
(what is, perhaps, of greater consequence) how the Woman of Innocence may
escape the miseries of the practice. Above all things be assured, the world
shall not long be unacquainted with the gentleman who has accommodated it with
so spirited an illustration of a book so much in vogue; and who knows but this
conduct may tempt you to favor the public with the remainder of the volumes,
equally enriched, and by the same eminent hand?


I am, Sir, Your indignant humble servant, C. La Motte.

LETTER CIII. Mrs. Thornton to Mrs. Mortimer.
YOU frighten me to death, my dear Fanny: what can possibly be the matter? Not
two hours before your alarming letter arrived at Lieutenant Vernon's, I had
given away my name, my hand, and my heart, to Mr. Thornton, of Leicestershire.
It is a match of haste, but I hope not of rashness. He is, I find, the friend
of a gentleman now intimate in your family, and, by the disordered answers I
have received from my husband, I am afraid, to the wicked schemes of that
friend you -- But it cannot be: Mr. Thornton would not avow any close
connection with a character so atrocious; nay, I may be mistaken as to the
villainy under which you tell me you are a dying. Dying, Fanny Mortimer! Heaven
forbid; what a wedding day have you made of mine! My husband, too, has been in
tears, almost ever since the receipt of your letter. I know not what to write,
or what to think: if you ever loved, satisfy the impatience of

Your much disturbed, but sincere, Araminta Thornton.

LETTER CIV. Mrs. Mortimer to Mrs. Thornton.
WRITTEN in the agony of her heart, and with a trembling hand, receive the last
sentiments that are to be expected from your wretched friend.

Was Mr. Thornton, then, intimate with the, the, Oh! Heaven! was he intimate
with this, this, I shudder at his name, this Mr. Sedley? Perhaps he was one of
his correspondents. If so, he knew his designs; and, if he did know them, how
shall his heart be appeased for concealing them from the unhappy woman whom
they have thrown into despair. Yes, Araminta, I am in despair. I am ashamed,
not only of my friends and my husband, but of my shadow. I dare not look in the
glass.

Seek not to know the particulars of what, cannot be spoken to. I am abused,
deceived, and hurt beyond the possibility of cure. I will die.

Dreadful officiousness! I had flown up to my chamber, and turned the key, to
indulge my anguish in all that luxury, which, on such occasions, is afforded by
solitude, when Mr. Mortimer tapped at the door, to know how I did? My father,
sister, and all the family, followed his example; and last of all came my
beloved mother, whose eye I beheld through the keyhole swimming in tears. But
I was proof even against this. Steady in my resolutions, I dared not to admit
her.

The cause of my new source of grief seems yet to be undiscovered. What of
that? I know it myself. The blessed GOD, "from whom no secrets are hid" knows
it. I was myself the aggressor. This fatal hand brought about the horrid
circumstance. I betrayed my weakness to him in a letter. I told him his
departure was necessary to my repose. That was enough to make such a man
perpetrate my destruction.

Partiality. Wretch that I was. What right had I to be partial? Mr. Mortimer
claimed my heart. Mr. Mortimer is the best of men. -- Memory be still!

Hush! Araminta, I hear his step on the stairs.

He has thrust a card through the door, and gone down again softly to the
parlour. Araminta, the pen falls from my hand. When I send this, I will send
with it the card! Araminta, I will not live!

Read, read, and tell me if I ought not to wish for annihilation.

The Card enclosed.
Edward Mortimer's tenderest invitations wait on Fanny, for her company (after
she has amused herself with her pen) in the parlour, as Delia is going to try a
gentle tune on her new Piano Forte, Edward will attempt a soft accompanyment
upon the flute, our little brother is to join in the strokes of the violin, Sir
Henry and Lady Delmore will be our auditors, and they are to have quite a
little concert. But they will be all out of tune, and it is impossible there
should be any harmony, unless Fanny is amongst them, now and then bestowing a
note from one of the most melodious pipes in the world. Perhaps Mr. Sedley may
drop in, and the manly elegance of his voice will be delightful. Edward desires
his Fanny to observe, that this very full card is subscribed by all the persons
in the world whom she best loves, and who best loves her, namely, by

Sir Henry Delmore, Lady Delmore, Delia Delmore, And Her Edward Mortimer.


I must pause again, Araminta; my strength fails me.

In Continuation. Ten o'clock at night.

No, my friend, I could not obey the summons. I could not, on the other hand,
have courage to send an apology. About ten minutes after the card was
delivered, I heard the dear, well-known voice of Lady Delmore, "Sweet as the
shepherd's pipe upon the mountains."
tenderly enquire, Is my child preparing to join us? Will she make us happy?
Take your own time, my love; only remember, that the pain or pleasure of the
night depends upon you. Don't hurry, don't discompose your spirits.

The excellent, most revered, and most venerable Lady, a second time returned
unanswered.

Oh! Araminta, Araminta, how I wept! how my heart yearned to clasp this dear
mother to it! but I was all the time laboring with a dreadful circumstance,
which to disclose would produce complicated misfortune.

GOD of compassion, to what an exigence am I reduced!

Scarce had Lady Delmore withdrawn, but Mr. Mortimer ascended the stairs, and
Will not my lovely Fanny, will not the wife of my soul, condescend to oblige
us? said he with a softness that was a fresh occasion of distress to me.

I could not, upon this, avoid giving way to some incoherent expressions, and
wild ejaculations, part of which were uttered upon my knees.

The trembling Mortimer turned down stairs, and presently I heard the whole
family assembled in the entry leading to the chambers, consulting by whisper.

They conclude (I overhear) that my brain is hurt. Ah! that it were, Araminta.
How, how, my friend, is this to be accounted for, but I would not enter the
sleeping apartment of Edward Mortimer for all that the sun surveys beneath its
radiance! My soul is not polluted!

When will the darling of my wishes suffer me (said Mortimer just now) to lead
her from that melancholy chamber to her own apartment?

"Never, never, never," (said I, in the extremity of my grief) "Never, Mr.
Mortimer."

"Fanny," (replied the astonished Mortimer) "Did you speak, my love?"

I recollected my imprudence, and catching up a piece of paper, wrote on it as
follows:

LET the dear and honored friends of Fanny, indulge her idle fancy for this
single night, and they shall command her for the remainder of her whole life.
She finds herself unusually well, and inclined to scribble to her
long-neglected correspondents; and when she is weary, she will lie down on the
little tent-bed in the room where she now is.

Her peace of mind depends so much on their yielding to this request, (however
romantic it may appear) that she flatters herself her dear friends will not
refuse it to her.

I put this under the bottom of the door, and heard the injured, yet most
delicate Mortimer immediately carry it away.

The maid has brought me a candle, and though I find the whole family (even to my
aged father, he who must needs want the balms of repose) is to set up, I am no
more to be invaded. This tenderness, this constant, uniform compliance
distracts me. Poor, poor Mortimer, this is the first time since our union that,
that --

Excuse me, Araminta, I must leave off, and think a little!

In Continuation.

It is midnight, Araminta. I have come to a resolution. In the common course of
human declinings I cannot live long. My constitution is utterly gone. A fair
excuse offers (during my present state of infirmity) to be indulged with an
apartment separate from the excellent Edward Mortimer. Let me, then dare to
live. Let me live, were it only to prevent a discovery which my death might
occasion. Let the secret of the most barbarous Sedley die with me, without
involving in it, either my father or my husband.

The maid tells me the whole house is in tears. What, my venerable father, my
mother, all, all in tears!

I was unable longer to support the idea; and I will go down to them that they
may rest -- But into the chamber of her husband never shall again go the
desolate

Fanny Mortimer:
I will privately give this letter to the postman with my own hand, if I can
steal out when he calls for others. But, it must, alas! my Araminta, it will be
my last.


Farewell! Farewell!
LETTER CV. Thomas at the Bath, to Timothy in Town.
Dear Timothy,
"How like a dog looked Hercules,
"Thus to a distaff chained!"
'SDEATH, Timothy, "I Am sped, I Am married." In the very flower of my youth, in
the bud of my adventures, I Am cut off from all the joys of rambling, by
matrimony. In a word, Timothy, the first fair she that I was well with, as the
great Lord Chesterfield calls it, complained in form to my master, who, in the
moment of his rage, drew his sword, cocked his pistol, and giving me the choice
of two cursed things, namely, death or a wife, would certainly have sent me to
my account, "with all my imperfections on my head," even now broad blown in the
middle of May, if I had not fixed upon something: and, although in the
confusion of my fears I have chosen the worst of the two destinies, by taking
to my bed the low-born wench I have simulated, yet, "no man knows the fate he is
born to," and I have been to the church with a water-dipper, yea, Timothy, with
a creature, who for some years, has got her bread by standing at the side of
the bath, and presenting a brimmer of the water to the passenger. Then she is
as insipid as the water itself, and ten times more illiterate than the tumbler
that contains it. I marked her out only as a petty experiment, just to bring my
hand into play, as it were, before I ventured to Chesterfieldise; a word,
Timothy, I collected from Thornton's letters, which thou know I have an
occasional access to, with others. However, my spouse, or rather my sposo, for
I would avoid vulgar expressions, which are "certain characteristics of bad
company, and a bad education," my sposo is wholesome, pretty, and not ill-made:
but as she has not the smallest degree of ton about her, and does not pretend
the most distant acquaintance with either A, B, C, or any of the twenty-four
members in that learned family, I despair of ever making her figure as an
editor, or, indeed, of collecting together any of my papers, upon which
account, I charge thee, Timothy, to preserve, very cautiously, all my letters,
notes, minutes, and maxims; and as I shall very soon travel, (for a wife at
home will only give me eclat abroad, and thou can not believe I will live
long with a water-dipper, though she were the Nereid of the spring) thou will
observe to tie them up, date them on the backs, docket them, and if thou
should survive me, (which I supplicate the heavens thou may not) I beg thee
to put them into the hands of the best bookseller then in vogue, and publish
them against my consent; and (as order and method are the very souls of
business) suppose the title (which I am to know nothing of) were to run thus:
The Letters of Thomas Traverse, abroad, to Timothy Trueman, at home: containing
Every Instruction necessary to form a Footman of Honor, Virtue, Taste, and
Fashion.

Above all points, Timothy, avoid carelessness: let not a slip of our sacred
simulations be seen. Sedley, with all his cleverness and graces, is a most
thoughtless fellow, saving his authority. There is not a syllable in his
correspondence to Thornton but I am acquainted with it. Many a small essential
he hits off to admiration. As far as the maxims of his Author extends, in
regard to being well with women, he is a wonder. But of this exclusive, between
ourselves, he is a bungler. He never puts his epistles into the office with his
own hand; he trusts them to me, under the simple safeguard of a wet wafer: my
knowledge of the world points out to me the necessity of learning all I can,
especially when I can make observations without being observed. But, besides
this, an epistle so hurried off is but half a letter; for nicely is it noted,
that neatness in folding up, sealing, and directing, is by no means to be
neglected: there is something even in the exterior of a letter that may please
or displease, and consequently deserves attention. Thou must know, Timothy, and
I tell it thee in great confidence, that I have bestowed several leisurehours
in preparing for thine eye (and in due time for the world, that is, against my
will) a Treatise on Tooth-picking, wherein I will show the precise method of
holding, handling, drawing, and re-placing the dentical instruments. Besides
which, I have almost ready, an Essay on Nail-cutting; and I have gone a great
way in bringing to perfection an instrument, for which, by the bye, I expect
both a reward and a patent, that is so contrived, as to curve the nails,
prevent their raggedness, hinder the flesh from growing up, and preserve them
smooth, even, and transparent. And that every thing may be complete, I have
sketched out a plan for a satire against tricks and oddities, of which I send
thee, underneath, a couplet or two, by way of specimen of the work.

Some pluck the button from the injured clothes,
While others rub the ears, and pick the nose.
Some are so destitute of air and grace,
Even while they speak, to turn away the face:
Nay, some there are, too delicately dead,
Who always have the fingers in the head;
This smells his meat, and makes his neighbor sick,
This clown eats slow, and that a world too quick.
Nay some, to such a height is rudeness grown,
Will grease their lips in picking of a bone.
I must not, however, forget to apprise thee of the most elaborate of all my
works, entitled, The Art of Carving, wherein the adroitness and gentility of
doing the honors of the table, without hacking across a bone, without
bespattering the company with the sauce, and without overturning the glasses
into our neighbors pockets, will be critically considered. -- At the end of my
performances I propose to annex certain miscellaneous observations on men and
manners, such as knowledge of the world, the taking off the hat, offering the
hand, making the bow, hanging the sword, managing the cane, holding the knife
and fork, blowing the nose, and all the et-caetera essential to a gentleman. I
shall, by way of supplement, add a few free thoughts on modest assurance, a
caveat against bashfulness, hints on exterior seriousness, and cautions on
flexibility of countenance; with a key to the heart, or the study of
weaknesses, infirmities, foibles, and passions, illustrated: in short, Timothy,
my labors altogether, will form a complete commentary on Chesterfield, and I
would have them lettered on the back thus: Traverse on Stanhope. Perspicuity is
a peculiar grace.

Oh! Timothy, why were talents like mine denied an adequate fortune? Here has
Sedley been, almost a month, catching a pair of beauties, simulating a couple
of petticoats; when I, had my purse been like his, could have encompassed a
dozen. To say the truth, he has been rather unlucky too, for one of his damsels
is dead, and the other is moving off.

You will guess what a regard I pay to moral character, when, notwithstanding
my poverty, I scorn to repair my shattered fortunes by impeaching him. No,
Timothy, that would be base; let every gentleman's affairs be sacred: I must
not wound my feelings. I must not be blasted, Timothy, I must not be blasted.

I lament nothing, my friend, but want of money; and yet I have been lately
thinking, manner, may procure even that. Surely, Timothy, the same sprightly
powers that can make a cuckold, cannot fail, if dexterously applied, to help a
man's pocket. There is a very rich, old, rheumatical, heavy-heel'd fellow at
the bath, whom I have fixed my eye upon, and I am resolved to try the
experiment.

Surely the serious exterior may befriend us with men as well as women. I know
his weaknesses, and he says he is sure I was born a gentleman. Money I must
really have.

Now, taking a ride upon the King's highway, rather late in the evening, is so
cursedly hazardous, and I have such an objection to roguery, that I cannot
think of it: but I am persuaded I can simulate or dissimulate (for I hardly
know the distinction) a purse or two, and make the person simulat ed pleased
with himself, and much obliged to me for taking it. This is, at worst, an
ingenious way of running round the halter, without putting the neck into it;
and if we view it as it ought to be viewed, it is only a notable way of making
a man pay so much gold for so much flattery, self-love, and satisfaction. For
the success of all these arduous and laudable undertakings, pray Timothy, and
believe me

Thy constant friend, Thomas.

LETTER CVI. Timothy in Town to Thomas at the Bath.
Mr. Thomas,
I Have received safe all the letters you directed to me, and I should have
honored them much sooner, had it been in my power; but the truth is, I have
too much business to allow much time for pleasure; or, rather, I endeavor to
make my pleasure and my business go fair and softly, like worthy
fellow servants in the same family. Besides this, Tom, you and your master, and
I and mine, (if you will excuse me for following your example of putting the
cart before the horse) are so very different, that it is impossible we should
agree upon any point we talk of. I am a plain fellow, with a worstedlaced
livery and a wig, and you a gentleman with ruffles at your wrists, tambour
waistcoat, and your hair tucked in braids under your hat. I condescend to take
a shilling, or even six pence, a head, by the way of Good bye to you, honest
Tim, from my master's company, and you are above such a custom, and break your
guinea at a tavern or a coffee-house to fling down your half-crown to the
waiter with a dignified disdain, like a Prince.

Philip Sedley, Esquire your Lord, makes it his amusement to rattle away from
salt water to fresh water, from this polite place to that polite place, (to
speak more properly) from one Ton to another Ton, till he has shown himself
every where, without settling any where. My master, on the contrary, Mr.
Michael Bankwell, is an elderly, industrious, regular, bachelor of a citizen,
up at eight, and in bed by eleven, who keeps me because he says I hit his
humor, and he hates new faces. Moreover, Mr. Tom, there is nothing similar
between our families. I save, you do not save. I am prudent, you are not. I
love a wife, to whom I have been married fifteen years, and am only sorry that
I cannot see her more than once in a week. You are tired of yours, to whom you
have not been a week married. I delight in the appellation of plain Tim, or
Timothy. You are offended unless, Sir, or Mr. precedes the name which was
bestowed upon you by your godfathers and godmothers.

In short, Tom, I beg pardon; in short, Mr. Thomas, I begin to think, (as we so
little resemble one another, either in our likings or aversions) that we had
better not put ourselves for the future to the expense of postage; which (as
you and your master are addicted to go pretty far into the country, and you are
apt to write four letters where a man of less genius and spirit would scarce
write one) is really a serious circumstance.

Not that I should propose such a matter neither, were there no other obstacle
in the way: for (to flourish for a moment in your mode) I must inform you, that

"The friends I have, and their adoption tried, I Would grapple to my heart with
hooks of steel."

Frankly to speak therefore, Mr. Traverse, (though you are undoubtedly a youth of
parts, and able to do as much harm as any lad I know) you are not the man to my
mind. In a word, Tom, I never took kindly to you; and since your last letter,
which lies on the table before me, I like you less than ever.

And so you look like a dog now you have got a wife, do you, Tom? and marriage
at three and twenty you call being cut off. Take care you are not cut off in
your flower another way! -- For if the scheme of simulating (the meaning of
which God knows) the rheumatical Gentleman's money out of his pocket should
fail, and you should employ the sprightly powers you talk of in making him part
with it whether he will or no, you may stand a chance to be promoted even
sooner than you wish.

With respect to the books you figure so much upon, I know nothing about them;
and if they relate only to picking of teeth, and turning out of toes, paring of
nails, blowing noses, and taking off hats, I must beg to be excused having any
thing to do with it; in the first place because I think I know all these things
partly as well as his Lordship, and, perhaps, some of them better. As to knives
and forks, I believe I can handle them as well as any nobleman in the universe.
I am no bad carver, unless, I am sharp set; I am not to be told when it is my
duty to have my hat under my arm; and, as to the rest, I never understood, till
his Lordship told me, that it was decent to pick the teeth at all in company,
if it could be avoided.

I shall make you laugh, no doubt, when I acquaint you that I approve a custom
my master has of reading to his family every Sunday evening; and, as to books,
I have as many as serve my purpose; namely, a Testament left by my aunt Mary in
the year 1701, a Whole Duty of Man, Farriery made Easy, and The Servants Guide.

You wish for a full purse, you say, for the sake of doing more injuries to
innocent women: there we differ again: though I am, in the main, contented with
what I have, I now and then sigh for an increase of fortune to distribute
amongst many worthy people whom I know to be under a cloud: and (if I thought
you would not smile too much) I should venture to tell you, that I have two
little orphan cousins in my eye, who shall not want a friend, if they turn out
well, though they have lost a father: and I have more pleasure in seating my
old frail mother her arm-chair by a cheerful fire, and giving now and then a
necessary to a blind brother that I have, all which I pinch out of my
perquisites and wages, than it is possible you should even simulate, as you
call it, out of a stranger, or get by the ruin of all the men, women, and
children, in Buxton.

And so, pretty, polite, Mr. Thomas, I leave you to your undertakings, and beg
that you will do me the favor to leave me to mine.

Timothy Trueman.
Lombard Street, London.
LETTER CVII. Sedley to Thornton.
OH, Thornton! Thornton! Thornton! I must write, I must fly to thy kind bosom
for resource, although it were only to tell thee that thy prophecy is
fulfilled! There walks not the insulted earth, at this present moment, such a
rascal, such a wretch, such a fiend as Philip Sedley. Oh, my GOD! what a stroke
of heart have I this instant sustained! The dead of the night, thou know, is
generally my hour for projection; and, as this evening was particularly dark,
serene, and favorable to my purpose of reflecting upon the mischiefs of the
morrow, I left my chamber about eleven o'clock, and took the path that would
soon have brought me to a little grove, by the side of a still streamlet, where
I could have indulged "meditation even to madness." But, oh, Mr. Thornton! what
an agonizing interruption met me in the way! As I reached the door where I
lately resided, (for on Horace's return to town I changed my lodgings) what, of
all things horrible to the heart, do thou think I saw? Not lightning, not the
flames of a burning town, but a single torch, that displayed to me two coffins,
containing the two fair creatures in whose fates I had been instrumental,
carried on the shoulders of the attendants to a hearse that was standing ready
to receive them: yes, my friend, -- Harriet Homespun, and the pledge of chaste
embraces, were both passing to their last home: I gave a scream that broke
voluntarily from my bosom. I fainted in the arms of a person that was standing
in a pensive posture against the side of the hearse. Oh, Mr. Thornton, it was
Horace himself! -- it was the honest man, the kind friend, the unsuspicious
priest, that I had injured past redemption. I recovered only to meet an eye
that sunk me to the earth again; the dominion of the accursed Dormer was past.
Truth took me by the heart strings, and Conscience cast me upon the knee. I had
no power over my own faculties; and the God of Nature did as he thought proper.
I took the coffin of the wife in my arms: I bathed it with the scalding tears
of unaffected penitence: I told the poor, trembling, astonished priest, whom he
might thank for all his miseries, whom he might consider as the murderer of his
family. I usually carry with me, in my night-walks, a sword: I was armed with
one at present: I offered it to the hand of Horace. I tore open my waistcoat,
bared my breast, and begged from him the stroke of mercy. He refused to give me
the death I merited. Cruel man! he left me to my GOD! I caught the weapon,
shortened it, and pointed it at the detested heart, that directed the detested
hand: but even here I was disappointed by the barbarity of Horace, who wrenched
it from me ere I had little more than perforated the skin; and assuring the
attendants, that I was at times, as now, disordered in my senses, ordered the
hearse to pass on. -- He mounted his horse, bade the landlord go quietly to
bed, say nothing of what had happened, and, wiping his eyes, rode after the
machine that contained the ruins of his family.

I was left alone; my shame is revealed; every man's tongue will be against me
on the morrow. I have followed my Preceptor into the pit of irremediable
perdition. Repentance is the labor of a life: a minute's ignominy is to me
insupportable. I will leave this cursed place directly. I will saddle my horse
privately but never, never shall thou again be disgraced, my still beloved
Thornton, by the presence of the

Detestible Philip Sedley.
P. S.
The poor Fanny Mortimer, too, is dying. I have reduced to ashes that family
also. To possess her undefended form in a swoon! What violence! What villainy!
Oh, shame! shame! I will not send this letter at present. I must ask the
forgiveness of the expiring Fanny before I die; or else I should be ashamed
even to leave existence. I will see her. Poor Mortimer, how have I wronged
thee! Unhappy Delia, how have I deceived thee! Let no man be tempted by the
maxims of a casuist, to leave the plain, simple path of singleness; and be it
engraven upon every heart, indelibly, that HYPOCRISY, however polished, will
lead us to the gates of Hell, and that TRUTH, only TRUTH, can conduct us,
through her temple to Heaven!



LETTER CVIII. Mr. Mortimer to Mr. Thornton. At Lieutenant Vernon's.
Sir,
I Am this moment arrived in town from Buxton, where the body of your wounded
friend, Mr. Sedley, will be found either by you, or any of those who think it
worth while to own him. He has, as I suppose you know, been the occasion of the
most multiplied mischief that ever was, I believe, committed in the same space
of time, in that or any other town. His death however, and his repentance which
appears to be sincere, are all that man can have.

It would by no means interest a stranger, as you are, Sir, to particularize
the sorrows your friend has introduced, not only in my family, but others
equally happy before his admittance into them. But I understand from this
libertine, who put your late letters into my hand after I had wounded him, that
you have married the most intimate friend of my dishonored Fanny: to her it
will not be uninteresting to observe, that it is impossible she should ever
behold again alive that most injured and unfortunate girl, who was upon the
point of expiring before I left Buxton, which I thought it prudent to do,
(notwithstanding my indifference to all future events, till I see what is to be
done with the brokenhearted authors of Fanny's existence.

The scene of Mr. Sedley's villainy has, I perceive, been already exhibited to
the eye of Mr. Thornton, who has, it seems, long been his confidant and
correspondent; though he must pardon me, if I esteem him less worthy the
noble-minded Araminta, who could countenance by his regard, the actions of a
Philip Sedley. -- Happy, however, am I to hear, for his lady's sake, that the
connection is at length dissolved. The affair betwixt me and the offender,
happened in the dead of night: the surgeon, to whom I went myself, in defiance
of danger, assures me the wound is vital. Mr. Sedley, who could not speak, gave
me, at my departure, your address: I must be excused from discovering mine to
Mr. Thornton at present; and I only write to acquaint him of his friend's
situation. My own misery is, indeed, extreme: but I have the honor to be, Sir,

Your most humble servant, Edward Mortimer.

LETTER CIX. Miss Delia Delmore, to Lady Lucy Saxby.
NEVER was the ruin of a happy family so rapidly completed, as that of your
wretched Delia Delmore's. All the fair hopes that I communicated to Lady Lucy,
in my late letters, are now totally overthrown; and the fairy prospect I drew
before her eye has terminated in death and horror. Oh! Lady Saxby, I can
scarce command my hand, or my tears, to enter into explanations: but your kind
condolence is the only consolation now left me, and I will endeavor to collect
myself.

About twelve o'clock, last night, a horseman stopped at our door, and knocked
loudly for admittance. We were seated quite out of spirits at the table, and
had just been talking about withdrawing for the night, while poor Mrs. Mortimer
was lulling her cares to rest upon the sopha, having past the day in a manner
too melancholy to describe to you. William had scarce opened the door, when a
person dismounted, from a panting, hard-ridden horse, and rushed into the
middle of the supper-room without any ceremony. We soon discovered, through the
dreadful metamorphose, the features of Mr. Sedley, his waistcoat unbuttoned,
his hair without a ribbon, his shirt spotted with blood at the bosom, his face
pale and squallid, and his eyes beating all the marks of terror and
desperation. Without making any apology for his intrusion, he drew a chair from
the side of the room, flung himself into it, stamped his foot twice against the
floor, smote his breast with an air of inexpressible vengeance, and, taking a
paper from his pocket, held it at arm's length, and burst into tears. By this
time our attention was diverted from this alarming object to another still more
dreadful; poor Fanny Mortimer was in the strongest convulsions I ever remember
to have seen. Sedley tossed away the paper, after he had crushed it in his
hand, and flew like lightning to Mrs. Mortimer: my father, mother, and my
brother, all assisted: we hurried her up stairs: as I had got to the edge of
the door, I saw Mr. Mortimer, with a trembling hand, pouring out a glass of the
brandy, and lean, almost ready to sink, against the wainscot: and just as I
left the room he took up the paper that Sedley had thrown away. It is a good
way to any bedchamber, and the stairs are sleep: we were some time reaching
Fanny's apartment: she remained insensible. When we got her into the bed-room,
Mr. Sedley went down stairs; where he had not been two minutes before the words
villain! imposter! murderer! were vehemently reverberated. Sir Henry ran to the
head of the stairs, and saying that he distinguished the clashing of swords,
ran down with the utmost precipitation: my mother followed him, and Fanny
started from the bed, and staggering at every step, begged, for God's sake, I
would conduct her down. Terror gave her swiftness, horror lent her temporary
strength: she was in the supper-room in a moment, but even that was a moment
too late; for Oh! Lady Lucy, the deed was done. Mr. Sedley was on the ground,
writhing in blood, and Mr. Mortimer was sobbing in his chair, with the weapon
of destruction smoking in his hand. Fanny Mortimer saw, shrieked, shivered,
and fell down: even at this moment she lies distracted. Her senses are quite
gone: neither bleeding, chasing nor any other applications can recover her; she
pierces us to the heart with her cries. She execrates first Sedley, then
herself, then Mortimer: Sedley is put into one of our beds; my poor father
wishes to hush the horrid affair as long as possible. Mr. Mortimer, without a
servant, has taken the road to London, and from thence to France. Sedley has
never been able to articulate a word. That paper, Lady Saxby, that fatal paper,
This was the last letter Mr. Sedley wrote to Thornton, but delayed the sending
of it till he had seen Mrs. Mortimer. See Letter CVII.
created all the mischief. I enclose you a copy of it, from whence you may
guess the other horrid deeds committed by this all-accomplished villain. What
is to be done Heaven knows. We are all inexpressibly miserable. I cannot go on:
the cries of Fanny are again begun.

Delia Delmore.

LETTER CX. Sir Henry Delmore to Mr. Thornton.
Sir,
YOUR letter came to me too late: the despoiler of my family left this world
about an hour before its arrival: his body, however, shall be conveyed
according to your directions. It was his dying request that he should be
brought before Mrs. Mortimer, my wretched daughter: but he expired before the
request could possibly be granted. In his pocket, which he begged with his last
words I would search, was found a small manuscript, that he enjoined me to
consider as the instrument of every circumstance that had happened. On opening
this I discovered, written with a pencil, the following maxims, the practice of
which might very properly lead to more mischief, if that were possible, than
they have occasioned.

MAXIMS.
1. Have a serious exterior. 2. A modest assurance. 3. Study command of temper
and countenance. 4. Dissemble resentment. 5. Judge of other men by your own
feelings. 6. Be upon your own guard. 7. Throw others off theirs. 8. Study the
passions and foibles of both sexes. 9. Flatter the vanity of all. 10. A
flexibility of manners commendable. 11. Soothe all, please all, conquer all.
12. Be every thing, to every body.
These are, I perceive, selected from the pernicious volumes of the late Lord
Chesterfield, whose letters falling into the hand of any voluptuous character,
might very naturally produce effects the most dreadful. It is very unhappy that
me and mine should have been marked out as the first victims. But that
misfortune, like every other, must be sustained to the best of my ability. My
poor daughter is not dead: her senses are in some measure restored to her; and
perhaps the life of her mother, husband, and father, may be made supportable by
her preservation. In the midst of my own misery, Sir, I have a wish for the
nuptial joy of you, and the amiable young lady to whom you are now so tenderly
united. I formerly knew the brave Lieutenant Vernon, and I beg the compliments
of a forlorn parent may be made welcome to him: recollect me, also, kindly to
Mrs. Thornton, and Mrs. Vernon. The corpse of Mr. Sedley shall be sent to your
address, as soon as the hearse can be provided. He purposely concealed himself
from all his worthy connexions here: nor did I know, till the receipt of yours,
the illustrious ancestors and family of the man to whom I am indebted for this
accumulated agony. Notwithstanding this, my resentment survives not the life of
the aggressor, whom I will see justice and decency done to, with a scrupulous
exactness. His loss of honor would ill warrant my loss of humanity.

I am, Sir, Your obedient servant, Henry Delmore.

LETTER CXI. Miss Delia Delmore to Lady Lucy Saxby. (Dated six weeks after the
preceding)
My dear Lady Lucy,
PROVIDENCE and Felicity seem again disposed to smile upon us. The trial and
honorable acquittal of Mr. Mortimer is over: and the thousand tender
assurances he has given his Fanny, (whom Heaven has spared to us) that the
violence she sustained, is quite forgotten, have contributed, with the caresses
of her affectionate parents, to reconcile her to that life, which GOD seems
intending to continue. Though extremely weak, she is in perfect possession of
her senses, and mends every day. -- There is certainly some turn in her favor,
and perhaps she is preserved as an example of Almighty benignity, that will not
desert persevering goodness, and patient affliction. The truth of Mr. Sedley's
death, I mean as to the precise occasion of it, is little known. The Judge was
extremely delicate on the subject: so was every body concerned. Mr. Sedley's
relations have not wept over the ashes of their kinsman, nor does any body seem
to regret, -- though every body professes to be astonished. For my own part, I
heartily detest his memory. Mr. Mortimer is so truly tender of Fanny, that her
gratitude seems ripening into love: none ever deserved a fonder return than our
Mortimer.

In a word, I warmly hope happiness will again subsist amongst us. On Thursday
se'nnight our whole family sets out for Montpelier: the southern softness, and
a short absence from the scenes of irksome reflection, with a change of air and
company, may be of service to us all. That, in the mean time, you may enjoy all
the tranquillity of a worthy, and ingenuous spirit, is the often-repeated
prayer of,

My dear Lady Lucy, Your own, undisguised, Delia Delmore.

END of the SECOND and LAST VOLUME.
NEW PUBLICATIONS for Sale, at BELL'S Book-Store, next Door to St. Paul's
Church, in Third-Street, Philadelphia,
MISCELLANIES FOR SENTIMENTALISTS: CONTAINING,
I. Life of David Hume, written by himself.

II. Travels of a Philosopher, by Le Poivre,

III. Principles of Politeness, and of Knowing the World, by Lord Chesterfield

IV. Maxims and Moral Reflections, by the Duke De La Rochefoucault.

V. Travels of the Imagination; a true Journey from Newcastle to London, by J.
Murray.

VI. A brief and humourous Account of such Persons as have exercised the Trade
and Mystery to Kingly Government, within the Island of GreatBritain, from the
Accession of James the First, until the fatal Reign of George the Third, when
the Americans declared themselves Independent.

VII. American Independence, an Everlasting Deliverance from British Tyranny,
by Philip F -- u.

VIII. The humble Confession, Declaration, Recantation, and Apology of Benjamin
Town, Printer in Philadelphia.

An ESSAY on CRIMES and PUNISHMENTS: Written by the Marquis Beccaria, of Milan.
With a COMMENTARY, attributed to Mons. De Voltaire. Extract from the Preface of
the Translator.
PENAL laws, so considerable a part of every system of legislation, amd of so
great importance to the happiness, peace and security of every member of
society, are still so imperfect, and are attended with so many unnecessary
circumstances of cruelty in all nations, that an attempt to reduce them to the
standard of reason, must be interesting to all mankind. It is not surprising,
then, that this little book has engaged the attention of all ranks of people
in every part of Europe. It is now about eighteen months since the first
publication; in which time it has passed no less than six editions in the
original language; the third of which was printed within six months after its
first appearance. It has been translation has also been several times
reprinted, and perhaps no book on any subject was ever received with more
avidity, more generally read, or more universally applauded.

N. B. Chambaud's Boyer's, Nugent's Dyche's, Bailey's Martin's Johnson's,
Entick's, Ashe's, Schrevelius's, Hedericus's, Ainsworth's, Littleton's,
Coles's, and Young's Dictionaries, with all the valuable Delphini and other
Classics, whether in Greek or Latin, may also be had at said Bell's Book-Store
-- Also Holy Bibles of various Kinds. Likewise Dilworth's Spelling Books by the
Dozen, Hundred or Thousand.

* French and English GRAMMARS and DICTIONARIES, with great Variety of Jewels
and Diamonds for Sentimentalists, may also be had at said Bell's Book Store, in
Third-Street.


