THE TRAVELS OF THE IMAGINATION; A TRUE JOURNEY FROM NEWCASTLE TO LONDON. TO
WHICH ARE ADDED. AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, AN EVERLASTING DELIVERANCE FROM BRITISH
TYRANNY: A POEM.

PHILADELPHIA. PRINTED, BY ROBERT BELL, IN THIRD-STREET. MDCCLXXVIII.

PREFACE.
IT is impossible to write a book without imagination. This faculty is
concerned with all our ideas; -- it either ininvents or colors them. The
philosophers may say what they please, but a sentiment is good for little
except the imagination is concerned in it. It is the fancy which colors our
sentiments, and makes them agreeable. And sentiments without being tinged a
little with the colorings of imagination, will appear very dull and insipid.

Things are not less real, because the fancy colors them, and this journey is
not less true, because the imagination has had a share in it; -- and there is
not a sentimental journey extant that would have existed, if fancy had not
woven a thread in the web of sentiments.

The critics will find some defects in these travels; but as every man has a
right to travel in his own way, so every critic has a right to find fault if he
has a mind.

J. MURRAY.

CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. A Morning's adventure in passing over the river Tyne -- The floating
chariot -- Hasslet's ghost, or the spirit of Gateshead Fell. Page 10 CHAP. II.
A description of the city of Durham -- The abbey -- The choir -- The clock --
Rural pleasures -- The female antipodes -- The arbor -- The cascade --
Inscriptions upon grave-stones. 19 CHAP. III. An account of the characters in
the coach -- a dispute concerning a standing army -- The theory of mobs -- The
eclaircissement. 32 CHAP. IV. The doctrine of steeples -- The West-Indian --
Reflections upon it. 51 CHAP. V. A new theory of sleep -- The cause thereof The
anatomy of the brain -- The necessity of taking breakfast -- Doctor Law's
opium. Page 59 CHAP. VI. A peep at London -- A conjecture -- The social
interview. 75 CHAP. VII. General Observations upon London -- Melancholy -- The
cause thereof in London -- Banking the way to Heaven. 79 CHAP. VIII.
Observations upon windows -- Remarks upon the police of London. 87 CHAP. IX. A
visit to St. Paul's -- A trip to the court -- Observations upon it -- The
advantages of London porter -- A journey to Hackney -- The hospitable
clergyman. 92 CHAP. X. A meeting of the clergy at the King's-head tavern in the
Poultry -- The first of August, a loyal enternment. 92 CHAP. XI. A brief and
humourous Account of such Persons as have exercised the Trade and Mystery of
Kingly Government, within the Island of Great Britain, from the Accession of
James the First, until the fatal Year 1776, when the Americans declared
themselves Independent. 108 CHAP. XII. American Independence, an everlasting
deliverance from British tyranny. 112
THE TRAVELS OF THE IMAGINATION; IN A TRUE JOURNEY FROM NEW CASTLE TO LONDON.
CHAP. I. A morning's adventure in passing over the river Tyne -- The floating
chariot -- Hasslet's ghost, or the spirit of Gateshead-Fell.
IT is a disagreeable consideration when a person is enjoying sweet repose in
his bed, to be suddenly awakened by the rude blustering noise of a vociferous
hostler. There is no help for it, provided a man intends to travel in a
stage-coach; this evil, like many others, must be suffered with patience.
Patience renders all burdens three fourths lighter than they would be without
it.

The morning was very fine when we entered the coach; nature smiled around us.
It is a pity, thought I, that we are not to ride on horseback; we should then
enjoy the pleasures of the morning, snuff the perfumes of the fields, hear the
music of the groves, and the concert of the woods.

In crossing the river Tyne from Newcastle to London, there is one
inconveniency: you must wait the pleasure of a little arbitrary Bashaw, who
will not move one foot beyond the rules of his own authority, or mitigate the
sentence passed upon those who are condemned to travel in a stage-coach within
a ferry-boat This was written before the temporary bridge was built.
.

As I hate every idea of slavery and oppression, I was not a little offended at
the expressions of authority which were exercised upon this occasion, by the
legislator of the ferry. We were now in the boat, and obliged to sit till this
little tyrant gave orders for our departure. The vehicle for carrying
passengers across the river, is the most tiresome and heavy method that ever
was invented. Four rowers in a small boat drag the ponderous ferry across the
river very slowly.

From the time we entered the boat, before we landed on the opposite side, an
hour was almost spent. We had time to reflect upon what might happen to us by
the way, and an opportunity to put up a few ejaculations to heaven, to preserve
us from the danger of ferry-boats and tyrants. This was the best use we could
make of our time, while we continued in this floating chariot; some of the
ladies who were in the coach, were so hurried in the morning, that they
scarcely had time to say their prayers -- This was a good opportunity.

As soon as we landed on the south side of the river Tyne, we were saluted by a
blackbird, which welcomed us to the county of Durham. It seemed to take
pleasure to see us fairly out of the domains of Charon, and whistled cheerfully
upon our arrival. Nature, said I to myself, is the mistress of real pleasure;
this same blackbird cannot suffer us to pass by without contributing to our
happiness. It is more blessed to give than receive. I wish that all men
understood this maxim as well by reason and tutorage, as this whistler in a
hedge does by instinct. -- The blackbird is free, and sings from a sense of
liberty -- it is under no control -- were it in a cage it might sing, but not
half so sweetly.

Liberty appears to be the first principle of music. Slaves can never sing from
the heart. The capons of Italy, which slavery, by the instruments of
castration, has formed to sing for the entertainment of arbitrary masters, can
never give such musical expressions, as a free citizen, and and a son of
liberty. They may be fit to please slaves or tyrants, but can never give true
entertainment to a soul that knows and values liberty.

After we had passed Gateshead, and ascended the Fell, the pleasures of the
morning increased upon us; -- the whins and brier sent forth a fragrance
exceedingly delightful. On every side of the coach, peerless droops of dew
dangling upon the blossoms of the thorns, helped to add to the presume. Aurora
began now to streak the western sky, and the spangled heavens announced the
approach of the king of day. -- The finest touches of the most curious artists,
are but mean imitations of those various colors which adorn the heavens at the
approach of the sun. Sol at last appeared, and spread his healthful beams over
hills and valleys. The wild beasts now were retired to their dens; and those
timorous animals which go abroad in the night, to seek their food, were also
withdrawn to the thickets. The hares were skipping across the lawn, tasting the
dewy glade for their morning's repast. The sky-lark mounted on high, and
serenaded his dame with mirthful glee and pleasure.

How pure are the feelings of nature? How strong the power of instinct! These
are not warped by the bias of false education, custom, or private interest.
That same lark does all that is in his power to render his mate happy. -- He
sings to make her toil easy, while she is employed about their mutual concerns.
Ah! little do those about the courts of monarchs know, the power of these
unmixed feelings. They are strangers to the chaste pleasures which fill the
soul with unmixed joy. Instead of nourishing and cherishing their own flesh,
they imitate the vilest of animals, in drinking stolen waters to gratify their
lusts. Say, ye libidinous children of licentiousness, did your maker implant
these desires in your nature? or have ye not rather by pursuing evil practices
acquired another nature than the Almighty endowed you with? For shame! do not
blame your Maker for those unnatural desires; he never implanted them in your
constitution. The lust remains in your mind -- and you yourselves have created
it, by tasting too frequently of forbidden pleasures. Blame not your flesh, but
your vile dispositions which you have acquired by the practice of vice, and
formed into a habit. Say, if you have not the same desires to licentiousness*
when nature revolts against the practice? Then, yourselves, and not nature are
to be blamed. -- Go to the lark, ye slaves of pollution, consider his ways and
be wise. -- He cherishes his dame with all the soft endearments of affection --
He does not stroll through the grove or the thicket, to search for some new
amor, but keeps strictly to the ties of conjugal affection, and cherishes the
partner of his natural concerns. Who but must frown, to see a D -- ke, L -- d,
or K -- t, pursuing a strange woman, embellished with a few trappings of
foreign silk and lace, to a house of pleasure, where he receives with his
forbidden enjoyment, a stain on his character a sting for his conscience, and
rottenness to his bones -- While she to whom he swore to be faithful, pines
away at home in discontent and fretful sorrow.

Nature has provided for men all those pleasures which she has formed
dispositions for the enjoyment of; -- but the loose desires which libidinous
mortals attribute to their natures, proceed from other causes -- from a neglect
of pursuing the principles of nature, and from behaving unnaturally.

In the midst of these contemplations, a grave and solemn scene opened to our
view. Hasslet that robbed the mail about two years ago, hangs on a gibbet at
our left hand -- Unfortunate and infatuated Hasslet! had thou robbed the
nation of millions, instead of robbing the mail, and pilfering a few shillings
from a testy old maid; thou had not been hanging a spectacle to passengers,
and a prey to crows. Thy case was pitiable -- but there was no mercy -- thou
wast poor! and thy sin unpardonable. Had thou robbed to support the Crown,
and murdered for the Ministry, thou might have been yet alive. Were all the
robbers of the nation hanging in the same situation, there would be some
appearance of justice and impartiality. But the poor only can commit crimes
worthy of death, -- and those also must be enemies to the Court, or lukewarm in
its interests.

The place where Hasslet hangs, is the finest place in the world for the walk
of a ghost. -- At the foot of a wild romantic mountain, near the side of a
small lake are his remains; his shadow appears in the water, and suggests the
idea of two malefactors. -- The imagination may easily conjure up his ghost.
Many spirits have been seen in wilds not so fit for the purpose. This robber is
now perhaps the genius of the Fell, and walks in the gloomy shades of night by
the side of this little lake. This is all supposition, -- and is perhaps as
good a supposition as any that has yet given for ghosts and goblins becoming
visible.

This dreary place is well calculated for raising gloomy ideas, which tend to
craze the imagination. -- It would not be wonderful to hear some visionary
mortals relating that they saw Hasslet walking by the side of the water. The
imagination is capable of creating things which are not, and can upon some
occasions quicken the dead. Many travelers have seen things that are
invisible, and affirmed what is as improbable, as that Hasslet was seen walking
upon the top of Gateshead Fell.

CHAP. II. A description of the city of Durham -- The Abbey -- The Choir -- The
Clock -- Rural Pleasures -- The female Antipodes -- The Arbor -- The Cascade --
Inscriptions upon Grave-stones.
THE city of Durham is very pleasantly situated. The river Ware, almost
encompasses it round, and forms a peninsula. The banks of the river from Old
Elvet Bridge to Framwell-gate, form a fine amphitheatre. The cathedral church
of St. Cuthbert, and the Bishop's palace, which stand upon the opposite bank,
afford a very grand prospect. The pleasant banks on the west side, adorned with
stately trees, mingled with shrubs of various kinds, bring to one's mind the
romantic ideas of ancient story, when swains and nymphs sung their loves
amongst trees, near the side of some enchanting river. The abbey and castle
call to remembrance those enchanted places where knights errant were confined
for many years, till delivered by some friend, who knew how to dissolve the
chains and charms of necromancy.

Durham would be a very fine place, were it not for the swarms of priests that
are in it, -- who devour very extensive livings without being of any real
service to the public. The common people are here very ignorant, and great
profaners of the sabbath day. It is customary for the idle people to play at
the long bowl on the Sunday when the weather is fair. Indeed, almost over all
England, the greatest ignorance and vice is under the noses of the Bishops. The
reason hereof I will not pretend to say, but the fact is apparent.

This city is a very healthy place, the the soil is dry, and the air wholesome.
-- It is built upon a rising ground, and the fields around it are pleasant both
in winter and summer. The sagacity of the monks appears conspicuous in the
situation of Durham Abbey. It is placed in the neighborhood of as fine land as
any in England, and the greatest part thereof now belongs to the dean and
chapter. Were I to refer the choice of an estate to any persons whatsover, it
would be to the clergy; -- they know the soil of this world better than any
denomination of mankind. Wherever they have taken up their residence, there is
sure to be found a fine situation, and a good soil. The air in and about Durham
being very wholesome, the inhabitants live to a good old age. It is a place of
little trade or business, being far from the sea, having no port nearer than
Newcastle or Sunderland. Here are some manufactories, but they have not yet
been carried to any great perfection.

One thing which travelers admire most in Durham, is the Cathedral, a grand
and ancient building. In this church there is a very fine organ, and an
excellent choir of singers; but devotion is performed here with great
lukewarmness and indifference. The persons who are principally concerned in the
acts of religious worship, perform their parts rather as a grievous task than a
matter of choice.

This ancient building is supported by two rows of Gothic pillars, of which,
scarcely any two of them are exactly alike. The architecture is very noble and
exceedingly delightful to the eye of any person who has a taste for antiquity,
or Gothic magnificence. The font for baptizing children, stands at the west end
of the abbey, as in other churches, for which I know no other reason than sic
voluerunt Romani.

On the south side of the abbey near the choir, stands a very famous clock,
said to be the workmanship of a man who was convicted of counterfeiting the
King's coin: he had no other method to screen himself from justice, than to
throw himself into the arms of the church, and do something meritorious to work
out his own salvation. He made this clock to the holy church, that he might
obtain the pardon of his iniquity. He would have been as surely hanged as ever
Hasslet was for robbing the mail, had he not taken shelter in this city of
refuge. In those days no power could touch an offender who fled for protection
to the clergy; -- whatever crime he might have committed, if the church once
received him under her protection, no other power durst interfere. Accordingly,
this coiner made this clock for the good of the church; and it appears to be of
more real service to the abbey, than the bishop and the whole college of
doctors. The clock is not only a mechanical oracle, but a kind of moral
machine; for in the first instance it directs the eyes of a traveller to the
things which are above; it exhibits a view of the planets and their motions,
and shows the variations of the moon; it points out the day of the month, and
the moon's age, with several other curious exhibitions.

The maker had certainly been a very ingenious person, and any good-natured man
would almost forgive him the sin of coining, on account of the merit he has
displayed in performing this noble piece of machinery. When we entered into the
church, the moon had not finished her first quarter. I thought to myself, that
this clock was certainly intended by the artist to teach the doctors the
changeableness of all created enjoyments, and to put them in mind of laying up
their treasure in heaven, where all fluctuation will cease, and all things
continue in a state of permanency.

On the opposite side of the cathedral, over against the clock, there is a
monument placed in the wall, with an inscription upon one Mr. Hartwell, who was
once a clergyman in this church. Upon the top of the tombstone these words are
inscribed, The last enemy that shall be destroyed is death. This inscription,
upon the very top of mortality, affords a noble reason of hope to those who
believe the New Testament, of a blessed resurrection to eternal life.

The tomb of St. Cuthbert is a curiosity which is shown to strangers. An old
woman showed us where the pilgrims were wont to pay their homage to the same,
-- and if there is any truth in the History of St. Cuthbert, they have left the
marks of their feet behind them; the flag is worn hollow with the ceremony of
obeisance. I observed to the old woman, that when this saint rose, it would
make a strange catastrophe, and spoil the devotion of the doctors; she had no
notion of a resurrection, but stared with wild surprise; I endeavored to
instruct her a little in this important point of religion, but to no manner of
purpose; -- for she neither understood, nor was willing to understand, any
thing of the matter.

It would be uncharitable to impute the ignorance of this old woman to the
negligence of the college of doctors; -- for they are all very learned men, and
preach many learned sermons, which this good woman might hear if she had a
mind. The reason why this female doorkeeper of the house of God, was so
ignorant of the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead, appeared to me to be,
that she did not think herself obliged to believe it, because it is not in the
Thirty-nine Articles of the Church, -- which is all that a member of the church
of England is concerned to believe.

After we were wearied with sauntering in this old Gothic abbey, we went down
to the river side, to view the curiosities in the fields. The large and
extensive banks of the river are all planted with trees, at the foot of which
is a fine gravel walk, where the ladies and gentlemen amuse themselves in the
forenoon before dinner, and in the afternoon before tea. Here a person who is
fond of rural pleasures, may riot at large. The river glides pleasantly by the
side of the banks, and in various parts forms delightful water-pieces of a
great extent. Stately oak and ash-trees, intermized with firs and shrubs, form
a prospect very agreeable to the eye. In summer, birds of various kinds make a
rural concert, more entertaining to a sentimental traveller, than all the music
of the cathedral which stands on the opposite side of the river. These
choristers of the grove sing from the heart, and express the feelings of nature
in a pure manner; -- while the hirelings in the abbey, wearied with their task,
perform their parts by the assistance of art, without feeling the power of the
music they express. Were it not for the perquisites of St. Cuthbert, they would
never tune an organ, nor chant an hymn. But the singers upon the other side of
the river sing from principles of love, without fee or reward. Say, ye learned
men in the college, which of the two are the best singers? Lay aside prejudice,
and tell the truth. Is not the song of a thrush, or a blackbird, infinitely
preferable to human music, where the soul has no part in it? Perhaps these
singers in the wood are as acceptable to him who made them, as any minor canon
or prebendary in any cathedral in England. Presumptive man! wants to make a
monopoly of the divine favor, and to exclude all other creatures from a share
thereof.

As we were walking on the side of the river, we had a conspicuous view of the
Antipodes. I had often heard of them in books of geography, but never saw them
before. It was just a little before dinner, that we walked along the foot of
the bank toward Old Elvet church, when we spied three young ladies walking
upon their feet, with their heads downmost. They were Antipodes to us, and
appeared to be taking a little fresh air before dinner. They had all the
appearance of English ladies, but walked in a quite different direction from
those who travel on our hemisphere. It seemed natural to conclude, that the
Antipodes in all parts of the globe are like to one another; for the Antipode
Ladies at Durham are as like those in the city of London, as ladies possibly
can be like to each other. Whether there is a chink in the globe in this place,
by which the opposite people become visible to one another, or that we saw only
some phantoms, I shall leave for a guess to my readers, -- but one thing I am
sure of, that a worthy surgeon, and a captain of a ship, were witnesses of this
phenomenon. I was ready at first to imagine, that the three ladies were some of
the remains of the ancient fairies, who in days of yore are said to have played
many droll pranks, -- by frisking speedily from one place to another, and
frequently turning themselves into strange attitudes; -- but as none of them
were dressed in green, I concluded they were the Antipodes, and totally gave up
the last hypothesis. I was afraid lest the surgeon, a young man, and unmarried,
should have made a precipitate descent into the river, and gone down to the
region of Antipodes; for the captain, who is a judge of fine women, spoke so
much in their praise, that he would have kindled the flames of love in the
heart of our fellow traveller, had not a cloud speedily removed them out of our
sight, and delivered the surgeon from any further temptation. I would advise
the publishers of courants, chronicles, and journals, to set this down among
the rarities of the county of Durham, instead of paragraphs from Polidore
Virgil, Speed or Stow.

Near to the place where we were favored with this beatific vision, there is
one of the most pleasant natural arbours that the eye can behold. Five stately
ash trees formed into a sort of semicircle, twisted round with ivy, make a very
delightful arbor; -- and to add to the pleasure of this retreat, from the
scorching beams of the sun, there is a cascade at a small distance, where the
water tumbling down a huge precipice, breaks into foam at the foot of the bank,
and makes a solemn sound. In ancient times this would have been an excellent
place of abode for the water nymphs, or the goddesses of the rivers; of which
number some might have been ready to suppose were the above mentioned Antipodes.

We came at last to Old Elvet churchyard, and walked a short while among the
dead. I read over some of the inscriptions upon the tomb-stones; several of
them had the marks of popery upon them, with a common motto in Latin,
frequently wrong spelled. -- Requiescat in pace, or Requiescant in pace, is
sometimes written Requiese-at in pace; -- and upon one stone, there is an
improvement made in the Latin orthography by substituting a g for a q, and then
it stands Reguiese-at in pace. It would be for the honor of the curate of the
parish to have these blunders corrected, lest travelers should conclude that
this ill spelled Latin was engraved upon the tomb-stones by his authority;
however this shall be left to his own discretion.

Our landlord in the New Inn at Durham, is a jolly honest man -- the house is a
very fine spacious building, and might serve the bishop. All things are clean,
cheap, and good, in this inn. If a person comes in well pleased, he will find
nothing to offend him, provided he does not create some offense to himself.
While I was marking down some observations which I had made in taking a walk
through the town, the orders were given for our departure -- so I conclude this
chapter.

CHAP. III. An account of the characters in the coach -- A dispute concerning a
standing army -- The theory of mobs -- The eclaircissement.
WHEN we left Newcastle the coach was full; -- four ladies, a gentleman of the
sword, and your humble servant, made up the principal contents of this stage
vehicle. We sat in silence for a short time, till we were jolted into good
humor by the motion of the coach, -- when the several social faculties began
to open. One of our female companions, who was a North Briton, a jolly middle
aged matron, and a lady of abundance of good sense and humor, entertained us
for a quarter of an hour, with the history of her travels. She had made the
tour of Europe, and had visited the most remarkable places in Christendom, in
quality of a dutiful wife attending her valetudinary husband, who was
traveling for the recovery of his health. Her easy unaffected manner in
telling a story, made her exceeding good company, and none of us had the least
inclination to interrupt her, till she pleased to cease. She knew how to time
her discourse, and never, like many of her sex, degenerated into tediousness or
insipidity. At every stage she was a conformist to all the measures of the
company, and went into every social proposal that was made. As she is the
mother of four fine daughters, in giving us the outlines of their history, she
puzzled us with a sort of enigma, which she was obliged to explain before we
could understand her meaning. They were married, she said, in four different
kingdoms, all belonging to King George the Third, and yet there were none of
them either in Hanover, Wales, or in any of the colonies. There was one of
them, she said, in England, whom she was going to see; another in Ireland, two
in Scotland -- These last appeared to us to be in one and the same kingdom, and
we could not devise a third; -- but by holding to an old distinction, and
division of Scotland, she made out two kingdoms in that part of the island. One
of those ladies was married in the kingdom of Fife, -- so the enigma was
explained.

Another of our companions was a widow lady in Newcastle, quite as agreeable as
the former. She understood how to make us laugh, and could tell a story as well
as most of her six; -- yet far from being troublesome or tedious, she rather
excited our inclination to have her continue, than end her discourse. She only
went with us for one stage, and then we lost the pleasure of her company.

The third was a Newcastle lady, well known in the literary world for her
useful performances for the benefit of youth. This female triumvirate would
have been much upon par, had they been all travelers, for their gifts of
communication were much alike; but the lady who had taken the tour of Europe,
had made several useful observations upon foreign places, which the others were
not acquainted with; -- these rather gave her an advantage, which must be
attributed to circumstances, and not to the want of abilities in her companions.

The last female was the Scotch lady's servant, -- and as she said nothing the
whole way, I shall say nothing of her.

The fifth of our companions was an officer in the army, who in the morning
appeared very drowsy, and came forth of his chamber with a sort of reluctance.
His hair was dishevelled, and quite out of queu, and he seemed to be as ready
for a sleep as if he had not been in bed. He was for a time as dumb as a
quaker, when not moved by the spirit, and by continuing in silence, at last
fell asleep, till we had proceeded near the half of our first stage. During
this time he said no ill.

We finished our first stage, without exchanging many words with this son of
Mars, except some of those flimsy compliments which the gentlemen of the sword
pay frequently to the ladies, when they mean nothing. After a dish of warm tea
had warmed his bowels, and suppled the fibers of his tongue, he began to let us
know that he was an officer in the army, and a man of some consequence. He
seemed to be fond of war, and spoke in high terms upon the usefulness of a
standing army. When he had exhausted his whole fund of military arguments, in
behalf of slavery and oppression; I observed to him, that a standing army had a
bad appearance in a free country, and put it in the power of the crown to
enslave the nation; -- that instead of being under a civil government a nation
was under a military one, when soldiers were let loose upon the subjects for
every small discord which happened between oppressors and those whom they
oppressed; -- and that I thought the militia was sufficient to answer all the
purposes of a standing army. I likewise observed, that instead of encouraging a
standing army, I would advise all my friends against being soldiers, because
that as soon as they commenced soldiers they became slaves for life.

At these words, the spirit of Mars began to stir in him, and he threatened,
that if he was near a justice of the peace he would have me fined for hindering
him from getting recruits; -- adding that he once had a man fined five pounds
for persuading others not to enlist in his Majesty's service. I told him, he
certainly had a right to say all the fine things he could to recommend the
service of his master; and when he had done all that he could to recommend his
service, he had no more to do: -- but, that any man had also a right to tell
his friends whom he saw ready to be seduced into bondage, that they were born
free, and ought to take care how they give up their liberty. -- However, if any
persons were disposed to be slaves, I should not hinder them, otherwise than by
showing them the rights of human nature, and the evils which attended bondage.
I affirmed, that all systems of government where a man was not tried by his
peers, were no better than tyranny and oppression, and contrary to the
principles of the English constitution; that the military government was of
that sort, because a court of officers pretended to have authority to dispose
of a private man's life and liberty, when he was not guilty of any crime, that
the laws of his country would condemn him for; and which in other persons was
not accounted criminal. -- That court martials were nothing but arbitrary
tribunals, oftentimes composed of officers, who, if they were private men,
would receive the same sentence which they passed upon others, and deserve it
better than the poor helpless culprits who fall a sacrifice to their pride and
caprice. I further told him, that Blackstone had affirmed in his Commentaries
upon the Laws of England, That the laws and constitution of these kingdoms know
no such state as that of a perpetual standing soldier, bred to no other
profession than that of war; -- and that it was not till the reign of king
Henry VII. that the kings of England had so much as a guard about their persons.

To convince this son of Mars, that a standing army, as distinct from the
people, is inconsistent with liberty and the English constitution, I told him
that Blackstone had observed from Montesquieu, That to prevent the executing
power from being able to oppress, it is requisite that the army with which it
is entrusted should consist of the people, and have the same spirit with the
people; as was the case of Rome, till Marius new modelled the legions by
enlisting the rabble of Italy, and laid the foundation of the military tyranny
which ensued. Nothing then, according to these principles, ought to be more
guarded against in a free state, than making the military, when such a one is
necessary to be kept on foot, a body distinct from the people. It should wholly
be composed of natural subjects; it ought only to be enlisted for a short and
limited time; no separate camps, no barrack, no inland fortress should be
allowed. -- And perhaps it might still be better, if by diminishing a stated
number, and enlisting others, at every renewal of their term, a circulation
would be kept up between the army and the people, and the citizen and soldier
be more intimately connected together.

It is not easy to make a military man understand any thing without the limits
of his own system; all laws, except what belong to a court martial are nothing
to him. Our companion understood not a single word of either Montesquieu or
Blackstone; all his laws were connected with the sword, and may properly be
called club laws.

I did not find, however, that our military protector was a blood-thirsty man,
for by his own confession, he and another brother officer, had a few months
before surrendered their purses to an highwayman between London and Highgate,
for fear of bloodshed. This shows that some officers are abundantly peaceable
in time of danger, and declare no inclination for taking away men's lives. Our
gentleman of the sword had a great many solid reasons why men should not
venture their lives for a little money: he said there was no courage in
fighting an highwayman, nor any honor to be had in the victory; that soldiers
should preserve their lives for the service of their country in case of war,
and not run the risk of losing them by foolish adventures.

These reasons did not altogether satisfy the ladies; -- for one of them
observed, that robbers were at war with both laws and government, and that the
king's servants were hired to keep the peace, and to defend the subjects from
violence; and that officers in the army are as much obliged by their office and
character to fight robbers, as they are bound to fight the French, or any other
enemy. That foot pads were invaders of other people's rights and properties,
and ought to be resisted by men whose profession it was to fight, and who were
well paid for so doing; that it was for money all the officers in the army
served the King, and fought his battles, and why should they not as well fight
for money in a stage-coach, as in a castle or in a field? She insisted that
only one of them could have been killed by the highwayman, or perhaps but
wounded, and there were several chances that he might have missed them both. --
But supposing the worst, that one had been shot, it was only the chance of war,
and the other might have secured the robber, -- which would have been of more
service to the community than the life of the officer. In short, she observed,
that it had more the appearance of cowardice than disregard for money, for two
officers to surrender their purses to a single highwayman, who had nothing but
one pistol.

The lady's reflections were severely felt by our young swordman, and produced
a solemn silence in the coach for a quarter of an hour, -- during which time
some of us fell asleep, and continued in that state till we came to the inn
where we were to change horses. Two or three glasses of port restored the
officer's courage, and he was determined, in case we were attacked, to defend
us from the assaults of all highwaymen whatsoever; -- and to show that it was
not for want of courage that he suffered the highwayman to escape, he told us a
pretty diffusive story of his own valor in quelling a mob at Dumfries.

Some hungry people in the town of Dumfries, who were not disposed to starve,
when there was plenty of provisions in the hands of the farmers and
corn-factors, assembled in a body to do themselves justice, and to endeavor to
have something to eat. The magistrates who thought that the people had a right
to starve, and were not disposed to assist them in relieving their necessities,
sent for a party of military men to oblige them either to fast discreetly, or
to be shot, to ease them from the cravings of nature and the pains of hunger.
Our hero was sent upon this expedition, and had the command of the party; --
where he performed wonders, all which we received upon the authority of his own
testimony. The poor people were shot at like woodcocks, and those who could get
away with safety, were glad to return home to wrestle with hunger, and the hard
demands of their appetites, till heaven should think fit to provide for them.
This was a hard case, but there was no help for it; authority enforced by
powder and ball, is not easily resisted. The mob, to be sure, are capital
transgressors, when they will not live without food, which they have no right
to taste, unless they are able to pay for it, according to the price that
monopolizers and ingrossers set upon it. -- And it is, to be sure, the duty of
magistrates to protect traders in the possession of whatsoever they can obtain,
but they have no concern with the necessities of the poor, who are no benefit
to society. The modern meaning of authority, is to protect the rich, and to
keep the poor in subjection; for every body knows, that those who have no money
can have no law; and without an exorbitant expense, no poor man can secure his
right when oppressors are diposed to dispute it.

Our young officer was very liberal in abusing those whom he called the mob,
and said they were ignorant, obstinate, and wicked; and added, that he thought
it no crime to destroy hundreds of them. The lady who before had given him a
lecture, began to put him in mind of the foot-pad whom he and his brother
officers had suffered to escape with their purses, and asked him how he would
quell a mob of highwaymen? He was off his guard, and the mentioning of the
foot-pad made him stare with a sort of wildness, as if the robber had been at
the coach door. The conversation ended, and I made the following remarks upon
it.

That all tyrants are either cowards, or under the influence of the spirit of
madness. Those who are disposed to enslave or tyrannize over others of their
fellow creatures, will always behave meanly under a reverse of fortune: Such as
show any degree of bravery, do it more from the influence of madness, than from
any true principle. Tyrants who oppress others, have more reason to dread those
whom they oppress, than the oppressed have to dread them; and they who are in
perpetual fear, are perpetual cowards. Such as do not fear them whom they
oppress, must be in a state of lunacy.

Secondly, the condition of the subjects is very miserable, when they are not
able to purchase the provisions which are necessary for life, and dare not take
them without danger of the gallows. It is a great grievance to hungry people,
to behold a number of large stacks of corn, and yet cannot obtain as much as is
necessary to support life. It is a terrible alternative to fast and starve, or
eat and be hanged. What are mobs and riots in times of scarcity? but hungry
people fighting for their meat. The full, the rich, and wealthy, whose interest
it is to have the prices of the necessaries of life high, may call them rebels,
or by what names they please; but if they would change circumstances for a
small season, they would soon alter their opinion.

Rebellion, is not a principle which rules in the hearts of the poor, it is to
be found chiefly among the rich. -- There are not any among the poor tribes of
mankind who do not pay the greatest regard to their sovereign, and would, if
there were occasion, venture their lives in his service; but they are not able
to endure hunger, for the belly has no ears. Is there no other way of pacifying
hungry people, than to cram powder and ball down their throats? Ah ye who riot
in the midst of plenty, little do ye know how hard it is to endure hunger.
There would be neither mobs nor riots, provided those who have more than they
have occasion for, would dispose of their superfluities to those who are in
distress. They are rebels against his Majesty's government who seek to starve
his people. The principal rebels are nearest the purlieus of the court. His
Majesty has not better subjects than the manufacturing and laboring part of
the people, and these are now obliged to suffer hunger -- and also to endure
the reproach of bad names. It is easy for a glutton of a minister to call his
betters the scum of the earth, and to hire scribblers to abuse them; but what
justice or mercy in this practice? Such behavior to his Majesty's best
subjects, must certainly happen without his knowledge!

Thirdly, all nations are near their downfall, when their internal peace is to
be kept by a standing army. Mutual love is the only thing that can support a
community; when the one half distresses the other, and endeavors to keep them
in subjection by force and compulsion, a dissolution must inevitably follow.

Fourthly, when the army, under the authority of the crown, is composed of the
worthless part of the community, they become a distinct society by themselves,
and will be ready to do any service to enslave the nation; being destitute of
all principles of honor or honesty, for a small hire, they will perform as
many arbitrary and oppressive acts as they expect to be rewarded for; and will
consider the injuries which they do the nation, as nothing more than advantages
taken of another community. Wherever such an army is, they will always consider
themselves as in an enemy's country, and pay no regard to the inhabitants. They
know that they are hated, and for that reason act toward all men as if they
were enemies. Rome was first enslaved by an army of Banditti, and so will
Great Britain, without some new regulations. Our armies at present are composed
of the dregs of the people, and the greatest part of the common soldiers are
made up of the refuse of gaols, and the scourings of the kennels of cities;
they are fit therefore for any dirty work that their officers may employ them
in. -- And a great number of the officers are dissolute and profligate, waiting
for perferment; and for that reason, are ready to do any thing that a prime
minister may order, without so much as paying the smallest regard to the
welfare of their country.

When we had ended our altercation, the officer and the rest of the company
came to an eclaircissement, and instead of repeating grievances or finding
fault with one another's profession, we agreed for the rest of the journey to
admit of nonconformity, and suffer every one to dissent when they pleased.

We saw nothing after we left Durham that was worthy of notice, till we came to
Grantham, except fine fields of grass and corn, which were exceedingly
delightful. -- We came into Grantham about seven o'clock at night -- but what
we saw there, shall be the subject of another chapter.

CHAP. IV. The Doctrine of Steeples -- The West Indian -- Reflections upon it.
THE first thing which travelers see in approaching to large towns, is
generally speaking, the church steeples. As they are ordinarily higher than the
rest of the buildings, they are on that account more conspicuous. There is a
pretty high steeple at Grantham, which salutes your eyes at a great distance
before you approach the town. It seems to be of the pyramidical kind; when we
first perceived it, a question was suggested to me, -- and perhaps as necessary
to be resolved as many in the Athenian oracle. -- But as it belongs chiefly to
the bishops and their clergy, I will not undertake to answer it. It is neither
mathematical, physical, mechanical, logical, nor moral: it appears to me to be
entirely ecclesiastical. For the benefit of the clergy I shall just propose it.
What is the reason that the greatest part of church steeples are for the most
part built at the west end of churches?

If I was to build a church, but I hope I never shall, I should certainly rear
the steeple upon the east end hereof. -- For as the highest winds in this
island generally blow from the west, in case the steeple should be blown down,
the church would be safe: -- while those churches which have their steeples
upon the west end, if they should chance to fall by the violence of the west
wind, would endanger the whole fabric, and perhaps spoil the devotion of the
congregation, if it should fall upon a Sunday or an holy day. For this reason
it would be right, when there is some mention of reforming the church, to begin
with reforming the steeples.

It must undoubtedly have been an article of the church in ancient times with
regard to steeples, that they should be all built upon the west end of the
edifice. If this is really the case, it removes all difficulties, and affords a
sufficient reason for the practice; for as the judgment of the clergy
determines the sense of all things ecclesiastical, if it was their will to have
steeples built in that manner, it is reason sufficient. Sic voluerunt Clerici,
is as good a reason as can be given for any article of the church. I shall
leave the full discussion of this material part of church discipline to the
bishops and their clergy.

As the sun was a good way up when we came to Grantham, we had some time to
take a view of it. The captain and I went sauntering through the town. It Is a
pleasant place, but the houses are indifferently built. -- We saw nothing of
any consequence to mention in this journal. After we had wandered through the
town, we came in to supper, when the captain took care to say some civil things
to our landladyes sister, who is a very handsome young woman. It was easy to
perceive that she was acquainted with those civilities, and could distinguish
between truth and falsehood. She made the captain keep his distance in such a
manner, as put an end to his civilities. The fineness of her person, and the
beauty of her complexion, were joined with a modest severity, that protected
her from the rudeness and insults which gentlemen think themselves entitled to
use toward a chambermaid, which was the character she acted in.

After supper, we were informed, that some of Mr. Garrick's servants were that
night to exhibit in an old thatched house in a corner of the town. They had
come abroad during the summer vacation, to see if they could find any thing to
keep their grinders going till the opening of Drury Lane Theater. They were
that night to play the West-Indian, with the Jubilee, and we determined to see
them perform. The actors played their parts very indifferently, but one could
perceive as much meaning in their performance, as to be able to distinguish
between an honest man and a rogue. I should be very much afraid in personating
the old rascal, of a solicitor too often, of becoming something more than an
imitation. It is not good to try experiments of this sort often, lest the
habits of roguery should become predominant. But the generality of players have
little morality to lose.

The scenes were tolerably good, though the house was extremely bad; -- and the
actors made a shift to go through with the play as well as could be expected.
The finest sight that we saw in this house, which was very crowded that night,
was a fine collection of ladies and gentlemen. I question if any town of the
same size in England can produce such a number of fine women. They were all in
general both stately and beautiful; -- not tawdry and tarnished like some fine
ladies in the metropolis; nature had given them complexions which needed no
assistance from art, and their native simplicity greatly added to their beauty.
I was exceedingly well pleased to see such a number of young men and women in
good health and good spirits. There was no clapping during the time of the
play, though I am persuaded, had it been performed in London, the actors would
have been clapped continually; -- but the people of Grantham follow nature, and
only clap when they feel. The whole of this night's work was over by eleven,
and the company dismissed; when we returned to our lodging. Our time and that
of the audience, might have been better employed, than in seeing a few stupid
rogues endeavor to imitate what some of them really were.

After our return I began to reflect up- the characters in the play, and the
performance of the several actors; as I had not a play-bill, I did not know the
names of the players. -- He who performed the part of old Varland the
solicitor, seemed to act most naturally. It is more easy to imitate vice than
virtue, thought I; and one of the company suggested, that the player who acted
old Varland must have been a rogue himself, otherwise he could not have entered
so well into the spirit of the character.

The play itself has some good characters in it, which are tolerably well
drawn; though I could wish for the sake of Old England, that Fulmer and his
wife had not been in it. Major O Flarherty is an excellent character, and was
tolerably well supported, but those who pretend to know the players say, that
he who sustained this character, was only an imitator of Mr. Moody.

The writer of the West-Indian has undoubtedly drawn his characters with
judgment, but it is not so easy to find actors. Loose, abandoned, dissolute
persons, will never be able to support the characters of Stockwell and
O'Flaherty; and yet the greatest part of our players are both loose in their
sentiments, and immoral in their lives. Lady Rusport is such a character as is
fit to create abhorrence in the mind of every tender hearted person; to act
such a character is a task fit for the Devil, for no woman who deserves the
name of a human being, is able to act it properly, or make a good imitation. If
there are any such old ladies in England, I heartily wish for the honor of the
nation, that they were all out of it.

Nothing pleased me more in the whole play, than the discovery which Major
O'Flaherty made concering the will in favor of Charles Dudley. The characters
of Miss Rusport and Miss Dudley are well supported in the play, but I was not
able to say so much in behalf of the actors.

The farce was intolerable, and notwithstanding all the traveling to the
Jubilee by persons of all ranks, the performance can never afford entertainment
to men of understanding. But it is now time to conclude this chapter, and
proceed on our journey.

CHAP. V. A new theory of sleep -- The cause thereof -- The anatomy of the
brain -- The necessity of taking breakfast -- Doctor Law's opium.
WE left Grantham at two o'clock in the morning, which was much too soon,
considering how little sleep we had got the preceding night. -- But there was
no help for it, -- we were under authority, and were obliged to obey. A person
who has paid three pounds eight shillings and six pence at Newcastle for a seat
in the stage-coach, will be a fool to lose it if he can help it -- But if he
cannot rise early in the morning, no one will wait upon him, or return him his
money.

We were all in the coach at two, -- and the driver went off as fast as if he
would have driven us to Stamford in the twinkling of an eye. As soon as we were
fairly out of the town, I fell asleep. -- And perhaps you will say, what is
that to us? what indeed. -- It is nothing but what every person does every
night, -- and sometimes every day -- unless when your lordships are at a
masquerade, or some such like godly employment; and then you are obliged to
turn the day into night. So far the argument is in my favor. Argument! what
have arguments to do with sleep? More than sleep has to do with arguments, --
for it will hear none, when it comes upon a person, -- but takes possession of
all his sensations at once, and renders him an imitation of death.

I dare venture to lay an equal wager, that there is not one who ever traveled
in a stage-coach can tell what I am going to say next concerning sleep. For all
what Rohault and Boerhaave have said upon this subject, it will be easy to
prove that they knew no more about the matter, than one of the seven sleepers.
--

For in the first place, they never saw it, -- in the second place, they never
smelled it, -- and in the next place, they never heard it. -- Now without the
assistance of some of these senses, how could they know what it is? It is
impossible they could see it, -- for it closes the eyes, and shuts the windows
of the human frame. It is impossible they could hear it, for it makes no noise,
and comes silently upon a person unawares. -- It is impossible they could smell
it, for it is no body; -- and it is a very improper way of speaking to say,
that they could taste or feel it, -- for it seems chiefly to consist of
negatives. It is a sort of want of feeling and sensation; for no sooner does a
man see, hear, feel, taste, and smell, than he is awake.

If an anatomist were to try an experiment, to find out the cause or residence
of sleep, he would as surely waken a man as ever he was wakened in his life; --
and this would spoil the whole experiment. Now Doctors Monro, Hunter, Hewson,
and all the lecturers upon anatomy, know no more about sleep, than a sleeping
man does. -- And the reason is, they never anatomized the brain of a sleeping
man, -- till they do this, without awakening or killing him, I will not esteem
them any better judges than other people. --

All we have to proceed upon is hypothesis, and the most probable hypothesis
must certainly be best. --

When a man is searching after an hypothesis, he is like one who is in search
of the philosophers stone. -- He tries this experiment, and the other
experiment, -- forms this proposition, and the other proposition, and pursues
them through all the modes and figures of logic; and when he can find nothing
to say against it himself, he concludes that nobody else can, and so determines
it to be right.

Rohault says, That sleep consists in a scarity of the animal spirits which
flow into the nerves, whereby the nerves are shut up, and bring on sleep.

Boerhaave defines sleep, to be that state of the medulla of the brain, wherein
the nerves do not receive so copious, nor so forcible an influx of spirits upon
the brain, as is required to enable the organs of sense and voluntary motion to
perform their functions. Now neither of these hypotheses are certainly true. --
It is all guess work; -- and by considering the attributes of spirits, we may
form another hypothesis entirely new.

It is the motion of the animal spirits which keeps us awake, by playing tricks
with our nerves, -- whether we consider them as tubes or strings. -- If they
are tubes, those little spirits must blow in them like a trumpet or a pipe, and
then we are kept awake by wind music; -- if they are cords or strings, then we
are kept awake by vibration, by the spirits playing upon our nerves as upon a
fiddle. As long as these invisible beings are disposed to play upon our nerves,
we are kept awake; but when they cease, then we fall asleep. Is it not then a
very natural inference, that sleep is no more than the spirits taking a rest.

The next thing to be considered in a stage-coach, is the cause of sleep; and
it is a very natural inference from what has been observed, that the cause of
sleep is the weariness of the animal spirits. To play constantly upon the
finest of musical instruments whatsoever, will produce weariness at last. It is
a labor which cannot always be sustained without some relaxation; -- for which
cause the spirits must rest occasionally.

Whether these invisible beings rest voluntarily or involuntarily, I will not
pretend to say. And indeed, as I am only speaking by hypothesis, I may be said
to determine nothing. Nor can any person determine certainly how the spirits
behave in time of sleep, till some of the adepts in anatomy dissect a sleeping
subject, and then we shall have an experiment which will afford the best and
strongest evidence, and the highest degree of certainty.

It is an uneasy circumstance in the way of sleep, when the foot falls asleep
first; for this disgusts the rest of the spirits which are performing their
functions, and makes them fall foul upon the lazy ones, which give over their
employment; -- and in the struggle between the lazy ones and those which are at
work, a man's leg is like to be torn to pieces.

The shortest definition of sleep is, that "it is a God;" this was the Romans
opinion of sleep, who generally deified those powers which they could not
account for. -- The French and the English take the contrary method; for they
will not admit of any invisible power to be divine, unless they can perfectly
account for it. Whether the Romans were wiser than the French and English, or
not, I shall not say, but it is manifest they were more pious.

Be sleep what it will, it is so powerful, that no person can resist its
energy; -- there is a sort of omnipotence in sleep. It can bind philosophers,
fools, giants, heroes, and cowards, so fast with its chains, that they will lie
as still as if they were dead.

As some physiologists have affirmed, that sleep lodges principally in the
brain, it will be necessary to consider the inside of the human scull, on
purpose to find where this deity takes up his residence. --

As Doctor Wallis is too tedious, and Winslow and the rest of anatomists, are
too prolix to copy, I shall take a way of mine own, in developing the contents
of the human brain-case. -- I promise to make no use of Latin or Greek words,
but shall endeavor to reduce the brain to pure English; for, with the leave of
the faculty, I see no reason in the world why an Englishman's brain should
always be rendered into Greek or Latin. When anatomists dissect the brain of a
Roman or a Greek, they may use the language which that brain has been
accustomed to, but when they touch an Englishman's scull, they ought to speak
and write plain English.

It will be only necessary to consider the brain as far as sleep is concerned
with it.

There are in the brain two mothers; a pious, and a hard mother. These take
care of the small vessels, and serve as guardians to the veins and arteries.
The pious mother embraces her children in her bosom, and kindly supports them.
-- The hard or strong mother, which is so called, because she defends the brain
from the severe pressure of the scull, and preserves it from violence, is
likewise of great service to the brain in some other respects. This may be
called the grand mother of the brain, -- the other the true mother.

Between these two mothers, there is a membrane, which is called the spider's
web. -- This is designed for catching intelligences, in the same manner that
cobwebs catch flies. When once an idea is entangled in this subtle net, unless
it is as strong as a be or a wasp, it is impossible it can get away again. --
It must remain there to add to the food of the brain, till it be digested into
a proposition. -- When two ideas are catched here, they make a a proposition,
but if three happen to be apprehended, then they form a syllogism in the brain.

Were it not for this spider's web, ideas would fly as fast out of the brain as
they come into it, and then the human scull would be as void of understanding,
as when the brain is taken out. -- Anatomists tell us, that this spider's web
is situated at the back part of the forehead, upon the hinder part of the head.

This intellectual trap is not in all persons the same, -- for in some brains
it catches the ideas, of points, lines, superficies, triangles, squares,
circles, cones, and cylinders. In others it lays hold upon ideas, of spirits,
and all things which are invisible. -- The first collection of ideas
constitutes a Mathematician, the latter a Metaphysician.

In some, this brain-trap catches nothing but ideas of verses, and articles of
poetry: -- Gods and Goddesses, flames and darts, are stowed so thick, that
scarcely one idea of common sense can get liberty to enter. A brain filled with
this sort of materials, makes the brain of a poet.

When the idea of gain is catched in this cob-web, it infallibly makes a man a
Merchant, and renders him covetous: from hence proceed flattery, dissimulation,
and deceit.

In some, the ideas of places and pensions are crowded thick in this spider's
web, which make them betray their country, and take sides with every dirty
administration.

To explain the human brain more particularly till we come to the residence of
sleep. -- Consider, it is divided into the upper and lower, or the fore and
hinder part. -- These two are separated by the second protuberance of the hard
mother. The upper side of the fore part of the brain is divided into two
hemispheres; and its lower side into four lobes, two before and two behind --
the latter are the largest. Where these four meet, there is a funnel, which
reaches from the bellies of the brain into the spitting gland, -- which gland
is seated upon the Turk's chair. Behind the funnel two small bodies appear,
called the two white protuberances. Between the two hemispheres of the fore
part of the brain, somewhat lower than the windings about, there is a white
body called the callous body. Under this callous body lie the superior and side
bellies, which are divided into right and left by a thin membrane, called the
bright enclosure, which reaches between the callous body and the arch. This
arch is a marrowy body; it has its rise from the fore part of these little
bellies, with two roots which join together, and running toward the back part,
they divide into parts called the legs of the arch. In the basis of these two
little bellies, are four heights; -- the two foremost are called the furrowed
bodies, the other two go by the name of the beds of the eye nerves. Beyond
these, there are two projections called the buttocks, and under them, two
called the witnesses. Above the buttocks, there is a gland called the
pineapple, where some have alleged the soul resides. -- But this I leave to
the learned.

Upon the beds of the eye nerves, there are a number of blood vessels, glands
and water ducts, called the work in form of a chorus. Under the beginning of
the arch, is a small hole, called the bore, or passage to the feet of the arch,
or the way to the funnel; and under the middle of the arch there is one called
the back-hole, which is covered with a valve, called the great valve. The space
under the two foremost bellies, between the holes and the hinder part of the
brain, is the third belly. -- So much for the fore part of the brain.

The hinder part, is situated under the second process of the hard mother, and
the fourth little belly is discovered by dividing this part of the brain
lengthways. -- The extremity of this, goes by the name of the writer's quill.
Here are two marrow bodies, called little feet, which are the basis of the
under part of the brain. The marrowy part in this corner of the brain, branches
out like a plant.

The substance of the brain is distinguished into the outer and inner, -- the
one barky, ashy, or gland-like -- the other marrowy, white, or nervous. There
is likewise in the brain, the marrow which is longer than it is broad, or the
oblong marrow; -- it appears in two bodies, from the former part of the
hindermost lobes of the brain. These two bodies are called the legs of the
oblong marrow. When they are joined, they form an isthmus, and beyond this is
an eminence, which has received the name of the ring process.

The spinal marrow is another thing contained within the human brain-case. It
is a production of the oblong marrow, and passes through the great bore of the
scull, and the channel of the spine; it enlarges about the last joint of the
back bone, and the first of the neck, where the large nerves branch off to the
arms; it enlarges in the loins, where the leg nerves begin. -- The lower end
thereof, with those and other nerves, is called the horse's tail.

I shall not proceed any farther in the description of the brain, but enquire
whether sleep resides in any of these parts already mentioned, -- or whether it
may not take up its residence in any other part of the body.

The most probable conjecture that I can think of, is, that as all the spirits
seem to originate in the oblong marrow, and pass through the great bore of the
scull into the spinal marrow, whereby all the nerves are supplied with spirits,
either to blow in them like tubes, or to beat upon them like fiddle-strings; so
sleep takes possession of this sally-port, and stops these little invisible
beings from issuing forth; and on this account the body ceases to perform its
usual functions. -- If any person knows more concerning this subject, they are
welcome to the discovery.

After a person in perfect health has traveled two stages in a stage-coach,
even suppose he should take a nap, he will find himself disposed for his
breakfast at the end of the second stage. -- This is necessary for the purpose
of keeping the spirits strong, to beat off sleep from his quarters; -- if a
traveller desire to keep awake, he must take his breakfast to strengthen his
spirits.

There are only two ways to keep a person awake, when he sees no visible
danger; -- either to make him very hungry, and then the spirits will turn
frantic and fight sleep, -- or to take all the reasonable supplies which nature
requires to support them in a regular manner.

As the animal spirits are restrained from their usual exercise by sleep, --
and as these invisible beings have been discovered to act in matter, so Dr. Law
and others have conjectured that the rational spirit must also fall into a
state of inactivity, as soon as the organs of sensation are unfitted for the
soul to act upon. When therefore the system of sensation fails, the action of
the soul (which they consider to depend as much upon the senses, as waking
depends upon the free exercise of the animal spirits) ceases, till a new system
of sensations be restored to it. -- And there is no certainty from any
principles of philosophy, that ever there shall be any more cogitation, if the
soul fall asleep at death.

This is but a dreary idea, and philosophy cannot help us out of this gloomy
difficulty. If the human soul falls asleep at death, and Dr. Law has assured us
that it will; there is no certainty that ever it shall wake again. -- Be
thankful ye children of wickedness! there is no pain or punishment in the next
state. Ye shall all sleep as sound as a top through all eternity, when all
former actions shall be quite forgotten. This is Dr. Law's spiritual opium, of
which I shall say nothing more in this chapter.

CHAP. VI. A peep at London -- A conjecture -- The social interview.
IN a fine summer afternoon, when you come over Highgate-Hill, you may see
London. -- In a stage-coach you have only a peep at it. There is, said I, a
nation of steeples in London. -- It must be a wonderful holy place, there are
so many churches in it. -- The sun shone upon the windows, and what we saw
appeared to advantage. -- It is a very fine place to be sure, otherwise there
would not so many go to it.

The fields between Highgate and London, are naturally pleasant, but they were
now parched for want of rain, not a single shower had fallen around London for
six weeks -- the fields were burnt up, and there did not appear to be a morsel
of grass for either horse or cow. It brought the days of Elisha the prophet to
my mind, and the case of Samaria.

The officer said, "the rain came down where it pleased." -- Nay, said one of
the ladies -- "where God pleases." -- The lady was right -- I expected that
there would have been a dispute about Providence -- but the officer yielded. --

The lady had the better of the argument. -- What place is London, thought I to
myself -- It is a large place -- a rich place -- and a wicked place; it was all
conjecture, for I never saw it before. "What sort of a place is St. James's?"
It is the King's palace -- "Do we see it yet" said I to our companions? they
answered, no.

I proceeded in my conjectures. -- Perhaps London is four times as large as
Newcastle -- it is ten times as large -- it is far too large. Is it a walled
town? are the walls high? There are no walls at all.

In the midst of my conjectures we reached London -- We are in the city now,
said I, -- not yet replied the officer, who had a mind to contradict me. This
is only the west part of the town -- you must pass Temple Bar before you enter
the city. I did not mind that distinction -- it is all city, said I to myself
-- The coach stopped -- we are in Holborn now, says the ladies -- we must get
out, said the officer. And so we did.

The rest of the company in the coach, went each their own way to their
friends; but I being a stranger, continued all night in the inn where we
alighted.

I had not been two minutes out of the coach, when I was surrounded by sixteen
intimate acquaintance. When a person is in a strange place, the sight of a
friend has more effect, than on other occasions. I thought myself at home, and
sat down. After enquiring concerning one another's welfare, all my acquaintance
went away, except four. Our company now consisted of a clergyman, two sons of
clergymen, and a doctor of physic. We called for some London beer, and drank
the health of our friends in the north. -- People may be happy any where,
provided they do not make themselves miserable. We parted in good time. -- My
friends went to their lodgings, and I went to bed.

CHAP. VII. General observations upon London -- Melancholy -- The cause thereof
in London -- Banking the way to Heaven.
THE people in London are vastly discreet to those who bring money with them,
and ask nothing from them. -- They naturally suppose, that those who come only
for a few weeks, have no favors to ask, and are very glad to see them. They
are sometimes mistaken, for those who come from the country have their own ends
in visiting the metropolis; and more come with a view to advantage, than merely
for pleasure. Pure and refined pleasures are not to be met with in large
cities. They may be enjoyed in greater perfection in the country.

When a stranger comes into such a city as London, he will naturally consider
the characters of the inhabitants; but if he was as wise as Solomon, he could
not describe the character of the Londoners. They are not of one, but a
thousand characters. Some are civil and kind; some are rude and uncivil; --
others are haughty, and some are humble. -- London is an abridgment of the
world -- whatever is said of the world, may be said of it. -- I wish there was
no reason to say, that it lies in wickedness.

London is a place of trade; the inhabitants are chiefly engaged in business;
but if it was not supplied from the country, in half a century it would be very
thin of people. Those that are born in London, are generally weak and puny, and
those who come to reside in it, grow every day weaker than they were when they
came to it. -- It is the same in all large towns.

Compliments are carried to great perfection in this great city; I wish honesty
was carried as far; but it is impossible for honesty to stay where there is
much business. -- This is no reproach to London, for Babylon, Tire, and Rome,
were so before it, and company takes away the edge of reproach. -- Mankind
seldom are ashamed, while they have multitudes to keep them in countenance.

The Coachmen in London are honest, and the reason is, they dare not be
otherwise; there is a law which enjoins punishment for them, if they fail in
point of honesty. -- Forced honesty is better than none; for though it does no
good to such as are honest for fear of punishment, yet it does good to the
community -- The gallows is good for some purposes.

In London, as in all great towns, noble actions are oftener done through
ostentation, than from a principle of truth; but as this city is composed of a
great variety of characters, this motive is stronger or weaker, according to
the habits which individuals have acquired before they came there, or the
influence which custom has upon the tempers of particular characters.

The merchants in London have the art of setting off all things to the best
advantage; the goods in their shops are full as good as those in their
warehouses. If they are not better, nobody can blame them. -- A trader always
makes the best of his window; and if it were not for the fine windows, the
Printsellers might shut up their shops. It is not safe, however, to stop to
look at their windows; for they are too often crowded with thieves, -- and you
are in danger of having your pockets picked.

The Bookseller's shop is the bank of authors; for none else in London pay the
least regard to genius. They endeavor, however, to serve themselves first, by
making a good bargain, -- and they may be said to live upon the brains of
authors.

Cheapside is one of the finest places in the city, but if there were fewer
shops in it, there would be more trade; it seems to be over-stocked, which
impoverishes the merchants; the business of the linen draper seems to be past
its meridian.

The Barbers in London are all sabbath breakers; they shave and dress upon the
Sunday, when the people will let them, which is generally as often as they
come. The shopkeepers have adopted the Macaroni heads, and are at as much
pains with their heads, as with their shops. If they endeavored to mend their
hearts, they would find the advantage of it; for it would be a means of keeping
them from cheating, to which they have many temptations.

The west end of the town consists chiefly of idle people, who have nothing to
do, and on that account are prone to do ill. The principal manufacturers of
vices lodge there; and it would be happy for London if nobody had any
communication with them. -- But then the superfluities would not sell; they are
therefore obliged to encourage sin for the sake of trade.

St. James's Park is a very fine place, but I have seen an hundred as fine
places in the country. Remove the King's palace and the court twenty miles from
it, and it would be no better than many other fields about London.

When I came to London, I thought the plague had been in the city, or the King
was dead; for all the people had distress in their countenances. Melancholy had
overspread the town, but raged most about the Exchange. The bulls and bears,
like the dogs in Homer, were first seized with this plague, which began in
Change Alley.

So strong was the force of this melancholy, that it was fit to bristle the
beard of a Jew. One would have thought that the whole town had just come from
the tabernacle, or had been within a few paces of purgatory; the muscles of
their faces were so severely distorted, that they looked as if they had seen an
apparition, or had been frightened by the Devil. The poor rogues who were going
to Tyburn, did not seem more concerned than the Gentry upon the Exchange.

The reason of this appeared to be, that they had not laid up their treasure in
heaven, but had given it into the hands of the banker; who instead of returning
them their own with usury, had hidden their talents in the earth, so that none
of them could find their money, but lost both stock and interest. --

This was the cause of their melancholy; the banker had run off with their God,
and what had they more? In London the fall of the stocks, or the failure of a
banking-house, is more severely felt than the stings of an ill conscience, or
the pangs of remorse. Where one man hangs or drown himself from a religious
consideration, ten jump into the Thames for fear of poverty, or from grief
through the loss of money.

Of all persons and classes whatsoever, there are probably the fewest bankers
that go to heaven; and yet banking is the only way to it.

Our Savior commands all his disciples to "lay up their treasure in heaven;"
this is their true bank; and where their treasure is, there will their hearts
be also. Therefore the only way to dispose men's minds to the things that are
above, is to lay up their treasure in heaven. I was lead to this reflection, by
observing on the Exchange almost all the people in the country, who had
entrusted their money in the hands of city bankers, closely attending to look
after their treasure. -- How hard is it for rich men to be saved? It is
impossible -- Impossible to every created power -- It is a mercy it is not
impossible to God! -- It is a maxim which will hold in general, though there
are some exceptions against it, that those who have most money, have least
mercy. -- If it were not so, there would be few poor and distressed people. --
Those who give to the poor, lay up their treasure in heaven, and can never
loose their money, if the Scriptures are true. -- But what have the Scriptures
to do in observations upon London? what indeed! Scripture will not sell; it is
a stale commodity, and does not answer to the booksellers. -- We shall pass it
over then, and conclude this chapter.

CHAP. VIII. Observations upon windows -- Remarks upon the police of London.
WHAT a great number of fine windows is there in London? -- but they are as
well paid for -- the tax upon window-light comes high. The poor as well as rich
feel this imposition. We talk of Liberty, but when we have not the free use of
light, it does not look as if we were very free. The wisdom of the legislature
is not to be questioned, but it is hard to lay such a heavy tax upon what
nobody can want. It smells rank of either distress in the government, or a
design to oppress. We must charitably suppose the first, for to suppose the
latter would be to blame the ministry, which must not be allowed. -- It is, and
it please your highnesses, very hard for poor people not to have liberty to
peep at the Sun, the moon, or the stars, without a prodigious expense. But how
can it be helped? If it pleased his Majesty and his Ministers, to lay the tax
upon painted ladies and loose women -- There are perhaps as many in London as
there are windows, -- or if there are fewer, advance the taxation.

But this would be still hard upon the town -- The shopkeepers would not be
able to keep mistresses, and the ministry would have to pay as well as the
rest, which would not be fair. However, there is no fairness in taxing light --
for it is absolutely necessary, and no person can want it who have eyes to see.
-- Suppose a person was to choose to live in a house without windows, there is
reason to fear they would tax his door, or lay an imposition upon his darkness,
for his candles are taxed already. There is something unjust also in the mode
of taxing windows, -- the quantity of light, and not the number of windows
should be taxed. There are some windows as large as ten, why is not the tax in
proportion? Oppression advances by a gradual motion. -- Ovid tells us that the
world was once a common. -- Communemque prius, ceu lumina solis, and aurae
Cautus humum longo signavit limite mensor.


The ground was as free as the sun and the air. -- But now the world is
divided, and the light and the air taxed; -- and the divisions are not very
equal, nor the taxes very light.

Cheapside, in a fine summer day, is a place of great concourse; -- a great
number of heads are to be seen in the streets, and they are all taxed. -- They
must undoubtedly bring a great sum of money to some place or other, and fill
some peoples purses.

Perhaps there are seven hundred thousand heads in London, which pay twopence
a piece; this will amount to five thousand eight hundred and twenty three
pounds. -- A goodly sum for liberty for men to use their heads. This to be sure
is for the good church, which ought not to be grudged. -- But then there is
also twopence for smoke, and fourpence for bread and wine at Easter. -- All
this will make near eleven thousand nine hundred and sixty-six pounds; for
which the people have no satisfaction, and the government no real advantage.

Some will be ready to smell Atheism from this reflection, and cry the church
is in danger. -- And she ought to be in danger, when she devours so much money
which might be better applied. Ah! these petitioners will never rest till they
bring in a root and branch petition; and where is the harm of that? People in
these dear times are obliged to take all methods to save money. And if it
please your reverences, you would do the same thing yourselves, provided the
Lord would turn it to your interest.

The Police in London is very good, and the government of the watermen on the
river Thames is also tolerable. -- No person will impose upon you, provided you
know the rules, and put them in mind of the laws. The coach-hire is all
settled, and so exactly, that a few yards will bring you in for one sixpence
more. -- There is no free grace among coachmen -- you must pay for every inch
of your way.

The city of London is full of lamps at night, and the watch is set at eight
o'clock, and continues till the morning light. The watchmen in London are the
most insignificant creatures I ever saw. -- Some of them are scarcely able to
walk -- a great number of them are old superannuated persons, who can only sit
in a box, and look at those who pass by. -- And if there is any truth in
reports, there are a number of them kept in pay by the ladies of the town.
Those who keep good hours in London, are in no danger; as for others they must
abide the consequences. Considering the largeness of the place, and the great
concourse of people, London is better than could be well expected. Any person
may live very happy in London, provided they have money, and are disposed to
live peaceably -- and if they are inclined to do business, they may have
wherewith to live upon.

CHAP. IX. A visit to St. Paul's -- A trip to the court -- Observations upon it
-- the advantages of London porter -- A journey to Hackney -- The hospitable
clergyman.
FOR a person to be in London, and not see St. Paul's, is next to impossible.
He may see the steeple before he comes near it; -- and he hears so many
extraordinary stories of its height and greatness, that his curiosity is
wonderfully excited before ever he approaches it.

It is needless to say, that St. Paul's church is five hundred feet in length,
and from the marble pavement to the cross on the top of the cupola, three
hundred and forty feet high. -- It is both high enough, and long enough, in all
conscience.

What is very remarkable in this large consecrated pile of building, there is
but a small part of it devoted for public worship. The rest is a lobby for
people to divert themselves in, and for loose people to make assignations.
There is a good organ in this church, and a choir of singers, who sing
tolerably well, but not extraordinary. Public worship is performed here in such
a manner, as any sober person would believe that the worshippers were infidels.
The persons concerned, appear either no way interested in their acts of
devotion, or divert themselves during the time in a scandalous manner. They
would play a comedy better than perform religious worship -- Indeed their whole
performance has more the appearance of a farce, than devotion. Public worship
is also but ill attended here; -- except those whose livings depend upon their
religion. -- Scarcely any else appear, except strangers who come out of
curiosity. If strangers were to judge of the truth of religion, from the
behavior of those who profess it in this place, they would certainly conclude,
that it was a fiction, and of no real service to mankind.

There are a few door-keepers who expose St. Paul's church to sale every day in
the year. -- You cannot have the privilege of seeing the gallery or the
steeple, without paying at every door you approach. What one sees, is well
worth the money; but it appears mean for christians to prostitute their church
for gain. In the very time of divine service, you may have the attendance of a
church officer, to show you all the curiosities about the cathedral.

Upon the top of the steeple, you have a fine view of London. -- I know no
place where it is so well seen at one view. The houses appear from hence to be
small insignificant huts, and the people like pigmies. The whispering gallery
is a great curiosity, -- you can hear a man who is so kind as to give you an
abstract of the history of this church in whispers, at a great distance, when
you would think that he was speaking very loud. -- But those who have read
Maitland's history of London will need no information concerning this building.

This cathedral is a grand piece of architecture, and Christopher Wren deserved
a patent for building churches.

It is reckoned a great meanness for a person to be in London, and not to visit
the court, and see the King. -- I was under a necessity to avoid this
imputation, to take a trip to the court to see their majesty's. The ideas of
those who have never seen a court, nor have had the opportunity of seeing
crowned heads, are ready to make them too sanguine in their expectations. --
The stories which they read in newspapers concerning his sacred Majesty, their
Highnesses the Princes of the blood, -- and the honorable Secretaries of
State, make them expect to see something very extraordinary. -- They are ready
to imagine, that kings and queens are not like other men and women, but of an
higher rank of beings.

His Majesty and the Queen came from Kew about half past one o'clock, and I
watched carefully to have a peep at them in their coming out of the coach. I
was in as good a situation as could be wished for. -- I no sooner saw his
Majesty, than the old maxim in the law of England came to my remembrance, that
the King can do no wrong. -- I am sure, said I to myself, if the King cannot,
the Queen will not do any wrong. She seemed exceedingly well pleased, and
appeared to smile upon the spectators with a great degree of affability. -- I
wished that his Majesty had done the same. Whether the little wag the Prince of
Wales had been calling Wilkes and Liberty that morning or not, and had
displeased our gracious Sovereign, I will not pretend to say, -- but I thought
he seemed not to be pleased. I wished him his health, and a long prosperous
reign -- but he did not hear me, for I said it inwardly. Vive le Roi, thought I
again, and may his Majesty have cause to be better pleased the next time I come
to see him.

There were none there, that wished him greater prosperity than I did. --
First, I wished, that he might be preserved from the bad advice of all selfish
ministers. -- Secondly, that he might always live and reign in the esteem of
his people. -- Thirdly, that he might always be, and seem well pleased, when
his subjects came to see him. -- And, lastly, that his Queen and his family
might prosper, and that Great Britain might never want a prince of the
Brunswick line, who was both able and willing to rule the nation according to
the laws of the constitution. If these are bad wishes, I am ready to beg his
Majesty's pardon.

Having stood a little at the door, we at last went up to the lobby, to see the
great people pass along to pay their respects to their Majesty's, where we saw
the ambassadors of France, Denmark, and Portugal. They were just like other
men, only they had more servants, and assumed a great deal of state.

There were some poor noblemen, and a number of pensioners, who came also to
make their court to his Majesty, probably to have their salaries enlarged, or
at least continued. -- By all means let them have some small matters. -- I
cannot endure the thought of sending away beggars without giving them
something. -- But if it please your Majesty, thought I to myself, keep them out
of the House of Commons, and do not lead them into temptation to betray the
interests of their country. -- Seeing they are beggars, do not place them upon
horseback, lest they ride to the --. If beggars have wherewith to live upon --
there is no reason why they should rule a nation.

The next thing which I was fond to observe, was the ladies of the court. --
What a falling off was here! except her Majesty, there was not one that was
worth the looking at. The famous Miss Vernon was there, the sister of the
chaste lady Grosvenor. I had heard of her being the toast of the town, and the
star of the court. -- But one of the ladies of Grantham would outshine a
regiment of such beauties. People indeed differ in their opinion; courtiers do
not follow nature, but plain people do. A painted woman may please a courtier,
which a clown would despise. A fine woman will never improve at court, unless
she imitate the Queen. -- There was more of nature and plain simplicity in her
Majesty, than about any woman I saw in London.

There was a very droll sort of a creature which had come to court among the
rest, I could not learn her name, but she had all the appearance of a London
Doll, with a death's head upon it: Her eyes were sunk in her head, her nose was
prominent, and inclined at the end like the bill of a kite; her cheeks were
sticking to the bone, her teeth were too large for her lips, her chin was
peaked like the snout of a pig, and her brow was furrowed with wrinkles. -- She
had, however, a very large fardingal, and was dressed like a girl of eighteen,
-- for which cause I took her for an old maid. My companion and I thought that
we had enough of the court for one day, and so we came away.

After walking four or five miles in London in a hot summer's day, thirst is
ready to scorch a man's jaws. -- A draught of porter is of great service on
such an occasion. -- We left the King, the Queen, and the court, and went into
the first beer-house we could see. A draught of beer had a good effect upon us;
it refreshed our spirits, and put us in trim for walking. We were as happy with
our porter, as any of the court could possibly be with Madeira or Champaigne.
It was very good, and we were very thirsty, which made us relish it the better.

We proceeded in our way together. -- My friend would have called a coach, but
I was determined to have none. -- Two shillings in London is as well in a man's
own pocket, as in that of a coachman. Money is always necessary, and two
shillings may be of service another time, said I to my companion.

We parted and I went on to Hackney. It was by this time three o'clock, and I
began to wish earnestly for my dinner. I had no occasion to wish when I came
there; it was as ready as I could have wished it. I was engaged to dine with a
clergyman there, who entertained me very kindly, and with a great deal of
hospitality.

Mr. S -- ns is a person who loves his friend, and is altogether undisguised in
his friendship. Without that needless ceremony, which is often substituted in
the room of sincerity, you receive a kind welcome, which you cannot miss to
perceive to be real. Mrs. S -- ns at first sight, insures you of a good
welcome, and without using a number of needless compliments, expresses the best
breeding with the best of hearts. -- Here you may perceive dignity without
pride, hospitality without vanity, joy without levity, and sincerity without
disguise.

I had not been ten minutes in this house, before I forgot that I was from
home, and behaved with as much freedom as if I had been seven years acquainted.
There is something in real friendship which is irresistible, and gains the
heart insensibly. Any person who possesses the feelings of friendship, will
soon feel its sympathy, and perceive its influence.

Hackney, in summer, is a sort of paradise, and I am very glad of it, for the
sake of this worthy family, which I never saw before. There are pleasant
fields, fine walks, and pure air. May the sun shine with his benign beams, and
the rain fall in its proper season upon this pleasant place! And may my
hospitable clergyman be never worse, but always better, than the last time I
saw him!

CHAP. X. A meeting of the Clergy at the King's-head Tavern in the Poultry --
The first of August, a great Entertainment.
THERE happened to be an assembly of ministers met for prayer at Founders-hall,
upon a very special occasion. The intention of this meeting, was, to ask the
favor of Heaven for a blessing upon a seminary for training up young men for
the ministry. This is a sort of a monthly solemnity, and is ordinarily
concluded with a good dinner. I was invited by a friend to attend this meeting,
which I did, both as to the praying and the dining part. We had abundance of
both.

The prayers were begun before I came, but I was in time to hear three long
prayers, and a tedious dull sermon. There are some ministers in London, pretend
to have a great intimacy with the spirit, but from what I heard, it did not
appear that they were more acquainted, than their neighbors. The sermons which
I heard from some of them, were indigested rhapsodies, destitute of sentiment,
and crowded with absurdities. They made exceedingly free with the Scriptures,
in applying them to cases quite beside their purposes. A mystic jargon, which
might have suited the days of John Dun Scotus, made up the greatest part of
their discourses, and their prayers were composed of irreverend addresses to
the Deity, concerning things of very little importance. A shameful
particularizing of individual persons, and of things, which appeared to be
intended rather as flattery to their hearers, than solemn addresses to God
Almighty.

One thing appeared very strange. The minister from the pulpit thought it no
shame to sound his own praises, and speak to his own commendation, in a manner
that no modest person could either do without shame, or hear without blushing.
A minister must be far gone in the practice of hypocrisy and self deceit,
before he can have the face to commend himself before a public audience. It is
impossible that any man can have a good meaning, when he commends himself.

After we had been a long time in the meeting house, we at last retired to the
tavern; where the devotion was succeeded with a good dinner, and the Sermon
washed down with a good glass. We all were entertained at the expense of the
society, where the devotion was performed, and made kindly welcome by a few
very decent laymen. The master of the academy sat at the head of the table, and
our entertainment was opened with a pretty long grace; -- all hands soon made
the best use of their time, till their appetites were fully satisfied; when two
or three toasts went round, and every man drank what he pleased.

A little tartar of a parson, whose conscience seemed to be scandalized with
the dresses of some of the lay-brethren, though his own was very spruce, and
his fingers covered with rings, began an oration upon the sinfulness of
tye-wigs. Such ornaments (he said) were inconsistent with the profession which
they made, and in the days of the puritans would not have been allowed. -- But
now the times were bad, and sin abounded to a great pitch. A waggish young
doctor who was present, could scarcely keep his gravity, when the dispute
concerning the tails of wigs was begun, which greatly chagrined the little
parson. The lay gentlemen said some sensible things in defense of their wigs,
and seemed to have the better of the argument. I did not choose to interfere in
this religious dispute, any farther than by asking this enemy of tailed wigs,
whether the immorality of a wig lay in the tail thereof? -- The question raised
a little laughter at the expense of the parson.

As there was nothing to pay, every man had liberty to go when he pleased, so
the gentleman who introduced me, and the waggish doctor, bade them adieu, and
came away.

Upon the first of August, I was invited to an entertainment at the Nag's-head
Tavern in Leadenhall-street, where a number of ministers were met to celebrate
the accession of George the First, to the throne of Great Britain. They had a
sermon before they met here, but I was not present to hear it.

The complexion of this meeting of clergy, was different from that of the
former -- they seemed to be pleased with one another, and showed all the marks
of true friendship. -- When dinner was over, and the toasts gone round two
gentlemen entertained us with two songs; "the glorious first of August," and
"the Roast Beef of Old England;" and I dare say that few in England could have
sung it better. There was no dispute concerning wigs in this assembly, but
every person was a friend to another. -- The reverend gentleman who preached
the sermon, was a cheerful old man, and with the gravity of the divine, mixed
the cheerfulness of the friend and companion so well, that he seemed to be an
amiable character. This entertainment was carried on with decency, and ended
with joy. -- So, Reader,

FAREWELL.
A brief and humourous Account of such Persons as have exercised the Trade and
Mystery of Kingly Government, within the Island of Great Britain, from the
Accession of James the First, until the fatal Year 1776, when the Americans
declared themselves Independent.
SCOTCH Jemmy, the presumptive bastard of an Italian fiddler, was born in
Scotland. Turning out a bonny lad, and of quick parts, he was put out
apprentice in that kingdom, to the business of King Craft (on which he
afterward wrote a treatise, and called it by that name); to this he served
part of his time there, and the remainder in England as a turn-over. He dying,

Charles, his Son, succeeded him; but, ambitiously grasping at too much
business, proved unfortunate, and left the shop to his Son. He made large
additions to his father's work, by interweaving it with Priestcraft.

Charles the Second, was some time kept out of possession by Oliver Cromwell,
who took the shop over his father's head, and although not regularly bred,
proved a most subtle, industrious, and able workman. Cromwell dying, this
Charles came and opened shop, carried on business but indifferently, owing, as
it is said, to bad company, being much addicted to lewd women, revelling with
buffoons, jesters, and stage players. He dying,

Jemmy the Second, his brother, an apprentice, came on trial, but, breaking his
oath with his masters, he forfeited his indenture, ran away, and was
transported for life; and although his Son and his grandson have endeavored to
follow the business abroad, they have as yet turned out but mere Pretenders. He
was succeeded by one

William, a Dutchman, who married before he embarked from Holland; and,
although some authors say he did not wait for an invitation, yet, as he had
given some good will, he took the stock at a fair appraisment, and set up on
the old premises, where he and his wife got a comfortable livelihood. They
dying,

Ann, his wife's sister came in, in her own right, and carried on business with
great reputation, whilst she employed honest and experienced journeymen; but,
turning these away, her credit sunk extremely toward the latter end of her
time, through the blunders and mismanagement of one Harley, her foreman, and
some others. She dying without issue, in that case the business, which was much
extended by William the Dutchman, was left to the present family, the first of
whom was

George, and whom we shall call the First; who was succeeded by his Son,

George the Second, who, with his father, were very good sort of men, though
both were much blamed for neglecting their business, by gadding to a dirty
farm, called Hanover. His namesake and grandson,

The present possessor, began with a fair prospect; but, being overruled and
misguided by a favorite servant, has lost great part of the business, and
although some of his best friends have remonstrated, and even petitioned him to
alter his course, he turning a deaf ear to their advice, being obstinate, and
still continuing to reject the humble petitions of thirteen rich Colonies, they
turned him away on the first day of July, 1776, and immediately set up for
themselves, under the banner of INDEPENDENCE; with a determination, never to
permit the Trade and Mystery of Kingly Government to be set up within the
United States of America: This very great mortification of being turned off,
has so effectually vexed him, that he quitted the old trade of King-Craft, and
has lately turned Button-Maker.

AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, AN EVERLASTING DELIVERANCE FROM BRITISH TYRANNY. A POEM.

By PHILIP F --, Author of the American Village, Voyage to Boston, etc.

I could a Tale unfold, whose lightest word
Would harrow up thy Soul, freeze thy young blood;
Make thy two Eyes, like Stars, start from their Spheres;
Thy knotty and combined Locks to part,
And each particular Hair to stand on End
Like Quills upon the fretful Porcupine!
SHAKESPEARE'S HAMLET. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED, BY ROBERT BELL, IN THIRD-STREET.
M DCC LXXVIII.

AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, etc.
IT IS done: and Britain for her folly sighs;
Take warning tyrants, and henceforth be wise:
If over mankind fate gives you sovereign sway,
Take not the rights of human kind away:
When God from chaos gave this world to be,
Man then he formed, and formed him to be free;
In his own image stamped the favorite race --
How dare thou tyrant the fair stamp deface?
When on mankind you fix your galling chains,
No more the image of that God remains,
People and King alike to ruin go;
Resembling Satan and his imps below.
Hail worthy Britain -- how enlarged your fame;
How great your glory, terrible your name,
"Queen of the isles, and empress of the main;"
Heaven grant you all these mighty things again.
But first insure us gaping fools below,
That you less cruel and more just may grow:
If fate, vindictive for the sins of man,
Had favor shown to your infernal plan;
How would your monarch have exulted now;
What smiles infernal beamed upon his brow:
A second Sawney Alexander the Great.
had he shone to day,
A world subdued and murder but his play:
How bad the monster without rule or law*
Glutted with blood his foul voracious maw!
At thy black heart I aim a mortal blow*
Demon accursed, dire author of our woe*
Soon shall thou feel the vengeance of the sky,
Due to thy crimes and hellish cruelty:
In him I see the depths of baseness joined,
Whatever disgraced the dregs of human kind,
Cain, Nimrod, Nero -- fiends in human guise,
Herod, Domitian -- these in judgment rise,
And envious of his deeds, I hear them say
None but a George could be more vile than they.
Hail tyrant crowned with infamy and pride,
How could thou dream that heaven was on thy side*
Did thou not see, when so decreed by fate,
They placed the crown upon thy stubborn pate*
Did thou not see the richest Jewel fall? --
Dire was the omen and astonished all;
That gem was thee, America; no more
Shall thou, bright gem, by such a wretch be wore
Yet thou to arms, and war, and blood inclined,
A court bred warrior with a woman's mind;
Fearless while others dare the shock of fate,
And ward off death that clips thy thread too late*
Thou to the fane, O hypocrite did go, General Fast.

While not an angel there but was thy foe;
There did thou kneel and sigh, and sob and pray,
Yet not to lave thy thousand sins away,
Far other motives swayed thy spotted soul,
'Twas not for those the secret sorrow stole
Down thy lank cheek -- 'twas vengeance and despair
Dissolved thine eye and planted sorrow there:
How could thou hope to bribe the impartial sky
By thy mad prayers and damned hypocrisy;
Heaven still is just, and rules the human race,
Not George like thee, the hero of disgrace:
What were thy prayers? -- thy prayers could be no more
Than the light winds that skim the Stygian shore,
Such prayers could never reach the realms above,
They were but curses in the ear of jove;
You prayed that conquest might your arms await
Horror and death, and all the plagues of fate.
That the fierce Indian, rousing from his rest,
Might slay the infant at its mother's breast,
Man, woman, child -- you wished to murder those
Whom your mad phrenzy counted for your foes;
And all, that you might rule the world alone,
No empire on the globe except your own --
You called us rebels -- tell me, monarch, whence
Such damned rebellion against common sense?
Say, are they rebels who could dare withstand,
And snatch the dagger from a ruffian's hand,
Just raised to strike? -- Then 'twas rebellion, true.
And such rebellion as shall ruin you.
Go now for comfort to your abject train
Of servile priests, whose real god is gain,
For your red sins get them to whine and pray.
Sure Heaven will hear so just a race as they;
Cooper The high-flying tory professor of King's college, New York, who advised
Jemmy Rivington to set up his lying Ministerial Gazette, which publication, in
conjunction wi(...) the lying letters of Governor Hutchinson, of the
Massachuset(...) has been the ruin of England, with respect to America.
himself, perhaps, will now, for bread,
Call out on Heaven to save your guilty head,
The mitred saints that bow before -- your throne,
Absolve you from your sins in formal tone,
Your holy bishops of Saint Peter's line*
The blessings of that stall-fed race are thine --
Yet shall not all their mingled prayers that rise,
Wash out thy crimes or bribe the angry skies.
The power alone that rules this frantic ball
Can tell what shame must on your nation fall,
Gold is their God -- nor think us fools nor mad,
Our wealth, our wealth was all the crime we had;
For that you ravaged India's climes before,
For that those lands were wet with human gore,
Witness, a Clive -- your hero brave and bold,
Who mowed down nations for his dearer gold;
The fatal gold could give no true content,
He mourned his murders, and to Tophet went.
For this vile ore, O sacred truth, confess
They armed their hosts of German slaves at Hesse,
For this they sent the faithless scoundrel Gage
War against peasants without arms to wage,
For this they first like cruel butchers came
And spilt our blood to their eternal shame, April 19, 1775.

Rage gave us arms: revenge in such a cause
Was acting up to Heaven's primaeval laws;
Who dares deny the right of self-defence
Slights God's own laws and wants even common sense.
For this, Dunmore, a snake-hair'd fury came,
For this a Tryon fed by fire and flame:
(These names to SCANDAL I do consecrate,
At once the objects of my scorn and hate)
A second monster of Chimerian kind,
Who only wants a dragon's tail behind,
That so his mind, which brutal is I swear,
May some resemblance to his carcass bear;
Hungry dependent on a needy court,
A madman, who with fire and flames can sport,
A thief, who like old Cacus See Titus Livius's Roman history, book the first,
also Virgil Encid 8, line 193, etc. Hic spelunca fuit vasto submota recessu
Semihominis Caci facies quam dira tenebat
Solis inaccessam radiis: semperque recenti
Caede tepebat humus; foribusque affixa superbis
Ora virum tristi pendebant pallida Tabo.
Huic monstro Vulcanus erat Pater.

, worst of men,
Conceals stolen herds within his hellish den;
Some son of Jove pierce the dark cave of night
And drag the yelling monster into light:
From his base heart I tear the thin disguise,
There brooding deep a restless Satan lies;
His power of burning and distress I know,
So on his head, ye Heavens, return the blow.
Led on by lust of lucre and renown,
Burgoyne came marching with his thousands down;
High were his thoughts and furious his career,
Armed with self-confidence and pride severe,
Swelled with the importance of his mighty deeds,
Onward to fame and conquest see he leads,
Before his hosts his horrid curses flew,
He swore to murder, ravage and subdue:
The vast intent of giant-like Burgoyne
Was to meet How, and the two armies join;
To fight was not this hero's only trade,
He shined in writing and his wit displayed See his Proclamations a little
before his captivity.

To stun us with his titles of command
"He told of forts he ruled in Scottish land;
Fort William there confessed his sovereign sway*
And fifty famished soldiers as they say;
He vowed destruction to those hardened foes
Whoever in arms against his monarch rose,
That by the blessing of the Power supreme,
Their blood should flow in many a purple stream,
Havoc and death Britannia's rage declare,
And famine follow where the sword might spare."
Foe to the race of man, fierce Hector say,
Had conquest crowned thee on that mighty day
When thou to GATES with sorrow, rage and shame
Resigned thy conquests, honors, arms and fame;
When at his feet Britannia's wreaths you threw,
And the sun sicken'd at a sight so new:
Had thou been victor -- what a scene of woe,
What souls had vanished to where souls do go.
What dire distress had marked thy fatal way,
Tremendous path of horror and dismay!
Can laurels flourish in a soil of blood
Or on those laurels, say, can honors bud?
Why then this lust of power, this love of death,
Why rob another of his little breath?
Curse on that wretch who murder makes his trade,
Curse on all arms that ever ambition made,
Romans or Britons fighting to subdue,
They have my curse and Heaven confirms it too,
Monsters insatiate, worthless, void of sense
Who war at all, but in their own defense.
Britons attend! -- No more your threats we fear,
Expect no conquests or submissions here,
The blood of thousands on your nation lies,
Like Abel's blood each soul for vengeance cries,
Their bitter cries have reached the throne of Jove,
Relent and dread the vengeance from above,
Son against father lifts the bloody knife,
Another murders her that gave him life Thomas Hill, with his own hands, killed
his own (...)there, his father in law, his sisters and their families -- Partial
Terry, the son of a man who bore a very respectable character, had several
times sent his father word that he hoped to wash his hands in his hearts blood.
Agreeable to such a horrid declaration, the monster with his own hand murdered
his father, mother, brothers and sisters, stripped off their scalps and cut off
his fathers head. -- Dunlap's Pennsylvania Packet, July 30, 1778.
;
Cut are the bonds that bind by nature's laws,
And you -- it is you, that are the direful cause:
Can crimes like these escape the listening sky?
Tremble ye Britons for your destiny:
Your Tory friends -- pray keep them if you can --
Beasts of perdition and disgrace to man;
So vile a race the world never saw before,
And grant ye pitying Heavens it may no more;
If ghosts malign infest the ambient air,
Those ghosts have entered their vile bodies here;
Murder and blood is still their fixed delight,
Scream round their domes ye ravens of the night --
Whenever they wed -- may demons of despair,
And grief, and woe, and blackest night be there;
Ye furies fierce! the nuptial lamp display,
Swift to destruction light them on their way;
From Etna's brow your blazing torches throw,
And give them terror as they gave us woe.
Britain be wise -- against your murdering hand
Rises the monarch of bright Gallia's land,
Our injured rights this gallant Prince defends,
And from this day that Prince and we are friends;
Old hateful feuds are vanished from our view,
Once were we foes -- but for the sake of you --
Britain, imperial Britain, now must bend,
Can she at once with France and us contend?
Britain and we no more in union join,
No more, as once, in bloody wars combine,
Fled are our loves that once did mutual burn,
Fled is the scepter never to return;
Lost is Columbia to Britannia's sway;
Dire was the contest, terrible the fray;
Our hearts are ravished from our former Queen,
Far as the ocean God has placed between;
You strive in vain to join this mighty mass,
Torn by convulsions from its native place;
As well might men to flaming Heckla join
The huge high Alps or frozen Appennine:
In vain you send your half-commission'd tribe The last Commissioners. --
,
And whom you cannot conquer strive to bribe;
Your crimes and follies broke our union chain
And fate forbid we should unite again.
Think not that France sustains our cause alone,
With gratitude her helping hand we own;
But hear ye nations -- How, himself, can say
We bore the heat and danger of the day;
They calmly viewed the tumult from afar,
We braved each insult and sustained the war;
Often drove the foe, or forced their hosts to yield,
Or left them, more than once, a dear bought field.
'Twas then, at last, on Jersey plains distressed,
We swore to seek the mountains of the west; I can assure you of a fact which
may make you tremble -- That there are a noble few in every State, whose souls
are well tried in the school of misfortune: who disdaining again to wear the
yoke of bondage, would in such extremity retire to the mountains and lakes, and
there preserve a seed of liberty, in hopes that Heaven -- would again fill this
happy land to the exclusion of the whole race of slaves and parasites. --
CIVIS. New Jersey Gazette, Numb. 36.

There a free empire for our seed obtain,
A terror to the slaves that might remain.
Peace you demand -- old friendship to renew --
You have our friends, our fathers, husbands slew;
Full many a corpse lies rotting on the plain,
That never shall see its little brood again.
See, yonder lies all breathless, cold and pale,
Drenched in her gore Lavinia Miss M'Crea: See General Gates's letter to
General Burgoyne.
of the vale,
The cruel Indian seized her life away,
As the next morn began her bridal day;
This act alone our just revenge would claim;
Did not ten thousand more your sons defame.
From every eye distills the frequent tear,
From every mouth some doleful tale I hear,
Some mourn a father, brother, husband, friend,
Some mourn in exile from their native land,
In loathsome ships what numerous hosts confined,
At once their lives and liberties resigned;
In dreary dungeons woeful scenes have passed,
Long in tradition shall the story last,
(As long as spring renews the verdant wood,
As long as breezes curl the yielding flood.)
Hunger and thirst in caverns dark and low,
With death itself in every shape of woe;
Some sent to India's sickly clime afar
To dig like slaves, for buried diamonds there --
The Atlantic isles West Indies.
thy cruelty confess,
There have thou reigned the parent of distress:
The poor adventurer, who, compelled to brave
And dare the dangers of the wintry wave
For the scant morsel that mere want did claim,
There did thou seize and plunder without shame:
Thine was his cargo -- nor with that content
The ruined wretch was often to prison to sent,
There left to sicken in that land of woe
Where, over scorched hills infernal breezes blow,
Whose every blast some dire contagion brings,
Fevers or death on its destructive wings,
'Till fate, relenting, its last arrows drew,
Brought death to him and infamy to you!
Pests of mankind, remembrance shall recall
And paint these horrors for the view of all:
Heaven has not turned to its own works a foe,
Nor left to Devils these fair realms below,
Else had your swords a broader torrent shed,
Else had these plains been died a deeper red,
And swelled with blood our solitary rills,
By Hessians, Scotchmen, from their barren hills,
Whose hardened souls no spark of pity warms,
Bred up in blood and pleased with others harms --
From these, may Heaven protect this injured land,
This Paradise is not for their command:
Shall they, ay they, who desolation spread,
And poured red vengeance on each guiltless head;
Shall they control our bleeding soil again?
Forbid it Freedom -- to thy name a stain:
Over Britain's realms a thousand woes impend,
Too weak to conquer, govern, or defend;
To Liberty she holds the lying claim,
The substance we enjoy, and she the name:
Her tyrant, circled by a thousand slaves,
Claims a dominion over the vagrant waves.
Such be his claims over all the world beside,
An empty nothing -- madness, rage and pride.
From Europe's realms bright Freedom has retired,
And even in Britain has the spark expired;
To her did Heaven entrust the roving flame,
False guardian to thy charge, confess thy shame,
Sigh for the change thy haughty empire feels,
Sigh for the doom that follows at thy heels;
Freedom no more shall Albion's cliffs survey,
Corruption there has fixed eternal sway;
Freedom disdains her honest head to rear,
Or herd with North or Bute, or Mansfield there,
She shuns their gilded spires and domes of state,
Resolved, O virtue, at thy shrine to wait;
'Midst savage woods and wilds she dares to stray,
And makes uncultur'd nature look more gay;
She is that glorious and immortal sun,
Without whose ray this globe would be undone;
A very chaos, sunk in deepest night,
An abject something, without form or light,
Disgrace to him who gave it first to be,
And only, George, befitting such as thee.
Never from thy coasts, Columbia, may she fly,
Prosper and live the favorite of the sky,
Let Turks and Ruffians glut their fields with blood,
Again let Britain dye the Atlantic flood,
Let all the East adore the sanguine wreath,
And gain new glories from the trade of death;
America, the works of peace be thine,
Thus shall thou gain a laurel more divine;
To thee belongs a second golden reign,
Thine is the empire over a peaceful main;
Protect the rights of human kind below,
Crush the proud Tyrant who becomes their foe;
Like Jove's great Son thy knotty club employ
To help the helpless -- Tyranny destroy.
AMERICANS revenge your country's wrongs,
To you the honor of this deed belongs,
Your arms did once this sinking land sustain,
And saved those climes where freedom yet must reign;
Your bleeding soil this ardent work demands,
Expel yon thieves from these polluted lands:
Your injured country groans while yet they stay --
Attend her groans and drive the dogs away:
Your mighty wrongs the tragic muse shall grace,
Your gallant deeds shall fire a future race --
To you shall Kings and Potentates appeal,
You shall the doom of jarring nations seal,
A glorious empire rises bright and new,
Firm be its basis and must rest on you;
Each clime shall here its share of praise bestow,
While over thy soil the streams of plenty flow;
And over the main you spread the trading sail,
Wafting the produce of the rural vale.
Such glories shall from this great contest rise,
While vanquished Britain with mere envy dies. --
FINIS.
Speedily will be published at BELL'S BOOK-STORE, next door to St. Paul's
Church, in Third-Street, Philadelphia,
1 VOLTAIRE's PRINCESS of BABYLON. 2 VOLTAIRE's PUPIL of NATURE. 3 TRAVELS for
the HEART, written in France by COURTNEY MELMOTH, 2 vols. 4 PUPIL of PLEASURE,
in a Series of Letters, by COURTNEY MELMOTH, 2 vols. 5 STERNE's LETTERS to his
most intimate Friends, published by his Daughter, 3 vols. 6 STERNE's KORAN,
containing the Life, Character, and Sentiments of TRIA JUNCTA IN UNO, M. N. A.
or Master of no Arts, 2 vols.
Lately published and now selling at Bell's Book-Store, next door to St. Paul's
Church, in Third-Street, Philadelphia,
1 TRAVELS of the IMAGINATION, in a true Journey from Newcastle to London; To
which are added, AMERICAN INDEPENDENCE, an everlasting Deliverance from British
Tyranny. 2 MAXIMS and MORAL REFLECTIONS by the Duke de la Rochefoucault. 3 The
LIFE of DAVID HUME, the Philosopher and Historian, written by himself; To which
are added, The TRAVELS of a PHILOSOPHER, containing Observations on the Manners
and Arts of various Nations, in Africa and Asia. From the French of M. le
POIVRE, late Envoy to the King of Cochin-China, and now Intendant of the Isles
of Bourbon and Mauritius. 4 PRINCIPLES of POLITENESS, and of Knowing the World;
by Lord CHESTERFIELD. Methodised and digested under distinct Heads with
Additions by the Rev. Dr. John Trusler: Containing every Instruction necessary
to complete the Gentleman and Man of Fashion to teach him a Knowledge of Life,
and make him well received in all Companies. 5 VOLTAIRE's MAN worth Forty
Crowns. 6 GREGORY's Father's Legacy to his Daughters on the most interesting
Subjects, viz -- On Religion -- Conduct and Behavior -- Amusements --
Friendship -- Love -- Marriage. 7 The LYING VALET. A Comedy in Two Acts.
Written by David Garrick, Esquire.

