TREATIES OF AMITY AND COMMERCE, AND OF ALLIANCE Eventual and Defensive,
BETWEEN His Most CHRISTIAN MAJESTY AND THE Thirteen UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOHN DUNLAP. MDCCLXXVIII.

TREATY OF AMITY AND COMMERCE, BETWEEN HIS MOST CHRISTIAN MAJESTY LOUIS the
SIXTEENTH, King of France and Navarre, AND THE Thirteen UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA.

Concluded at Paris 6th February, 1778.

TREATY OF ALLIANCE.
THE MOST CHRISTIAN KING and the UNITED STATES of NORTH AMERICA, to wit,
New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York,
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina,
South Carolina, and Georgia, having this day concluded a Treaty of Amity and
Commerce, for the reciprocal advantage of their subjects and citizens, have
thought it necessary to take into consideration the means of strengthening
those engagements, and of rendering them useful to the safety and tranquillity
of the two parties; particularly in case Great Britain in resentment of that
connection, and of the good correspondence which is the object of the said
Treaty, should break the peace with France, either by direct hostilities or by
hindering her commerce and navigation in a manner contrary to the rights of
nations and the peace subsisting between the two Crowns. -- And his Majesty and
the said United States having resolved in that case to join their councils and
efforts against the enterprises of their common enemy.

The respective Plenepotentiaries empowered to concert the clauses and
conditions proper to fulfill the said intentions, have after the most mature
deliberation, concluded and determined on the following articles.

ARTICLE I.
IF war should break out between France and Great Britain during the
continuance of the present war between the United States and England, His
Majesty and the said United States shall make it a common cause, and aid each
other mutually with their good offices, their counsels and their forces,
according to the exigence of conjunctures, as becomes good and faithful allies.

ARTICLE II.
The essential and direct end of the present defensive alliance is, to maintain
effectually the Liberty, Sovereignty and Independence absolute and unlimited,
of the said United States, as well in matters of government as of commerce.

ARTICLE III.
The two contracting parties shall each on its own part, and in the manner it
may judge most proper, make all the efforts in it is power against their common
enemy, in order to attain the end proposed.

ARTICLE IV.
The contracting parties agree, that in case either of them should form any
particular enterprise in which the concurrence of the other may be desired, the
party whose concurrence is desired, shall readily and with good faith join to
act in concert for that purpose, as far as circumstances and its own particular
situation will permit, and in that case, they shall regulate by a particular
Convention the quantity and kind of succor to be furnished, and the time and
manner of its being brought into action, as well as the advantages which are to
be its compensation.

ARTICLE V.
If the United States should think fit to attempt the reduction of the British
power, remaining in the Northern parts of America, or the islands of Bermudas,
those countries or islands, in case of success, shall be confederated with, or
dependent upon the said United States.

ARTICLE VI.
The Most Christian King renounces forever the possession of the islands of
Bermudas, as well as of any part of the Continent of North America, which
before the Treaty of Paris, in 1763, or in virtue of that treaty, were
acknowledged to belong to the Crown of Great Britain, or to the United States,
heretofore called British Colonies, or which are at this time, or have lately
been under the power of the King and Crown of Great Britain.

ARTICLE VII.
If His Most Christian Majesty shall think proper to attack any of the islands
situated in the Gulf of Mexico or near that Gulf, which are at present under
the power of Great Britain, all the said isles, in case of success, shall
appertain to the Crown of France.

ARTICLE VIII.
Neither of the two parties shall conclude either truce or peace with
Great Britain, without the formal consent of the other first obtained; and they
mutually engage not to lay down their arms, until the Independence of the
United States shall have been formally or tacitly affured, by the treaty or
treaties that shall terminate the war.

ARTICLE IX.
The contracting parties declare, that being resolved to fulfill each on it is
own part, the clauses and conditions of the present Treaty of Alliance,
according to its own power and circumstances, there shall be no after-claim of
compensation, on one side or the other, whatever may be the event of the war.

ARTICLE X.
The Most Christian King and the United States agree, to invite or admit other
powers, who may have received injuries from England, to make common cause with
them, and to accede to the present alliance, under such conditions as shall be
freely agreed to, and settled between all the parties.

ARTICLE XI.
The two parties guarantee mutually from the present time, and forever against
all other powers, to wit -- The United States to His Most Christian Majesty the
present possessions of the Crown of France in America, as well as these which
it may acquire by the future treaty of peace; and His Most Christian Majesty
guarantees on his part to the United States, their Liberty, Sovereignty, and
Independence, absolute and unlimited, as well in matters of government as
commerce, and also their possessions, and the additions or conquests, that
their confederation may obtain during the war, from any of the dominions now,
or heretofore possessed by Great Britain in North America; conformable to the
fifth and sixth Articles above-written, the whole as their possession shall be
fixed and assured to the said States, at the moment of the cessation of their
present war with England.

ARTICLE XII.
In order to fix more precisely the sense and application of the preceding
Article, the contracting parties declare, that in case of a rupture between
France and England, the reciprocal guarantee declared in the said article,
shall have its full force and effect, the moment such war shall break out; and
if such rupture shall not take place, the mutual obligations of the said
guarantee shall not commence until the moment of the cessation of the present
war, between the United States and England, shall have ascertained their
possessions.

ARTICLE XIII.
The present Treaty shall be ratified on both sides, and the ratifications
shall be exchanged in the space of six months, or sooner, if possible.

IN FAITH WHEREOF the respective Plenepotentiaries, to wit; on the part of the
Most Christian King, CONRAD ALEXANDER GERARD, Royal Syndic of the city of
Strasbourg and Secretary of His Majesty's Council of State. And on the part of
the United States, BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, Deputy to the General Congress, from the
State of Pennsylvania, and President of the Convention of said State; SILAS
DEANE, heretofore Deputy from the State of Connecticut; and ARTHUR LEE,
Counselor at Law, have signed the above Articles both in the French and
English languages; declaring nevertheless, that the present Treaty was
originally composed and concluded in the French language, and they have
hereunto affixed their seals.

DONE at PARIS, this Sixth Day of February, One Thousand Seven Hundred and
Seventy-Eight. (L. S.) C. A. GERARD. (L. S.) B. FRANKLIN. (L. S.) SILAS DEANE.
(L. S.) ARTHUR LEE.


LOUIS, By the Grace of GOD, KING of FRANCE and NAVARRE, To ALL who shall see
these Presents, GREETING:
THE CONGRESS of the THIRTEEN UNITED STATES of North America, having by their
Plenepotentiaries residing at Paris notified their desire to establish with Us
and Our STATES a good understanding and perfect correspondence, and having for
that purpose proposed to conclude with Us a Treaty of Amity and Commerce: WE
having thought it Our duty to give to the said States a sensible proof of Our
affection, determining Us to accept their proposals: For these causes and other
good considerations Us thereunto moving, We, reposing entire confidence in the
abilities and experience, zeal and fidelity for Our service, of Our dear and
beloved CONRAD ALEXANDER GERARD, Royal Syndic of the city of Strasbourg, and
Secretary of our Council of State, have nominated, appointed and commissioned,
and by these presents signed with Our hand, do nominate, appoint and commission
him Our Plenepotentiary, giving him power and special command for Us and in Our
name to agree upon, conclude and sign with the Plenepotentiaries of the United
States, equally furnished in due form with full powers, such Treaty, Convention
and Articles of Commerce and Navigation as he shall think proper, willing, that
he act with the same authority as We might or could act, if We were personally
present, and even as though he had more special command than what is herein
contained; promising in good faith and on the word of a King, to agree, to
confirm and establish forever, and to accomplish and execute punctually, all
that Our said dear and beloved CONRAD ALEXANDER GERARD shall stipulate and
sign, by virtue of the present power, without contravening it in any manner, or
suffering it to be contravened for any cause, or under any pretext whatsoever;
and also to ratify the same in due form, and cause Our ratification to be
delivered and exchanged in the time that shall be agreed on. For such is Our
pleasure. In Testimony whereof We have hereunto set Our Seal. Done at
Versailles, this thirtieth day of January, in the year of our Lord one thousand
seven hundred and seventy-eight, and the fourth year of Our reign.

(Signed,) (L. S.) LOUIS.
(Underneath) By the KING. GRAVIER de VERGENNES.

TREATY OF AMITY AND COMMERCE.
THE MOST CHRISTIAN KING and the THIRTEEN UNITED STATES of NORTH AMERICA, to
wit, -- New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York,
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina,
South Carolina and Georgia, willing to fix in an equitable and permanent
manner, the rules which ought to be followed relative to the correspondence and
commerce which the two parties desire to establish between their respective
countries, states and subjects; His Most Christian Majesty and the said United
States have judged that the said end could not be better obtained, than by
taking for the basis of their agreement, the most perfect equality and
reciprocity, and by carefully avoiding all those burden some preferences which
are usually sources of debate, embarrassment and discontent; by leaving also
each party at liberty to make respecting Navigation and Commerce, those
interior regulations which it shall find most convenient to itself, and by
sounding the advantage of commerce solely upon reciprocal utility, and the just
rules of free intercourse, reserving withal to each party the liberty of
admitting, at its pleasure, other nations to a participation of the same
advantages. -- It is in the spirit of this intention and to fulfill these views,
that his said Majesty having named and appointed for his Plenepotentiary,
CONRAD ALEXANDER GERARD, Royal Syndic of the city of Strasbourg, Secretary of
His Majesty's Council of State; and the United States on their part, having
fully empowered BENJAMIN FRANKLIN, Deputy from the State of Pennsylvania to the
General Congress, and President to the Convention of said State; SILAS DEANE,
late Deputy from the State of Connecticut to the said Congress, and ARTHUR LEE,
Counselor at Law: The said respective Plenepotentiaries, after exchanging
their powers, and after mature deliberation, have concluded and agreed upon the
following articles.

ARTICLE I.
THERE shall be a firm, inviolable and universal peace, and a true and sincere
friendship between the Most Christian King, his heirs and successors, and the
United States of America, and the subjects of the Most Christian King and of
the said States, and between the countries, islands, cities and towns situate
under the jurisdiction of the Most Christian King, and of the said United
States, and the people and inhabitants of every degree, without exception of
persons or places, and the terms herein after-mentioned, shall be perpetual
between the Most Christian King, his heirs and successors, and the said United
States.

ARTICLE II.
The Most Christian King and the United States engage mutually not to grant any
particular favor to other nations, in respect of Commerce and Navigation,
which shall not immediately become common to the other party, who shall enjoy
the same favor freely, if the concession was freely made, or on allowing the
same compensation, if the concession was conditional.

ARTICLE III.
The subjects of the Most Christian King shall pay in the ports, havens, roads,
countries, islands, cities or towns of the United States, or any of them, no
other or greater duties or imposts, of what nature soever they may be, or by
what name soever called, than those which the nations most favored are or
shall be obliged to pay; and they shall enjoy all the rights, liberties,
privileges, immunities and exemptions in trade, navigation and commerce,
whether in passing from one port in the said States to another, or in going to
and from the same, from and to any part of the world, which the said nations do
or shall enjoy.

ARTICLE IV.
The subjects, people and inhabitants of the said United States, and each of
them, shall not pay in the ports, havens, roads, islands, cities and places
under the domination of His Most Christian Majesty, in Europe, any other or
greater duties or imposts, of what nature soever they may be, or by what name
soever called, than those which the most favored nations are or shall be
obliged to pay; and they shall enjoy all the rights, liberties, privileges,
immunities, and exemptions in trade, navigation and commerce, whether in
passing from one port in the said dominions in Europe, to another, or in going
to and from the same, from and to any part of the world, which the said nations
do or shall enjoy.

ARTICLE V.
In the above exemption is particularly comprised, the imposition of one
hundred Sous per ton, established in France on foreign ships, unless when the
ships of the United States shall load with the merchandise of France, for
another port of the same dominion; in which case the said ships shall pay the
duty abovementioned, so long as other nations the most favored shall be
obliged to pay it; but it is understood, that the said United States, or any of
them, are at liberty, when they shall judge it proper, to establish a duty
equivalent in the same case.

ARTICLE VI.
The Most Christian King shall endeavor, by all the means in his power, to
protect and defend all vessels and the effects belonging to the subjects,
people or inhabitants of the said United States, or any of them, being in his
ports, havens or roads, or on the seas near to his countries, islands, cities
or towns; and to recover and restore to the right owners, their agents or
attorneys, all such vessels and effects which shall be taken within his
jurisdiction; and the ships of war of His Most Christian Majesty, or any convoy
sailing under his authority, shall, upon all occasions, take under their
protection all vessels belonging to the subjects, people or inhabitants of the
said United States, or any of them, and holding the same course, or going the
same way, and shall defend such vessels, as long as they hold the same course,
or go the same way, against all attacks, force or violence, in the same manner
as they ought to protect and defend the vessels belonging to the subjects of
the Most Christian King.

ARTICLE VII.
In like manner the said United States, and their ships of war, sailing under
their authority, shall protect and defend, conformably to the tenor of the
preceding article, all the vessels and effects belonging to the subjects of
the Most Christian King, and use all their endeavors to recover, and cause to
be restored, the said vessels and effects that shall have been taken within the
jurisdiction of the said United States, or any of them.

ARTICLE VIII.
The Most Christian King will employ his good offices and interposition with
the King or Emperor of Morocco or Fez; the Regencies of Algeirs, Tunis and
Tripoly, or with any of them; and also with every other Prince, State or Power,
of the coast of Barbary in Africa; and the subjects of the said King, Emperor,
States and Powers, and each of them, in order to provide as fully and
efficaciously as possible for the benefit, convenience and safety of the said
United States, and each of them, their subjects, people and inhabitants, and
their vessels and effects, against all violence, insults, attacks or
depredations, on the part of the said Princes, and States of Barbary, or their
subjects.

ARTICLE IX.
The subjects, inhabitants, merchants, commanders of ships, masters and
mariners of the states, provinces and dominions of each party respectively,
shall abstain and forbear to fish in all places possessed, or which shall be
possessed by the other party; the Most Christian King's subjects shall not fish
in the havens, bays, creeks, roads, coasts or places, which the said United
States hold, or shall hereafter hold; and in like manner the subjects, people
and inhabitants of the said United States, shall not fish in the havens, bays,
creeks, roads, coasts or places, which the Most Christian King possesses, or
shall hereafter possess; and if any ship or vessel shall be found fishing,
contrary to the tenor of this Treaty, the said ship or vessel with its lading,
(proof being made thereof) shall be confiscated; it is however understood, that
the exclusion stipulated in the present article, shall take place only so long,
and so far as the Most Christian King or the United States shall not in this
respect have granted an exemption to some other nation.

ARTICLE X.
The United States, their citizens and inhabitants, shall never disturb the
subjects of the Most Christian King in the enjoyment and exercise of the right
of fishing on the Banks of Newfoundland, nor in the indefinite and exclusive
right which belongs to them on that part of the coast of that island which is
designed by the Treaty of Utrecht, nor in the right relative to all and each of
the isles which belong to His Most Christian Majesty, the whole conformable to
the true sense of the Treaties of Utrecht and Paris.

ARTICLE XI.
It is agreed and concluded, that there shall never be any duty imposed on the
exportation of the molasses that may be taken by the subjects of any of the
United States, from the islands of America, which belong, or may hereafter
appertain, to His Most Christian Majesty.

ARTICLE XII.
In compensation of the exemption stipulated by the preceding article, it is
agreed and concluded, that there shall never be any duties imposed on the
exportation of any kind of merchandise, which the subjects of His Most
Christian Majesty may take from the countries and possessions, present, or
future, of any of the Thirteen United States, for the use of the islands which
shall furnish molasses.

ARTICLE XIII.
The subjects and inhabitants of the said United States, or any one of them,
shall not be reputed Aubains in France, and consequently shall be exempted from
the Droit d'Aubaine, or other similar duty, under what name soever, they may by
testament, donation or otherwise dispose of their goods, moveable and
immovable, in favor of such persons as to them shall seem good, and their
heirs, subjects of the said United States, residing whether in France or
elsewhere, may succeed them, ab intestat, without being obliged to obtain
letters of naturalization, and without having the effect of this concession
contested or impeded under pretext of any rights or prerogatives of provinces,
cities or private persons; and the said heirs, whether such by particular
title, or ab intestat, shall be exempt from all duty called Droit de
detraction, or other duty of the same kind; saving nevertheless the local
rights or duties as much and as long as similar ones are not established by the
United States, or any of them. The subjects of the Most Christian King shall
enjoy on their part, in all the dominions of the said States, an entire and
perfect reciprocity relative to the stipulations contained in the present
article: But it is at the same time agreed, that its contents shall not effect
the laws made, or that may be made hereafter in France, against emigrations,
which shall remain in all their force and vigor; and the United States on their
part, or any of them, shall be at liberty to enact such laws, relative to that
matter, as to them shall seem proper.

ARTICLE XIV.
The merchant ships of either of the parties, which shall be making into a port
belonging to the enemy of the other ally, and concerning whose voyage and the
species of goods on board her there shall be just grounds of suspicion, shall
be obliged to exhibit, as well upon the high seas as in the ports and havens,
not only her passports, but likewise certificates, expressly showing that her
goods are not of the number of those which have been prohibited as contraband.

ARTICLE XV.
If, by the exhibiting of the abovesaid certificates, the other party discover
there are any of those sorts of goods which are prohibited and declared
contraband, and consigned for a port under the obedience of his enemy, it shall
not be lawful to break up the hatches of such ship, or to open any chest,
coffers, packs, casks, or any other vessels found therein, or to remove the
smallest parcels of her goods, whether such ship belongs to the subjects of
France, or the inhabitants of the said United States, unless the lading be
brought on shore, in the presence of the officers of the Court of Admiralty,
and an inventory thereof made, but there shall be no allowance to sell,
exchange, or alienate the same in any manner, until after that due and lawful
process shall have been had against such prohibited goods and the Court of
Admiralty shall by a sentence pronounced have consiscated the same, saving
always as well the ship itself as any other goods found therein, which by this
Treaty are to be esteemed free; neither may they be detained on pretense of
their being as it were infected by the prohibited goods, much less shall they
be confiscated as lawful prize; but if not the whole cargo but only part
thereof shall consist of prohibited or contraband goods, and the commander of
the ship shall be ready and willing to deliver them to the captor who has
discovered them, in such case the captor having received those goods, shall
forthwith discharge the ship and not hinder her by any means freely to
prosecute the voyage on which she was bound. But in case the contraband
merchandises cannot be all received on board the vessel of the captor, then the
captor may, notwithstanding the offer of delivering him the contraband goods,
carry the vessel into the nearest port agreeable to what is above directed.

ARTICLE XVI.
On the contrary it is agreed, that whatever shall be found to be laden by the
subjects and inhabitants of either party on any ship belonging to the enemies
of the other, or to their subjects, the whole, although it be not of the sort
of prohibited goods, may be confiscated in the same manner as if it belonged to
the enemy, except such goods and merchandise as were put on board such ship
before the declaration of war, or even after such declaration, if so be it were
done without knowledge of such declaration, so that the goods of the subjects
and people of either party, whether they be of the nature of such as are
prohibited or otherwise, which, as is aforesaid, were put on board any ship
belonging to an enemy before the war or after the declaration of the same,
without the knowledge of it, shall no ways be liable to confiscation, but shall
well and truly be restored without delay to the proprietors demanding the same;
but so as that if the said merchandises be contraband it shall not be any ways
lawful to carry them afterward to any ports belonging to the enemy. The two
contracting parties agree, that the term of two months being passed after the
declaration of war, their respective subjects, from whatever part of the world
they come, shall not plead the ignorance mentioned in this article.

ARTICLE XVII.
And that more effectual care may be taken for the security of the subjects and
inhabitants of both parties, that they suffer no injury by the men of war or
privateers of the other party, all the commanders of the ships of His Most
Christian Majesty and of the said United States, and all their subjects and
inhabitants, shall be forbid doing any injury or damage to the other side; and
if they act to the contrary they shall be punished, and shall moreover be bound
to make satisfaction for all matter of damage, and the interest thereof, by
reparation, under the pain and obligation of their persons and goods.

ARTICLE XVIII.
All ships and merchandise of what nature soever, which shall be rescued out of
the hands of any pirates or robbers on the high seas, shall be brought into
some port of either State, and shall be delivered to the custody of the
officers of that port, in order to be restored entire to the true proprietor,
as soon as due and suflicient proof shall be made concerning the property
thereof.

ARTICLE XIX.
If shall be lawful for the ships of war of either party, and privateers,
freely to carry whithersoever they please, the ships and goods taken from their
enemies, without being obliged to pay any duty to the officers of the Admiralty
or any other Judges; nor shall such prizes be arrested or seized when they come
to and enter the port of either party; nor shall the searchers or other
officers of those places search the same or make examination concerning the
lawfulness of such prizes; but they may hoist fail at any time, and depart and
carry their prizes to the places expressed in their commissions, which the
commanders of such ships of war shall be obliged to show: On the contrary, no
shelter or refuge shall be given in their ports to such as shall have made
prize of the subjects, people or property of either of the parties; but if such
shall come in, being forced by stress of weather or the danger of the sea, all
proper means shall be vigorously used, that they go out and retire from thence
as soon as possible.

ARTICLE XX.
If any ship belonging to either of the parties, their people or subjects,
shall within the coasts or dominions of the other stick upon the sands, or be
wrecked or suffer any other damage, all friendly assistance and relief shall be
given to the persons shipwrecked, or such as shall be in danger thereof. And
letters of safe conduct shall likewise be given to them for their free and
quiet passage from thence, and the return of every one to his own country.

ARTICLE XXI.
In case the subjects and inhabitants of either party, with their shipping,
whether public and of war or private and of merchants, be forced through stress
of weather, pursuit of pirates or enemies, or any other urgent necessity for
seeking of shelter and harbor to retreat and enter into any of the rivers,
bays, roads or ports belonging to the other party, they shall be received and
treated with all humanity and kindness, and enjoy all friendly protection and
help; and they shall be permitted to refresh and provide themselves at
reasonable rates with victuals and all things needful for the sustenance of
their persons or reparation of their ships and convenience of their voyage, and
they shall no ways be detained or hindered from returning out of the said ports
or roads, but may remove and depart when and whither they please, without any
let or hindrance.

ARTICLE XXII.
For the better promoting of commerce on both sides, it is agreed, that if a
war should break out between the said two nations, six months after the
proclamation of war shall be allowed to the merchants in the cities and towns
where they live for selling and transporting their goods and merchandises; and
if any thing be taken from them, or any injury be done them within that term by
either party, or the people or subjects of either, full satisfaction shall be
made for the same.

ARTICLE XXIII.
No subjects of the Most Christian King shall apply for or take any commission
or letters of marque for arming any ship or ships to act as privateers against
the said United States or any of them, or against the subjects, people or
inhabitants of the said United States or any of them, or against the property
of any of the inhabitants of any of them, from any Prince or State with which
the United States shall be at war; nor shall any citizen, subject, or
inhabitant of the said United States or any of them, apply for or take any
commission or letters of marque for arming any ship or ships to act as
privateers against the subjects of the Most Christian King, or any of them, or
the property of any of them, from any Prince or State with which the said King
shall be at war; and if any person of either nation shall take such commission
or letters of marque, he shall be punished as a pirate.

ARTICLE XXIV.
It shall not be lawful for any foreign privateers, not belonging to the
subjects of the Most Christian King, nor citizens of the said United States,
who have commissions from any other Prince or State at enmity with either
nation, to sit their ships in the ports of either the one orthe other of the
aforesaid parties, to sell what they have taken, or in any other manner
whatsoever to exchange their ships, merchandises or any other lading; neither
shall they be allowed even to purchase victuals, except such as shall be
necessary for their going to the next port of that Prince or State from which
they have commissions.

ARTICLE XXV.
It shall be lawful for all and singular the subjects of the Most Christian
King and the citizens, people and inhabitants of the said United States, to
sail with their ships with all manner of liberty and security, no distinction
being made who are the proprietors of the merchandise laden thereon, from any
port to the places of those who now are or hereafter shall be at enmity with
the Most Christian King or the United States. It shall likewise be lawful for
the subjects and inhabitants aforesaid, to sail with the ships and merchandises
aforementioned, and to trade with the same liberty and security from the
places, ports and havens of those who are enemies of both or either party,
without any opposition or disturbance whatsoever, not only directly from the
places of the enemy aforementioned to neutral places, but also from one place
belonging to an enemy to another place belonging to an enemy, whether they be
under the jurisdiction of the same Prince, or under several. And it is hereby
stipulated, that free ships shall also give a freedom to goods, and that every
thing shall be deemed to be tree and exemptwhich shall be found on board the
ships belonging to the subjects of either of the Confederates, although the
whole lading or any part thereof should appertain to the enemies of either,
contraband goods being always excepted. It is also agreed in like manner, that
the same liberty be extended to persons who are on board a free ship, with this
effect, that although they be enemies to both or either party, they are not to
be taken out of that free ship, unless they are soldiers and in actual service
of the enemies.

ARTICLE XXVI.
This liberty of navigation and commerce shall extend to all kinds of
merchandises, excepting those only which are distinguished by the name of
contraband, and under this name of contraband or prohibited goods shall be
comprehended arms, great guns, bombs with their fuses and other things
belonging to them, cannon ball, gunpowder, match, pikes, swords, lances,
spears, halberds, mortars, petards, gren^does, saltpetre, muskets, musket-ball,
bucklers, helmets, breast-plates, coats of mail, and the like kinds of arms,
proper for arming soldiers, musket-rests, belts, horses with their furniture,
and all other warlike instruments whatever. These merchandises which follow
shall not be reckoned among contraband or prohibited goods; that is to say, all
sorts of cloths, and all other manufactures woven of any wool, flax, silk,
cotton, or any other materials whatever, all kinds of wearing apparel, together
with the species whereof they are used to be made, gold and silver, as well
coined as uncoined, tin, iron, latten, copper, brass, coals; as also wheat and
barley, and any other kind of corn and pulse, tobacco, and likewise all manner
of spices, salted and smoaked flesh, salted fish, cheese and butter, beer,
oils, wines, sugars, and all sorts of salts, and in general all provisions
which serve for the nourishment of mankind and the sustenance of life;
furthermore, all kinds of cotton, hemp, flax, tar, pitch, ropes, cables, sails,
sail-cloths, anchors and any parts of anchors, also ships masts, planks, boards
and beams of what trees soever, and all other things proper either for building
or repairing ships, and all other goods whatever which have not been worked
into the form of any instrument or thing prepared for war by land or by sea,
shall not be reputed contraband, much less such as have been already wrought
and made up for any other use; all which shall be wholly reckoned among free
goods; as likewise all other merchandises and things which are not comprehended
and particularly mentioned in the foregoing enumeration of contraband goods, so
that they may be transported and carried in the freest manner by the subjects
of both Confederates, even to places belonging to an enemy, such towns or
places being only excepted, as are at that time beseiged, blocked up or invested

ARTICLE XXVII.
To the end that all manner of dissentions and quarrels may be avoided and
prevented, on one side and the other, it is agreed, that in case either of the
parties hereto, should be engaged in war, the ships and vessels belonging to
the subjects or people of the other ally must be furnished with sea letters or
passports, expressing the name, property and bulk of the ship, as also the name
and place of habitation of the master or commander of the said ship that it may
appear thereby that the ship really and truly belongs to the subjects of one of
the parties, which passport shall be made out and granted according to the form
annexed to this treaty; they shall likewise be recalled every year, that is if
the ship happens to return home within the space of a year; it is likewise
agreed, that such ships being laden are to be provided not only with passports
as above mentioned, but also with certificates, containing the several
particulars of the cargo, the place whence the ship sailed, and whither she is
bound, that so it may be known whether any forbidden or contraband goods be on
board of the same, which certificates shall be made out by the officers of the
place whence the ship set sail, in the accustomed forms; and if any one shall
think it fit or advisable to express in the said certificates, the person to
whom. the goods on board belong, he may freely do so.

ARTICLE XXVIII.
The ships of the subjects and inhabitants of either of the parties coming upon
any coast belonging to either of the said allies, but not willing to enter into
port, or being entered into port and not willing to unload their cargoes or
break bulk, they shall be treated according to the general rules prescribed or
to be prescribed relative to the object in question.

ARTICLE XXIX.
If the ships of the said subjects, people or inhabitants of either of the
parties shall be met with, either sailing along the coasts or on the high seas,
by any ship of war of the other, or by any privateers, the said ships of war or
privateers, for the avoiding of any disorder, shall remain out of cannon shot,
and may send their boats on board the merchant ship which they shall so meet
with, and may enter her to the number of two or three men only, to whom the
master or commander of such ship or vessel shall exhibit his passport
concerning the property of the ship, made out according to the form inserted in
this present treaty, and the ship, when she shall have showed such passport,
shall be free and at liberty to pursue her voyage so as it shall not be lawful
to molest or search her in any manner, or to give her chase or force her to
quit her intended course.

ARTICLE XXX.
It is also agreed, that all goods, when once put on board the ships or vessels
of either of the two contracting parties, shall be subject to no farther
visitation, but all visitation or search shall be made before hand, and all
prohibited goods shan be stopped on the spot before the same be put on board,
unless there are manifest tokens or proofs of fraudulent practice; nor shall
either the persons or goods of the subjects of His Most Christian Majesty or
the United States, be put under any arrest or molested by any other kind of
embargo for that cause, and only the subject of that State to whom the said
goods have been or shall be prohibited, and who shall presume to sell or
alienate such sort of goods, shall be duly punished for the offense.

ARTICLE XXXI.
The two contracting parties grant mutually the liberty of having each in the
ports of the other, Consuls, Vice-Consuls, Agents and Commissaries, whose
functions shall be regulated by a particular agreement.

ARTICLE XXXII.
And the more to favor and facilitate the commerce which the subjects of the
United States may have with France, the Most Christian King will grant them in
Europe one or more free ports, where they may bring and dispose of all the
produce and merchandise of the Thirteen United States; and his Majesty will
also continue to the subjects of the said States, the free ports which have
been and are open in the French islands of America, of all which free ports the
said subjects of the United States shall enjoy the use, agreeable to the
regulations which relate to them.

ARTICLE XXXIII.
The present treaty shall be ratified on both sides, and the ratifications
shall be exchanged in the space of six months, or sooner if possible.

IN FAITH WHEREOF the respective Plenepotentiaries have signed the above
Articles both in the French and English languages; declaring nevertheless, that
the present Treaty was originally composed and concluded in the French
language, and they have thereto affixed their seals.

DONE at PARIS, this Sixth Day of February, One Thousand Seven Hundred and
Seventy-Eight. (L. S.) C. A. GERARD. (L. S.) B. FRANKLIN. (L. S.) SILAS DEANE.
(L. S.) ARTHUR LEE.


Form of the passports and letters which are to be given to the ships and
barques according to the 27th article of this treaty.

TO ALL who shall see these presents greeting. It is hereby made known, that
leave and permission has been given to (...), master and commander of the ship
called (...) of the town of (...) burden (...) tons or thereabouts, lying at
present in the port and haven of (...) and bound for (...) and laden with
(...). After that his ship has been visited and before sailing, he shall make
oath before the officers who have the jurisdiction of maritime affairs, that
the said ship belongs to one or more of the subjects of (...) the act whereof
shall be put at the end of these presents; as likewise that he will keep and
cause to be kept by his crew on board, the marine ordinances and regulations,
and enter in the proper office a list signed and witnessed containing the names
and sirnames, the places of birth and abode of the crew of his ship, and of all
who shall embark on board her, whom he shall not take on board without the
knowledge and permission of the officers of the marine, and in every port or
haven where he shall enter with his ship, he shall show this present leave to
the Officers and Judges of the marine, and shall give a faithful account to
them of what passed and was done during his voyage, and he shall carry the
colors, arms and ensigns of the King, or United States during his voyage. In
witness whereof we have signed these presents and put the seal of our arms
thereunto and caused the same to be countersigned by (...) at (...) the (...)
day of (...) Anno Domini (...)


