PROCEEDINGS OF A GENERAL COURT MARTIAL, HELD AT CAMBRIDGE On TUESDAY the
Twentieth of JANUARY; And continued by several ADJOURNMENTS to WEDNESDAY the
25th of FEBRUARY, 1778: UPON THE TRIAL OF COLONEL DAVID HENLEY.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY J. GILL, IN COURT-STREET. M.DCC.LXXVIII.

GENERAL ORDERS, FOR HOLDING A GENERAL COURT MARTIAL FOR THE TRIAL OF COLONEL
DAVID HENLEY.
HEADQUARTERS, BOSTON, January 18, 1778.
THE Court whereof Brigadier General GLOVER was president, appointed by the
orders of the 10th inst. to inquire into the grounds of a complaint exhibited
by Lieutenant General BURGOYNE, against Col. HENLEY, late commanding-officer of
the American troops at Cambridge, after mature consideration, are of opinion,
"That from the evidence offered on the side of General BURGOYNE, against Col.
HENLEY, it will be most for the honor of Col. HENLEY, as well as for the
satisfaction of all interested, that the judgment of a Court Martial should be
taken on his conduct, during his command at Cambridge."

The General approving the opinion of the Court, orders that a special General
Court Martial set on Tuesday next, at ten o'clock A. M. at the Courthouse in
Cambridge, for the trial of Col. DAVID HENLEY, late commanding-officer at that
post, accused by Lieutenant General Burgoyne, "of a general tenor of language
and conduct heinously criminal as an officer, and unbecoming a man, of the most
indecent, violent, vindictive severity against unarmed men, and of intentional
murder."

Brigadier-General GLOVER, President. Col. Wesson, Col. M. Jackson, Col. Lee,
Col. H. Jackson, Lieut. Col. Colman, Lieut. Col. Badlem, Lieut. Col. Popkins,
Major Curtis, Capt. Randall, Capt. Langdon, Capt. Sewall, Capt. Hastings,
MEMBERS.

Lieutenant Colonel TUDOR is directed to act as Judge-Advocate.

All evidences and persons concerned, to attend the Court.

A true copy of General Orders, J. KEITH, D. A. G.

At a General Court Martial held at Cambridge, on Tuesday the 20th day of
January, 1778, and continued by several adjournments to Wednesday the 25th
February following, by virtue of the orders of Major General HEATH, dated the
18th day of January.

Brigadier-General GLOVER, President. Col. M. Jackson, Col. Wesson, Col. Lee,
Col. H. Jackson, Lieut. Col. Popkins, Lieut. Col. Badlem, Major Curtis. Capt.
Allen, Capt. Randall, Capt. Langdon, Capt. Sewall, Capt Hastings. WILLIAM
TUDOR, Judge Advocate.
The members being met and duly sworn, the Judge Advocate being also sworn, a
letter from Lieut. Genesis BURGOYNE to Major General HEATH, of the 9th of January,
was read as follows, viz.

Cambridge, January 9, 1778. SIR,
A Report has been made to me of a disturbance that happened at the barracks on
Wednesday afternoon, for which I am much concerned; and though the provocations
from your people which originally occasioned it, were of the most atrocious
nature, I was willing the offender on our part should be properly punished. --
But Col. Henley, not content with that, made prisoners eighteen innocent men,
and sent them on board a guard-ship, as alleged by your order. It is not only
a duty to my situation to demand the immediate discharge of these men, together
with a satisfactory apology; but I also mean it as an attention to you, Sir
that I give you an immediate opportunity to disavow so unjustifiable a
proceeding as committing men to the worst of prisons upon vague report, caprice
and passion.

Insults and provocations at which the most placid dispositions would revolt,
are daily given to the officers and soldiers of this army. -- Regular, decent
complaints are received by your officers, sometimes with haughtiness, sometimes
with derision, but always without redress. -- These evils flow, Sir, from the
general tenor of language and conduct held by Col. Henley, which encourages his
inferiors and seems calculated to excite them to the most bloody purposes.

For want of sufficient information and not bringing myself to believe it
possible, facts as related by common report could be true, I have hitherto
declined taking public notice of this man; but upon positive ground, I now, and
hereby, formally accuse Col. Henley of behavior heinously criminal as an
officer, and unbecoming a man -- of the most indecent, violent, vindictive
severity, against unarmed men, and of intentional murder. -- I demand prompt
and satisfactory justice, and will not doubt your readiness to give it.
Whenever you will inform me that a proper tribunal is appointed, I will take
care that undeniable evidence shall be produced to support these charges.

I am, Sir, your most obedient servant, J. BURGOYNE.

To Major General HEATH.

Col. David Henley came prisoner before the Court, and the following charge was
exhibited against him, viz.

"Lieutenant General Burgoyne accuses Colonel Henley, of a general tenor of
language and conduct heinously criminal as an officer; and unbecoming a man; of
the most indecent, violent, vindictive severity against unarmed men; and of
intentional murder."

To which accusations Col. Henley answered he was not guilty.

Observations of Genesis Burgoyne upon his letter of complaint to Genesis Heath, and
the order for the Court Martial consequent thereupon, being read by the
Judge-Advocate:

Lieut. Genesis Burgoyne arose and took occasion to observe a distinction between
the charge as stated in his letter, and in Genesis Heath's orders. In the letter,
the general tenor of Col. Henley's language and conduct, "Encouraging his
inferiors, and seeming calculated to excite them to bloody purposes," was
matter of suspicion, belief and reasoning, upon the plain principle that it was
more candid to suppose one instigator of such evils, than a general voluntary
bad disposition among the American troops -- that the direct matters of charge
which Genesis Burgoyne pledged himself formally and officially to support, was
contained in the words "Behavior heinously criminal as an officer, and
unbecoming a man, of the most indecent, violent, vindictive severity against
unarmed men, and of intentional murder."

Genesis Burgoyne having stated this observation, as a security against censure of
inconsistency on his part, for not going at large, and in matters of inferior
moment into the general tenor of language and conduct of Col. Henley; declared
he should confine his evidence to the transactions of the nineteenth of
December, and eighth of January, except in cases where the behavior of Col.
Henley at other times, served to elucidate the principles and designs upon
which he acted on those particular days; and Genesis Burgoyne admitted the words
should stand in the order, without remonstrance or trouble to the Court, upon
the persuasion that even as he has now limited the time, a sufficiency of
evidence would appear to make good the whole. -- And then addressed the Court
in substance as follows.

Mr. President and Gentlemen of the Court,

I Present myself as prosecutor before you in charges of a heinous nature
against Col. Henley -- and before I begin to adduce the evidence in support of
them, I think it a duty to my station, and a part of propriety toward the
Court, to declare the principles upon which I act.

If the reports in my hand, and which will presently be brought to test upon
oath, do not deceive me, public faith has been shaken, wanton barbarities have
been committed, and a general massacre of the troops under my command
apparently threatened.

In objects of this magnitude, where not only the rights of a single nation,
but the interests of human nature are concerned, the effort of vindication
falls indispensably: -- However disagreeable the office, and unequal the talent
of the person, to him who has the supreme trust of his country upon the spot.

A second inducement to appear here, is that of private honor. -- I have
undertaken to accuse Col. Henley in a degree that ought to effect the feelings
of a soldier nearer than life. -- It is fit that I stand forth in person to
maintain my accusation, and if it fails in point of proof, to make him the
fullest atonement in my power.

I acknowledge a third impulsion upon my mind equally irresistible --
gratitude, esteem, affection to that meritorious, respectable part of my
country, the brave and honest British soldiers.

A private man defenseless, because unarmed; ignorant of your laws; unqualified
to make good his cause in a court of justice, -- has no where to look for
redress of injury, but to his own officers. -- I confess I am too selfish to
resign to any brother officer the pride and gratification of standing in the
front, for the defense of men -- faithful comrades of honor and misfortune --
who have fought under my orders, who have bled in my presence, and who are
suffering oppression and persecution by the abuse of a treaty signed by my hand.

Thus much I thought proper to premise, least any man should suppose me
actuated by so mean and paltry a motive as vindictive personal resentment,
against a gentleman too of whom before these transactions, I could know no
harm, and toward whom if I had any prejudice, I seriously declare it was from
his general deportment a favorable one: -- Personal resentment! -- no
gentlemen -- I stand upon broader and upon firmer ground, the ground of natural
right -- personal protection -- and public honor -- and I appeal to the great
principles and landmarks by which human societies hold and are directed, and
which, whether in times of amity or hostility, are held equally sacred by the
universal concurrence of civilized man.

And this leads me to a momentary reflection upon the order under which you
sit, originating from the report of the Court of Inquiry. It states, "After
mature consideration, are of opinion, that from the evidence offered on the
side of Genesis Burgoyne, against Col. Henley, it will be most for the honor of
Col. Henley, as well as for the satisfaction of all interested, that the
judgment of a Court Martial should be taken on his conduct during his command
at Cambridge."

"The General approving of the opinion of the Court, orders," etc. etc. etc.

I confess I expected Genesis Heath would have joined issue with the prosecutor in
this instance, and placed the court martial upon a more enlarged basis than the
honor of an individual, however respectable he may be, or the satisfaction of
the mere complainant -- but be it as it may, my purpose is answered -- a
court martial is obtained; the members are sworn, and you are bound to decide.
I know you will feel with me the difference between this and common courts:
Such a state of the minutes as would suffice for your internal conviction after
hearing the evidence, or as would be merely explanatory to the person who is to
confirm the sentence, will not be thought sufficient here.

You well know the whole of this matter will be published, translated,
considered, commented upon by every nation in the world; and not only reality
but perspicuity of justice must appear upon the face of these proceedings. --
You are trustees for the honor of an infant state, and therefore evasion,
subterfuge and law-craft, was any man hardy enough to offer such to your
tribunal, would be of no avail; nay, were it possible any member could be
warped unintentionally by personal favor, or the prejudices of civil contest:
Good minds are sometimes prone to such illusions -- yet here a moment's
reflection upon the reputation of his country, would interfere, and what his
prejudice inclined him to adopt, his policy would prompt him to reject.

Upon the full confidence therefore of the necessary as well as willing justice
of the Court, I shall proceed to call the evidence. I have neither inclination
nor powers to heighten the facts by a previous narrative: Let them strike the
view, as truth shall show them in all the simplicity of their horrors -- a
monstrous spectacle! from which the eye and the mind will turn aside with
detestation.

The following witnesses were called in, and being particularly cautioned, were
sworn:

Corporal Buchannan, 9th regiment.

Q. Was you present at the barracks on prospect-hill on the 19th December last?

A. I was.

Q. Did you see Col, Henley there?

A. Col. Henley came down and ordered a number of the British soldier's who
were prisoners, out of the guard-house: Col. Henley addressed himself to
Corporal Reeves, with the rest of the prisoners, inquiring what he was confined
for? Reeves said that he had affronted one of the Provincial officers, not
knowing him to be an officer, and he was sorry for it. Col. Henley replied,
Sir, if you had served me so, I would have run you through the body, and I
believe you to be a great rascal. Reeves made answer, Sir, I am no rascal, but
a good soldier, and my officers know it. Col. Henley then demanded silence. On
this, Reeves repeated I am no rascal, but a good soldier, and I hope soon to be
under the command of Genesis How, to carry arms, and to fight for my king and
country. Col. Henley said, damn your king and country -- when you had arms you
were willing to lay them down. Reeves said he was not willing to lay them down.
Col. Henley then ordered silence; Reeves not obeying his orders, but repeating
the same words, Col. Henley ordered one of the guard to run him through the body:
the man not obeying him, Col. Henley immediately dismounted from his horse, and
seizing a firelock with a fixed bayonet from one of the guard, stabbed Reeves
in the left breast; while the bayonet was at Reeves's breast, Col. Henley told
him if he said another word, he would have it through his body. Reeves said he
did not care, he would stand for his king and country 'till he died. Col.
Henley then made another push at him, when I threw up my hand and turned the
bayonet over Reeves's shoulder. I told Col. Henley the man was a prisoner, and
said don't take his life; as he is now in your custody, you can take other
means with him: Col. Henley then returned the firelock to the man of the guard
he took it from* and then ordered Reeves and myself into the guard-room, and
dismissed the rest of the prisoners.

Q By Genesis Burgoyne -- When Col. Henley made the second pass at Reeves, where
would it have struck him had you not thrown the bayonet up with your hand?

A. Much about the same place in the left breast.

Q When Col. Henley demanded silence, did he direct himself particularly to
Reeves?

A. I cannot tell, as there was ten or a dozen prisoners who were making their
excuses together.

Q. Was there not much noise made by the prisoners?

A. There was, as they were all speaking together.

Q By the President. -- What kind of noise was it?

A. It was excusing themselves to one another, so that Col Henley might hear
them; that they had been confined there for some nights, and they should take
care not to come there again.

Q. By the President. -- Was there any other sort of noise or laughing?

A. No.

Q By the Court -- Was there any muttering or grumbling, or insolent looks
directed to Col. Henley?

A. No, but quite the reverse; the men seemed pleased at being released.

Alexander Thompson, 29th regiment.

Q. Was you present at or near the barracks on Prospect-Hill on the 19th of
December?

A. I was, and saw Col. Henley there -- Col. Henley coming up, ordered the
prisoners out of the guard-house, of whom I was one -- the prisoners were drawn
up before the guard-room window, the guard in their front -- Col. Henley
pulling a paper out of his pocket* began to read the crimes at the right of the
line of the prisoners -- Col. Henley said, now soldiers I am come to release
you, and hope you will behave better for the future -- Col. Henley directing
himself to corporal Reeves, told him he was confined for abusing an officer of
the Continental service; and asked him what was the reason of his abuse? Reeves
replied he did not know the reason of the abuse as he was in liquor at the
time, but said he was very sorry for it, not knowing him to be an officer: Col.
Henley then said had it been me, I would have certainly run you through the body,
and added, I believe you to be a rascal. Reeves said he was no rascal, but was
a good soldier, and his officers knew it: Col. Henley demanded silence and
Reeves again said that he was a good soldier, and hoped in a short time to
fight under Genesis How for his king and country: Col. Henley then said, damn
your king and country, when you had arms you were willing to lay them down.
Corporal Reeves made answer that he was not willing to lay them down, and had
he then arms, he would do his utmost to fight for his king and country; Col.
Henley then ordered one of his guard to run the rascal through. The man not
obeying, he immediately dismounted his horse, seized a firelock with a fixed
bayonet from one of the guard, extended his arm above his head, with his hand
on the butt of the fire-lock, and made a pass at corporal Reeves and pricked
him near the nipple of the leaft breast; he then drew back the fire-lock and
made another pass at him; I then seized hold of the socket of the bayonet and
begged of Col. Henley not to take his life, that he might use other means of
satisfaction, and begged he would send him into the guard-room again; Col.
Henley then ordered Reeves into the guard-room, the guard committed him, and
Col. Henley went on to speak to the rest of the prisoners. Reeves put his head
out of the guard-house window and said something, but the deponent does not
know what. Col. Henley then released the rest of the prisoners, except
Buchannan, who was ordered into the guard-house.

Q. By the President. -- Was there noting said by Reeves between the first and
second pass of Col. Henley?

A. To the best of my recollection there was not.

Q. Did not Col. Henley frequently command silence before he stabbed Reeves?

A. I believe he did more than once or twice.

Q. Did not Col. Henley direct himself to Reeves when he demanded silence?

A. He looked first at Reeves, and then along the line of prisoners.

Q Was not Reeves more talkative than any of the other prisoners?

A. He was.

Q. Was there any thing said about King Hancock?

A. I heard nothing.

The same question was put to Buchannan.

A. Not 'till after Reeves was returned to the guard-room, and the other
prisoners dismissed; Reeves then said to me (Buchannan) this is a poor pass I
am come to, to be taken out of the guard-house and stabbed, and my king and
country damned -- damn King Hancock and the Congress. Whether Col. Henley heard
it or not I cannot say; he might have heard it: This discourse was between
Reeves and myself as we stood near the guard-house window.

Q. To Thompson. -- Did any one assist you in warding off the second pass made
by Col. Henley at Reeves?

A. Yes; Corporal Buchannan had hold of the firelock at the same time.

Q. Did not Col. Henley address the prisoners when they were first paraded, in
a mild and civil manner?

A. He did.

Dr. Bowen, acting surgeon to the 9th regiment.

Q. Did you see corporal Reeves after he was wounded by Col. Henley?

A. I did a few hours after; the wound appeared to be made by a bayonet, it
penetrated the breast a little above the left nipple; the wound was not so bad
as to require immediate dressing; the wound was slight, it did not penetrate
deep enough to be of any consequence, it might have drawn a drop or two of
blood.

Q. By Genesis Burgoyne -- What further depth would have put his life in danger?

A. An inch farther might have rendered the wound hazardous.

Q. By Genesis Burgoyne. -- Was the direction of the wound toward the heart, or a
mortal part?

A. It was not toward the heart, but toward a mortal part.

The Court adjourns to Wednesday 21 st January, at ten o'clock.

WEDNESDAY, 21st January. The Court met according to adjournment.
Robert Steel, sergeant 62d regiment.]

Q. WAS you at the barracks on prospect-hill on the 19th December?

A. I was.

Q. Did you see Col. Henley there?

A. I did; Col. Henley came down to release some British soldiers, prisoners in
the guard-house there; the prisoners were ordered out and paraded in the front
of the guard-house; Col. Henley asked the prisoners their names, and what
crimes they were confined for? corporal Reeves told him that he was confined
for abusing a Provincial officer in Cambridge, and said he did not know him to
be an officer, if he had he would not have abused him, was very sorry for it,
and ready to ask his pardon; Col. Henley made answer that if it had been him he
had abused, he would certainly have run him through, and told him he believed him
to be a damned rascal. Reeves replied I am no rascal, Sir, but a good soldier,
and my officers know it; and I hope in a short time to join Genesis How, and
fight for my king and country. Col. Henley replied, damn your king and country,
what do we care for your king and country; when you had arms you laid them down
very willingly. No, Sir, Reeves replied, we did not, we were willing to fight.
Upon this, Col. Henley ordered one of the guard to run him through, his order not
being complied with, Col. Henley dismounted from his horse, seized one of the
guard's fire-lock and stabbed Reeves in the breast; Reeves demanded the reason
of his stabbing him? Col. Henley cried silence, Sir, and made another pass at
him, two of the prisoners who stood nearest Reeves, seized the fire-lock, and
desired Col. Henley not to take his life, as he was a prisoner, and his life
was in his hands: Col. Henley then told him he would send him on board a
guard-ship, and ordered him into the guard-room; he released the rest of the
prisoners, excepting Reeves and corporal Buchannan.

Q. Before Col. Henley stabbed Reeves, did he not order him more than once to
be silent?

A. Not that I know of.

Q. Did not the Colonel command silence among the prisoners before he stabbed
Reeves?

A. After he stabbed him he did, I don't know that he did before.

Q. Did you not hear Reeves say King Hancock was an impudent fellow for coming
to see their General?

A. I did not indeed.

Q. Is what you have now related the whole of what you heard and saw pass
between Col. Henley and Reeves?

A. It is.

Q. Was your situation such that you might have seen and heard every thing that
passed between Reeves and Col. Henley?

A. It was; but I did not attend to all that passed.

Q. By the President. -- After Col. Henley stabbed Reeves, before he made the
second pass at him, did he not command silence?

A. He did; but Reeves said he would not be silent, or words to that purpose,
he would stick up to his king and country.

Q. Did not Reeves strike his fists, and use a menacing expression?

A. I did not observe.

Q. By Col. Henley. -- When I first came down to release the prisoners, did I
not appear in good humor toward the prisoners?

A. You did.

Page 24th regiment.]

Q. Was you at or near the barracks on prospect-hill on the 8th January?

A. I was, and saw a guard of Continental soldiers about eleven o'clock, A. M.
coming up from Winter-hill; when they came near the British guard-house, a
number of us were standing to see them march by, I happened to tread on one of
my comrade's toes, and he cried out God damn my soul, when a sergeant (as I
took him to be as he was out of the ranks) turned about, steped back two or
three paces, and stabbed him in the right breast, then drew out his bayonet
from the man's breast, and said to the man damn you, you rascal do you damn me?
the soldier made answer no; I likewise said that he did not speak to him; he
then made another push at him, and pricked him the second time, and then
clubb'd his firelock and cut him on his right temple; a Provincial officer,
came from the rear of the party and damned us for rascals, and told us we all
deserved it.

Q. Did you see Col. Henley at or near the party during this transaction?

A. I did not.

Q. What number of British soldiers were together when the party passed them?

A. There might be fifty or sixty.

Q. By Genesis Burgoyne. -- What number did the Provincial guard consist of?

A. I guess about one hundred and fifty.

Q. Did you see any insult by word or gesture passed from the British soldiers
toward the guard?

A. I did not.

Q. By General Burgoyne. -- Did you hear any Provincial officer or soldier
complain of any affront offered?

A. I did not except what passed as before related.

Q. By the President. -- Did the British soldiers give the party full room to
march in the same open order after they came up to them as before?

A. There was full room where I stood for the party to pass.

Thomas Lee, 24th regiment.]

Q. Was you at the barracks on prospect-hill on the 8th of January?

A. I was. -- The witness confirms the whole of Page's testimony, both in the
narrative and the answers to the same questions.

Q. What brought the British soldiers together at the guard-house? And did they
laugh at or insult the guard?

A. Curiosity to see the guard; and there was no laughing or insult on the side
of the British soldiers.

John George, 24th regiment -- Was present at the same time and place with
Page, and confirms the whole of his testimony, except that he thinks there
might be one hundred and thirty or forty British soldiers, and the Provincial
guard upwards of one hundred.

Q. Do you know any rescue of a prisoner at this time?

A. I do not.

Mr. Walker, surgeon's mate to the 47th regiment.]

Q. Do you know of a British soldier being wounded on the 8th of January?

A. I dressed a British soldier about eleven o'clock on the same day, who had
just before been wounded, his name was Traggot, there were two orifices just
above the right breast, which the man told me had been done by two different
stabs of a bayonet; from the free communication of the two orifices I should
have thought it had been only one wound; the wound was not dangerous, I have
dressed it several times since, and at present it is in a fair way of a cu^; I
saw no other wound nor saw any marks of beating about the man.

Q. Are you satisfied that the wound was made by one stabb of the bayonet, or
more?

A. I am of opinion from the nature of the wound it was done by one push.

Q. Did the man complain of any other wound?

A. He did not.

Major Foster 21st regiment.]

Q. Was you present at the time Traggot was wounded, and did you see any insult
on the part of the British soldiers offered to the guard?

A. I was distant about thirty yards, and neither saw or heard any provocation
on the part of the British soldiers to the Continental guard; I was attentively
counting the files of the guard as they passed; when the rear of the guard came
near the British guard-room, I observed a scuffle, the guard passed on; I went
up and found Traggot, a British soldier, had been wounded by one of the guard
as I was told, and the blood was then running down the side of his face. I
ordered the men to disperse and they went off immediately.

Q. Was there a free passage for the Continental troops to march, or was there
any dispute upon that subject?

A. There was a free passage and no dispute that I heard of or saw.

Q. Was you looking at the British soldiers the whole time the guard was
passing?

A. I was looking at both, and could not see one party without the other, of
those on the right of the guard.

Q. Did you see Col. Henley there?

A. I did not.

Q. Was your situation such, that had any insult or provocation been offered by
a British soldier to the guards, you could have seen or heard it?

A. I think it was.

Q. What was the number of British soldiers collected?

A. Including the British barrack-guard of twenty-four, the whole was about
sixty or seventy; the Continental guard was about one hundred.

Q. While you was counting the files of the Continental guard, might not many
transactions have escaped your notice?

A. I think not, because the Provincial guard and the British soldiers were
both in my sight.

Lieutenant Smith, royal artillery, was standing by Major Foster at the time
mentioned, and confirms the whole of his testimony, except with respect to the
last question.

Mr. Clartey, surgeon's mate of 24th regiment.]

Q. Do you know any thing of a wound Thomas Tragget received on the head?

A. I saw him the day after he received it, about the 9th of January; he had
received a blow on the right side of his head, there was some clotted blood, it
was swelled, I ordered the man to wash it, and did not hear any thing more
about it; with respect to the wound in the breast, I confirm Mr. Walker's
testimony.

Corporal Kidley, 9th regiment.]

Q. Was you at the barracks on prospect-hill, on the forenoon of 8th January?

A. I was about eleven o'clock standing at the upper end of the barracks, near
the flag-staff, talking with six or seven British soldiers, and one of them
called to Willson of the 9th regiment to take care of himself, I turned round
to see what was the matter, and saw Willson parrying the point of a bayonet,
with which a Provincial soldier was stabbing at him; another Provincial soldier
who was standing at the distance of ten yards, charged his bayonet, ran up and
stabbed Willson in the left side.

Q. Did you not see corporal Buchannan, a British soldier, in the custody of
two Provincial soldiers, a little before this?

A. About two minutes before this, I did, but what became of him I cannot tell.

Q. How was you employed between the time of seeing Buchannan in custody, and
the time that Willson was stabbed?

A. I was talking with some British soldiers.

Q. How many British soldiers were present at the time Willson was stabbed?

A. Within the compass of about fifty yards, there might be forty or fifty
British soldiers.

Q Do you known of Buchannan's escaping from the centries before Willson was
stabbed?

A. I do not; I heard afterward in the barracks that Buchannan had ran away
from the centries.

Q. Was Col. Henley near when this transaction took place?

A. He was about thirty yards distant within the works, in the rear of the
Provincial guard-house.

Q. Was Col. Henley near enough to have prevented Willson from being stabbed?

A. He was near enough to have given any orders he pleased; but I did not hear
him speak.

Q. What was Col. Henley doing at this time?

A. Looking over the works toward the place where Willson stood.

Q. After Willson was wounded, did you hear Col. Henley take any notice of the
man who had done it?

A. I did not, for I went immediately off the ground.

Q. Was it in the power of Col. Henley to have prevented the action?

A. I do not think it was, it was done so suddenly.

John Keith, 9th regiment.

Q. Was you at the barracks on prospect-hill on the 8th January?

A. I was standing near Willson, and had just come up to the crowd of British
soldiers, when a Provincial soldier came up with a fixed bayonet, making a push
through the crowd -- Willson parry'd it, another Provincial soldier immediately
ran up and stabbed Willson in the side.

Q. Do you know of a British soldier being rescued, or running away from the
Provincial guard at this time?

A. I do not; after I returned to the barracks I heard of Buchannan's running
away from the Provincial guard.

Q. By Genesis Burgoyne. -- If Buchannan had ran toward the place where Willson
stood, should you not have seen him?

A. I certainly should, for I was standing close by Willson; I did not see
Buchannan 'till afternoon, and then he was in his barracks.

Q. Did you see Col. Henley there or near?

A. I did not.

Q. What number of British soldiers were in the crowd when Willson was stabbed?

A. Sixty or seventy.

Q. Did the Provincial soldiers run up into the crowd and push among them with
their bayonets without provocation?

A. I saw no provocation, nor heard the Provincials give any reason for acting
such a part.

Q. Was Willson doing any thing to impede the progress of the men who stabbed
him?

A. I did not see him do any except warding off the pass of the bayonet.

Q. Where did the soldier who stabbed Willson go afterward?

A. He returned toward the Provincial guard-house.

The Court adjourns 'till tomorrow at ten o'clock, A. M.

THURSDAY, January 22d, 1778. The Court met according to adjournment.
Arthur Lesslie, corporal royal artillery.]

Q WAS you at the barracks on prospect-hill on the forenoon of the 8th January
last?

A. I was in my barrack-room between 11 and 12 o'clock that forenoon, and
hearing that there was a party of American soldiers drawn up in the rear of the
artillery-barracks, I got up and went to the place, and found a party drawn up
with Col. Henley in the front of them; and then heard Col. Henley say to the
British soldiers go off and clear the parade -- the British soldiers turned
about and moved off as (...) as they could, being much crowded, and the road
being very dirty; Col. Henley turned and went a little to the right of his
party, turned about again, and addressing the British soldiers, said, damn ye,
I Will make you make more haste, and came up to corporal Hadley and pushed his
sword into his left side and bent his sword, turned himself about straightning
his sword as he went along to the right of his party; I saw no more, as I went
immediately to my barrack-room.

Q. By Genesis Burgoyne. -- Did you hear any words pass, or see any insult offered
by corporal Hadley, or any other British soldier at the time?

A. I heard nor saw none.

Q. Was you so near that if any had passed you would probably have seen it?

A. I was.

Q. Did the British soldiers surround Col. Henley's party?

A. They were mostly in the front, some straggling ones in the flank and in the
rear.

Q. What number was there of British soldiers on the parade at that time?

A. About sixty or seventy in the front of the party.

Q. How long was it between Col. Henley's ordering the soldiers to disperse,
and his stabbing Hadley?

A. Two or three minutes.

Q Did the British soldiers crowd Col. Henley's party?

A. They did not; most of them were two or three yards distant, when the orders
was given to disperse; when Hadley was stabbed, he was walking off at the
distance of three or four yards from the party.

Q. By Col. Henley -- Did you not hear me more than once give orders to the
British soldiers to disperse?

A. I did not.

Q. Was you present when I was with the party in the fort?

A. I was not.

Q. Did you see me draw up twelve men of the party in single rank, and order
them to lead?

A. I saw no such thing.

Q. Did you not hear me tell the British soldiers that I had lost one prisoner,
and if they attempted to rescue another, I would order the party to fire on
them?

A I did not.

Q. Did you not think there were more British soldiers on the (...) than there
were of Col. Henley's party?

A I don't think there were.

Q By Col Henley. -- Was you not present when I ordered (...) thirty or forty
men from the left of the party, and gave them to the command of an officer, to
take charge of the British prisoners?

A. I did not see it.

Q What was the distance between the front of Col. Henley's party and the rear
of the barracks?

A. Six or seven yards to the best of my knowledge.

Q How long was you on the parade?

A. To the best of my judgment not ten minutes.

John Upwood, royal artillery.]

Q Was you at the barracks on Prospect-hill on the forenoon of the 8th January?

A. I was in my barrack-room, and hearing a drum and fife, went out of my
barrack-room to see what occasioned it, and found a party of Provincial
soldiers drawn up in the rear of our barracks, with Col. Henley in the front of
them; he came up to the left of his party, where some British soldiers were
standing, and desired them to disperse and go to their barracks, which they
instantly seemed to comply with, but not so fast as I imagined he expected, he
passed one or two British soldiers that were between him and Hadley, and made a
pass at Hadley, wounded him in the left side, and then walked before his party
straightning his sword, which was bent in the thrust; I then returned to my
barrack-room.

Q. By General Burgoyne. -- Was Col. Henley's sword drawn when you first saw
him on the parade?

A. It was.

Q. Was Col. Henley making any flourishes or menacing motions with it?

A. No otherwise than a commanding-officer at the head of a party of soldiers.

Q. What number of British soldiers were there in all upon the parade?

A. About sixty or seventy.

Q. Did not the British soldiers surround Col. Henley's party?

A. The greatest part stood on the left of the party, there might be a few
straggling ones in the rear.

Q. Did Col. Henley order the British soldiers to disperse more than once
before he stabbed Hadley?

A. I did not hear him.

Q. How long was it between the order to disperse and Col. Henley's stabbing
Hadley?

A. Col. Henley almost instantly on giving the orders, stabbed Hadley.

Q. Do you really think the British soldiers moved off when ordered, as fast as
they might have done?

A. They did; some of them in moving fell into the ditch.

Q. By Col Henley -- Was the falling into the ditch before or after Hadley was
wounded?

A. Both before and after.

Q. By Col. Henley. -- Was you not present when I ordered off thirty or forty
men from the left of the party, and gave them to the command of an officer to
take charge of the British prisoners?

A. I was, and they went into the fort.

Q. At that time when I had weakened my party, did not the British soldiers
crowd upon me to hear the orders I was giving to my officers?

A. I did not observe it.

Q. How long was you on the parade?

A. About ten or twelve minutes, and then left it; all the British soldiers had
not left it.

Q. Was Hadley wounded before or after Col. Henley had detached a party into
the fort?

A. After.

The witness confirms the answers of Lesslie to the 2d and 3d questions put to
Lesslie.

Corporal John Davis, 9th regiment.

Q. Was you at the barracks on prospect-hill on the 8th January?

A I was in the forenoon of the 8th; Col. Henley came up with a party of
Provincials and marched them very near the flag-staff on the hill, there halted
them and sent off a party to take care of some prisoners, the remainder he
formed in two divisions; a number of British soldiers came up to see what was
the matter, and Col. Henley desired them to disperse, upon that the British
soldiers immediately moved off at a moderate pace, when Col. Henley made a push
with his sword, but I don't know he hurt any body* he afterward walked a few
paces, turned about and stabbed Corporal Hadley through his left arm into his
left side: Winks of the 9th regiment, being the last moving off the parade,
Col. Henley followed him with his sword drawn, and told him if he did not move
faster he would run him through the body, or asked him if he wanted to be run
through the body, I am not sure which, and a Provincial soldier pushed Winks
into the ditch; I went off. -- I was on the parade from the time of Col.
Henley's coming up with the party 'till he marched them off, which might be
half an hour or three quarters.

Q. Was there not a greater number of British soldiers round the party than the
party consisted of?

A. I do not think there was.

Q. Was there any abuse of any kind offered by the British soldiers to Col.
Henley or his party?

A. I heard nor saw none.

Q. Did not Col. Henley repeatedly order the British soldiers to leave the
parade before he stabbed Hadley?

A. I heard him only once.

Q. After Col Henley made the first pass at the British soldiers, did he not
order them to disperse before he wounded Hadley?

A. He did not.

Q. How far did Col. Henley follow Winks with his drawn sword?

A. Four or five yards.

Q. Did not the Colonel declare to the British soldiers that he had had a
prisoner rescued, and if another was rescued he would fire upon them?

A. Col. Henley swore before he would have a prisoner rescued from him, he
would send every British soldier on board the guard-ships.

Q. Did you observe Col. Henley's motions after wounding Hadley?

A. Col. Henley turned about and straightned his sword on his knee, which had
been bent by the violence of the thrust.

John Winks, 9th regiment.]

Q. Was you on the parade near the flag-staff on prospect-hill, on 8th January?

A. I was there when Col. Henley with a party came up; he formed his party in
two columns, and ordered all that were not loaded to load directly; after they
were loaded and shouldered, he told his own men that the first man who rescued
a prisoner out of his hand, he would blow his brains out; he then turned about
with his sword in his hand, and ordered the British soldiers to leave the
parade immediately; they moved off directly; Col. Henley finding the men did
not go off so fast as he expected, he went up to Hadley who was in the rear of
the British soldiers, and stabbed him, drawing his sword back which was much
bent; he came up to me after he had straightened it on his knee, as I was going
off as fast as I could walk, followed me ten paces and damned me for a rascal,
and told me if I did not go off the parade he would run me through the body; I
was getting off and one of the Provincial sergeants knocked me into the ditch;
I got up and went to my barracks.

Q Did not the British soldiers crowd on Col. Henley's party?

A. They did not.

Q. Was there no abuse offered to Col. Henley or the party by the British
soldiers?

A. There was not of any kind that I saw.

Q. Did not the British soldiers surround Col. Henley's party?

A. They were chiefly hemmed in between the party and the barracks in the front
of the party.

Q. By General Burgoyne. -- Was you so near that if any insult had been offered
to Col. Henley's party, you must have seen it?

A. I was.

William Anderson, serjeant-major 20th regiment.]

Q. Was you on the parade near the flag-staff on prospect hill on 8th January?

A. I was between 11 and 12 in the forenoon; coming out of my barracks I saw a
number of British soldiers going up toward the flag-staff, I went up to know
the occasion of it, when I got up I saw a number of British soldiers standing
in front of a Provincial guard, and Col. Henley at the head of them, with his
sword drawn in his hand; Col. Henley desired the British soldiers to move back,
which they immediately complied with, they not moving so quick as I suppose
Col. Henley could wish, I saw Col. Henley move up quick toward the crowd, and
make a pass at Corporal Hadley, of the 9th regiment, which wounded him through
the left arm into the left side and bent his sword with the force of the pass;
Hadley went off immediately to his barrack, not using any words either before
or after, as I heard; Col. Henley walked toward his party straightning his
sword with his left hand; I went away and saw nothing more.

Q. What number of British soldiers were near the party?

A. About sixty or seventy.

Q. Was there any sort of abuse offered to Col. Henley or the party, by the
British soldiers?

A. I saw none; and I was so situated that I must have seen it if any had been
offered.

Q. Did the British soldiers move off on being ordered, as fast as they might
have done?

A. I think they did; those in the front run, the rear could not get off so
quick on account of the crowd.

Q. When Col. Henley stabbed Hadley, did he appear in a passion?

A. He did, and as if he was much vexed at something.

Lieut. Bibby, 24th regiment.]

Q. Was you going to the barracks on Prospect-hill on the forenoon of the 8th
January; relate what passed?

A. Between eleven and twelve beforenoon I was going to the upper barracks, and
at the barrier gate there was a Provincial sentry who stopped me and said, I
could not go in there; supposing he did not know me for an officer, I told him
I supposed his orders were not to stop officers, he prefaced his answer by
charging his bayonet, said he did not care who, or what I was, I should not
pass there; I told him he need not be violent, I should not attempt to pass
him; I (...) a turned off from him, and went round into the barrack through the
ditch, a very dirty path; when I got to the rear of the barracks, I saw a
Provincial guard drawn up, and before I came very near them, I saw Col. Henley
between the rear of a barrack and the guard, with his sword drawn, making
motions with his sword on his knee, as if he was straightning of it; upon my
coming quite up to the rear of the guard, I saw and heard a person who I took
to be the Captain of the guard, damn his men on the right for not being more
attentive, desiring them to run any man through, who attempted to come near
them; I did not know at that time that Col. Henley had stabbed any one, I
walked off; as I passed in the rear of the guard I bowed to Col. Henley, who
immediately returned the bow.

The Court adjourns 'till tomorrow at ten o'clock.

FRIDAY, January 23d. The Court met according to adjournment.
Lieut. Col. Anstruther.]

Q. DID you see Colonel Henley on the 8th of January?

A. On the 8th of January, my orderly sergeant came and informed me that on the
night of 7th, twelve men of my regiment had been taken out of the barracks;
upon the report, I set out for the barracks, and in my way heard they were
brought down to Col. Henley's quarters, I went to Col. Henley to inquire into
the cause of their confinement: at Col. Henley's gate, I was denied admittance
by two centries; after some time, upon application to an officer, I got
admittance to Col. Henley, and upon enquiring into the causes of my men's
confinement, was referred to a gentleman, who I afterward understood was Col.
Gerrish of the militia, who told me the British soldiers had behaved very odd
the night before, and that he had a great mind to have fired into the door and
windows of the barracks upon them, and should have done it, had he not been
afraid of killing some of his own men; upon observing this was very odd to Col.
Henley, Col Henley told me that the British soldiers had behaved so hadly that
morning, that he was obliged to run one of them through the body, and that some
others had been hurt by his men's bayonets: I then left Col. Henley and went
down to the barracks, where on enquiry I found one of the men had been out of
his barrack after nine o'clock; I ordered him confined; a regimental
court martial set upon him, and sentenced the man to be punished for the
offense; the proceedings were communicated to Col. Henley, and an officer sent
to know if Col. Henley would order out his men to see the punishment inflicted
-- Col. Henley sent me word back I might do as I pleased with the man, but he
should not interfere, or order his men out. -- The man received his punishment
the next day at 12 o'clock, in the presence of the whole regiment.

Q. Did the man who was punished for being out of his barrack belong to the
same room where the twelve men were taken?

A. He did not, but to a room in a different part of the barrack.

Q. By Genesis Burgoyne. -- When you went down to the barrack did you make a
particular inquiry into the transactions of the preceding night?

A. As far as I was able I did; and found on an examination of the
non-commission'd officers that the men had behaved peaceably, except one man
who being in liquor, had been out of his barrack after nine o'clock, and who I
had punished as before related.

Lieut. Velancy.]

Q. Was you present at Col. Henley's the day Col. Anstruther had the
conversation he has related with Col. Henley?

A. I was; and confirm Col. Anstruther's relation.

Dr. Bowen acting surgeon 9th regiment.]

Q. Did you attend corporal Hadley from the time of his being wounded?

A. I attended him except the first dressing. About one o'clock on the 8th
inst. I was called to dress corporal Hadley's wounds, and sound upon
examination, the sword had passed through the left arm and entered his left side;
I dressed his wound, the instrument had penetrated the membrane under the skin
that lies over the muscle.

Q. Was the wound, so deep in the side as to require immediate dressing?

A It did.

Q. Was the wound of such a nature as to put the man's life in danger?

A. It was not.

Q. What part of the arm did the sword pass through?

A. It passed over the muscles on the back of the arm.

Q. What was the distance of the two orifices on the arm?

A. About half an inch or a little more.

Q. How long did you dress the wound in the side?

A. Near a week, when it was well; I dressed the wound daily 'till it was
healed.

Q. What is the state of the wound in the arm now?

A. It is well; I dressed it 'till about six days ago, when it was so far
healed as to require no further dressing.

Q. By General Burgoyne. -- Supposing the sword to have missed the arm, would
it have penetrated so far as to make the wound dangerous?

A. I imagine it would have penetrated the cavity had not a ribb interfered,
and in that case it must have been dangerous.

Q Are you positive that the sword did not touch a ribb?

A. I am positive it did not.

Q. Do you think the resistance of the clothes and the flesh of the arm
sufficient to have bent the sword?

A. I make no doubt but they were.

Q. Must not the pass then have been made with considerable violence?

A. Certainly.

Q. By the Court. -- Did it appear from the nature and direction of the wound
that Col. Henley designed to have taken the man's life.

A. From its passing so slightly through the arm, I imagine the sword was aimed
at the body.

Q. By the Court. -- Were the wounds such as to take him off his duty?

A. They were; and he has not been returned well 'till within these three or
four days.

Lieut. Col. Lind, 20th regiment.]

Q. By General Burgoyne -- Was you present at any time in December when a
Provincial sentry fired at one or more Women?

A. I was; on or about the 22d December, being field-officer of the week, I was
going upon Prospect-hill in the forenoon with Capt. Banks of the same regiment,
I saw three women coming down the hill, one of which run past a Continental
sentry, who called upon her to stop, and immediately fired his piece before she
had time to turn round, the ball from the noise, passed between the woman and
myself, and near me; I ordered the woman to go back, and went up to the centry
and asked him if he was not ashamed to fire upon a helpless woman, he replied
he had orders for so doing; I then went to a serjeant's guard which was just
by, told the sergeant what had happened, and desired him to confine the sentry
that the affair might be inquired into; he told me he would not confine him,
that they had orders to fire upon all British soldiers and women, who attempted
to pass the sentries; I observed a number of British soldiers were collecting
who were murmuring and clamouring at the time. I therefore, for fear of the
consequences, desired them immediately to disperse and go to their barracks,
and promised them my endeavor to get them redressed: -- I then went toward
the main or captain's guard, and in my way was stopped by a Provincial sentry,
who charged his bayonet upone me, with the muzzle pointed at my breast, I told
him I only wanted to speak to the captain of the guard, and did not want to go
further, and begged he would call him, and remove the muzzle of his gun from my
breast; he said he would keep the muzzle there, and bid me keep off, and then
called the sergeant of the guard, who immediately came up, who I desired would
order the sentry to remove his firelock as I was an officer and commanded in
the barracks, and wanted to speak to the captain of the guard upon business.
The sergeant told the man to take away his gun, telling me he was a young
soldier and did not know better, the captain of the guard came up soon after
and I pulled my hat off, which he took no notice of. I then told him the action
of the sentry's firing on the woman, and begged the sentry might be confined
'till the affair should be inquired into; he told me that he would not, and
that the sentries had particular orders to fire on all women who attempted to
pass the sentries, as well as soldiers. I observed it must be some mistake, he
replied it was none of his business, they were his orders, and I must seek
redress somewhere else, and we parted.

Q From the position of the sentry at the time he fired, were not passengers on
the road exposed to the shot?

A. Most undoubtedly.

Q. Was any report of this transaction made to Col. Henley?

A. Not that I know of.

Sergeant John Fleming, 47th regiment]

Q. Was you at the Deputy-Adjutant-General's office in the month of December
last, while Col. Henley was there?

A. On or about the 16th of December I was at the door with a number of the
sergeants of the office to apply for passes, I mistook Col. Henley for Mr.
Keith, the Deputy-Adjutant-General, and saluting him was just going to address
him, when Col. Henley extended his arm with his fist clinch'd, and exclaimed,
you rascal, I Will make damnation fly out of you, and I will myself one of these
nights go the rounds, and if I hoar the least word or noise in your barrack,
I Will pour shot amongst you, and make flames of hell jump out of you, and turn
your barracks inside out, ye are all a parcel of rascals: In the discourse he
said if he was a sentry and a British soldier looked sulkey at him, he would
blow his brains out.

Q. Was there any thing that brought on this discourse on your parts?

A. Nothing.

Q. Did Col. Henley mention no circumstance which could account for such
violent expressions?

A. After being asked by me whether any thing was amiss, he said there was, for
that the last night one of his sentries had been knocked down by some of our
people; he moderated his passion, and very few words passed afterward.

Sergeant Willson, 24th regiment -- confirms the testimony of sergeant Fleming.

The evidence on the part of the complainant being closed -- on motion from
General Burgoyne to be allowed time to arrange and state the evidence in
support of the charge, the Court adjourns to Tuesday 27th January, at ten
o'clock.

JANUARY 27, 1778.
TWELVE of the Court met according to adjournment, but one of the members being
absent, the Court adjourns to Wednesday 28th instant, at ten o'clock.

WEDNESDAY, January 28, 1778. The Court met according to adjournment.
Judge-Advocate.]

Mr. President and Gentlemen of the Court,

GENERAL Burgoyne having claimed liberty of remarking upon the evidence, and
argumentatively supporting the charge against Col. Henley, I rise to object to
his claim. In Courts-Martial, there is no prosecutor but the Judge-Advocate;
there have been instances of Council allowed the prisoner, but not against him:
And I call upon the Generals and Field-Officers of the British army, now in
Court, to point out a single exception to what I have advanced; yet if Col.
Henley has no objection, and the Court concedes to it as an indulgence, I shall
acquiesce.

General Burgoyne expressed surprise at the Judge-Advocate's exception being
made so late in the cause; he thought it more particularly extraordinary, as
the General had not only stated his idea of the mode of proceeding at the
first, in which the Judge-Advocate had acquiesced, but at the last meeting it
had been fully discussed in open Court between them, and the Judge-Advocate had
agreed to the General's right both of applying the evidence upon the charge,
and also of replying to the defense, provided he, the Judge-Advocate, had the
closing of the whole. The General observed that had the Court declared against
this claim in the beginning, or could he have expected such objection, he
should have examined the witnesses in a very different manner, in order to
bring several matters more fully and pointedly before the Court than he thought
necessary to do upon the supposition of a future occasion to explain the
reasons of his questions, and by deduction and inference to make the
application.

The General nevertheless proposed that the principle upon which he spoke
should lie dormant to avoid trouble to the Court, that he had his own opinion
upon the right, the Judge Advocate might retain his upon the indulgence,
provided nothing concerning the matter was entered upon the proceedings, he
should make use of the power without further question.

Col. Henley.]

Mr. President and Gentlemen of the Court,

I Have no objection to Genesis Burgoyne's making use of all the rhetoric in his
power against me; I stand on such firm ground, I can safely trust my reputation
in your hands, against every effort of my prosecutor to ruin me.

The Court then told the General he might proceed, and he addressed the Court
as follows:

Mr. President and Gentlemen of the Court,

IT being now admitted that in closing the evidence, I may offer such arguments
as to me shall seem proper, in support of the charge, and reserving to myself a
claim of replying to the defense, I shall enter upon the first part of the very
painful, though by no means difficult undertaking: -- Painful, because I cannot
pursue the offense without setting the offender in points of view at which
every benignant mind must shudder -- Easy in every other respect is the task,
because I venture to pronounce the evidence when arranged and adjusted, will
amount to such a mass of proof as cannot be overthrown, and will authorize and
call for the strongest terms I can use in my demand of public justice. And
Gentlemen, let me be permitted to assume to myself applause rather than blame,
that the evidence has not been laid before you in a regular series; the reason
was, that though assured by the reports made to me that the evidence would
produce conviction upon the whole, I was ignorant how the testimony of the
particular witnesses would apply and point to the progression of the charges,
because I had had no previous intorcourse with them. I declare upon my solemn
word of honor, that I have had no concert or communication directly or
indirectly with any non-commissioned officer or soldier who has appeared at
your bar, one only excepted, viz. sergeant Fleming of the 47th regiment, who
has deposed to the salutation Col. Henley, gave to him at the
Adjutant-General's office; that whole matter appeared to me so very improbable,
that I not only sent for the sergeant to warn him of the sacredness of an oath,
and of the sin of intemperate zeal, but also I thought it my duty to inquire
minutely into his character; I found the man firm and uniform in averting his
veracity, I found his officers unanimous in supporting his credit.

In every other instance I adhered religiously to the determination I had taken
of secluding myself from the witnesses, not only to guard my character in this
region of suspicion and aspersion, against the supposition of unfair practices;
I besides had a scruple of trusting my own mind with too hasty progressions in
a cause wherewith the most solemn matter of a public nature is involved the
fate of a gentleman high in his military station, and to judge by the apparent
signs of good wishes on this day, also high in popular esteem.

Thus unprejudiced I came into your court, I scorn to rake up the slighter
matters that might be comprehended in the general words of the charge, such as
personal incivility to officers expressions and actions of peevishness,
haughtiness and disgust. I mean not to press that they existed, or if they did,
I am desirous they should pass as faults of temper and deficiencies of manners
incident to a man's nature, education and habitual course of life; and I shall
confine my comment as it is my duty to do, to the testimonies upon your
minutes, and the circumstances immediately relating to them.

Without departing from this principle, it will be necessary to take a general
review of the state of things previous to the date of the grievances complained
of.

We arrived at Cambridge passengers through your country under the sanction of
a truce. In whatever capacity we had been found in a foreign and independent
state, we were entitled to personal protection by the general and most sacred
laws of truth and reason; but when to the promulgated law of civilization are
added the written principles -- or written only upon the hearts of generous
people -- honor, respect for the brave, the hospitable wishes that usually
press to the relief of the unfortunate, the stranger, and the defenseless man
in your power, how will our claims multiply upon the mind? Sanguine
imaginations conceived yet further motives for kindness. There were men among
us so vain as to believe that notwithstanding the present separation between
us, the different duties we now maintained, the prejudices of political zeal,
and the animosity of civil war; -- Yet still the conflict over, it might be
remembered we once were brothers, and the more especially as it was improbable
by the Convention of Saratoga, that the generality of us should ever oppose
America in arms again.

We were led into these delusive hopes by the very honorable treatment shown us
by General Gates, by that we received from you Mr. President when you conducted
us upon the march, and from that we afterward found from the worthy member of
the Court near you, who had the immediate command in this district upon our
arrival and to whom most happily for us the same command is now again devolved.

The first symptom we discovered of any uncandid designs, was the mode
established for correcting errors and disturbances in the troops of the
Convention; men were taken up, imprisoned, and otherwise punished by the
American troops, without any prior reference to their own officers. I very well
know with how much slight and even derision my sentiments have been treated
upon this subject; but I still (...) that after taking men up for faults, to
have applied to the officers of the Convention troops in the first instance for
their punishment, would have been consonant to every principle of decorum and
good policy; not meaning to deny that upon any proof of partiality, or
connivance, or undue lenity, it then became the proper and indispensable duty
of General Heath, to take the distribution of justice into his own hands.

The contrary maxim having been established, let us examine how it was carried
into execution. -- And the first circumstance in point of time, though the last
in the proceedings, is that burst of indecency, scurrility and impiety, from
Col. Honley to the Quarter-Master-Serjeants at the Adjutant-General's office --
it is not without difficulty I can frame my mouth to read the words as they
were delivered upon oath, by that very respectable witness Sergeant Fleming,
viz. -- "You rascals, I Will make damnation fly out of ye, and I will myself one
of these nights go the rounds, and if I hear me least word or noise in your
barracks, I Will pour shot amongst ye, and make flames of hell jump out of ye,
and turn your barracks inside-out."

The Court will remember that when this evidence was given, it rather excited
laughter in some part of the audience, than any serious condemnation.

This day it seems to make a very different impression. -- The minds of all
around will follow me, while I contend that expressions so wild, so unfit, so
unprecedented from the mouth of a gentleman, argue the most diabolical passions
boiling in the breast, the very enthusiasm of rancour and malice.

I defy any man to divert himself of that idea, it will attend the mind through
the whole course of these proceedings, and cast a shocking glare over every
subsequent transaction, of forethought, intention and bloody resolution.

It is very material to observe that this demonstration of Col. Henley's mind,
was on or about the 16th December, and it was no longer than 'till 19th, before
he confirmed by overt act the principles he had professed.

The stabbing of Corporal Reeves is proved by the evidence of Corporal
Buchannan, Alexander Thompson and Robert Steel.

I shall quote indiscrminately from the testimony of one or other of these
witnesses, because though some recollect a few short passages or words more than
others, there is not a shadow of contradiction, and I am confident there never
was an instance where truth was ever laid before a Court by united evidence
more perspicuously.

It has been sworn "That on the morning of the 19th of December, Col. Henley
went to the barracks on Prospect-Hill, to release some British soldiers who
were prisoners; that having had them paraded, he read over their crimes, and
coming to Reeves told him he was confined for insulting a Provincial officer;
Reeves made answer be was very sorry for it, that he was in liquor, and would
not have acted so had he known him to have been an officer." -- I pause here to
apply to the feelings of the Court, whether a more decent, proper, satisfactory
excuse could have been conceived; what did it draw from the Colonel? -- "Had it
been me you had served so, I would have run you through the body you rascal" --
Continue the comparison between the language of the Colonel and the Corporal --
Sir, I am no rascal, but a good soldier, and my officers know it, and I hope
soon to be with Genesis How and fight for my king and country -- what did this
produce from the Colonel? -- "Damn your king and country," and an order to the
guard "to run him through the body," -- not a hand nor a heart could be found
for the butchery; the Colonel enraged at the virtuous disobedience of his men,
leaps from his horse, seizes a firelock with a fixed bayonet, and strikes at
the man's heart. I call upon the gentleman of a learned profession near me to
inform the Court when he sums up the evidence at the close of the trial,
whether this act would not constitute malice propense in law. I mean that
admitting for the sake of the argument, that there had been such provocation
given as would have justified a man having an offensive weapon to make use of
it instantly, which would have been only manslaughter; the intermediate act of
dismounting his horse and taking a firelock from the other, implying time for
recollection, would have made the act wilful murder, had the man died. Consider
now gentlemen what followed. -- The brave Corporal in the instant expectation
his words would cost him his life, persevered -- I don't care, I will stand by
my king and country 'till I die. The action would have charmed a brave man; it
would have been a spell upon his arm, and kept the stroke suspended beyond the
power of witchcraft -- What effect had it upon the Colonel -- to provoke a
second stab, which was only diverted by the intervention of the man next him,
who caught hold of the bayonet and threw it up.

Gentlemen, when I say the perseverance of the corporal ought rather to have
pleased than provoked. I speak not vaguely or romantically, I feel conscious
proof of the truth -- and when I consider the actions of a Washington -- when I
meet in the field a Gates, an Arnold, a General Glover -- and see them bravely
facing death in support of their principles, though I would shed my last blood
upon a different conviction, I cannot withhold from the enemy the respect due
to the soldier, and the immediate conflict over, he robs me of my anger and
seizes my good will.

Gentlemen, in the different parts of the examination upon this fact, many
questions have been asked by the prisoner, by the Judge-Advocate, and by the
Court respecting the appearance of the prisoner's temper -- was he not in a
mild mood? -- Did he not seem good humored? Mild murder! Good humored murder!
-- are phrases I fancy will not convey any clear meaning, 'till men change
their ideas of that crime. -- We hear it is true sometimes as a sort of proverb
to mark the utmost malignity and treachery of a man smiling in your face while
he cuts your throat, but I believe it never was produced as an excuse or
extenuation of guilt. -- These questions therefore, as I conceive can have no
tendency but to insinuate that Col. Henley's passion was entirely raised by the
immediate provocation he received; I am ready to join issue upon this argument,
and if the Gentleman will rest his cause upon it, I will relinquish the proof
established of Reeve's decency and consistency, and give him latitude for all
the provocation he can suppose, short of personal assault, and the necessity of
self-defence, which I am sure will not be pretended. -- I will transpose if he
pleases the time when Reeves is proved to have talked about King Hancock, and
bring it back to the instant where it was attempted to be introduced, as a
substantial matter of provocation -- he shall add insolence of gesture to
abusive terms, and under all these fictitious circumstances I will take the
judgment of the Court, whether Col. Henley with full power to imprison and to
punish by regular, decent, legal proceeding, has a shadow of justification
(...) making himself in his own person, party, judge and executioner.

From the 19th December, the hands of Col. Henley were unembrued in blood 'till
the 8th of January, but it evidently appears upon your proceedings that the
influence of his example and the encouragement of his precepts failed not to
operate, as the first proof of it. I request the attention of the Court to the
testimony of Col. Lind; the position of the sentry which was such as must
necessarily effect every passenger upon the public road whenever he fired, and
at the same time a readiness to do mischief so marked that he took women for
his objects, and would not give them time to turn round; he had orders so to
do. Let the behavior of the next sentry to whom Col. Lind applied, the
ungentleman-like behavior of the officer, with his confirmation of the whole
proceeding, being according to order, be combined and compared, and it must
universally strike common sense, that these were several parts of one
determined plan to diffuse the seeds of discord and fury, in order afterward
to countenance a general havoc.

But it may be said the orders under which the Continental troops acted were
not those of Col. Henley, but of a superior -- will that be pleaded? was the
position of the sentries to kill or wound three or four passengers at a shot,
the firing upon innocent women, the refusal of redress to Col. Lind, with all
the indecent manner and language attending; will these circumstances be
alleged to have proceeded from superior orders? If so, the excuse becomes
indeed more alarming to us. -- It is my part at this time to drop a
consideration that would lead so far. -- I shall only remark how little the
excuse would benefit Col. Henley, who would still remain a cruel agent of (I
will use no improper term) I will only say a cruel agent of a too hasty
principal.

Col. Henley has asked whether complaint was made to him of the transactions of
the 22d -- I believe they were not -- but I dare say he will recollect the
reasons -- other grievances of the most atrocious nature, abuse of officers,
and assaults upon their lives, were preparing to lay before General Heath. They
were in number and in time to have filled up much more of the interval between
the 19th December and 8th January; but not brought before this Court because I
understood it to be the intention of Genesis Heath they should be seperately
enquired into. Enough has appeared to show how the system of persecution was
preserved, and I come now to the transactions of the 8th of January.

Upon a general view of that black day, I am at a loss where first to carry
your observation. -- The field was extensive, the scenes separate and
successive, but evidently guided by one uniform design -- In one place a party
on the march are stabbing and knocking out the brains of inoffensive spectators
-- at another men under pretense of a prisoner's escape, are glutting the same
bloody purposes upon men not pretended to be concerned -- in athird Col. Henley
in person (the British officers at the same time being denied admittance, as
appears by the evidence of Lieut. Bibby) is running men through the body with
his sword.

The first of these complicated horrors in point of time, was the attack upon
Traggett, first with the bayonet and afterward with the butt of the firelock.
-- I will read the evidence without a comment. (Vide the evidence in the
proceedings.) And I have only now to remark (it is not an unfavorable idea to
the Continental troops) that such malicious treatment could not be upon a
general sentiment -- no body of people are so barbarous unless instigated --
and now is the time to call upon the learned Gentleman near me for another duty
of his office, to expound to the Court the principles of law respecting
accessaries and accomplices, and to say whether a man by order, advice,
example, or any other encouragement, influencing another to do a mischievous
act, is not particeps criminis at an hundred miles distance, as much as if
present upon the spot.

The stabbing of Wilson follows in the course of the evidence; (vide
proceedings) and it appears as little comment is necessary upon this as upon
the former action, further than to remark that in this case Col. Henley is
found to be accessory not upon circumstantial, presumptive and argumentative,
but upon positive proof; for it is sworn the action was done within his sight;
that he made no attempt to prevent it; and though it should be alleged and
admitted that he was at too great a distance, yet his giving no reprimand nor
check to the soldiers upon seeing the act committed, carries as direct
conviction of approbation and encouragement, as if he had given open applause.

The last act to mark the thirst of blood, was the stabbing of Corporal Hadley,
and following Winks with threats of the same fate. -- It would be superfluous
to expatiate upon the strength of the proofs, the concurrence of witnesses that
there was no provocation, the deliberation and the wantonness of the barbarity.
-- The intention is so clear in my opinion against the probability of doubt,
that I should not touch a moment upon it, were it not that a very grave
application was made to the Court, by the most respectable authority in it, to
consider the nature of wounds as matters of the greatest importance, and
question upon question was put to the surgeon in every case, to find whether
they were dangerous or not. Is it possible that any gentleman can mean to
measure the degree of the crime by the depth of the wound, and to argue that a
man may thrust a weapon into another's breast with impunity, provided he does
not touch a mortal part? If this doctrine holds good, you ought to establish
schools of anatomy for the education of young officers, this science of
desection should be added to the skill of the fencing master, to train the
pupils in that nicety of touch that can feel to a hair's breadth between death
and life -- a sort of fiddlestick dexterity -- that can run divisions upon
veins and arteries, and stop short in tune and time to the thousandth part of a
second. Really Gentlemen, I am not willingly ludicrous upon this subject, but
it is impossible to treat such an argument gravely. -- I dismiss it to my
learned neighbor with one more injunction, to show the Court in law that where
a man passes a sword with violence at another's breast, whether the wound is a
mere puncture or goes to the hilt, the intentional guilt is the same. I have
only one matter further to observe upon the cross questioning the witnesses --
It has perhaps been wished to insinuate, that at the time of these violent
proceedings there was cause of apprehension the armed troops might be
surrounded and overcome. -- The troops themselves will hardly thank their
friends for this idea -- what shall it be alleged that the militia of America,
who animated by their cause, have been self-taught the use of arms? that body
where every man is supposed to be in himself an host; shall such soldiers be
apprehensive of danger from half their number of unarmed, mercenary,
ministerial slaves -- for such you know they think us -- No Gentlemen I reject
with you so injurious a supposition -- I give credit to the spirit and the
force of the militia -- I do it seriously and upon experience -- and it is upon
that credit I found this proposition that it being impossible the officers or
soldiers should be induced to acts of violence by any apprehension of
resistance; -- it follows by the fairest deduction, that either there was more
prevalent malignity than ever appeared before in the human heart, or that the
whole proceeded from direction, order, and systematical plan.

Little more I imagine need be remarked to apply the evidence to the several
distinct terms I have used in the charge -- That the whole tenor of Col
Henley's conduct was heinously criminal as an officer, will hardly be disputed
in a country where the principles of liberty have been so deeply studied. -- An
army is not to be borne in a free state, but upon the principle of defense
against an outward enemy, or the protection of the laws. -- The officer who
makes himself the arbiter of the law is guilty of the most shameful perversion
of moral duty, and his impunity would scarcely be thought a very comfortable
presage of the growing liberties of his country.

I have also said the Colonel's behavior was unbecoming a man. -- I will not
trifle with the time or understanding of the Court to enter into difinitions
upon this term; nor will I shock the ears of officers nor even of the
unfortunate person under trial, with so gross a term as the world in general
apply to the act of assaulting a woman, a priest, or an unarmed man, for they
are all exactly in the same predicament.

The sword drawn for such a purpose is no longer the badge and distinction of a
Gentleman; it is degraded with the implements of the assassin and hangman, and
contracts a stain that can never be wiped away.

Gentlemen, I have now gone through the material parts of the proceedings,
whether the offenses are resolved into vindictive resentment, or more deep
designs, or both, it must still appear wonderful, that general massacre did not
ensue -- by the patience and discipline of the British soldiers those horrors
have been avoided -- but whatever the escape may have been on our part, it is
ten-fold more material on yours -- we might perhaps for the struggles of the
desperate are hard -- but perhaps we might have been sacrificed to the last
man, we should thus have paid a soldiers debt, which we have often risked, our
fall would have been revenged, and our memories attended with pity and with
honor -- but for America, the transaction would have remained a foul and
indeliable blot in the first page of her new history; nor would any series of
disavowable penitence, nor ages of rectitude in government, purity in manners,
inflexible faith, or the whole catalogue of public virtues, have redeemed her
in the opinion of mankind.

Now Gentlemen, consider the words of the order under which you sit; reform the
opinion of the Court of Inquiry; and say whether it is the honor of Col. Henley
or the honor of America, with which your minds ought to be impressed when they
proceed to judgment in this cause. -- I close with that consideration, as far
as I can impress it on your breasts -- I trust they are replete and pregnant
with justice, honor, duty to your profession; and above all with that glorious
whig principle, the words of which are become almost a general motto in this
country, and the genuine substantial practice of which I shall ever revere in
any country, "A due sense of the general rights of mankind." I trust you have
all these qualities, and in that persuasion I cannot doubt what will be the
issue of this cause.

Judge-Advocate.]

I SHALL not now trouble the Court with any observations on the evidence,
because at this stage of the trial they must necessarily be partial. After the
examination of the witnesses on the side of Col. Henley is finished, I shall
endeavor to lay before the Court a true state of facts, from a general and
aggregate view of the whole evidence; and at the same time submit to your
consideration those remarks which may conduce to elucidate and confirm them.

At present I only renew my objection to Genesis Burgoyne's observing upon the
evidence in defense. It is true I did not until this morning, directly oppose
the General's claim, which is therefore called an agreement to it; if it was
such, it must have been an agreement subject to the opinion of the Court. It
was not made a point of, and so passed off sub silentio. The precedent, if it
becomes one in this cause may hereafter be considered an important one; my duty
therefore requires me to take the judgment of the Court upon the right now set
up. I do not press the General upon a discussion of the question to day. Any
hour previous to closing the evidence may do as well.

General Burgoyne.]

I do not just now recollect any precedent of the kind which have been enquired
for by the Judge-Advocate; but I believe there have been many. Between this and
the time mentioned by the Judge-Advocate I will endeavo^ to satisfy the Court
that my claim of being admitted a prosecutor is not unprecedented.

Col. Henley being called upon to make his defense, told the Court he should
not then enter into a detail of his conduct as connected with the charge, but
only beg that the witnesses whose names he would hand to the Judge-Advocate,
might be sworn; if any observations in vindication of himself should be
necessary, he would afterward submit them to the Court's opinion.

Major Swasey was called in and sworn.]

Q. Was you present with Col. Henley at the guard-house on Prospect-Hill 19th
December last?

A. I was present the day that the Colonel wounded Corporal Reeves at the
guard-house; the day of the month I do not remember. On the forenoon of the day
I attended Col. Henley to the guard-house, with a design of enquiring into the
offenses of a number of British soldiers confined there. Previous to this step
I had acquainted Col. Henley with General Heath's orders, which were to release
those prisoners whose crimes were trifling: those who had insulted any
inhabitant and refused making any atonement for the affront were to be sent on
board a guard-ship. When we came to the guard-house the prisoners were ordered
out and paraded. I examined the charges of each, and finding Buchannan and
Reeves, who stood together, were confined (Buchannan for insulting and striking
an inhabitant, Reeves for insulting an officer;) we passed these two over as
not subjects of releasement After learning the other prisoners offenses, Reeves
was called upon to relate how he got into confinement. He mentioned the
circumstances, and closed his narrative by repeating a low and very abusive
expression, which he had made use of to the officer who confined him; on which
I told him he was an impertinent rascal for treating any person with such
language: He replied he was no more a rascal than I was, that he was a good
soldier. On this I ordered silence, and threatened if he did not stop his
impertinence I would lay him over the head with my whip. He kept on his talk
and Col. Henley dismounted his horse, after bidding the fellow be silent to no
purpose, tock a firelock with a bayonet from one of the guard, and told Reeves
if he said another word he would run him through; Reeves replied he might do it
if he pleased; upon this Col. Henley made a lunge at him and pricked him in the
breast. Reeves continuing his insolent language, Col. Henley stepped back and
made a motion to cock the firelock, and told him if he was not silent he would
blow his brains out. One of the British soldiers finding Reeves was not to be
silenced, begged of the Colonel to return him to the guard-house. Buchannan and
the other British soldiers begged the Colonel not to take notice of the affair
for Reeves was drunk; on this Reeves damned them and said he was not drunk He
was ordered into the guard-house. I do not remember that much swearing passed,
nor can I recollect the words of insolence used by Reeves. After Col. Henley
had pricked him, Reeves said he was a good soldier and he would fight for his
king and country as long as he had breath and hoped that he should soon be with
Genesis How that he might seek revenge.

Q. Did it appear to you that Col. Henley's intention in making the pass at
Reeves was to injure or to frighten him into silence?

A. Only to silence him; for had the Colonel extended his arm he might have run
him through with the bayonet.

Q. By Genesis Burgoyne. -- Did you hear Col. Henley order any of the guard to run
Reeves through the body before he dismounted from his horse?

A. I did not; but he might have done it.

Q In what position was Col. Henley when he made the pass?

A. He had his right hand on the butt of the firelock, and the left grasping
the stock.

Q. Did you hear Reeves apologize to Col. Henley for insulting the officer?

A. He said he did not know him to be an officer.

Q. Did you not think Reeves's insolence of language as much directed to
yourself as to Col. Henley?

A. It was before the Colonel pricked him

Q. By what rule do you judge of insolence of language when you do not remember
the words?

A. By the manner.

Q. Did Reeves throw out any reflections upon America, or the persons concerned
in the cause of it?

A. He did not that I heard.

Q. Did you consider Reeves's saying he would fight for his king and country as
part of the insolence you mention?

A. I did not; Col. Henley in reply damned Genesis How or his king and country,
and told him no body blamed him for fighting in the cause he had engaged in.

Q. Did you see any resistance made, or any mark of disobedience on the part of
Reeves to the Colonel's orders, except his not being silent?

A. There was no other order given; Reeves made no open resistance.

Q. In going down to the guard house did Col. Henley express satisfaction at
having it in his power to release the British prisoners?

A. He did.

The Court adjourns 'till tomorrow at ten o'clock.

THURSDAY, January 29, 1778. The Court met pursuant to adjournment.
Capt. Silas Wild of the militia.]

Q. DID you see Colonel Henley at the guard-house on prospect-hill 19th
December last?

A. I did; I had the command of the guard that day. Col. Henley and Major
Swasey came to the guard-house and enquired what number of prisoners I had in
custody, and ordered them paraded; they were accordingly drawn up in a single
line, Reeves was on the right and Buchannan next to him. The Colonel mildly
asked the prisoners why they would get into difficulties? I handed the charges
against them to Major Swasey, and as he read over their names and offenses, the
Colonel spoke to each one upon the subject of his confinement. When he came to
Reeves he observed to him that he was the lad who abused the officer down in
town; Reeves said he did not know him to be an officer at the time. Major
Swasey told him that if he had been the officer, he should have taken his
satisfaction on the spot. Col. Henley then told Reeves he was a rascal; Reeves
replied I am no rascal but a tree Briton, and by God I will stand up for my
king and country 'till I die. The Colonel told him he was a good fellow to
stand up for his king and country, that he did not blame him, but he must be
silent. Reeves kept on talking; the Colonel ordered silence, and turned to
Buchannan. The Major went on to read his crime, and Buchannan was making an
excuse for his conduct; Reeves continued talking and swearing, and turned round
to Buchannan and said damn you why don't you stand up for your king and
country; Buchannan desired him to be quiet; Reeves answered God damn them all,
I Will stand up for my king and country while I have life; if I had my arms I
would soon be with Genesis How, and be revenged on them. Upon this Col. Henley
got from his horse and took a gun from one of the guard with a fixed bayonet,
and brought it up toward Reeves's breast, and made a push at him, and said you
rascal if you don't hold your tongue I will run the bayonet through you; Reeves
stepped one foot back, and said he would stand up for his king and country, and
if you have a mind to kill me you may. The Colonel brought up the piece again,
and Reeves repeating the same words, the Colonel exclaimed God damn your king
and country, if you do not hold your tongue I will run you through the body:
Buchannan then took hold of the musket, and Col. Henley bid him keep his
distance. Finding Reeves was not to be quieted, I desired the Colonel to
recommit him, and he was remanded to the guard-house. After he was in the
guard-house, he looked out of the window and kept talking and swearing while
Col. Henley was addressing the other prisoners.

Q. Do you suppose Col. Henley in the pass he made at Reeves intended to wound
or only to silence him?

A. Only to silence him; the Colonel spoke very mildly 'till Reeves said "God
damn them all."

Q. Did Col. Henley dismiss the rest of the prisoners with a mild reproof?

A. He did.

Q. Did Col. Henley do all he could to satisfy the prisoners before he
dismissed them?

A. Yes; he mildly cautioned them, and told Buchannan he would release him
after he had wrote to the inhabitant who bad been abused.

Q. If Reeves had not stepped back do you think the bayonet would have gone into
his body?

A. I do not think it would.

Q. By General Burgoyne. -- Is it usual in the American service to silence men
by the sword and bayonet?

A. No, it is not; but when the temper is raised a man will do that which at
another time he would not.

Q. Did you hear Col Henley order any of the guard to run Reeves through the
body, before he got from his horse?

A. I did not hear him; he might possibly have ordered it, but I was very near
to him.

Corporal John Deane of the militia]

Q. Was you at the guard-house on 19th of December last?

A. I was. The witness confirms the testimony of Capt. Wild, as to the
prisoners being paraded, and says that when Col. Henley asked Reeves what he
was confined for, Reeves replied he was confined for talking saucy to a
Lieutenant, but did not at the time know him to be an officer. Col. Henley
inquired what the abuse was; Reeves answered that if he must tell, he must --
"That he was walking along with a comrade, who told him that King Hancock was
come to town, upon which I said don't you think him an impudent fellow for
coming so near Genesis Burgoyne. A Continental officer asked me what it was I
said, I replied if you want any thing of me here is my pass. The officer told
me I had better not talk so saucy, and I bid him kiss my arse." Upon hearing
this account, Major Swasey told Reeves that if he had given him such a reply he
would have settled it with him on the spot, and not sent for a file of men --
Col. Henley added so would I you rascal Reeves answered he was no rascal; the
Colonel told him he was one; Reeves then said if I am a rascal, you are a
damned rascal. Upon this Col. Henley got off his horse, took a firelock from
one of the guard, and bid Reeves be silent, and came up to him with the fixed
bayonet -- Reeves bared his breast and told the Colonel that his life was at
stake, and he might take it. Upon this the Colonel pricked him with the
bayonet, but I saw no blood run; and then ordered him into the guard-house
without making another pass at him that I saw.

Q. Was the whole of Reeves's conduct insolent and saucy?

A. It was; and had I been Col. Henley I should have thought so.

Q. Did the words "damnd rascal" pass from Reeves before the Colonel got off
his horse?

A. They did.

Q. How near was you to Reeves when he made use of those words?

A. About two rods.

Q. Was you looking at Corporal Reeves at the time he made use of those words?

A. I was looking at the Colonel and Reeves at the same time and I am positive
it was Reeves who used the words.

Q. Was Major Swasey nearer Col. Henley and Reeves than yourself?

A. I don't know; there were some persons nearer, but I don't know who; some
were British soldiers.

Q. Did you see Corporal Buchannan, or any other British soldier take hold of
the firelock in Col. Henley's hands?

A. I did not.

Q. Did you hear Capt. Wild advise Col. Henley to send Reeves to the
guard-house?

A. I did not.

Q. How long after Col. Henley pricked Reeves before he ordered him into the
guard-house?

A. It was five or six minutes.

Q. What passed in that time?

A. I know of nothing.

Q. Did Col. Henley return the firelock to the man from whom he took it before
he ordered Reeves into the guard-house?

A. He did.

Q. Did Corporal Reeves step back when Col. Henley made the pass at him?

A. I did not see him.

Q. Was the position of Col. Henley such that he could easily have run Reeves
through the body, had he tried to have done it?

A. It was.

The Court adjourns to Friday 30 th instant at ten o'clock.

FRIDAY, January 30, 1778. The Court met according to adjournment.
Elijah Horton.]

Q. WAS you at the guard-house 19th December, when Col. Henley was there?

A. I was present, being one of the guard; Col. Henley and Major Swasey came
down and after inquiring into the number of prisoners, ordered them out. The
witness confirms the testimony of Corporal Deane, and says that upon Col.
Henley's calling Reeves a rascal, Reeves replied if I am a rascal, you are a
damned rascal; and that this was before Col. Henley got off his horse.

Q Did you hear Col. Henley order one of the guard to run Reeves through before
he got off his horse?

A. I did not; and my situation was such that if Col. Henley had given such an
order I must have heard it, being about three yards distance.

Q. How often did Col. Henley bid Reeves be silent before he pricked him?

A. I heard him two or three times.

Q. When Col. Henley made a pass at Reeves did it appear to you that Col.
Henley intended rather to silence him than to punish him by wounding him?

A. It did appear so; for Col. Henley might easily have wounded or killed him,
had he been disposed so to do; the Colonel pushed moderately, Reeves drew back
his body. The push was not sufficient to have forced the bayonet through a
thick woolen cloth.

Q. By Genesis Burgoyne. -- Did you see Corporal Buchannan or any British soldier
take hold of the firelock to prevent Col. Henley's making a second pass?

A. I did not.

Q. Did you hear Col. Henley reply to Reevss, damn your king and country?

A. I did not; and if he had said it I think I was so near I must have heard it.

Q. How near was Major Swasey to Col. Henley when he stabbed Reeves?

A. Col. Henley's horse was between him and Major Swasey, who was on horseback.

Silas Morse confirms the substance of Corporal Deane's testimony, as to his
narration.

Q. Did Reeves step back when Col. Henley made the pass at him?

A. He moved one foot back.

Q. By the Court. -- It Reeves had not stepped back, would Col. Henley have
wounded him deeply?

A. No; for Col. Henley did not instantly push at him on his stepping back.

Q. Did Col. Henley draw back the bayonet on finding it touch Reeves?

A. I believe he did.

Q. Did you hear Col. Henley say to Reeves damn your king and country?

A. I did not; and was so near him at the time he got off his horse I should
have heard him had he said so.

Q. Did you see Corporal Buchannan or any other British soldier take hold of
the firelock in Col. Henley's hands?

A. I did not.

Q. Did you hear Major Swasey or any body else, advise Col. Henley to send
Reeves to the guard-room?

A. I did not.

James Brazier confirms the testimony of Horton and Morse, both in the
narrative and in the answers to the same questions.

Wadsworth Horton confirms the narrative of Brazier, word for word; and adds
that Col. Henley first called Reeves a rascal, Reeves replied God damn you,
don't call me a rascal.

John Barry confirms the testimony of Horton and Morse, and of Wadsworth
Horton, except that he did not hear Reeves say to Col. Henley God damn you,
don't call me a rascal.

The Court adjourns to Tuesday the third of February.

TUESDAY, February 3d. The Court met pursuant to adjournment.
John Kittle, sergeant in the militia.]

Q. WAS you one of the detachment ordered to Prospect hill on the forenoon of
the 8th January?

A. I was; we marched from the North side of Winterhill up to Prospect-hill.
When we were going up Prospect-hill the British soldiers crowded much upon us;
the sergeants were obliged to fall into the ranks and exert themselves to keep
the British soldiers off, they would not though repeatedly ordered, move out of
the way; I thought they deserved stabbing, as they would not go out of the way
when they were ordered. I saw one of our sergeants with his gun and fixed
bayonet over his arm make a push at a British soldier, and I believe stabbed
him, and then said to the British soldier do you damn me? and then turned his
firelock and struck him with the butt of it; we kept on marching and I saw no
more of it.

Q. Did the British soldiers insult the party as they marched along?

A. We were insulted by their crowding on us, laughing and sneering at the
guard.

Q. Was there any other object to excite their attention?

A. No, not that I know, of; and their looks in general were directed to the
guard.

Q. Was it your own opinion that you, had a right to stab the British soldiers
who did not get out of your way, or was you told so by any other person?

A. It was my own opinion entirely.

Q. Did you see any British soldier with a club, stone, or other weapon in his
hand, or any attack or assault made upon the guard, or other insult offered
except that of laughing?

A. No; except that of crowding on us.

Q. What was the number of British soldiers that crowded round you?

A. Three hundred at least in my opinion; I saw no British officer near.

Thomas Duckenfield of the militia.

Q. Was you one of the detachment ordered to Prospect-hill on the 8th January.

A. I was; as we marched along toward the fort on Prospect-hill, the British
soldiers crowded much upon us, so as not to give us elbow-room; it was very
muddy; our sergeant spoke to the British soldiers and desired them to give way
for us to pass, but they crowded close upon us; a British soldier then desired
them to move back, upon which one of the British soldiers said damn the
yankies; upon that our sergeant asked him what he said, and he repeated damn
the yankies; with that the sergeant made a push at him, whether he wounded him
or not I cannot say, but the man cried out. The sergeant then clubb'd his
firelock, and the British soldiers crowding in, he made a stroke at the same
man, but did not strike him I am certain, I was quite close to him all the
time; we marched on.

Q. Were you interrupted or impeded by the British soldiers?

A. We were; for they crowded so upon us as to break our ranks several times.

Q. Were you insulted by the British soldiers?

A. They crowded so upon us that they forced us into the mud and water, and
would not give way?

Q. Did they laugh at or hoot at the guard?

A. They did laugh at us.

Q. How many British soldiers were round you?

A Four or five hundred.

Q. Did you see any British soldier with a club or other weapon in his hand?

A. I did not.

John Anderson of the militia.

Q. Was you one of the detachment sent to Prospect hill on the 8th January?

A. I was. The witness confirms the evidence of Duckingfield, except that he
did not hear the British soldiers say damn the yankies. They made use of the
words damn, but who they damned he cannot tell; he was within three feet of the
sergeant when he made the pass at the British soldier. The witness gives the
same answer in substance to the questions put to the last witness, except that
there were in his opinion between two and three hundred British soldiers around
the party.

Captain Dodge of the militia.]

Q. Was you Captain of the detachment that was ordered to Prospect-hill on the
8th January?

A. On the 8th January an order came for Col. Gerrish to furnish a detachment
of 100 men from his regiment, which was made, and the command given to me, with
verbal orders to reinforce the main guard on Prospect-hill. We marched on,
myself at the head of the party, and during the march I saw no insult, I looked
directly forward. When we came abreast of the barracks, the British soldiers
turned out generally. As we marched on they followed. In the front I saw no
insult offered by the British soldiers; how it was in the rear I cannot say,
but I had no report of any at the time of the march. Just before I came up to
the barracks, I halted the men, in order to close and cover properly; and then
gave orders that they gave no insult nor received any?

The Court adjourns 'till tomorrow at ten o'clock.

WEDNESDAY, February 4. The Court met according to adjournment.
Asa Pierce of the militia.]

Q. WAS you one of the guard who had a British soldier in custody, carrying him
to the guard-house on the 8th January?

A. I was; in the forenoon orders came to the sergeant of our guard to furnish
a file of men and a corporal to take charge of a British soldier, of which I
was one; we took him at the bridge just below the provision house. Col. Henley
when we took charge of the prisoner was by, and gave us orders if any man
attempted to rescue him, to fire upon them. We marched on with him, (his name
was Buchannan) he told us he had done nothing more than having a pass that was
not his own, that he should not be punished, and that one of us would be
sufficient to guard him. Just as we got within the works behind the barracks,
where there was a considerable number of British soldiers collected; a British
soldier came up to us upon the run* I told him to keep off, he muttered
something and told me if I did not mind he would take my firelock from me. Our
corporal told him if he did not mind how he talked he would take care of him.
On this he stepped aside and walked along with us talking with Buchannan upon
the subject of his confinement; as we went along we came up to a crowd of
British soldiers, I should think three or four hundred of them; our corporal
ordered them to make way, which they refused to do, and stood so thick together
that we could hardly tell which the prisoner was. The prisoner stepped out and
another British soldier stepped in, took hold of Buchannan's arm, and placed
himself between me and Buchannan who went off with the crowd; our corporal
turning round and seeing Buchannan gone stepped in among the British soldiers to
recover Buchannan; the same British soldier who had taken hold of Buchannan's
arm, took hold of the corporal and stopped him; upon this I brought my piece
down and pricked the soldier who had hold of the corporal between the hip and
the ribbs. The soldier then let go the Corporal's arm, and we marched on to the
main-guard without our prisoner.

Q. Did the British soldiers refuse by words or actions to make way for the
guard to pass?

A. By actions; I mean they did not move out of the way; they talked, but I
don't recollect what they said.

Q. After Buchannan had escaped from the guard did the British soldiers show
any marks of triumph?

A. Yes; they laughed and huzza'd a good deal.

Q. Do you know the name of the person whom you pricked?

A. I do not

Q. Do you think you run the British soldier into the body?

A. I imagine I did, for I pushed with a good will, and he cried out God damn
you.

Thomas Lewis of the militia.

Q. Was you one of the guard who had the custody of a British soldier on the
8th January?

A. I was. The witness confirms the substance of Peirce's testimony, except
that he did not see a British soldier take hold of Buchannan nor the corporal

Q. Might a British soldier have taken hold of Buchannan or the corporal, and
you not see it?

A. Yes; for upon Buchannan's stepping out I turned round to keep the British
soldiers off on the other side of us, and hearing a British soldier cry out I
turned back and saw Pierce pulling back his bayonet from the side of a British
soldier.

Q. Did it appear to you that the prisoner (Buchannan) was forced away by the
British soldiers, or that he run away himself?

A. I cannot say, for it was done very quick; Buchannan started before I turned
round.

Q. After Buchannan had got away did the British soldiers show marks of triumph?

A. They shouted and huzza'd.

Q. Did you see Col. Henley at any time during this transaction?

A. I saw an officer who I think was Col. Henley on the fort, his head above
the breast-work, at about five rods distance.

It is conceded by Genesis Burgoyne that on the evening of the 7th of January, a
provincial sentry was knocked down on his post by a British soldier; that he
was much beat, and his gun taken from him.

Col. Gerrish of the militia.]

Q. Do you know any thing of a Provincial sentry being knocked down on his post
on the evening of 7th January, and what transactions ensued?

A. In the evening of 7th of January, a messenger came to me at Winter-hill,
where my regiment is posted, and acquainted me that a sentry had been knocked
down on his post, and his gun taken from him. In consequence of this report, I
ordered the regiment out and detached 200 men, with two Captains as a
reinforcement to the guard at the French lines on Prospect-hill, with orders to
march silently and surround the first row of barracks, where I supposed the gun
was carried in. I accompanied the detachment. The party was in two divisions,
one under Capt. Huse, the other under Capt. Kimbal. I left the party under
Capt. Huse in front of the first row of barracks, and then ordered Capt. Kimbal
(who had mistaken my first orders and got to a wrong situation) to join Capt,
Huse; while Capt Kimbal marched to make the junction, I was left a little
behind in front of the second row of barracks, a British soldier came out and
said to me, damn you what do you come here for, we have done you no hurt in
these barracks: We have got arms and we will shoot you. I then thought the
sentry's gun might be in that barrack, and called for a sergeant and a dozen
men; they came up, then the British soldiers came to the door of the barrack
and presented a weapon out (I thought it had been a musket, though I afterward
found it had only been a club) and said God damn you we'll shoot ye. I then
ordered my small party to fire upon them, but upon the party's cocking I
re-called the order, as the British soldiers in the room might not all be
guilty, and some of my own men might be endangered who were in the rear of the
barrack. We then approached close to the door and found that they were not guns
which the soldiers in the room had in their hands. One of them as we approached
made a stroke at us with a stick, but did not hit either of us; as he was
making another pass I struck him down, and we entered the barrack and took five
or six of those in the room and sent them off to the main-guard. I then got a
candle and searched the room, found no arms, but a number of hickery-sticks,
shorter and stouter than walking sticks. When the search was over, one of the
British soldiers catched at the candle and put it out and followed us to the
other barrack, where he was insolent and saucy, and I thought proper to send
him to the guard-house. I then gave orders to the British soldiers that they
should not leave the barracks 'till the barracks were searched, telling them
they should not be molested by my men. I then searched the barracks where I
supposed the gun was carried in; they were loath the barracks should be
searched, and refused giving me any direct answers; they were insolent and kept
damning of us, several of them called us damned rebels and yankies several
times; this gave me strong reasons of suspicion that the gun was secreted among
them, and I therefore thought proper to send the greater part of those in that
room to the main-guard. I then went on and searched several rooms in the same
row of barracks, and met with no opposition or insult. Finding the search
fruitless, I returned with my detachment to Winter-hill, except a party I left
to reinforce the guard at the French lines.

Q. By Col. Henley. -- Did you receive any orders from me whatever, that
evening?

A. No; I made report of the transaction to you next morning.

Q. By Genesis Burgoyne. -- Was you distinguished from the men by any mark that
could designate you to be an officer of rank?

A. I had on a blanket-coat and sword slung over it, with a firelock in my
hand, and it was dark.

The Court adjourns 'till tomorrow at ten o'clock.

THURSDAY, February 5. The Court met according to adjournment.
GENERAL Burgoyne informs the Court, That extraordinary business requires his
attendance at his own house today, and begs that Genesis Phillips might be
allowed to assist in the examination of the witnesses.

The Court consents to Genesis Phillips's assisting in the examination.

Jsaac Howard.]

Q. Was you with Col. Gerrish on the evening of 7th January, when the barracks
on Prospect-hill were searched by him?

A. After the detachment had got down to the barracks as has been related,
Col. Gerrish gave orders to a corporal and four men to go in and search the
rooms: I was one of the four. We searched several rooms in the most northerly
row of the barracks, and met with no resistance from the British soldiers. We
then went to the barracks in the row below. When we came to the door of the
room intended to be searched, some one in the room called out to the rest to
fire; a weapon was presented out of the door, whether it was a gun or a stick I
cannot say; the British soldiers said they would defend their own room. On this
Col. Gerrish ordered Lieut. Searle to fire upon them, but presently recalled
the word: Four or five of us then rushed in among them, they were armed with
clubs, we turned them out of the room, and one of them made a stroke at Lieut.
Searle, which he parry'd with his gun, Lieut. Searle then knocked three or four
of them down with his gun: We had then orders to take five of them to the
guard-house, one without his breeches. The British soldiers were insolent and
said to us damn your bloods, you shall not come in; and the first that does
we'll knock him down. I did not hear any expressions of yankies or rebels. In
another room into which I went with a Lieutenant, as soon as we entered the
door a British soldier blew out the light they had in the room; the Lieut.
seized the man by the collar who blew out the candle, and brought him out of
the room with some difficulty, and asked him for the candle, which he denied to
have seen or touched, an officer of ours put his hand into his pocket and took
it out, and then the Captain struck him, then the Adjutant, and then the
Colonel, who called him rascal for denying his having the candle, and ordered
him under guard. We went to several other rooms, where the British soldiers
held the light for us, and assisted us in searching the room; the search was
fruitless, for we could not find the gun.

Q. Was there any firearms in any of the rooms you searched?

A. There was not; in one room they had clubs, I mean hickery sticks, three or
four feet long, and near as thick as my wrist.

Q. When you rushed into the room did the British soldiers strike at you with
their clubs; and how many British soldiers were in the room?

A. There were about 16 or 18 soldiers in the room, and they did not strike at
us when we went into the room.

Q. Was there time for the man who was without his breeches to have put them on
if he chose it before he was carried off by the guard?

A. There was; several of the others went in and put on their stockings. This
man was sulkey, and I suppose he meant to knock some of us down before he put
his breeches on, as he came out of the room with his club.

Col. Eleazer Brooks.]

Q. Did you make any report to Col. Henley on the morning of the 8th January?

A. I did to the best of my remembrance in the following words: -- "Sir, before
I make my report as an officer of the day, (yesterday) I thought it my duty to
inform you that one of your sentries was last night knocked down, and his gun
taken from him; that Col Gerrish in attempting to recover the gun was resisted
with clubs, etc. That about 20 of the British soldiers were confined for this
affair. I am this moment informed that two of our men were killed last night,
whether it be true or not I cannot say."

Q. By Col. Henley. -- Had you orders to get your regiment under arms?

A. The regiment were, I believe, got under arms immediately, and soon after
dismissed; but I was not with them.

Col. Gerrish. -- I was at Col. Henley's on the morning of the 8th January, and
as I came along I saw Col. Brooks's regiment upon the common under arms; I was
told that a hundred men had been ordered from my regiment, I asked the reason,
'twas answered -- there were two of our men killed, I replied I believe it is a
false report, for I had been on the Hill that morning and had heard nothing of
it; upon that Col. Brooks's regiment was dismissed. Col Henley immediately went
to Prospect-hill -- soon after I went to the Hill myself, as I was officer of
the day. -- When I entered the fort on Prospect-hill I saw Col. Henley with the
reinforcement from my regiment; Col. Henley told me the British soldiers had
rescued a prisoner from our guard; I then went in front of the detachment from
my regiment with Col. Henley, I saw about a hundred British soldiers front of
the detachment, between it and the barracks, the distance was so small between
the detachment and barracks, that 'twas difficult passing without interruption
on account of their being in front; I apprehend about 200 more British
soldidiers were dispersed about, particularly in the rear of the detachment. I
think I told Col. Henley if I had the command I should order them to disperse,
as I did not look on the guard safe; I thought they might disarm his guard if
they should rush upon them. I went immediately into the citadel, and saw
nothing further. When I came out of the citadel into the fort again, I saw Col.
Henley marching off the Hill with the detachment and the prisoners; as they
were marching off, a number of British soldiers standing together said, I
wonder what the damned Yankies are going to do now.

Q. When Col. Henley conversed with you, did any of the British soldiers come
close up and listen to what was said?

A. They did; We moved a little farther and they followed us with a view, as I
thought, of hearing the conversation. I don't recollect Col. Henley's saying
any thing to them about it.

Q. By General Phillips. -- How long was you with Col. Henley in the front of
the detachment?

A. About four or five minutes.

Q. Did the British soldiers crowd so much upon the detachment as to prevent
the execution of any orders which Col. Henley might give?

A. They did; and it would have been impossible for the detachment to have
formed a maneuver without the British soldier's removing.

Q. During the time you stood with Col. Henley by the detachment, was there any
words or actions on the part of the British soldiers that menaced any assault
on Col. Henley or the detachment?

A. I heard no words except a laughing and talking among them; I saw no
appearance of an assault on the guard except their crowding upon the guard.

Q. Did you see any weapons whatever in the hands of the British soldiers?

A. I did not.

Capt. Caleb Brooks.]

Q. Did you see Col. Henley on Prospect-hill on the forenoon of the 8th January?

A. I did; I was the Captain of the guard on the Hill that day, and had in
custody twenty-nine British soldiers. About 11 o'clock Col. Henley and Major
Swasey came up to the guard-house, and after some inquiries, and my reporting
that every thing was very quiet, Col Henley told me that a reinforcement was
coming up, and he thought it would be best to take the prisoners out of the
guard-house, and send them to Cambridge, where an enquiry could best be made
into their crimes. We went into the guard-house together, and presently the
detachment came into the citadel, and formed about four rods from the
guard-house. At this time I saw a large number of British soldiers collecting
near a corner of the guard house. I went with Col. Henley's orders to bid them
disperse and retire to their barracks, he ordered them two or three times,
finding they would not obey him, he called twelve men from the detachment.
After some time the twelve men moved from the party, upon which the British
soldiers gave a shout and dispersed, going off toward their barracks.
Immediately on this, a man came up and told Col. Henley that a prisoner had
been rescued from him by the British soldiers. Col. Henley on this said he
would take the command himself; and then marched the detachment out of the
citadel and paraded them in the rear of the barracks in the fort. I know of no
transactions while the detachment were in the fort, for as Captain of the
main-guard I could not quit my post at such a time.

Q. What was the number of British soldiers who were assembled near the corner
of the guard-house?

A. I believe near three hundred, and more were collecting when they dispersed.

Q. Was there any insult offered to Col. Henley by the British soldiers?

A. Not personally to Col. Henley; but they were laughing and jeering at the
guard; some of them cried out Yankies, but I cannot be particular in their
expressions.

Q. By Genesis Burgoyne. -- Was there any appearance of an assault on the part of
the British soldiers?

A. No; they appeared to me rather with a view of insulting than assaulting the
guard; they pointed at and laughed at the guard; they were talking but I did
not hear their expressions; there was a breast-work between the British
soldiers and the detachment, over which they were looking at the detachment

Q. Had the British soldiers any weapons in their hands?

A. Not that I saw.

The Court adjourns 'till tomorrow at ten o'clock.

FRIDAY, February 6, 1778. The Court met according to adjournment.
Major Swasey]

Q. DO you know any thing of corporal Buchannan a British soldier, being taken
into custody on the 8th January, and his being rescued from the guard who had
charge of him?

A. On the morning of the 8th January I was accompanying Col. Henley to
Prospect-hill. At the bridge on the road to Prospect-hill the sentry was
examining a pass showed hint by corporal Buchannan; Col. Henley suspecting the
pass might be forged, ordered Buchannan to show it to him, with much reluctance
be gave it to Col. Henley; the name of another man inserted in it; in
consequence of this discovery Col. Henley ordered a file of men to take charge
of him: As there had been frequent rescues before, Col. Henley ordered the
guard in case any British soldiers should attempt to rescue him out of their
hands to fire upon them. I then went on with Col. Henley to the guard-house on
Prospect-hill Soon after we got upon the hill a detachment which had been
ordered up to take charge of some prisoners in the main-guard arrived; after
the detachment had paraded near the guard-house, a large body of British
soldiers appeared near the breast-work who were ordered to their barrack by an
officer, and then by Col. Henley; they appeared to move slowly off At this time
I stepped up to the breast-work, and observed Buchannan coming up with the
guard; the guard had got into a crowd of British soldiers, and I observed a
British soldier hold of the skirts of the coat of one of the guard, and heard
some amongst the crowd cry out, run damn you run, and saw Buchannan running
through the crowd of the British soldiers: one of the guard pursuing him with a
charged bayonet, was intercepted by the crowd, and I saw no more of Buchannan.
Immediately on this Col. Henley ordered the whole of the detachment to march
out of the fort, and we went out of the fort together, and Col. Henley asked me
what measures he should take to recover Buchannan? I observed to him the best
way would be to acquaint the British commanding-officer of the day of it, and
did not doubt he would give Buchannan up. Col. Henley then desired me to wait
on the commanding-officer and acquaint him with the matter; I accordingly
weired on Major Foster of the 21st regiment, and on acquainting him with the
matter, the Major told me he would send for the Adjutant of the regiment and
order him confined, and report the matter to the Brigadier. In six or seven
minutes I returned to Col. Henley and reported Major Foster's answer, with
which he seemed perfectly satisfied.

Q What number of British soldiers were assembled at the time Buchannan was
rescued?

A. I imagine one hundred and fifty, within a circle of one hundred yards.

Mr. James Hartwell.]

Q. Did you see Col. Henley with a detachment of soldiers on Prospect-hill, on
the 8th January last?

A. I was at the guard-house on Prospect-hill, on the forenoon of the 8th
January, when Col. Henley and Major Swasey rode up, and soon after a detachment
came up and were paraded near the guard house; at this time a number of British
soldiers made their appearance outside the breast-work, near the guard-house;
orders were repeatedly given to them by the Captain of the guard and by Col.
Henley to disperse, which they paid little regard to. There were about one
hundred at the bread-work,and more were coming up; at this time I saw two or
three of our men armed, coming through the British soldiers; Col. Henley called
out for a dozen men, upon which the British soldiers gave a shout and moved
toward the barracks, and on their way rushed between the two or three armed
men beforementioned, and there was a scuffle among them as they cleared away;
I suppose a British soldier by his clapping his hand near his hip, was wounded.
Col. Henley soon marched out with the detachment, and paraded them in the rear
of the barracks; I followed and stood in the rear of the guard near the center.
As soon as the detachment halted the British soldiers gathered round in front
and rear of the detachment, to the amount of upwards of two hundred. On this
Col. Henley ordered twelve men on the right to prime and load, and then wheeled
them to the left so as to form an angle. Col. Henley then turned toward the
British soldiers and said that he had had one prisoner rescued, and if they
offered to rescue any more he would order his guard to fire upon them. Col.
Henley asked for Major Swasey, and seeing Col. Gerrish on horseback, he
stepped up to him, two or three British soldiers followed him and stood at two
or three yards distance listening (to appearance) to what was said by Col.
Henley and Col. Gerrish. Col. Henley then ordered a division from the left of
the detachment to go into the citadel and bring out some prisoners; they
marched off accordingly, and were about one fourth of the whole detachment.
Col. Henley then disposed his men to receive the prisoners which might be
brought; by this time the British soldiers had collected in such numbers, that
the Colonel had hardly room to pass in front of his guard; Col. Henley then
addressed the British soldiers, and ordered them to disperse and go their
barracks, some few turned round, Col. Henley repeated his orders and said
begone to your barracks every one of you; some others then turned round and
moved slowly, Col. Henley on their moving slowly, cried God damn you why don't
you move, and made a lunge with his sword at a British soldier, which I imagine
struck him, as I observed the sword was bent, and saw the Colonel endeavor to
straighten it. They then moved off, and the men returned from the guard-house
with the British prisoners, and the whole detachment marched off the hill with
them.

Q. Did you hear any British soldier say any thing to Col. Henley during any of
the time you have spoken of?

A. I did not; there was a buzzing amongst them, but I cannot repeat any
expression they used.

Q. Had any of the British soldiers any weapons in their hands?

A. Not that I saw.

Q. Did you observe any circumstance to prevent Col. Henley from taking any of
the British soldiers prisoners had he thought proper?

A. He might have taken the man prisoner whom he struck at with the sword.

Q. Might he not have taken any other man prisoner?

A. He might have taken a single man; it might have been dangerous taking more.

Q. Was the man Col. Henley made the lunge at moving off at the time?

A. I think he was not; he stood with his face toward the guard, at the
distance of a yard or two.

Q. What did Col. Henley do after making the lunge you have mentioned?

A. He turned round and walked in the front of his guard toward the right, and
spoke to a British soldier who was walking very slowly in front of the guard,
and bid him go along immediately, he repeated the order, the soldier did not in
the least quicken his pace; Col. Henley followed him a little way and then
turned round; the British soldier attempted to pass the sergeant who stood on
the right of the guard, the sergeant pushed him off the bank.

Q. Did you see Col. Henley make a pass at this last soldier you have mentioned?

A. I did not.

Q. Did you hear him make use of any other words besides what you have related?

A. I do not recollect any other.

Sergeant Samuel Humphreys.]

Q. Was you on the detachment on Prospect-hill on the 8th January, when Col.
Henley was present?

A. I was; after the detachment got into the citadel and were paraded I
observed a number of British soldiers looking over the breast-work; Col. Henley
ordered them to disperse, they did not seem to move, he ordered them a second
time, they did not move, Col. Henley turned round and ordered twelve men to
advance, I was one of the twelve, we advanced out to the sally-port, Col.
Henley ordered us to go on, the British soldiers seeing us advance scattered
slowly; soon after Col. Henley came up and advanced with us to the rear of the
barrack, we were there paraded with the rest of the detachment; Col. Henley
ordered twelve men to load, he then said he had had one prisoner rescused, and
determined not to have another, and ordered the British soldiers to disperse,
they moved very slowly, he walked along the guard and back again, and said to
two of the British soldiers damn you do you want to be run through, and bid
them be gone, and turned round, one of the British said he would be damned if he
was in any hurry, I don't know that the Colonel heard him; the two soldiers
went on slowly, and when they came to the right of the detachment, they
attempted to crowd by the sergeant who pushed them both over the bank, they got
up and damned the sergeant, and looked black and sour as the devil at him; I
did not see Col. Henley stab a British soldier, I stood so far on the right
that I could not see all that passed; the British soldiers did not crowd on the
right of the guard, they were pretty thick on the left; I imagine upon the
whole parade there might be three or four hundred British soldiers.

Capt. Dodge]

Q. Was you a Captain of the detachment on the 8th January ordered to
Prospect-hill, and what took place on the arrival of the detachment within the
citadel?

A. After we arrived in the citadel I paraded the detachment on the south cast
side; I saw Col. Henley and Capt. Brooks going toward the North-west part,
where a number of British soldiers were assembled; Col. Henley had his sword in
his hand and drawn, he repeatedly ordered them to disperse and immediately
ordered a sergeant and twelve men from my detachment; soon after the twelve men
had marched as I suppose out of the citadel, Col. Henley came and took the
command of the detachment and marched them out of the citadel, the sergeant and
twelve men marched as a vanguard, so far as to have room to parade; the twelve
men formed a rank entire, and formed ah angle on the right; Col. Henley then
walked up and down the front of the detachment, and immediately addressing
himself to the British soldiers, said, you have rescued one prisoner, but you
shall not rescue another, Col. Henley at this time had is sword drawn, but I am
uncertain when he drew it, as he walked to the right where there was not so
many British soldiers as on the left, he asked one or two of them a question,
what it was I cannot tell, but think it implied do you want me to force you
off; with that they went off slowly, three of them than attempted to get (...)
the sergeant on the right, which one of them did, the sergeant immediately
pushed the other two off the bank; about one half of the detachment there, were
ordered off to bring the prisoners from the guard-house, the detachment was
formed into an oblong square, with the prisoners in the middle; during this
time there were about eighty British soldiers in the front, and about two
hundred in the rear.

Henry Hamson, sergeant in the militia.]

Q. Was you on the detachment paraded by Col. Henley in the rear of the
barracks on Prospect-hill on the 8th January last?

A. I was; after we were drawn up in the rear of the barracks, Col. Henley sent
off a party from the left of the detachment to bring out some prisoners from
the guard-house in the citadel, and as Col. Henley was walking up and down the
parade, the British troops came up thick in the front of us, Col. Henley
ordered them to disperse and go to their barracks, they made no movement at
this order; Col. Henley then moved to the left 80 or a 100 paces and looking
round, found they had not moved, came back again and ordered them to go off; on
this they turned and began moving very slowly, Col. Henley pushed his sword at
them, but whether he wounded any one I cannot say, one of the British soldiers
turned to the left and came down in the rear of me and said, damn your eyes you
buggers, you shall pay for this one of these days, and went off.

Q. What number of British soldiers were round the detachment at the time you
mention?

A. Upwards of three hundred.

Q. Did you see any insult either in action, word or gesture, on the parts of
the British soldiers, before Col. Henley made a pass at the man?

A. They looked sulkey and malicious; they were in front and rear of the
detachment.

The Court adjourns 'till tomorrow at ten o'clock.

SATURDAY, February 7, 1778.
A VIOLENT snow-storm preventing the Court from assembling, a majority of the
members being present, the Court was adjourned to Monday at ten o'clock.

MONDAY, February 9, 1778.
TWO members being absent, the Court is adjourned 'till tomorrow at ten
o'clock.

TUESDAY, February 10, 1778. The Court met pursuant to adjournment.
Daniel Mason, corporal in the militia.]

Q. DO you know that a militia sentinel was insulted and knocked down on his
post on the evening of 15th December?

A. The 15th December I was one of the provision guard near Prospect-hill, and
about eight o'clock in the evening hearing a gun fired stepped out of the
guard-house to enquire of the sentinel where the gun was fired; finding the
sentinel surrounded by five or six British soldiers, and hearing them demand of
the sentinel if his gun was loaded, I thought it necessary to order them to
disperse, on this order they seized the sentinel's firelock; I took hold of the
firelock to wrest it from them, they knocked the sentinel down with their fist,
and then knocked me down and kicked me several times in the face, and one said
God damn him, fire him through, one of them had the gun in his hand at this
time, and snapped the gun within four feet of my breast; a file of our men
coming up, they all went off except the one who had the gun, the corporal
ordered him to lay down the firelock, which be refused, they then seized him,
wrested the gun from him, and carried him prisoner to the guard-house; the
sentinel was much bruised in the face; they closed one of my eyes by a kick, so
that I could not see out of it for two or three days.

Samuel Stearns, Lieutenant in the militia.]

Q. Do you know of a British soldier being rescued from your guard on or about
the tenth of December?

A. The tenth of December I was on duty on the main-guard on Prospect-hill; on
hearing from one of our men that a sentry had fired on some British soldiers, I
went our to enquire into it; upon coming up to the sentry, I found fifteen or
eighteen British soldiers round the sentinel; the British soldiers were
reprimanding the sentinel in high terms for firing on one of their men, I
addressed myself to the chief spokesman and desired him to go off to his
barracks, he turned upon me and said, "What business have you here you God damn
clown, with a sword under your arm. I Will have you to know we are not prisoners,
but I will do as I have a mind;" I again ordered him to go to his barrack
peaceably, and I would take no notice of his abuse to me; he on this turned
about and cried out, God damn you, kiss my arse, and repeated it three or four
times; I then ordered the sentry to take him into custody, he then striking his
fists together, swore he would kill the man who should offer to take him; the other
soldier who stood by said he should not be carried to the guard-house, they
would turn out the regiment upon me first: On these threats I called for a
sergeant of the guard; he not coming immediately. I ordered two of our guard
who were coming down the hill to take the man who had so grossly insulted me
into custody and carry him to the guard-house; I went with the guard half way
up the hill, and returning to the sentinel looking back, saw a number of
British soldiers round the two men who had the custody of the British soldier
abovementioned, I saw a British soldier running up the hill, and heard the
British soldiers cry out we have got him, on which a loud huzza was raised by
the British soldiers in front of the barracks where the man run into; some
little time after this I saw the man who I had taken into custody as above
related, walking before the barrack with a number of other British soldiers, I
ordered a sergeant with a file of men to go and take him, the sergeant went,
the soldier seeing him coming set out and run, and the sergeant after him, the
British soldiers seized their comrade, pulled him into the barrack, and pushed
the sergeant back as he was entering the barrack and set up a loud huzza. All
these transactions I afterward reported to Major Gage our officer of the day,
who advised me to make application to the British officers, I accordingly went
down and finding some of them, Major Gage related the circumstances of insult
and rescue beforementioned. The British officer told us the men were to be
paraded presently, and if I could point out the man he should be confined.
After the men were paraded I pointed out the fellow and he was ordered off the
parade under guard. The next day according to notice, I attended a British
regimental court martial, with the witnesses to support the chare against him;
the man was arraigned, and I gave the court the necessary information and
withdrew. The next day I had a line from Lieut. Col. Lind informing me with the
proceedings of the court martial, the criminal was sentenced to receive fifty
lashes, the messenger told me that the punisment was to be inflicted the next
day at ten o'clock, and desired me to attend; the next day according to the
hour appointed I attended, and after waiting some time, was told that the
punishment was deferred 'till two o'clock afternoon. I staid 'till two o'clock
and then saw the serjeant-major of the regiment, who told me the punishment was
remitted, and the men set at liberty. Thus ended the matter, and I never
received any sort of satisfaction. The whole of this transaction was reported
to Col. Henley.

Sergeant Jepthah Crane of the militia.]

Q. Do you know any thing of the rescue of a British soldier from a militia
guard the beginning of December last?

A. One day the beginning of December, I came up to Cambridge with a patrole
party, and was returning to the main-guard with a British soldier in custody,
(who I had taken up for being found without a pass) carrying him to the
guard-house, when my party, which consisted of six men, came opposite the
barracks of the British soldiers, near a hundred of them rushed upon us, seized
hold of the prisoner and carried him off, huzzaing. I reported the transaction
to the officer, but the man was not recovered that I ever knew of.

Philemon Warren, of the militia]

Q. Do you know of a militia sentinel being insulted and knocked down on his
post, on the evening of 15th December?

A. I do; I was the man. The witness confirms the whole of the narrative of
corporal Mason, and adds that he was blind a day or two from a blow he received
on the occasion.

Benjamin Crane of the militia.]

Q. Do you know of a militia sentinels being insulted and disarmed on his post,
on the 6th January last?

A. On the 6th January last I was posted as a sentinel at the door of the
provision store, at the foot of Prospect-hill, and Mr. Davis, one of the
Deputy-Commissaries, delivered to my charge a British soldier whom he accused
of stealing rice, he was in the room and stood at the door, and a large number
of British soldiers came up and enquired what he was confined for, they did
this several times, and presently one of them, as I held my gun and bayonet
across the door, said damn the bayonet we'll have him out* on this I charged my
bayonet and bid them keep off, they seized my gun and took off my bayonet and
run away with it: They made no other attempt to rescue the prisoner.

The following standing orders brought from the main-guard were produced and
read, viz.

THE guards are to be vigilant and alert, and do their utmost to prevent
disorder, and keep peace, ever attentive to the security of the camp. No
officer or soldier shall be allowed to stroll from the guards. No offense to be
given to any officer or soldier of Genesis Burgoyne's army, nor is any to be
received from them by the officers and soldiers of the United States of
America; but they are to take up and confine any that offer the least abuse,
and report them to the commanding-officer. The officer commanding the guard
will give orders to the sentries, that they are to defend barracks, fences, and
all property whatsoever belonging to the army, or to any of the inhabitants of
the United States. When any insurrection of the prisoners shall appear to be of
consequence, the commanding-officer at Cambridge, is to have due notice thereof.

Given under my hand at Cambridge, this 23d day of December, 1778. D. HINLEY,
Commanding-Officer.

The Court adjourns 'till tomorrow at ten o'clock.

WEDNESDAY, February 11, 1778. The Court met pursuant to adjournment.
GENERAL Bugoyne being unwell, and Col. Henley asking for a few days to look
over the evidence, and observe upon it, the Court adjourns to Wednesday the
18th of February, at ten o'clock.

WEDNESDAY, February 18, 1778. The Court met pursuant to adjournment.
THE following witnesses were produced by Genesis Burgoyne in invalidation of Col.
Henley's, with respect to corporal Reeves.

Philip Roth, sergeant 21st regiment.]

Q. Was you present on 19th day December at the guard-house, when Col. Henly
had the difference with corporal Reeves?

A. I was one of the prisoners, and present all the time, during the
conversation between Col. Henley and Reeves, at about the distance of three or
four yards.

Q. Did you during any part of the conversation, hear corporal Reeves call Col.
Henley a rascal, or damn him?

A. I did not; and I was so situated and so attentive, that if he had I must
have heard him.

Robert Maxwell, 21st regiment, gives the same answers to the same questions
put to Roth, except that he was at the distance of two yards only from Reeves
at the time the conversation happened.

A number of hickery clubs designed to play at bat and ball with, were produced
from the barracks mentioned in Col. Gerrish's deposition, to show they were not
designed for any other use, and used suddenly on the occasion mentioned by Col.
Gerrish.

General Burgoyne.]

Mr. President and Gentlemen of the Court,

THE evidence in the cause being finished, I will now produce several
precedents from Courts-Martial held in the British army to show that
prosecutors have been admitted assistant to the Judge-Advocate. This Country
once allowed British precedents great weight in all their Courts. Whether the
change of Government has nullified the usages, as well as subverted the
written positive institutions of England is left to the Court to determine. You
Gentlemen, can certainly regulate your own proceedings, and there cannot, I
think be any impropriety in your making use of any assistance which may
contribute to discover facts or enforce truth. Capt. England, Capt. Willoe, and
Lieut. Bibby, will inform the Court of the instances to my purpose.

The following are the Precedents offered.

THAT in the month of August 1774, he was member of a General Court Martial at
New York, whereof the late Brigadier-General Nesbitt was President, that Capt.
Adye of the Royal Artillery was Judge-Advocate to the Court Martial; that the
Rev. Mr. Newburgh, Chaplain to the 18th regiment, was tried by the
Court Martial for various offenses, and prosecuted by Capt. Chapman of the same
regiment, and in the name of the regiment; that after the witnesses against and
for the prisoner were examined, the prisoner made a defense, to which Capt.
Chapman the prosecutor made a reply, in which, he commented and remarked upon
the prisoners evidences and defense, having being allowed a certain time to
prepare his reply.

The above is true upon my honor, R. ENGLAND, Capt. 47th Grenadiers.
Cambridge, Feb. 18th, 1778.
LIEUTENANT Molesworth of the 52d regiment, tried by a General Court Martial,
of which I was a member, at Quebec, in the year 1769. After the prisoner had
made his defense, Lieut. Williamson, who prosecuted replied, and remarked upon
the evidence produced by Mr. Molesworth.

The above I declare is true upon my honor. S. WILLOE, Capt. King's (or 8th)
reg't.

IN the trial of Capt. Garsten of the 17th dragoons, in Dublin, in the year
1771, Major Birch appeared as prosecutor, and it being objected at first by the
prisoner, that the prosecutor should have the assistance of council, it was the
opinion of the Court, that both the prisoner and prosecutor should, if they
thought proper, have council to prompt and assist them, but not to plead; the
Judge-Advocate upon this trial was an attorney; Major Birch acted through the
whole course of trial as prosecutor. I was present at this trial.

THOMAS BIBBY, Lieut. 24th reg't.
Judge Advocate.]

Mr. President and Gentlemen of the Court,

THIS, in common with all Courts of Record, undoubtedly has power to direct
it is own proceedings, subject to the articles of war. I do not ground my
objection on any thing in those articles prohibitory of the claim I oppose, but
on the customs which prevail in the American army and the supposed duty of the
Judge-Advocate. Those articles constitute a Judge-Advocate, who, although
enjoined to prosecute In behalf of the government; has always been considered
in our armies bound to assist the prisoner, not only in points of law, but by
an impartial representation of facts. The whole evidence in the trial is taken
in writing, subject to the inspection of the Court. You cannot, therefore,
Gentlemen, be deceived by sophistry, or misled by rhetoric. Pleadings for this
reason are unnecessary, except on a point of law, for which the Judge-Advocate
is presumed to be competent; and unbiassed by the tenure of his office.

I do not oppose these precedents because they are British; had they been from
Portugal or Turkey, and been pertinent and reasonable, they ought to influence
your determination. Although the instance mentioned by Lieut. Bibby, is rather
against the General, considered in the latitude to which he aims to extend his
claim. The articles of war which govern the British army are extracted from the
Roman code of civil law; and ours are nearly the same with those adopted by the
British mutiny act.

The trials by Courts-martial are designed to be simple, speedy and decisive.
The soldiers duty is clearly prescribed, and the punishment for neglect of it
plainly ascertained, by the articles which give jurisdiction to the Court that
are to inquire into, and punish delinquency. The Judge-Advocate acts in the
double capacity of prosecutor and council to the prisoner, which, those who are
acquainted with the proceedings of military courts, will allow not to be
inconsistent duties. The office of Judge-Advocate has been considered by some
in an army, the same as that of Attorney General in the courts of criminal
jurisdiction at common law, but I can safely appeal to your decision Gentlemen,
if I am wrong in the duty of that officer in our army as I have laid it down.

The altercations of the bar in the Courts of common law, arise from a
combination of rights in free society, which are unknown in an army. A man when
he commences a soldier, makes a temporary relinquishment of the privileges of a
citizen. If a prosecutor, (and in this case a very able one) is admitted in
addition to the Judge-Advocate, surely it would be unreasonable to deny council
in defense of the prisoner -- and then consider, Gentlemen, what would be the
consequence: Every man brought before a Court Martial would be entitled to the
same indulgence. All the subtleties and delays which prevail at common law
would be introduced, into Courts-martial, infinitely to the public disservice,
under the circumstances which armies, Durante bello especially ought to be
maintained and governed. I submit my objection to the opinion of the Court.

The Court was ordered to be cleared.

The Court after debate, were of opinion, that General Burgoyne should have the
liberty of remarking upon the evidence offered by Col. Henley, and the
Judge-Advocate was directed to acquaint the General with this determination.

The Court adjourns 'till Monday 23 d February, at ten o'clock.

MONDAY, February 23, 1778.
Col. Henley being called upon to close his defense, replied as follows.

Mr. President and Gentlemen of the Court,

I HAVE particular reasons, and in my own apprehension very sufficient, for
declining to say a single word in answer to the illiberal abuse thrown upon me,
and the palpable dishonor done to my country, by Genesis Burgoyne, in this Court.
It is Mr. President, a new thing under the sun, and taken in all its
circumstances totally without example. -- The Judge-Advocate will sum up the
evidence wiih ability and impartiality -- Such is my consciousness of having
done nothing through this whole affair, but what the honor and safety of my
Country absolutely required, that I shall rest entirely satisfied with your
decision; being at the same time fully persuaded, that the impartial public, at
whose bar I stand, will join with you in acquitting me from all the injurious
and illiberal charges of Genesis Burgoyne, and that they will vindicate me for
that humanity, characteristic of an American officer, and with which the
officers and soldiers of Genesis Burgoyne's late army have been treated, while I
was honored with the command of the guards.

Genesis Burgoyne then made a few remarks upon the evidence offered by Col.
Henley; and finished his address to the Court by submitting some reasons to
justify the part he had taken during the trial, and in exculpation of himself
from the reflections of Col. Henley. (No notes were taken of this speech.)

The Court adjourned to Tuesday 24 th instant, at ten o'clock.

TUESDAY, February 24, 1778. The Court met pursuant to adjournment.
The Judge-Advocate addressed the Court in substance as follows.

Mr. President and Gentlemen of the Court,

IT remains with me to close this cause which has employed so much time, and
been the subject of such public expectation. The mode of inquiry established in
all trials by Courts-martial, necessarily renders the process tedious. This has
been particularly so, and was an apology wanting, the patience exhibited by the
Court through the whole course of it, would atone for the hours spent in the
investigation of the subject.

This cause, Gentlemen, has been rendered important rather from the
distinguished rank and peculiar circumstances of the very able prosecutor, than
from the real merits of it. For however it may have been insinuated that Col.
Henley was appointed commandant of the garrison at Cambridge, for the purpose
of executing the bloody designs of an irritated, vindictive, and sanguinary
people; I believe the public, as well as the Court, will consider the prisoner
as alone interested in it; and that this trial must forever stand the cleared
resutation to any one hardy enough to repeat an assertion as injurious as it is
false.

No sooner was the charge handed to Genesis Heath, the guardian of the public
military reputation in this department, than Col. Henley was suspended from his
command and an immediate inquiry ordered into his conduct.

Yet notwithstanding this prompt, this early endeavor to discover facts, and
punish if criminality should be proved, a wound has been aimed at the
reputation of this country.

It has been said, Gentlemen, before a respectable and crowded audience, that a
general massacre of the troops of the convention was in contemplation, and Col.
Henley fixed upon as the black instrument of execution. There was not an
American present at that time, I dare assert, who did not feel indignation beat
in every pulse, while his heart reprobated the idea.

This charge, heightened with all the pomp of words which attic diction and
tragic eloquence could furnish; painted in those vivid, animated colors which
keen feelings and lively apprehensions would supply; wanted nothing but truth
to have answered the design proposed. And that this was wanting, you Gentlemen,
from the evidence now on your table, are, I presume, convinced. The world
hereafter may be satisfied.

If I thought General Burgoyne when making this assertion sincerely believed it
to be true, though I should wonder at his deception, I should have a better
opinion of his fairness: And while we smiled at his panic, we might pity his
timidity.

Whatever particular, personal reasons for gaining popularity, or securing the
affections of his army; or great political motives may have actuated the
prosecutor in this business, you Gentlemen who are to judge upon oath as well
as upon honor, the two strangest ties that can bind you as men and as
soldiers, will be swayed by nothing but the sacred principles of truth and
justice.

It is my duty to exhibit facts as they arise from the evidence, stripped of
the meretricious coverings which ingenuity and rhetoric have attempted to
conceal them in.

However excusable it may be in Genesis Burgoyne to take a partial survey of the
cause; by well turned periods to catch the attention and force the admiration
of listening crowds; and by a brilliancy of expression or affected nobility of
sentiment attempt to dazzle, the more effectually to mislead the Court; the
Judge-Advocate has a very different part to act. He ought to know no party, but
undeviatingly to follow the road marked out by truth alone.

The difficulty of keeping the mind unbiased in this cause will strike the
minds of die Court. This is the trial a gallant and meretorious officer; of a
man, whose services in camp and in the field most of you Gentlemen have been
witnesses to, and whose conduct as a citizen, previous to his commencing the
soldier, was ever irreproachable. I must then depend on the candor of the
Court, should I err in summing up the evidence, to restore me to the path of
disinterestedness. Much is due to the character of such an officer; but more to
the safety of thousands, who, disarmed and in our power, are entitled by the
laws of nations, of war, of humanity and of justice, to protection and
security, provided no mal-conduct on their parts, works a forfeiture of these
rights. Fiat justitia ruat coelum. Let us now look into the evidence; the Court
will adjudge the blame to fall where it ought.

Col. Henley stands before you, Gentlemen, accused by Genesis Burgoyne etc. (The
charge was here read)

The evidence in maintenance of this charge, may be reduced to five different
heads, or classed as distinct facts, in each of which the prisoner has been
represented by the prosecutor, either as principal agent, or a particeps
criminis.

1st. The wounding of corporal Reeves at the guard-house on 19th December. The
Colonel -- a principal.

2. The stabbing Tragget by a sergeant of the militia on the morning of 8th
January. The Colonel an accessory.

3. The stabbing Willson on the same morning. The Col. an accomplice.

4. Col Henley wounding corporal Hadley on the parade at Prospect-hill the 8th
January.

5th. Head of evidence. To prove a general, inimical and murderous principle in
the officers and soldiers of the guards, toward the British troops. In which
the Colonel is involved, because he took no care to curb the malevolence and
cruelty of his men,; and ought therefore to be considered as an accomplice is
all the violences committed.

Agreeable to this arrangement. I will read the whole evidence adduced in
support of each separate fact, and then contrast it by the testimony offered on
the part of the defense.

The depositions of Buchannan, Thompson, Steel (and Mr. Brown as to the nature
of the wound) read, and opposed by those of Major Swasey, Capt. Wild, Dean,
Elijah Horton, Morse, Brazier, Wadsworth Horton, and Barry. (Vide their
testimonies.)

From this collective view of the evidence it appears, that Col. Henley on the
19th December in consequence of orders from General Heath, visited the
main-guard with Major Swasey with the design of releasing a number of British
soldiers who had got into custody, for different misdemeanors. That he was calm
and good humored, and proceeded to execute his instructions in the most
suitable way, that of enquiring into the respective offenses of the culprits,
previous to their dismission, and cautioning them against conduct which might
subject them to another confinement. Reeves, in turn, being asked the cause of
his commitment, with some hesitancy informed the Colonel. And from his own
account it appeared he had so grossly affronted an American officer that even
the nerves of the candid, the placid Major Swasey grew irritated, and he was
provoked enough to give Reeves a very resentful answer. Col. Henley's feelings
being more keen, he called Reeves a rascal; Reeves retorted the epithet; and
the Colonel after repeatedly ordering silence, in order effectually to stop a
very harsh altercation, which had ensued, dismounted from his horse, seized a
gun and fixed bayonet and pricked Reeves in the breast. It appears from the
concurrent testimony of all the witnesses on the side of Col. Henley, that his
design was rather to silence Reeves than to wound him; rather to convince him
he would be obeyed than to injure him. The extreme slightness of the wound,
which, from the surgeon's account was little more than a scratch, confirms this
to have been the Colonel's intention. It would certainly have been better to
have remanded him to the guard-house. And if, Gentlemen, you think the
witnesses in support of the charge have told you all that really passed, you
ought, at least, to think, that Col. Henley is a rash, passionate, precipitate
officer, a man who considers stabbing his fellow creatures as a very venial
offense. But if full credence is given to the evidence of Dean, E. Horton,
Morse, Brazier, Barry and particularly Wadsworth Horton, the Court will
consider whether an officer, acting in such a character as the Colonel then
appeared in, so saucely and abusively replied to by a prisoner in Reeve's
circumstances, is not pardonable, I do not say justifiable, in adopting such a
mode of silencing impudence and repressing contempt.

It has been said that Reeve's behavior was only firm, not insolent British
firmness often so nearly approaches insolence, that Europeans as well as
Americans have been very apt to confound them. The Court will recollect the
pains taken, in one or two instances during this trial, to get from the British
witnesses their idea of insolence. They all affected to think it impossible a
Briton could look insolent. It was, they said, only looking up. But this os
sublime, this erect countenance which they boast of, leads them to looking down
upon the rest of the world, though not always with impunity. Britain is feared
because she is powerful. What pity it is a nation cannot be just as well as
gallant. Less pride had prevented the dismemberment of her empire, had saved
the blood of thousands. And real magnanimity had ever this arrested the hand of
destruction from the heads of men, whose greatest fault (once the glorious
fault of Britons!) is the love of freedom.

Let us now inquire, whether in this action the prisoner is guilty of the last
part of the charge, viz. "Intentional murder."

Murder is thus defined by one of the first sages of common law. When a person
of found memory and descretion, unlawfully kills any reasonable creature in
being, and under the King's (or State's) peace, with malice aforethought,
either expressed by the party or implied by law, so as the party wounded and
hurt, die of the wound or hurt within a year and a day after the same 3 Inst.
47,

The grand criterion of this crime is malice prepense, the dictate of a wicked,
depraved and malignant spirit; and is either express or implied. Foster 256.

I will not trouble the Court with multiplied authorities. The above definition
of Lord Coke's is so well analyzed and illustrated by the able and accurate
Judge Blackstone, that a few pages from his commentaries will furnish the Court
with all the law necessary on this point. Vid. 4th Blackst. 195, 6, 7, 8 9,
200, 201.

From the doctrine here laid down you will consider, appying the evidence to
the principles just read, whether the prisoner can be said to have acted from
express or implied malice. Did Col. Henley aim at taking Reeves's life? If he
did, and the provocation did not arise to the degree, which the law makes
necessary to excuse, although the stroke was not sufficient to effect the
murderous design, you must be of opinion that the last article of the charge is
proved. If he did not attempt Reeves's life, you ought to acquit him of the
intentional guilt he is in this instance charged with.

But it is said, that admitting Reeves's behavior to have amounted to such a
degree of provocation that if the Col. had killed him in the passionate instant
and while sitting on his horse, it might not have been murder, yet the
dismounting gave him time for recollection; and had he then killed instead of
wounded him, it would have been murder.

I must deny this distinction to be just. And to show that the General was
erroneous in this position, I shall read a case cited by Judge Foster from Lord
Coke and Hale. Vid. Fost. 294. From this and many similar adjudications which
might be produced, it is clear, if Col. Henley would not have been guilty of
murder had he stabbed Reeves to the heart, while upon his horse, that his
committing the homicide after the dismounting and seizing the bayonet, would
not have been evidence of that crime, because there was not time for the blood
to cool.

Intentional criminality is punishable at the bar of God alone. Yet, Gentlemen,
should you be convinced, that Col. Henley designed to kill Reeves at the time
he made the pass at him although he failed; you must consider him as a very
improper person to handle muskets and bayonets, for the man was so entirely in
his power, that he could easily have adopted any other mode of punishment. And
though he might deserve a caning or a flagilation for his impudence and insult,
he surely did not merit death.

The next transaction is the stabbing Tragget by a sergeant of the militia on
the 8th January.

This is proved by Page, Lee and George, and the surgeons Walker and Clartey
swear to the nature and depth of the wound. Major Foster and Lieut. Smith to
the peceable behavior of the British soldiers while the detachment was
marching by. Their depositions are strongly contrasted by those of Kettle,
Duckinfield, Anderson, and Capt. Dodge. (Vid. the evidence of each.)

It has not been alleged that Col. Henley was present at or knowing to this
transaction. I shall not therefore here minutely enter into the circumstances
attending it, but only consider whether Col. Henley can be adjudged an
accessory to the stabbing of Tragget.

Accessory (particeps criminis) is where a man is guilty of a felonious
offense, not principally, but by participation, as by command, advice or
concealment.

A man may be an accessory either before or after the fact.

An accessory before the fact is he that being absent at the time of the felony
committed does yet procure, counsel, command or abet another to commit a
felony, 1 H. P. C. 615.

Accessory after the fact is he that receives, assists, or comforts any man
that has committed felony or murder, 1 H. P. C. 618.

Is there the least evidence to show, that in the case of Tragget, the Colonel
comes within the circumstances necessary by the above description, to involve
him in the predicament contended for? There certainly is not.

It is hardly necessary to observe, that as there was no felony committed,
there could be no accessory. And that if the Colonel had any thing to do in
this affair, he must be considered as a principal; for in all crimes under the
degree of felony there are no accessaries. 4 Blackst. 36.

So far from Col. Henley's counselling, abetting, assisting or comforting the
persons concerned in this action, it does not appear that he ever heard of it,
till the witnesses related the fact upon oath before the Court.

But, says General Burgoyne, Col. Henley's conduct had a great effect on his
guards: He was known to be no friend of the British soldiers; he had himself
wounded one, and been violent in his menaces against them all: he thus
influenced his soldiers to stab and murder whom they pleased, if they belonged
to the British army; and ought therefore to be considered as an accomplice in
every outrage which took place. If this reasoning is conclusive, by the same
logic the General himself is an accessory to all the murders perpetrated by the
ferocious Bipeds, the Savages who accompanied and disgraced his army last
summer. Ought it to be said that because these black attendants knew that Genesis
Burgoyne did not love Americans, that therefore he would be pleased at the
butchery of the nerveless old man, defenseless female, and infant prattler?
Because he hated rebels, he therefore influenced the Indians to massacre that
young unfortunate, the inoffending and wretched Miss McCrea!

The wounding Willson on the same morning is proved by Kidley and Keith. The
evidence in justification of this act, is collected from the testimonies of
Pierce, Lewis, and Major Swasey.

The incidents whieh led to this affair, appears from the evidence to be these:
On the morning of 8th January, Col. Henley and Major Swasey on their way down
to Prospect-hill met Buchannan, who the Court have before heard of as an
offender as well as a witness, stealing up to town under the cover of another
man's pass. Deceptions of this kind had been so often played off upon the
centries, that the Colonel thought proper to send Buchannan to the guard-house
for this flagrant breach of general orders. And at the same time gave orders to
the corporal and file of men who had the charge of him to fire on any men
daring enough to attempt rescuing him. Major Swasey (the town Major) says that
rescues had become frequent. This order then was right, and necessary:
Particularly as the guards, composed entirely of militia, had too often
suffered themselves to be duped, ridiculed and insulted, and wanted spirited
orders and support to encourage them to discharge their duty and trample on
contempt. The guard proceeded with their prisoner, but before they reached the
guard-house, were interrupted in their march by a large cluster of British
soldiers who by pressing upon them, and huzzaing and clamouring, gave Buchannan
a very favorable opportunity to effect an escape, and he did not want much
urging to make the most of it. Willson who was most busy in this matter after
Buchannan had got husled among his comrades, seized the corporal of the guard
who was endeavoring to recover his prisoner from the crowd and stopped his
pursuit. This roused Pierce, who could not tamely look on and see his corporal
checked in an act of duty, and he made a pass at Willson and wounded him; and
very honestly tells you that he did it with a good will.

Though the witnesses to this affair militate more than in any other part of
the evidence, yet it is past a doubt that a rescue or something extremely like
one took place. Kidley and Keith both say, that they did not see Buchannan
escape, but they heard afterward he had. Pierce swears positively that he was
forceably taken from the guard, and Lewis corroberates his evidence. Major
Swasey whose candor in every narrative he has given the Court stamps him as
respectable a witness as has been sworn, declares that he saw a British soldier
take hold of one of the guard, at the same time Buchannan was pushing his way
through the crowd of British soldiers who were calling out and encouraging him
to run off.

Should the Court think a rescue was made and Willson principally concerned in
it, they must think Pierce justified in what he did. For I assert that had he
killed him upon the spot, and wounded every man who was abetting the rescue, he
would have been excusable.

I will produce only one authority to justify this opinion, Homicide (says
Lord Hale) in civil causes may be justified in some cases: As where a Sheriff
attempting to make a lawful arrest in a civil action or to retake one who has
been arrested and made his escape, is resisted by the party and unavoidably
kills him in the affray. H. P. C. 71.

If this doctrine is true upon a civil process, a fortiori, it is on a criminal
one. In this case Buchannan was an offender in custody: Whoever ventured to
rescue him did it at their utmost peril. British soldiers are too well
acquainted with discipline and military severity not to know they were acting
egregiously ill. But such attempts had before succeeded, and why not then? The
offenders had before escaped with impunity, and why not again? Willson
painfully learnt that such reasoning was sometimes wrong. I wish all his
brother-soldiers may profit from his experience.

The Court will consider the principles before laid down under the head of
accessory, and as far as they are applicable, allow their operation. And then
determine whether any part of the charge is supported against Col. Henley in
the case of Willson.

The Court adjourns 'till tomorrow at ten o'clock.

WEDNESDAY, February 25, 1778. The Court met pursuant to adjournment.
Judge Advocate.]

Mr. President and Gentlemen of the Court,

WE come now to the last and principal transaction of of the 8th January -- the
wounding Hadley on the parade.

It will be necessary to state the circumstances anterior to this unfortunate
action. You have the fullest proof, the confession of the prosecutor, that a
sentinel on the evening of the 7th was knocked down on his post, that he was
beat, disarmed and his gun carried off. Col. Gerrish, like a true spirited
officer, upon hearing of this daring outrage, determined immediately and in
person to discover the British soldiers who were concerned in it. He
accordingly with a party of his regiment surrounded one of the British
barracks, and after some opposition searched several rooms which appeared
suspicious. The conduct of a number of very obstreperous fellows, which he
found in one of the rooms, strengthened his suspicion, and he thought proper,
after being assaulted, menaced and insulted, to send several of them to the
main-guard. The transactions of this evening were reported to Col. Henley next
morning with aggravation. The Colonel finding he had got so large a number of
British soldiers as 29, prisoners in the main-guard which was situated so near
the barracks of the British army that some difficulty might arise, adjudged it
most prudent to remove all the prisoners up to the town, where a proper inquiry
could be made; the culpable punished, and the innocent dismissed. A detachment
of 100 men were ordered to the main-guard for this purpose. And the Colonel
with the town major set out for the Hill to see that the detachment did their
duty. On his way down, he met Buchannan, playing off upon a sentinal the
evasive trick which had now become common, with the British soldiers, that of
escaping from their barracks under counterfeit or borrowed passes. The Colonel
gave the orders (respecting Buchannan) we have before read; and proceeded on
for the main-guard; not with the most agreeable feelings, if we suppose the
irritation which a variety of offensive reports and provoking considerations,
must have raised in his mind, during the course of the morning. Soon after he
got to the main-guard, the detachment marched into the citadel and formed near
the guard-house. By this time a very large body of British soldiers had
assembled near the guard-house, Captain Brooks says, to the number of three
hundred. The Colonel apprehensive that some disorders might arise, when the
British prisoners should be sent off with the detachment, ordered the British
soldiers to disperse -- finding he was not likely to be obeyed -- he called for
a dozen men from the detachment, which produced a movement among them, and they
were going off; when just at this time Buchannan was rescued within sight of
Col. Henley. This act of insolent triumph, determined Col. Henley to take the
immediate personal command of the detachment, which he instantly marched out of
the citadel upon the parade in the rear of the barracks. He had hardly time to
halt his men before he was surrounded by the British soldiers, who amounted to
near two hundred men, which was double his number. I rate the number on a
medium between what they were said to be, by the witnesses for the prosecution,
and those in behalf of Col. Henley. Consider now Gentlemen, what must have been
Col. Henley's sensations; at the head of a party of militia, who, from being
daily affronted by the British soldiers, were become their jest; that it had at
length become absolutely necessary to convince these Britons, that there was
energy enough in their guards to force obedience and curb licentiousness; that
a tumult had arisen the night before, and that an act had just taken place
which was a defiance to himself: that he had not room to maneuver his men
without great difficulty, owing to the British soldiers pressing in upon the
party; and that these were most of them the very men who had just before been
laughing at the party, while paraded in the citadel, and who, in contempt of
his orders, were again collected to keep up the laugh at the expense of the
detachment. I put it upon this footing, because I think it was apparent they
were assembled rather to insult than to assail the party; though they were so
near, that it was only stretching out their arms, and it would have been easy
to have disarmed the detachment by a sudden movement; especially after the
Colonel had detached a quarter of his whole party to bring out the prisoners
from the guard-house. -- Under these circumstances, Gentlemen, and still more
so if he was apprehensive of an attempt to disarm his men, how extremely
difficult must it have been for the Colonel to have checked his resentment, or
stopped the hand which had been so repeatedly and insolently defied. The
Colonel had told them he had lost a prisoner, threatened to fire upon them, and
given reiterated orders for them to disperse before he made the lunge at
Hadley. It has been proved that the British soldiers in general were slowly
moving off at the time, but not that Hadley was one of them. If you are
convinced, Gentlemen, that he was going off, you will then consider how far the
Colonel's impetuosity is reprehensible, and punish him accordingly.

It appears clearly that the British soldiers had no weapons of any kind in
their hands, that they made no attempt on the guard nor struck any of them,
from which it may be a question, whether had Hadley died of the wound he
received from Col. Henley, the Colonel would not have been guilty of murder,
because upon the principles of municipal law, words alone, however impudent or
provoking, will not reduce murder to manslaughter, though a very slight blow
first given by the person killed might have made the killing manslaughter, or
even a less species of homicide.

If the nice distinctions of common law are to be made the rules of conduct in
military discipline, and the regulation of a garrison, Col. Henley must suffer.
But I imagine Gentlemen, you will hardly admit this to be true. Because
soldiers and citizens are entitled to very different privileges.

In an army, the disobedience of an order is sometimes punished with instant
death, and such an action justified and applauded, which was it to take place
among citizens might subject a man to a halter.

Col. Henley had stood for some time, first in the citadel, and afterward on
the parade at the head of a detachment armed, and heard the provoking epithets
of yankey and rebel very liberally thrown out against his guards, by the Scotch
and British loyalists who surrounded him. The word yankey, when used by these
proficients in abuse, is intended to convey the idea of clownishness and
cowardice. And to call a man yankey rebel, is considered by them as the
strongest term of invective. Where is the officer in such circumstances who
could suppress his indignation upon such an occasion?

If Gentlemen you should be satisfied, that Hadley at the time he was wounded,
was moving off, you will consider whether Col. Henley is not very blameworthy
for making a violent lunge into a man's body, who was obeying his orders and
getting out of his way -- should you be convinced that Hadley was not removing,
though such preremptory and repeated orders were given him with his comrades to
retire to their barracks, your opinion will be different.

The witnesses under the last head of evidence are Lieut. Bibby, Lieut. Col.
Lind, sergeants Fleming and Willson.

Mr. Bibby swears that on the morning of the 8th January, as he passed over the
parade where the detachment was drawn up, he heard an officer who he took to be
the Captain of the guard, "Damn his men for inattention and ordering them to
run any man through who came near them." This speech appears to have been made
soon after the wounding Hadley, while the passions were in a tumult, and the
pulse beating high from what had passed. The order was rash and unjustifiable,
and the Court will consider whether the example just set by Col. Henley, in
stabbing Hadley, did not occasion it, and how far he is accountable for
encouraging sentiments of such a nature.

The instance mentioned by Col. Lind, of the sentry's firing on three camp
women, cannot by any means affect Col. Henley, because it does not appear that
he ever gave such orders, nor was any report made of it to him. For surely it
would be unreasonable to make the commandant of such a garrison as this is,
where the guards are made up of a young and inexperienced militia, unskilled in
military science or duty, accountable for all the mistakes and violences of
such soldiers. Had a complaint been made to him of this action, and he had
refused taking notice of it, it would undoubtedly have been such an avowal of
it, as to have made him responsible for all the consequences of it.

The expressions and violent menaces, which Fleming and Willson swear they
heard Col. Henley throw out at the Adjutant-General's office on 16th December,
carry with them, prima facie very strong marks of malice, and a heart boiling
with the most vindictive and turbulent passions. But the Court will recollect
that the Colonel had that morning a report of Mason and Crane being knocked
down and disarmed, while one of them was on his post. They were both much beat.
It does not appear what led to the conversation, but Col. Henley was relating
the affair to some officer in the office when the sergeant came up and met with
the salute, which has been laid before the Court. The greeting was rough to be
sure, but might not the meaning only be, that the Devil had got into their
barracks and possessed the occupiers of them, and that he should turn exorcist
some night or other, turn the barracks inside out, and expel him from their
territory. But I mean not Gentlemen to palliate this matter, the words are
before you. You are the judges, and will determine how far the sentiments
expressed were malicious, and afterward as such, acted from by the Colonel.

I will not take up any of the Court's time by remarks on the evidence of the
different rescues that took place from the beginning of December to 8th
January, except of that sworn to by Lieutenant Stearns. This officer, after
being insulted in the grossest manner by words and gesture; after having the
fellow who gave it rescued in his sight; and after complaining, through
tenderness, to the man's own officers; proving the complicated charge against
him; to be then trifled with by a promise of a proper punishment being
inflicted on the aggressor, and after all to have the fellow set at liberty
unpunished; proves the necessity of exercising the right set up by Genesis Heath
of punishing the offenders of the convention troops, who could thus commit
enormities with impunity, and shows in how contemptable a light the officers of
the guards were held by the British army, and the expediency of convincing them
that there was spirit enough to resent, injuries and energy enough to chastise
offenders.

I shall now submit the cause, Gentlemen, to your decision. Many observations
have been omitted, which might have been pertinent -- but which have doubtless
occurred to the minds of the Court, particularly with respect to the characters
and contradictions of the witnesses. And I doubt not your judgment will
vindicate the justice of our country, and be approved by the honest and
impartial wherever it shall be known.

The Court was then ordered to be cleared.

THE Court after mature consideration are of opinion that the charge against
Col. Henley is not supported, and that he be discharged from his arrest.

JOHN GLOVER, PRESIDENT.
Cambridge, 25 th February, 1778.

