Mr. West's ANNIVERSARY SERMON, PREACHED AT PLYMOUTH, DECEMBER 22d. 1777.

AN ANNIVERSARY SERMON, PREACHED AT PLYMOUTH, DECEMBER 22d, 1777. IN GRATEFUL
MEMORY OF THE FIRST LANDING OF OUR PIOUS NEW ENGLAND ANCESTERS IN THAT PLACE,
A. D. 1620.

BY SAMUEL WEST, A. M. Pastor of the CHURCH in DARTMOUTH.

The secret of the Lord is with them that fear him; and he will show them his
covenant. The Psalmist David. Surely the Lord God will do nothing, but he
reveals his secret unto his servants the prophets. Prophet Amos. Thus says
the Lord, the holy one of Israel, and his Maker, ask me things to come
concerning my sons, and concerning the work of my hands command ye me. Isaiah
45, 11. Many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased. Daniel 12,
4. BOSTON: PRINTED, BY DRAPER and FOLSOM, AT THEIR Printing-Office, AT THE
CORNER OF Winter-Street. M,DCC,LXXVIII.

At a Meeting of the Town of PLYMOUTH, legally assembled and held at the Court,
House in PLYMOUTH, March 16, 1778. Voted,
THAT Major Joshua Thomas, William Watson and Isaac Lothrop, Esq'rs. be, and
they hereby are appointed a Committee, to wait on the Rev. Samuel West, with
the Thanks of this Town, for his learned and ingenious Sermon, delivered in
this Town, on the last Anniversary of the landing of our Fathers here, and
request a Copy thereof, that it may be printed.

Attest, Ephm. Spooner, Town Clerk.

AN ANNIVERSARY SERMON.
ISAIAH LXVI 5, 9. Hear the word of the LORD, ye that tremble at his word: your
brethren that hated you, that cast you out for my names sake, said, Let the
Lord be glorified; but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall be ashamed.
A voice of noise from the city, a voice from the temple, a voice of the LORD
that rendereth recompense to his enemies. Before she travailed she brought
forth; before her pain came, she was delivered of a man child. Who has heard
such a thing? Who has seen such things? Shall the earth be made to bring forth
in one day, or shall a nation be born at once? For as soon as Zion travailed
she brought forth her children. Shall I bring to the birth, and not cause to
bring forth? Says the LORD; shall I cause to bring forth, and shut the womb?
Says thy God.
AS the end of our assembling together at time, is to commemorate the goodness
of God toward our forefathers, in conducting them from their native land, into
this American wilderness, and providing for them here a safe retreat from the
rage and malice of prelatical bigotry; -- and as he has, by a numerous train of
surprising events, remarkably shown himself to be our God, as he was the God of
our fathers; I thought I could not better entertain this respectable assembly,
than by choosing this passage of sacred scripture for the subject of our present
meditation: For, I have been fully persuaded in my own mind for several years,
that this text does contain in it, a prophecy of the dispensations of divine
providence toward his church and people in New England: And I hope to make it
appear highly probable, that a great part of this text has already been
remarkably fulfilled in our Land.

IN the words of our text, we find two things worthy of observation. The first
is, the relation of a fact, viz. That the church and people of God were hated,
and grievously persecuted by their brethren. The second is, a gracious promise,
that God would appear for the deliverance of his church and people, and to the
confusion of their adversaries.

The first thing worthy of our observation, is, the relation of a fact, viz.
That the church and people of God were hated, and grievously persecuted by
their brethren. That the persons who suffer this affliction from their
brethren, are the church and people of God, appears from the character given
them in our text, of trembling at the divine word, -- Hear the word of the
LORD, ye that tremble at his word: Now those that tremble at the word, or
command of God, are the peculiar favorites of heaven, who walk in all the
ordinances and commandments of the LORD blameless, who are in heart sincere,
and being humble and contrite, are afraid to disobey, or break the divine law.
These are the true church of God, in opposition to all hypocritical, formal
professors, who are strangers to experimental religion and the power of
godliness; see the second verse of the context, -- But to this man will I look,
even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and that trembles at my
word; -- this is the man whom God will accept; whereas the hypocritical
formalist displeases God, while he pretends to obey his ordinances; as we may
see in the third verse: He that kills an ox, is as if he slew a man; he that
sacrifices a lamb, as if he cut off a dog's neck; he that offers an
oblation, as if he offered swines blood; he that burns incense, as if he
blessed an idol. The reason of God's displeasure at such persons, is rendered
in the following words; -- Yea they have chosen their own ways, and their soul
delights in their obominations: i. e. They had mixed their own inventions
with the divine institutions; they had made void the law of God, through their
own traditions, and had taught for doctrines, the commandments of men; and they
delighted in many things, that were contrary to the divine will. But those who
tremble at the word of God, dare not delight in any thing that is an
abomination to the LORD: they dare not add any thing to the word of God;
neither dare they diminish ought from it; they are afraid to corrupt the Divine
Word with their own inventions; they dare not set up any human institutions in
the room of the Divine Commands. To tremble at the word of God, and to fear
God, are synonimous terms, and mean the same thing: see Philip. 2d chap. and
12th verse. Work out your own salvation with fear and trembling. Now the fear
of the Lord in scripture, signifies the whole of religion and true piety; fee
Eccles. xii. 13. Let us hear the conclusion of the whole matter: Fear God, and
keep his commandments; for this is the whole duty of man. The object of the
divine fear in the law of God; hence the Psalmist speaking of the Divine Law,
calls it the fear of the Lord, Psalm. 19. 9. The fear of the Lord is clean,
enduring forever: i. e. the Divine Law, which is the object and only rule of
true religious fear, is pure and free from all corrupt mixtures of human
invention, and, like the author of it, shall abide forever. If the law of God
is the whole rule of our conduct, and the sole ground of all true religious
fear; then those who fear God, and tremble at his word, are such, who dare not
set up the ordinances and commandments of men in the place of the Divine
Institutions; they are afraid to solicit the favor of men by any sinful
compliances with their humors; because that such a conduct is inconsistent
with their being the servants of God: Therefore they are hated by the world; --
there always was, and there always will be, an enmity between the seed of the
woman, and the seed of the serpent; the true children of God have always been
hated by the children of the wicked one; hence our Savior tells his disciples,
Matt. 10. 22. Ye shall be hated of all men for my names sake; and he declares,
in John 17. 14. that the world has hated them, because they are not of the
world; i. e. because they disapprove of the maxims of the world, and bear
testimony against the wickedness of it. -- But what renders the case in our
text the more aggravated, is, that the children of God are hated, not by
strangers and foreigners, but by their own brethren; your brethren that hated
you; by which we are to understand, that they were hated by their own nation,
who professed the worship of the true and living God; for the persecutors of
the church of God in our text, are doubtless the same that are described in the
3d and 4th verses of the context, who, under pretense of worshipping the true
God, chose their own ways, and delighted in their own abominations; i. e. they
mixed their own inventions with the Divine Institutions; they did evil in the
sight of the Lord, by adulterating and corrupting his word; and they were angry
with the true worshippers of God, because they rejected the unscriptural
traditions, by which these hypocritical professors had adulterated his pure
worship, and because they would not submit to their corrupt additions to the
word of truth. This excited the hatred of these bigoted traditionists, who
were determined to cast them out, as unworthy of their communion and
fellowship, pretending that God could not be acceptably worshipped, nor duly
honored, unless their own additions to the word of God were readily complied
with and obeyed. Your brethren that hated you; that cast you out for my names
sake, said, Let the Lord be glorified; i. e. the men that hated you, and cast
you out, did it because you strictly adhered to the truth; because you
professed my name, and kept to my worship in the purity of it; for they
pretended, that God could not be glorified, unless their inventions were
complied with, and their commands were obeyed.

IT is worthy of observation, that the word which we translate, cast out, is
very emphatical in the original, and signifies to separate from, and to reject
any person or thing as impure and unclean, and also to expel, remove far away,
or to cast afar off; so that the people of God, for maintaining Divine Worship
in its genuine purity, were viewed by their superstitious brethren as being so
impure and unclean, that out of zeal for God, left his name and worship should
be polluted, and themselves defiled by conversing with such scandalous persons,
they thought themselves obliged, not only to cast them out of their communion
and fellowship, but that they ought to use them with such rigor and cruelty as
would in effect drive them afar off, and force them to seek a retreat from
their rage and malice in some foreign land: -- and that this is the meaning of
their being cast out by their brethren, is fairly implied in the 8th verse. --
Shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day, or shall a nation be born at
once; for as soon as Zion travailed she brought forth her children; i. e. as
soon as their extreme tribulation came on, the whole land where they dwelt
became a distinct nation from their enemies; but this could not have taken
place had they, at that time, dwelt in the same land with their persecuting
brethren; the conclusion then is, that when it is said, they were cast out by
their brethren, it means, that they were forced by the persecution of their
enemies to flee into a foreign land, that thereby they might escape the malice
of their foes. -- A false blinded zeal prompts its votaries to commit the
greatest outrages and cruelties agianst the maintainers of true religion under
the notion of pleasing God: hence our Savior tells his disciples, John 16. 2.
They shall put you out of the Synagogues, yea, the time comes, that whosoever
kills you will think that he does God service. So these hypocritical
professors in our text, thought they were glorifying God, while they were
hating, persecuting and expelling from their borders, the true worshippers of
God.

NOR could they rest contented with only exercising such rigor, as to drive
them out of their sight, and cause them to flee into a foreign land; but their
restless fury and ambition prompted them to pursue their brethren, with
unrelenting cruelty, into the very place to the which they had retreated for
shelter from their rage and malice. This appears to me to be fairly implied in
the 7th and 8th verses -- Before she travailed she brought forth, etc -- As
soon as Zion travailed she brought forth, etc. Here you see is mention made of
the travail of Zion, i. e. the church of God. Now this metaphor is used in
scripture to denote and express a very severe tribulation, even such an one as
fills the mind with great consternation and anguish; see Jeremiah 30. 5, 6, 7.
Thus says the Lord, we have heard a voice of trembling, of fear, and not of
peace. Ask ye now, and see whether a man does travail with child: wherefore do
I see every man with his hands on his loins, as a woman in travail, and all
faces are turned into paleness? alas! for that day is great, so that none is
like it; it is even the time of Jacob's trouble, but he shall be saved out of
it. This terrible calamity, here called a travail, appears to me to be
something that takes place long after they were cast out by their brethren, and
to be entirely distinct from it; because this travail is represented as being
the immediate occasion of their becoming a distinct nation from their brethren;
shall a nation be born at one? for as soon as Zion travailed she brought forth
her children; and also, because before this travail came on, they were
possessed of a political head, signified, as we shall show hereafter, by the
birth of the man-child; which seems to be considered as the means of their
being supported, and carried through this tribulation; but before they were cast
out by their brethren, they are not considered as having any civil powers
distinct from them: Nor could a few weak refugees, that were obliged to flee
from the persecution of their brethren into a foreign land, be able immediately
to form themselves into an independent state, and become a distinct nation from
their brethren; for without a miracle it must take up a great length of time to
perform all this. -- For these reasons I conclude, that Zion's travail is some
very severe and terrible affliction, that was brought upon her by her enemies,
many years after they had cast her out from among them. Now this severe
tribulation brought upon the church and people of God by their persecutions,
most evidently means, (as I take it) the calamity of war. First, because the
scriptures frequently express the judgment of war by this metaphor, as seems
fairly implied in the text just now cited from the prophet Jeremiah: So the
prophet Micah speaking of the distress of the daughter of Zion, when many
nations were gathered together against her, uses the same figure; see Micah 4.
9. Now why do thou cry out aloud? is there no king in thee? is thy counselor
perished? for pangs have taken thee as a woman in travail: Jeremiah also
speaking of the destruction brought upon the Jewish state by the Chaldean army,
expresses their calamity by this metaphor, Jerem. 4. 31. For I have heard a
voice as of a woman in travail, and the anguish as of her that brings forth
her first child, the voice of the Daughter of Zion; that bewaileth herself,
that spreads her hands, saying, Woe is me now, for my soul is wearied because
of murderers: And the same prophet speaking of the consternation that should
seize the Moabites, and Edomites, when they saw themselves surrounded by their
enemies, declares the hearts of their mighty men should be, in that day, like
the heart of a woman in her pangs; Jerem. 48. 41. see also Chap. 49. 22. Many
other passages of scripture might easily be produced, where this figure is used
to signify the calamity of war: So that from the known and usual sense of this
metaphor, I conclude, that the travail of Zion in our text, implies in it that
consternation of mind, which had seized her, because her enemies had engaged
her in a calamitous war. Secondly, another reason, which convinces me, that
Zion's travail means the calamity of war, is, that the 6th verse does plainly
contain in it an alarm of war: A voice of noise from the city, a voice from the
temple, a voice of the Lord that rendereth recompense to his enemies; i. e. an
alarm of war to rouse the inhabitants to defend themselves against their
enemies. Thirdly, the man-child, or ruler, mentioned in the 7th verse, as being
born for the protection of the people of God; and the children that are
mentioned in the 8th and 9th verses, as being born for the defense of Zion
against her foes, plainly imply, that her persecutors had made war against her*
-- We see then, that the persecution and affliction which the people of God
suffered from their brethren, was, their being cast out, in the first place, as
unworthy of their fellowship, and driven by them afar off, even into a foreign
land, where, after many years, the malice of their enemies pursues and involves
them in all the horrors of a calamitous war; just as in the Revelation of the
Apostle John, we find, that when the Dragon had by his persecution driven the
woman into the wilderness, he still continued to vent his rage and malice
against her; for we read, Rev. 12. 17. that the Dragon was wroth with the
woman, and went to make war with the remnant of her seed, which keep the
commandments of God, and have the testimony of Jesus Christ. -- Having
considered what the persecution was, which the people of God suffered from
their brethren;

I come now to the

SECOND thing worthy of observation in our text, viz. A generous promise that
God would appear for the protection and deliverance of his people, and to the
confusion of their enemies; -- but he shall appear to your joy, and they shall
be ashamed. God is always ready to appear for the protection and safety of his
covenant people, while they put their trust in him; and he will deliver them
from their enemies: thus God's promise to David in Psalm 89. 23. I will beat
down his foes before his face, and plague them that hate him. The Lord promised
the children of Israel, that if they would be obedient to his laws, they should
overcome their enemies; see Lev. 26. 3, 7, 8. If ye walk in my statutes, and
keep my commandments, and do them -- ye shall chase your enemies, and they
shall fall before you by the sword; and five of you shall chase a hundred, and
an hundred of you shall put ten thousand to flight; and your enemies shall fall
before you by the sword.

SUCH a regard has God for his covenant people, that he ever esteems what is
done against them, as being done against himself, see Luke 10. 16. He that
despises you, despises me; and he that despises me, despises him that sent
me; -- Thus when Saul was persecuting the church of Christ, the Lord says to
him Acts, 9. 4. Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? For this reason God always
brings the most terrible and desolating judgments upon those that persecute his
church and people; hence he tells the Jews, -- He that touches you, touches
the apple of his eye, Zech. 2. 8. Even when the church and people of God have
very grievously sinned and rebelled against him, so that in holy anger he has
permitted the nations of the world to overthrow them, and bring them into
bondage; yet he has been pleased to bring the severest judgments upon those,
who were the instruments of punishing his people for their sins: Thus we find
that the Chaldeans, who were permitted for the wickedness of the Jews to carry
them captive into Babylon, were for this very thing, threatened with no less
punishment, than that of being given up as a prey to their enemies; see Jerem.
50. 10, 11. And Chaldea shall be a spoil; all that spoil her shall be
satisfied, says the Lord; because ye were glad, because ye rejoiced, O ye
destroyers of mine heritage. From what has been said, we learn, that it is part
of God's covenant with his people, to deliver them from their oppressors, and
severely to punish all that have injured them. Now the means whereby God
appears for the help and delieverance of his people, in our text, are, 1 st. By
rousing up and animating them to stand in the defense of their just rights
against their enemies. 2 dly. By providing them with a political head, or
ruler; and 3 dly. By continuing to animate the people to resist their foes,
until their deliverance is completed. -- In the first place, we find the Lord
stirring up and animating the people, in the 6th verse, to stand forth in the
defense of their invaded rights. A voice of noise from the city; i. e. a call
to the people together themselves together, to stand in their own defense
against their foes. A voice from the temple; i. e. a call to the ministers of
the alter, animating and encouraging the people, bravely to defend their just
rights. A voice of the Lord that rendereth recompense to his enemies; i. e.
This voice of the people, is the voice of the Lord; it is he that has moved and
excited the people, that by them as instruments, he may render recompense to
his enemies by severely punishing them for oppressing his people. -- We are, in
the Second place, informed of their being provided with a political head for
their protection, expressed in the 7th verse, by the birth of the man-child;
before she travailed, she brought forth; before her pain came, she was
delivered of a man-child: i. e. before her enemies had brought upon her the
calamity of war, which surprised her suddenly, like the pains of a travailing
woman, her king, or political head, was established. That by the man-child is
to be understood a king, or some person or persons endowed with supreme civil
power. I have the authority of Jonathan Ben Uzziel, in his Targum upon the
place, who paraphrases the words of the 7th verse thus, -- Before her
tribulation comes upon her, she shall be redeemed; before trembling seizes her
like the pangs of a travailing woman, her king shall be revealed. Thus you see,
this ancient Chaldec Paraphrast, who flourished in the reign of Herod the
Great, or near about the time that Christ was born, understood by the
man-child, a king, raised up to deliver the people of God from their
tribulation; and that he was to be manifested before their trembling for fear
came upon them. We find also the Apostle John in the Revelation using the same
metaphor to signify a king, or ruler; see Rev. 12. 2, 5. Where he tells us that
he saw a woman clothed with the sun, and having the moon under her feet, and
upon her head a crown of twelve stars; and she being with child, cried,
travailing in birth* and pained to be delivered -- and she brought forth a
man-child, who was to rule all nations with a rod of iron: and her child was
caught up unto God, and to his throne. Here we see, that by a man-child is
meant a king, who was to rule all nations with an iron rod: and the best
expositors by the man-child understand Constantine the Great, the first
Christian Emperor, who defended the church against the rage and malice of the
heathen world. From these authorities I conclude, that by the man-child in our
text, is meant supreme civil power, whether lodged in the hands of one; or
many; for in ancient times, by a king was frequently meant any kind of
political head -- hence John, in the Revelation, calls the seven heads of the
beast, seven kings, by which he means the several forms of Roman Government:
for, according to our best interpretors, not only kings, emperors and
dictators, but also consuls, tribunes and decemviri are here called kings. So
the learned Mr. Mede cites a passage from Homer, where he calls a senate of
nobles by the name of Famous Kings: we likewise find Abimelech putting the
question to the men of Shechem, Judge. 9. 2. Whether (says he) is better for
you, either that all the sons of Jerubbaal, which are three score and ten
persons, reign over you, or that one reign over you: we see from this instance,
that the being governed by one person or by many, is expressed by the same
phrase of reigning over them. -- From these examples it appears, that king, or
kingdom, was sometimes used by the ancients to signify any state or polity,
whether monarchical, aristocratial, or popular. The people of God being thus
possessed of a political head by the birth of a man-child, even before they
were involved in the calamities of war, we find, that as soon as the war had
taken place, God in a most wonderful and unheard of manner stirred up the
people through the whole land to resist their foes, and to appear for the help
of Zion in her distress; and of a sudden they were formed into a distinct
nation, and acted as a people independent of any foreign jurisdiction: Who has
heard such a thing? Who has seen such things? shall the earth be made to bring
forth in one day, or shall a nation be born at once? for as soon as Zion
travailed, she brought forth her children. Here we see, that the firm union of
all the people through the whole land, and their being fully determined to assist
Zion in her distress, is represented as a very wonderful and unheard of thing;
even as strange as though the earth should bring forth a people in an instant,
or as if a whole nation should start into existence in one day. Now according
to the common course of things, we know, that it must naturally take up a great
length of time for a people to be brought forth, or for a nation to come into
existence; may we not then very naturally conclude from the words of our text,
that the malice of the enemy was directed principally, if not wholly against
Zion; and that multitudes of people immediately espoused her cause, against
whom the malice of the foe had not been levelled; and that their so readily
espousing the cause of Zion, is the reason why they are considered as children
born for her assistance. And does not the wonder consist in this? viz. that the
whole earth, i. e. a great and numerous people inhabiting the adjacent
countries, should espouse the cause of Zion, who in numbers was much smaller
than themselves, and by so doing, involve themselves in the calamitous war that
had been commenced against her; and consequently be obliged to act as a
distinct and separate nation from the power they were opposing, and with which
they were, till now, united into one people. This is a thing wonderful indeed!
and this, I apprehend, is the very thing spoken of in our text, as what had
never been heard of, nor seen before: for a nation being born at once, as soon
as Zion travailed, implies, that before this travail had taken place, neither
the city of Zion, nor any of her friends, were considered as a distinct nation,
from their persecuting brethren; and their immediately becoming a distinct
nation as soon as Zion's tribulation seized her, was a thing unexpected by
their foes, and surprising to all that heard it. Further, we may observe, that
when it is said, that the man-child was born before Zion travailed, i. e. that
a political head was established before the war against Zion commenced, it
implies, that the people of God were alarmed with certain cruel impositions,
that were laid upon them by their enemies, which made them judge it necessary
to be provided with a political head, or leader, to conduct them through those
calamities, which they were apprehensive were coming upon them: but though they
had such a foresight of the dangers that threatened them, as to think it prudent
to establish a political head; yet it appears from the text, that they had then
no design of becoming a distinct nation from their persecuting brethren; for
had they designed a revolt from their brethren, when they first established
their political head, their becoming a distinct nation would not have been
spoken of as immediately taking place upon the travail of Zion, i. e. upon the
commencement of the war; for in this case, their becoming a distinct nation
must have been placed at the birth of the man-child. -- It is further implied
in the text, that although as soon as Zion travailed, she should bring forth
her children to defend and protect her cause; yet it would be a considerable
time before her tribulation would be at an end, and her deliverance be fully
completed; -- this I gather from these words, Shall I bring to the birth, and
not cause to bring forth? Says the Lord: shall I cause to bring forth and shut
the womb? Says thy God; i. e. As I have so wonderfully brought forth a people
to maintain the cause of Zion against her enemies, can you think that I will
stay my hand, and not continue to raise up persons to defend her, till her
deliverance is completed: be not discouraged nor dismayed, either with the
length, or with the severity of your tribulation; for as I have began to raise
up sons for the defense of Zion, so will I continue my mercy in raising up
children for her protection, until she is entirely delivered from her enemies.
-- Here then is the Third means, by which God appears for the help and
deliverance of his people, viz. his continuing to animate them to resist their
foes, until their deliverance should be completed. -- For we have the faithful
word of God, that Zion should not be forsaken in her tribulation, but that like
a fruitful mother she shall be continually bringing forth sons for her defense,
until she has obtained an entire victory over her foes. A mostglorious support
in such a time of distress.

I have now gone through with the explanation of the text; but before I apply it
to the present occasion, I beg leave to take notice of the glorious, peaceful
and happy state of the church, which is to take upon her being entirely
delivered from her persecuting brethren; as also of the utter overthrow and
destruction of her enemies. This prediction is contained in the words
immediately following our text, from the 10th, to the end of the 16th verse --
Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that love her: rejoice
for joy with her, all ye that mourn for her: that ye may suck, and be satisfied
with the breasts of her consolations: that ye may milk out, and be delighted
with the abundance of her glory. For thus says the Lord, Behold, I will extend
peace to her like a river, and the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing stream:
then shall ye suck, ye shall be borne upon her sides, and be dandled upon her
knees. As one whom his mother comfort, so will I comfort you, and you shall
be comforted in Jerusalem. And when ye see this, your heart shall rejoice, and
your bones shall flourish like an herb; and the hand of the Lord shall be known
toward his servants, and his indignation toward his enemies. For behold, the
Lord will come with fire, and with his chariots like a whirlwind, to render his
anger with fury, and his rebuke with flames of fire. For by fire, and by his
swords, will the Lord plead with all flesh, and the slain of the Lord shall be
many. Here we see, that all the friends of Zion, all who loved Jerusalem, and
mourned for her, i. e. who sought her prosperity, and were grieved for the
affliction which she suffered from her persecuting brethren; are called upon to
rejoice with joy for her complete deliverance from her enemies: because, that
now they might suck, and be satisfied with the breasts of her consolation; i.
e. they have the greatest reason to rejoice at the prosperity of Jerusalem,
because that from her, as from a spiritual mother, they might receive the
sincere milk of the word, the food of immortality, i. e. the clear knowledge of
divine truths contained in the word of God, and become acquainted with the
glorious promises of divine grace, and of eternal life, which are the precious
privileges of that covenant of everlasting life, that contains in it the sure
and never failing mercies of Jesus Christ, the son* of David, and that they
might be made partakers of the abundant glory that should be bestowed on her:
these spiritual blessings will yield an everlasting consolation, and will
abundantly satisfy the longing desires of every needy soul. Here is a gracious
promise also of a solid and lasting peace; for thus says the Lord, Behold I
will extend peace to her like a river; i. e. as a river keeps continually
flowing, without any intermission, and its streams never fail; so shall your
peace be firm, uninterrupted and lasting. Here is likewise a promise, that God
would extend the glory of the Gentiles to her like a flowing stream; i. e. that
the nations of the world shall become Proselytes to the church, and be brought
to the acknowledgement of the truth. Upon the whole, it appears very plain to
me, that this passage of scripture contains in it a promise of what is commonly
called the latter day glory, when the kingdom of Jesus Christ shall be
established through the whole world, and the knowledge of God shall cover the
earth as the waters do the sea: A glorious promise which has never yet been
accomplished, but which it seems is to begin to take place immediately after
Zion's complete deliverance from her persecution and tribulation spoken of in
our text: and that this* glorious state of Zion is to be attended with the
entire overthrow and destruction of her enemies; for we are told, that the hand
of the Lord shall be known to all his servants; i. e. his power in saving his
people from their enemies, and bestowing upon them such peculiar privileges,
shall be so conspicuous, that it shall be generally owned and acknowledged; and
so shall his indignation toward his enemies: the terrible manner in which God
will execute his judgments upon his enemies, will be so remarkable, that it
will strike the minds of men with such conviction, that they will be forced to
acknowledge his holy hand, that he has done all this; for we are told, that
the Lord will come with fire, and with his charriots like a whirlwind, to
render his anger with fury, and his rebukes with flames of fire; for by fire,
and by his sword the Lord will plead with all flesh, that have opposed the
cause of truth: the consequence of which will be, that the slain of the Lord
shall be many. This terrible destruction of the enemies of God is to take place
a little before the establishing the new heavens and new earth, wherein
dwells righteousness, as appears from the 22d verse of the context. This
plainly shows, that the great tribulation of Zion, of which our text speaks,
does not respect the church under the Jewish, but under the christian
dispensation; and is to take place not long before the establishment of the
glorious kingdom of Christ upon earth, commonly called the Millennum State.

I come now to apply the words of our text to the occasion on which we are
assembled together at this time, and to show that this passage of Scripture has
been remarkably fulfiled in the dispensations of Divine Providence toward our
fathers, and toward us their posterity, in the present day. For in the Frist
place, may we not say, with the utmost propriety, that our forefathers, who
first came into this country, were men, who trembled at the word of God? Were
they not persons of the most exemplary piety and zeal? Did they not pay a
strict regard to the word of God? They were for adhering closely to the sacred
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, as the only rule of christian faith
and practice. They durst not teach for doctrines the commandments of men; nor
mix any human inventions with the pure worship of God: They were for standing
fast in the liberty wherewith Christ had made them free; and for rejecting all
human impositions in matters of religion: They were not for being attached to
any mere human systems; nor for calling any man father, or master: They
reserved to themselves the right of private judgment in searching the
Scriptures, and were willing to reform their principles and practices according
to the light which from time to time they should derive from the word of God,
without founding their sentiments on the judgment of others, however great or
learned. Mr. Prince in his Chronology has preserved to us a memorable testimony
to this truth, from the writings of Governor Winslow, who tells us, that When
Plymouth people parted from their renowned pastor, Mr. Robinson, with whom they
had always lived in the most entire affection, -- He charged us (says he)
before God and his blessed Angels, to follow him no further, than he followed
Christ: and if God should reveal any thing to us by any other instrument of
his, to be as ready to receive it, as ever we were to receive any truth by his
ministry: For he was very confident the Lord had more truth and light yet to
brake forth out of his holy word. He took occasion also miserably to bewail the
state of the reformed churches, who were come to a period in religion, and
would go no further than the instruments of their reformation. As for example,
the Lutherans could not be drawn to go beyond what Luther saw; for whatever
part of Gods word he had further revealed to Calvin, they had rather die, than
embrace it: and so, said he, you see the Calvinists, they stick where he left
them: a misery much to be lamented; for though they were precious shining
lights, in their times; yet God had not revealed his whole will to them: and
were they now alive (says he) they would be as ready to embrace further light,
as that they had received. Here also he put us in mind of our Church covenant;
whereby we engaged with God and one another, to receive whatever light or truth
should be made known to us from his written word. But whithal exhorted us to
take heed what we receive for truth; and well to examine, compare and weigh it
with other Scriptures, before we receive it. For, said he, it is not possible
the Christian world should come so lately out of such antichristian darkness,
and that full perfection of knowledge should break forth at once, etc. -- Words
(as Mr. Prince observes) almost astonishing in that age of low and universal
Bigotry, which then prevailed in the English nation; wherein this truly great
and learned man, seems to be almost the only Divine, who was capable of rising
into a noble freedom of thinking and practicing in religious matters, and even
of urging such an equal liberty on his own people. He labors to take them off
from their attachment to him, that they might be more entirely free to search
and follow the Scriptures. Thus far Mr. Prince. And certainly, I think every
one must own that this great and good man discovers a most noble and generous
spirit of true christian freedom. We here see, that our fathers were engaged in
the most glorious cause in the world, viz. the cause of true Christian liberty;
and as they were for maintaining their own freedom in matters of pure religion;
so they were for allowing the same liberty to others: neither were they for
condemning men of different denominations from themselves, nor for seperating
from any of the disciples of Jesus Christ, nor rejecting from their communion
any persons, that in a judgment of charity, they supposed the great head of the
Church would own. For, says Doctor Mather, The New England Churches make only
the substantials of religion, or that vital piety wherein all good men are
united, the terms of communion among them; and they do with delight see Godly
Congregationals and Presbyterians, Episcopalians and Antipedobaptists, and
Lutherans, all members of the same Churches, and sitting together without
offense about their lesser difference, in the same holy mountain, at the same
holy table. -- Thus have I shown, that our fathers were tremblers at the word
of God, and strictly adhered to the divine rule.

We may observe in the

Second place, That for being tremblers at the word of God, in the sense above
explained, they were hated by their brethren; i. e. for maintaining these truly
christian sentiments, and for striving earnestly to practice a thorough
reformation from all antichristian corruption, they were hated by their
brethren who could not bear their attempts to assert and maintain their
christian freedom from every human imposition, respecting the worship and
service of God. And their hatred rose to such an height, as to occasion them to
harrass and persecute our fathers with so much rigor and severity, that they
were obliged to leave their native land, and to seek for an assylum in the
deserts of America: and all this severity was exercised toward them, because
they would not submit to their unscriptural impositions; even to things, which
the imposers themselves acknowledged to be matters of mere indifference. One
would have thought, that not only Christianity, but even Humanity itself, had
they been possessed of any degree of it besides the outward form, would have
engaged them to condescend to the scruples of those, who might appear to them
as weak brethren, especially, seeing that the things which they scrupled, were
in the judgment of the imposers, no articles of faith, nor commands of God; but
things of an indifferent nature: yet, strange as it must appear to an impartial
mind, so the fact was, that because our fathers conscientiously scrupled to
comply with those things which were styled indifferent, they were treated as if
they had been the offscouring of the earth, and the very dregs of human nature;
so that they not only hated these tremblers at the word of God, but we may
observe,

Thirdly, That they cast them out as unclean, and unworthy the privileges of
christians, and the communion of Saints. For this reason only, they were fined,
and imprisoned, and persecuted, unto death: from these persecutions they fled
into this land; chosing rather to expose themselves to the mercy of Indian
savages, and all the intolerable hardships attending the settling and subduing
such an uncultivated desert, than to be deprived of their religious freedom;
viz. the liberty of worshipping God according to the dictates of their own
consciences. I observe again in the

Fourth place, That their adversaries when they cast them out, said, Let the
Lord be glorified; -- they pretended that their own impositions were things
decent and ornamental in the service of God, tending to promote piety and
devotion -- that they were enjoined by the authority of their superiors, and
that to refuse a compliance with, and submission to their injunctions, was an
act of obstinacy and contempt of the authority that God had set over them; of
consequence that God was dishonored by their conduct. -- Hence they called
them, Fanatics, Schismatics, and, in scorn, Puritans; and they doubtless
thought, that God would be glorified by their thus cruelly* persecuting their
brethren. But the Lord was with our fathers, his providence protected and
defended them to the end of their days, and in many instances very remarkably
appeared for their help; a manifest blessing attended their endeavors, and by
the smiles of Heaven, they were enabled, through much tribulation, to lay a
foundation for a very flourishing country, where both civil and religious
liberty, and every other blessing, might have been enjoyed in the greatest
perfection: and we who inherit the possessions which our fathers so dearly
acquired, would have been the happiest of all people in the world, had not our
enemies envied our happiness, and beheld with a malevolent eye our prosperous
situation: But as their ancestors hated our fathers, and by their cruelties
drove them into this land; so they, imitating the deeds of their fathers, have
hated us; and their vengeance has pursued us across the Atlantic: -- For by
many unconstitutional acts they have been seeking to rob us of our just rights
and privileges: and although they have not openly struck at our religious
liberties; yet from the severe reflections frequently cast upon us as a
religious society, there is the utmost reason to conclude, that they have a
design to destroy our sacred, as well as civil rights. But when they saw that
we would not submit to their unconstitutional laws, but were determined to
stand fast in that liberty wherewith heaven had made us free, they took up the
sword against us, and have involved us in all the horrors of a calamitous war:
so that we may observe in the

Fifth place, That the travail of Zion mentioned in our text has come upon us,
and been remarkably fulfiled in our land; for the sudden and unexpected attack
made upon us at the time of Lexington battle, spread consternation through the
whole Land: fear and trembling seized us, and we had our hands upon our lions
like a woman in travail, and all faces were turned into paleness: But as soon
as our Zion travailed she brought forth her children for her protection and
defense; the people immediately gathered themselves together to withstand our
foes, and the Lord appeared for our help and to our joy, and our enemies were
ashamed, beobliged to flee before a number greatly inferior to their own.

So that we may observe in the

Sixth place, That the earth was made to bring forth in one day, and a nation
was born at once: for we were then immediately severed from Great Britain, and
obliged to consider ourselves as a distinct people from them. And what makes it
the more wonderful is, that when the malice of Great Britain, was levelled
almost wholly against the Massachusetts State, the other governments should so
readily espouse our cause, and make it their own: this was a thing rather to be
wished, than rationally hoped for by us; and it was unexpected by our enemies;
the union of the Colonies appearing so chimerical to Lord North, that he called
it a rope of sand, by way of contempt. Our enemies had no idea, that when they
had drawn the sword against us, the whole Continent would immediately rouse up,
and come to our assistance; but so Divine Providence ordered it, that as soon
as it was known, that our inveterate foes had commenced hostilities against us,
the whole Continent espoused our cause, and engaged in our defense. May we not
say, Who has heard such a thing? Who has seen such a thing? Shall the
Continent be made to bring forth in one day? or shall a nation be born at once?
for as soon as we were involved in a war, the several States immediately united
in our defense, and we became a destinct nation from our enemies. This we may
observe

Seventhly, was a voice of noise from the City, stirring up the people to
engage in the cause of our Zion; it was a voice from the temple, from the
ministers of the word, who animated and encouraged their brethren to quit
themselves like men, and to defend their just and injured rights; and it is to
be considered as the voice of the Lord, who has stirred up the people to render
a recompense to his, and our enemies.

We may observe in the

Eighth Place, That God had, in many instances, appeared to our joy, and our
enemies have been ashamed. Even the apparent advantages that at any time they
have gained over us, have in the end been turned against them; so that they
have been, as one prettily expresses it, blessings in disguise: To mention one
fact which is yet fresh in our minds -- the evacuating of Ticonderoga and Mount
Independence was an apparent advantage to our enemies, and looked like a very
severe blow upon us; but Divine Providence overruled it for our good, and make
it the occasion of the overthrow of our enemies; for the vainglorious, haughty
Burgoyne, who had proudly boasted that he could march through the country with
five thousand men, being elated with his success, boldly pushed so far into the
country, that he was surrounded with our troops on every side, and was obliged
to surrender himself and his whole army into our hands. Thus has the Lord
appeared in this instance, as well as in several others, remarkably to our joy,
and our enemies have been ashamed.

It is worthy to be remarked in the

Ninth Place, That before the travail of our Zion came on, she was delivered of
a man-child: -- For as soon as the act for blocking up the harbor of Boston
became generally known, the several Colonies, chose Delegates to sit in a
General Congress, in order to take the lead in those difficult times, and to
direct the people, by advising them to such measures as might tend to the peace
and safety of the public: so that long before the travail that took place at
Lexington battle, we were possessed of a political head, or ruler; though we
had no design, at that time, of setting up for independency; it being then our
desire to have the unconstitutional acts repealed, and to continue under the
protection of Great Britain. And here I cannot but remark, how Divine
Providence, unbeknown to us, had laid a foundation for our becoming a nation at
once: for when by the war, in which our enemies had involved us, we were
obliged to act as an independent people; we found ourselves possessed of a
political head in the Continental Congress; which being the grand center of
union for all the States, rendered us capaple of proceeding and acting as a
regular political body, and without which we should have been in danger of
being thrown into the utmost disorder and confusion. My brethren, let us now
stop a moment, and bless God for his goodness to us in granting us a political
head before the commencement of the war, without which we can hardly conceive
how the union of the States could have been effected, without which union we
should have been in the utmost danger of being soon swallowed up by our foes.
We may further observe the goodness of God in endowing the members of Congress
with such wisdom and prudence, as to enable them to give such general
satisfaction to the whole continent; -- It has often been matter of surprise to
me, to see how readily the people have acquiesed in the resolves of that
illusous body, even when they seemed to be unhinged from all government, and
there was no authority to oblige or enforce any obedience to them. Must we not
here acknowledge the hand of God, inspiring the members of Congress with a
spirit of wisdom and prudence, and the people with a disposition to comply
with, and submit to their resolves? Ought we not to look upon this as a
remarkable token, that God intends to save and deliver us from our enemies? Let
it be our constant prayer to God, that he would still continue to dispose the
hearts of the people to honor, respect, and cheerfully to submit to all the
just and reasonable resolves of that grand convention of the United States, and
that he would continue to grant to the several members of it, that wisdom and
fortitude, that is necessary to enable them to discharge the arduous and
important trust reposed in them.

Tenthly, and lastly, we observe, that God does still continue to raise up
children for the defense and support of our Zion, according to the
encouragement given in the text, that after he had once caused Zion to bring
forth children, he would not shut the womb; i. e. he would not cause her to
stop from bearing any more children, but that she should continue to be a
fruitful mother, and bring forth children for her protection and defense, until
her deliverance is completed. -- From what has been said, we may see how
surprizingly the several parts of our text have been accomplished, and even
literally fulfilled, in the dispensations of Divine Providence, both toward
our fathers, and toward us their posterity in the present day. And can any one
suppose, that such a wonderful agreement, in so many particulars, between the
prediction and the events, could take place by mere chance, without design? He
that can be so skeptical about such a number of plain facts agreeing so exactly
with the prediction, as to imagine this agreement happened merely by chance,
appears to me to have giving up that moral evidence which would be thought
sufficient to establish any proposition in philosophy, or any historical
matters of fact; and so must be left to the just reward of his own
increduility. For that this prophecy cannot belong to the Jewish Church, or to
the ancient state of the Christian Church, plainly appears, from the
impossibility of accommodating the text, in all its parts, to any facts that
have taken place in former days: The case of the seven united Provinces or
States of Holland, perhaps, in some respects, may, in the opinion of those who
have not duly considered the matter, look like an accomplishment of this
prophecy; but let it be remembered, that their persecutors were not their
brethren, either by nation or religion; these Dutch Protestants being
persecuted by Spanish Roman Catholics; but our fathers were persecuted by
their Protestant brethren, who were of the same nation and religion with
themselves, and even members of the same Church. And what further shows that
this prophecy could not be fulfiled by the States of Holland, or by any other
fact that has taken place in former days, is, that, as we have already shown,
this prophecy respects events, that are to take place just before the revival
of pure religion, and are to be preparatory to the setting up of the glorious
kingdom of Jesus Christ upon earth: Hence I conclude, that either the prophecy
respects the present state. of America, or else it is to be fulfilled in some
future period: But so many particulars of this prophecy have already been so
exactly accomplished in America, that I am fully persuaded, in my own mind,
that the whole of it, which is contained in our text, does in its fullest and
utmost extent respect God's dealings with our fathers, and with us their
posterity, However, grant that we should be mistaken, and that this prophecy is
to receive a more eminent accomplishment in some future day; yet the case will
be so similar to ours, that we may, with a great deal of propriety apply the
gracious promises and encouragements in the text to ourselves, viz. that God
will still appear to our joy, and that our enemies shall finally be ashamed, --
that as he has began to raise up sons for the defense and support of our Zion,
so he will still continue to raise them up, until we obtain a complete
deliverance from our enemies: For as there is a surprising uniformity in all
the works of God; so it seems to be the constant method of Divine Providence,
that in similar cases, similar events shall take place. Whether then this
prophecy does more immediately respect us, or whether it is to have its fullest
accomplishment in some future similar event, the encouragement will be much the
same. From our text and context, we have then the utmost reason to put our hope
and trust in God, that he will yet show us his salvation, and grant a final
victory over our foes; and that upon our obtaining a complete deliverance from
our enemies, and establishing our independence, pure religion will revive and
flourish among us in a much greater degree of perfection than ever it has done
before: That this Country will become the seat of civil and religious liberty;
the place from which christian light and knowledge shall be dispersed to the
rest of the world; so that our Zion shall become the delight and the praise of
the whole earth, and foreign nations shall suck of the breasts of her
consolations, and be satisfied with the abundant light and knowledge of Gospel
truth, which they shall derive from her; that America shall be the place to
which the persecuted in other nations shall flee from the tyranny of their
oppressors, where they shall find a safe retreat, and shall be cherished by her
like children by a tender mother: and that peace an quietness shall be
established upon a firm and lasting basis, so that the enemy shall have no more
power to oppress: and that God will take vengeance on our enemies, and will
subject them to the most terrible and desolating judgments, which will end in
their entire overthrow and destruction. All these consequences seem fairly to
be deduced from our text and context: and indeed the dealings of divine
providence toward us have been of so singular a nature, that many judicious
persons have conluded that some grand events would soon take place, and a new
and remarkable era commence from this period; that America would become the
seat of Liberty, civil and religious; and a place to which the persecuted
should repair for safety from the malice of their persecutors. How surprizingly
do these conjectures of wise men agree with the sacred prophecy under
consideration! Being then, my hearers, animated with the glorious encouragement
and promises set before us, let us with holy confidence look to him who has
been both our God and our fathers God, and who will never leave nor forsake his
covenant people while they put their trust in him: Our Fathers trusted in him,
and were delivered; and will he not deliver us, if we like them firmly rely
upon him in the faithful discharge of our duty? With what cheerfulness then may
we endure our present calamities, when we have the word of a faithful God; that
he will appear to our joy, and that our enemies shall be ashamed; and that as
he has caused our Zion to bring forth children for her defense, so he will
continue to raise up sons for her protection, until her deliverance is
completed. Let us then be strong in the Lord and in the power of his might,
let us quit ourselves like men engaged in the most noble and glorious cause;
let us behave like the true sons of freedom and the faithful sons of Zion; let
us imitate the patience and fortitude of our pious forefathers, which they
exhibited under all their hardships and terrible sufferings that they endured;
and if at any time we feel depressed or discouraged with the prospect before
us, let us for a moment consider their situation, and we shall find enough to
stop our mouths, if not to make us ashamed; -- let us behold them landing in an
uncultivated wilderness, inhabited by savages, destitute of many of the
comforts and even the necessaries of life, exposed to the inclemencies of the
season, one half of them perishing in a few months through the hardships which
they endured; so far distant from any English settlement that they could
receive no assistance in case of a sudden invasion from the Indians. A most
deplorable situation indeed; -- but through their patience and fortitude they
were supported under all these sufferings; for they committed their cause to
God, and were not forsaken. Are there any among us that are ready to murmer
because they are deprived of a few luxuries, or because they cannot have all
the elegancies which they formerly enjoyed? Let them consider, that when our
fathers for want of the conveniences of life were obliged to live upon
ground-nuts and shell fish, they did not murmer nor repine at their situation,
but gratefully acknowledged the goodness of God toward them: -- this I have
somewhere sound an instance recorded, that one of them having dined upon clame,
very devoutly gave thanks to God, that he had sed him of the abundance of the
seas, and with treasures hid in the sand. What a truly christian temper, is
here discovered? They had learned the Apostle Paul's lesson, Whatever state
they were in, therewith to be content. And as they were resigned to the Divine
Will, so he appeared for their safety and protection, and the heathen were cast
out before them. And as Divine Providence appeared for the protection of our
fathers in the first settling of this land, so has he continued to protect both
them and us their posterity unto the present day. Thus when that bigoted
Papist, James the second, had sent over Sir Edmond Andros, to establish tyranny
and popery in this Land, the Lord appeared for the protection, and to the joy
of our fathers, and their enemies were ashamed; for the glorious revolution
under King William, put a final period to their schemes for enslaving this
land. In like manner when a formidable French fleet had arrived at Hlalifax, in
the year 1746, with a design to conquer and subdue the country, the Lord
appeared to our joy, and our enemies were ashamed; for they were destroyed by
the hand of Divine Providence in so wonderful a manner, that none of them were
suffered to do us any harm. And in our present tribulations, we may observe a
minifest design in providence to prevent our being subjected by our enemies to
the iron rod of slavery. For how often have they been prevented from taking the
advantage of our weakness? And Divine Providence has in great kindness so
ordered it, that our enemies have increased their army no faster than we have
increased in strength to resist them. Can we, my brethren, when we consider the
glorious example of our forefathers, and how they were protected; when we
consider the manifest tokens of the Divine favor toward us in the present day,
and the gracious encouragement afforded in our text, once entertain a thought
of being discouraged, even though our tribulation should become much greater
and severer than it ever yet has been? Surely to be dismayed when we have such
glorious encouragements, must discover a great degree of ingratitude, and a
criminal want of faith in the promises of God. Ought we not rather in a firm
belief of the word of God, with a pleasing and grateful sense of the Divine
goodness, reflect upon that happy and glorious state which is to take place
when our deliverance is completed? Most certainly we may, in the midst of our
tribulations anticipate the joy of that happy period, when our peace shall be
extended to us like a river, and the glory of the Gentiles like a flowing
stream; when all the friends of our Jerusalem that mourned for her, shall come
to rejoice with her, and to suck of the breasts of her consolations, and to be
delighted with the abundance of her glory.

But there is one thing that damps the joy of these delightful contemptations,
and is a very sensible alloy to the pleasure that would otherwise arise from
such a noble and glorious prospect as we have before us -- and that is, my
brethren the awful spirit of rapacity and oppresion, of profaness and
irreligion, that seems so generally diffused through our land; this is a very
alarming consideration indeed, which loudly calls for deep humiliation and a
speedy reformation, if we expect to escape the judgment of heaven. Let us
remember that the sins of God's covenant people are more aggravated in his
sight than the sins of others, and therefore they are exposed to his severest
judgments: hence the Lord says to Israel, Amos 3. 2. You only have I known of
all the families of the earth; therefore I will punish you for all your
iniquities. And what still increases the guilt, is, that this spirit of
Avarice, oppression and Monopolizing, has taken place in a time of general
calamity, when there is a loud call upon every one to exert himself for the
public good, and to relieve those that are sufferrers by the times. Oppression
at such a time must discover the utmost degree of baseness and depravity.
Besides, to harden ourselves in impiety and wickedness, when the judgments of
God are abroad in our land, what is it but to fill up the measure of our
iniquities, that wrath may come upon us to the uttermost. Let the avaritious
and the profane hear these things and tremble! -- Can you dwell with devouring
fire? can you inhabit with everlasting burnings? For remember that God will be
a consuming fire to all hardened and impenitent sinners.

But I trust that God has reserved to himself a remnant among us, who have kept
their garments from being defiled with the sins of the times, and who lament
and bewail all the abominations that are done in the Land. These shall be
preseved, from the terrible judgments, which shall befall not only our enemies,
but also all those, who have been guilty of the attrocious crimes of the
present day, and do not repent of their deeds.

In the next place, while we are considering the pious example of our Fathers,
let us remember that they witnessed a good consession; for they trembled at the
word of God; they made it the only standard of their christian faith and
practice. Let us herein imitate them, and never mix any of our own invention
with the word of God. Let us ever pay so much reverence to the Divine Oracles,
as never in any one instance to depart from the plain and obvious sense of
scripture for the sake of indulging any favorite hypothesis; let us never dare
to reject any truths to be believed, or any ordinances that Christ has
commanded us to observe. Let us always be ready to receive any new light or
truth, which shall at any time be discovered from the word of God. This we have
already seen was the sentiments of our Fathers. Let us never be desirous of
being denominated from any man as our father and founder, nor ever set up any
human systems, or particular expositions of scripture as the standard of truth;
but let us ever be ready to correct any error in doctrine or practice, whenever
any proper matter of convictions is laid before us, or exhibited to be from the
word of God,

THERE is no doubt with me, but that we are all of us mistaken about many
things contained in the sacred Scriptures; for I am fully persuaded, that there
is no one denomination of christians among us, to it what does deviate in many
things from the sacred rule. The true Apostolic christianity contained in the
New Testament, does no where shine forth in its meridian luster and brightness:
and there is no way that I know of to revive primitive christianity and to
purge it from all corrupt mixtures but only by a close and impartial
examination of the Scriptures, and our being ready to reform any error as soon
as we discover it. Further, if we have no cause to serve but the cause of Jesus
Christ, we shall never be governed by a party spirit; but shall be ready, as
our fathers were, to receive all persons to our communion, that agree with us
in the solid points of piety, however they may differ from us in matters of
small moment. To require any terms of communion that Jesus Christ has not
established; to separate from any society of christians holding to the grand
fundamentals of religion, when they do not impose upon us sinful terms of
communion; or to exclude from our communion any person whom we believe that the
great head of the Church will own and receive, is to make ourselves guilty of
an antichristian spirit. When we renounce from our communion and fellowship,
persons, that in a judgment of charity we believe to be real christians, only
because they are of a different persuasion from us, or belong to another
denomination of christians, it is plain that we are not seeking, but opposing
the interest of Christ's kingdom. Hence the Apostle Jude tells us, that those
who separate themselves are sensual, having not the spirit. And the Apostle
Paul, has taught us, that they who cause divisions, serve not our Lord Jesus
Christ but their own bellies; and by good words fair speeches they deceive the
hearts of the simple; under pretense of greater purity in religion they draw
off from others, though their whole design is to serve their own corrupt
purposes: therefore he orders us to avoid them. Romans 16. 17,18. Love and unity
are essential marks of a true christian. Were we possessed of true christian
candor, by a fair and impartial examination we should find, that many
differences in explaining particular articles of faith, are only mere (...)
differences, and entirely vanish when we come to define our terms. I have
always conversed freely with persons of very different sentiments from each
other; and to my great surprise have often found amongst persons of supposed
opposite principles, that a very great part of their difference in sentiment
arose from their affixing different ideas to the same words and phrases; so
that when they have been at the pains to explain their own terms, the
difference has vanished, and there has remained nothing of any moment to
contend about.

To conclude, may God the father of mercies enable us to imitate the virtuous
examples of our pious forefathers -- May we strive to cultivate the benevolent
spirit of the gospel -- May our enemies be confounded -- may a happy and
glorious peace be established, -- may our just rights be secured upon a firm
and unshaken foundation: -- But above all, may the glorious kingdom of our Lord
Jesus Christ be established throughout the world, and all nations be brought to
the unity of the faith; AMEN.

APPENDIX.
THERE is one observation which was omitted in the preceding discourse, that I
beg leave to insert in this place; viz. that the Persecutors in our text were
not idolators, or image worshippers. This I collect from the three first verses
of the context, in which they are shown that true religion consists in the
temper of the mind, and not in external pomp. Thus says the Lord, the heaven
is my throne, and the earth is footstool: where is the house that ye build unto
me? and where is the place of my rest? For all those things has my hand made,
and all those things have been, says the Lord: but to this man will I look,
even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit, and that trembles at my
word. Here the Lord shows the vanity of consining the residence of the Most
High to temples made with hands; or of the supposition that he could be
circumscribed or bounded by any thing that he had made; that the temples that
he would delight to dwell in, were the hearts of the humble and contrite ones.
And to show his abhorrence of those men who pretended to great zeal in
attending the ordinances of God, while their hearts were destitute of real
piety, the Lord instances in these things which were held in the greatest
abhorrence among the Jews, ver. 3. He that kills an ox, is as if he
slew-a-man: he that sacrifices a lamb, as if he out off a dogs neck: he that
offers an oblation, as if he offoreth swine's blood: he that burns incense,
as if he blessed an idol: yea, they have chosen their own ways, and their soul
delights in their abominations. Now as the Lord manifestly designs to
convince them of his displeasure at them, for their offering sacrifices to him
with impure hearts, it is necessary that the examples by which he manifests his
displeasure, should be such things, as they themselves abhorred: but blessings
an idol being one of the things mentioned by way of illustration, it follows
that idolatry was one of the things which those persecutors themselves
abhorred. But if any one should ask, by what authority I apply this passage of
Scripture to the times of Christianity, when there are so many expressions in
it that evidently relate to the Jewish worship? I answer, That the writers of
the sacred pages often describe the christian church and worship in terms and
expressions taken from the Jewish church and Mosaic dispensation: Thus the nine
last chapters of Ezekiel are generally understood to be a prophecy of the
church under the christian and gospel dispensation, though every phrase is
taken from the Mosaic and Levitical dispensation. Thus Israel, the seed of
David, the seed of Abraham, Zion and Jerusalem, are applied to the church of
God under the gospel dispensation: accordingly we find a prophecy in Hosea 1.
10. that the number of the children of Israel should be as the sand of the sea,
which cannot be measured or numbered; and that in the place where it was said
of them, ye are not my people, there it should be said of them, ye are the sons
of the living God. This passage is applied by the the apostle, Romans 9. 24, --
26. to the calling of the Gentiles to the embracing of Christianity. We also
find a passage in the Prophet Jeremiah, that in the reign of David's righteous
branch, i. e. under the government of Jesus Christ, the son of David; we find a
promise, I say, that the seed of David, and the Levites, God's ministers,
should become innumerable, like the sand of the sea, and the stars of heaven;
see Jerem. 33. 15 -- 26. Now here by the seed of David, must evidently be
understood the disciples of Jesus Christ the son of David, and by Levites,
Gospel ministers; inasmuch as the Jews having long since lost their
genealogies, it seems impossible, without a miracle, to discover who are the
natural offspring of David, from those that are not. In the same sense must be
understood Zech. 12. 7 -- 12 where the house of David, and inhabitants of
Jerusalem mean true christians: the family of the house of Nathan, I apprehend,
mean Deacons; for Nathan, as I take it, is only the singular of Nethinim. Now
the Nathinims were persons, whom David and the Princes of Israel appointed to
be over the treasures of all those things, which had been dedicated either by
David or any other persons for the maintenance of the house and worship of God;
compare Ezra 8. 20, with 1 Chronicles. 26. 20 -- 28. Nethinims, therefore, answer to
the order of Deacons, under the gospel dispensation; and the family of the
house of Levi answer to gospel ministers, or pastors of churches: by the family
of Shimei I understand those that have been bearers of the word preached, but
who have not made an open profession of christianity; my reasons are First,
that Shimei properly signifies a hearer; and that an appellative, and not a
proper name, is here intended, from the article he; s being affixed to it; now
this article is not commonly placed before proper names, but only before
appellatives; so that it ought to have been translated, not the family of
Shimei, but, the family of the hearer. Secondly, we may observe that the word
house is added to the other families, but omitted here; thus it is expressed,
the family of the house of David, the family of the house of Nathan, the family
of the house of Levi; but with regard to Shimei, it is only simply the family
of Shintei, which omission, as I take it, implies that the persons here
signified by the family of Shimei, do not belong to the church of Christ; for
that by house is sometimes meant the church, see Heb. 3. 6. but Christ as a son
over his own house, whose house are we if we hold fast the confidence, and the
rejoicing of the hope firm unto the end; and 1 Timothy 3. 15. the house of God,
which is the church of the living God. These are the reasons that induce me to
believe, that by the family of Shimei, is meant the persons that attend the
preached word, but are not members of any visible church. We also find in the
Epistle to the Heb. Chap. 12. 22,23, that christians are said to have come unto
Mount Zion, and the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem; i. e. that
they were joined to the general assembly and church of the first born, which
are written in heaven; by which we are to understand, that they were members of
the church of Christ, and heirs of eternal life; and the Apostle tells us, Gal.
3. 29. that all that are Christ's, i. e. that are true christians, are
Abraham's seed and heirs according to promise.

THESE remarks may serve to show the propriety of applying the prophecy
contained in our text and context to the state of the church under the gospel
dispensation: and by these helps we are naturally led to understand the 17th
verse of the context, of those who prosess christianity, and yet live after the
manner of the Gentiles. They that sanctify themselves and purify themselves in
the gardens behind one tree in the midst, eating swines flesh, and the
abomination and the mouse, shall be consumed together says the Lord. Is here
not a prophecy of the destruction of the church of Rome? For do not the members
of that church, although they profess christianity, defile themselves with the
abominations of the Gentiles? And are they not called Gentiles in the 11th
Chap. of Rev. verse 2. We are also told that those who escaped the destruction
that should befall the enemies of truth, should spread the knowledge of God
among the Gentiles, and that they should bring their Gentile converts to the
holy mountain Jerusalem, and there offer them for an offering unto the Lord,
and that the Lord would take of these Gentile converts for Priests and Levites,
see context, ver. 18 -- 21. Here we see, that those who were not descendents
from Israel by natural generation, but who were Gentile converts, are called
Priests and Levites; which is a very strong proof that this prophecy belongs
not to the Jewish, but to the christian church. And as Gospel Ministers are
here described under the character of Jewish Priests and Levites, so the
christian solemnities for public worship are expressed agreeable to the
dispensation of Moses, verse 23. And it shall come to pass, that from one new
moon to another, and from one sabbath to another, shall all flesh come to
worship before me, says the Lord. New moons and sabbaths, we all know, were
Jewish solemnities; yet they are here used to describe the seasons for public
worship under the Gospel dispensation. What is to me a further and infallible
proof, that this prophecy respects the Christian and not the Jewish
dispensation is, that it is to receive its full accomplishment at the time when
the new heavens and the new earth are established, as we may see from the 22.
ver. For as the new heavens and the new earth, which I will make, shall remain
before me, says the Lord, so shall your seed and name remain. But the promise
of the new heavens and new earth remains yet to be fulfilled, 2 Peter, 3. 13.
Nevertheless we according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new earth
wherein dwells righteousness. This glorious and happy state of the church,
according to the Apostle John in the Revelation, is to take place after the
first resurrection, Rev. 21. 1. And I saw a new heaven and a new earth, for the
first heaven and the first earth were passed away; and there was no more sea.
In this new heaven and new earth he saw the holy city new Jerusalem, coming
down from God out of heaven; which city he largely describes in the 21st and
22d chapters. In order to understand this description, we are to remember, that
almost every thing in the Revelation relating to the christian church is
expressed by figures taken from the dispensation of Moses; thus the four living
creatures, and the 24 elders, are supposed by learned men to be taken from the
encampment of the children of Israel in the wilderness under four standards,
and from the division of the Priests into 24 courses, which was made by David.
In like manner we find that the true Apostolic Christians who receive the seal
of the Divine protection, by which they are preserved from the judments that
shall befall the corruptors of the faith, are said to be an hundred and forty
four thousand, of all the tribes of the children of Israel, i. e. 12,000 out of
every tribe, each of which tribes is here particularly named, one by one, Rev.
7 Chap.

Now as there has been no such remarkable conversion of the natural descendants
of Israel to the christian faith; and as for many ages the ten tribes have been
lost, or rather utterly unknown to the rest of the world, we are obliged to
have recourse to the mystical sense, and to understand by the twelve tribes of
Israel, christians, who are founded upon the covenant promises made to the
twelve Patriarchs, or sons of Jacob. The twelve thousand of any particular
tribe, are the thousands that embrace the doctrine of the twelve Apostles,
being heirs of the promises made to the twelve Patriarchs; see Acts 26. 6,7,8.
When therefore we are told that the city New Jerusalem, i. e. the pure church
of Christ, had twelve gates, and names written thereon, which are the names of
the twelve tribes of the children of Israel, we are naturally led to
understand, that we cannot enter into the church of Christ, until we become
heirs of the spiritual blessings promised to the twelve tribes of Israel. The
twelve Angels at the gates are the Ministers of Christ, whose business it is to
admit proper subjects to church fellowship, and to open the gates of the church
for the admission of members. These twelve gates are classed in four divisions,
each division containing three gates, and facing one of the four cardinal
points of the compass: this evidently alludes to the encampment of the children
of Israel in the wilderness under four standards, having three tribes to a
standard, and each standard fronting one of the four cardinal points of the
compass: see the second chapter of Numbers. This shows that all who belong to
the New Jerusalem are to be considered as belonging to some one of the twelve
tribes of Israel; agreeable to this, is that passage in Ezekiel. 47. 22,23. And it
shall come to pass that ye shall divide it by lot, for an inheritance unto you,
and to the strangers that sojourn among you, which shall beget children among
you; and they shall be unto you as born in the country among the children of
Israel: they shall have inheritance with you, among the tribes of Israel; and
it shall come to pass, that in what tribe the stranger sojourneth, there shall
ye give him his inheritance, says the Lord God. By being grafted into the same
stock with the children of Israel, they are considered as being of the same
nation with them, and are treated in every respect, as though they were the
natural offspring of Jacob. See Romans 11. 16 -- 27. The wall of the city we are
told had twelve foundations, and in them the names of the twelve Apostles of
the Lamb; to denote that pure christianity is to be taken from the Apostolic
writings, and not from the traditions of fallible men. The wall of the city is
also said to be an hundred and forty four cubits, which is 12 multiplied by 12,
to denote that the security and protection of christians consist in their
closely adhering to the covenant of grace made with the ancient Patriarchs, and
to the doctrine of the twelve Apostles. The foundations of the wall of the city
are said to be garnished with all manner of precious stones, each one of the
twelve foundations being garnished with one particular stone; a metaphor taken
from the law of Moses, where the Jewish High Priest was ordered to wear before
the Lord the breast plate of Judgment, in which were placed twelve precious
stones, which had engraven on them the names of the twelve tribes of Israel;
and they were set in four rows, three stones in a row, agreeable to the
encampment of the children of Israel in the wilderness under four standards,
having three tribes to a standard. Now these twelve foundations being garnished
with twelve precious stones, seems to imply that the doctrine of the twelve
Apostles shines with the luster of the precious promises made to the ancient
fathers of the twelve tribes of Israel. We also find that the sight of the city
New Jerusalem is said to be like a Jasper, which was the stone that represented
the tribe of Benjamin in the High Priest's breast plate, a proper figure for
the city Jerusalem, which belonged to the tribe of Benjamin.

IN like manner God the father sitting upon his throne of grace and mercy, is
said to be like a Jasper and a Sardine Stone; a Jasper to signify Jerusalem,
and a Sardine stone to signify Judah: Now Judah and Jerusalem are proper types
of the true church of Christ. Here then is a representation of the Deity,
considered as the God and father of his church and covenant people. The rainbow
round about the throne is a proper token of the covenant. It Is being in sight
like an emerald, the stone of Ruben, in whose standard was the figure of the
face of a man, denotes that this covenant was established by the man Christ
Jesus, for the salvation of the Human race. The tree of life, i. e. the
covenant of Grace, is said to bear twelve manner of fruits, i. e. fruits for
every tribe of Israel; which implies that the blessings of the covenant of
grace belong to all the children of God. This tree yields it is fruit every
month; by which we are to understand, that these blessings are dispensed to the
faithful on every season of public worship. Here is a plain allusion to the
Jewish new moons, which were sacred solemnities for public worship, see 2.
Kings 4,23. And Isaiah, 66,23.

2d. Another reason that induces me to think that this passage of scripture.
viz. the 66th chapter of Isaiah, is applicable to the times of christianity,
is, that the enemies and corruptors of the truth under the gospel dispensation,
are spoken of by the same names with the enemies of the Jewish church, and such
who were guilty of gross corruptions under the old Testament dispensation: Thus
in the Revelation, Babylon is the name of the great enemy and persecutor of the
true church of Christ. In like manner we are told, Rev. 11. 8. That the
Antichristian church is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt. Does not this
imply, that the ancient prophets prophesied of this Antichristian church, under
the figure of Sodom and Egypt? And may we not find a prophesy concerning this
mystic Sodom? Ezekiel, 16,46 -- 61. That her captivity shall be restored, and
that Sodom and her daughters shall return to their former estate. But can this
be understood of Sodom in a litteral sense? In the same prophesy Samaria is
called the elder, and Sodom the younger sister of Jerusalem: But how can this
be true in the litteral sense, when Sodom was destroyed from Heaven many years
before that Samaria was built? Are we not then naturally led to the mystic
sense, viz. that before the final destruction of Antichrist, many Roman
Catholics shall be converted, and embrace primitive christianity; which seems
to be confirmed from, Ezekiel, 47, 8. -- 11; where we are told that the dead
sea of Sodom should be healed by the waters that proceeded from the sanctuary;
i. e. that by the means of grace, multitudes of this mystic Sodom shall be
brought to the acknowledgement of the truth. Egypt is the figure that
represents the church of Rome in the following prophesies, Isaiah, 11. 11,15.
Chap. 19,23. -- 25. and chap. 27. 13. Zechariah, 10. 10, 11. The Assyria which
is mentioned with Egypt, in these prophesies, is doubtless the same with the
land of Magog in Ezekiel, 38. 2. by which is generally supposed that Turkey is
intended, of which the ancient Assyria is now a part: In the same sense, I
suppose, is Assyria to be understood in Micah, 5. 6.

The reason why the Antichristian church is called Sodom, seems to be this;
that having imitated Sodom in wickedness, the punishment that is to be
inflicted on them, will be like the destruction that was brought upon Sodom and
Gomorrah. -- Compare Isaiah, 1. chap. verse, 9,10. and chap. 3, verse 9.
Jeremiah, 23, chap. 14, verse. Deuteronomy. 29. chap. verse, 23. In the last mentioned
text, Moses tells the Isralites, that when God's covenant people should
apostatize to idolatory, their punishment should be like that of Sodom, And
that whole Land thereof is brimstone, and salt and burning, that it is not sown
nor bears, nor any grass grows therein like the overthrow of Sodom and
Gomorrah. Now as this was never literally true with respect to the land of
Israel is it not a perdiction concerning the destruction of that mystic Sodom
the church of Rome? Edom seems another type of the Antichristian Rome, for in
the 63d, chap. of Isa. Christ conquering his enemies is represented as coming
from Edom as the place where this tragical seen is acted. Now compare this
with Rev. 19. chap. verse 13, (...) and it will plainly appear that the church
of Rome is mistic Edom; for in both places Christ is represented as treading
the wine press of God's wrath, and having his raiment dyed with the blood of
his enemies. Compare also Revelation, chap. 14, verse, 18,20. It is also well
known, that the Jewish writers by Edom understand Rome, and romish christians;
we are also told that the genuine editions of the Targum of Jonathan paraphrase
the 34th chap. of Isa. verse 9th, thus; and the Rivers of Rome shall be turned
into pitch, and the dust thereof into brimstone, and the Land thereof shall
become burning pitch; it shall not be quenched night nor day, the smoke thereof
shall go up forever. Now we know, that this Chapter is a prophecy of the
destruction of the Edomites; but the rivers of Edom litteraly taken, have never
been turned into pitch, nor the dust thereof into brimstone. Are we not then to
understand the prophecy as a prediction of the destruction of the Church of
Rome, that mystic Edom? I will now close this Appendix, by asking whether the
66th chap. of Isaiah, may not be illustrated by compairing it with the 4th
chapter of Micah, the first five verses of which are evidently a prophecy of
the glorious state of the Church of Christ in the latter days, in the 6th verse
it is added, in that day i. e. at the time when God shall be about to establish
the glorious state of the church, says the Lord will I assemble her that
halteth, and I will gather her that is driven out, and her that I have
afflicted; and I will make her that halted, a remnant, and her that was cast
far off, a strong nation; are not these they who in Isa. 66th, verse 5th, were
hated and cast out by their brethren, that afterward were born into a nation
at once. In verse 9th, we read, Is there no king in thee? Is thy counselor
perished? Does not this imply such a dissolution of the form of government as
took place when our Charter was vacated? there next follows a prediction of the
travail of Zion, i. e. as we have shown above, the calamity of war, in which
calamity, it is said in verse 10, that they should go out of the city, and
should dwell in the field; and have not our capital towns been seized by the
enemy, which has obliged many of the inhabitants to retire into the fields of
the country? It is added thou shall go even to Babylon, there shall thou be
delivered; there the Lord shall redeem thee from the hand of thine enemies. Are
not the French and Spaniards a considerable part of mystic Babylon? And does it
not appear probable, that they will be the means of our deliverance from our
enemies, in consequence of our applying to them? many nations have also
gathered together against us, both Europeans, Africans, and American Savages,
according to verse 11th. And farther is it not employed in the 3d verse of the
5th chap. of Micah, which is plainly a continuation of the prophecy, contained
in chap. 4th, that the restoration of the Jews to their own Land shall take
place soon after the deliverance of Zion is completed? for the 2d verse being
a prophecy, that Christ should be born at Bethlehem, a city of the Jews, it is
added in verse 3d, Therefore will he give them up, i. e. the Jews, until the
time that she which travaileth has brought forth; then the remnant of his
brethren shall return to the children of Israel. These observations I submit to
the judgment of the candid and judicious Reader.

S. W.


