DIRECTION FOR PRESERVING THE HEALTH OF SOLDIERS: RECOMMENDED TO THE
CONSIDERATION OF THE OFFICERS Of the ARMY of the UNITED STATES.

BY BENJAMIN RUSH, M. D.

PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF THE BOARD OF WAR.

LANCASTER: PRINTED BY JOHN DUNLAP IN QUEEN STREET. M,DCC,LXXVIII.

AT A BOARD OF WAR, September 5th, 1777.
ORDERED, That Doctor B. RUSH be requested to re-publish, in a small Pamphlet,
certain Directions for preserving the Health of Soldiers; published in the
Pennsylvania Packet, No. 284, with such Additions and Alterations as he shall
think proper.

Extract from the Minutes,

RICHARD PETER'S, Secretary.

DIRECTIONS, etc.
FATAL experience has taught the people of America that a greater proportion of
men have perished with sickness in our armies than have fallen by the sword.
The two last campaigns produced melancholy proofs of this assertion. But we
ought to consider upon this occasion, not only the mere loss of those worthy
citizens who perished in this manner; the complicated distress which
accompanied their sickness and death, should never be forgotten. The gallant
youth who had torn himself from the arms of his parents, or the partner of his
joys; who had plighted his life to his country in the field; and who, perhaps,
(in the enthusiasm of his military ardor) has courted death from a musket or a
cannon ball, was often forced from the scene of action and glory by the attack
of a fever, and obliged to languish for days or weeks in an hospital; and, at
last, to close his eyes, deprived of the sweet consolation of a dying soldier,
the thoughts of ending his life in the arms of victory, or in an act of just
resentment against the enemies of the liberties of his country.

The munificence of the Congress has made the most ample provision for
lessening the calamities of war from sickness in their armies, and, if
possible, to prevent it altogether; for I maintain that the mortality from
sickness in camps is not necessarily connected with a soldier's life: It was
unknown to the armies of ancient Greece and Rome. -- Their armies had no
diseases peculiar to themselves; nor were the diseases, to which their soldiers
were subject, attended with any peculiar symptoms. But the munificence of the
Congress, and the skill of Physicians and Surgeons, will avail but little in
preventing mortality from sickness among our soldiers, without the concurrence
of the officers of the army. Your authority, Gentlemen, is absolutely necessary
to enforce the most salutary plans and pre^e^ts for preserving the health of
the soldiers. Your own personal safety is concerned in concurring in the plan
adopted by the Congress. But if this were not the case, I am persuaded humanity
and patriotism would not plead in vain in favor of those brave fellows, whose
lives are committed to your care by the ^u^^rages of your country.

The art of preserving the health of a soldier consists in attending to the
following particulars: -- I DRESS. II. DIET. III. CLEANLINESS. IV. ENCAMPMENTS.
And V. EXERCISE.

1. The DRESS of a soldier has a great influence upon his health. It is to be
lamented, that the peculiar situation of our country, from the infancy of our
foreign trade and domestic manufactures, has obliged us to clothe our soldiers
chiefly in linen. It is a well known fact that the perspiration of the body, by
attaching itself to linen, and afterward, by mixing with rain, is disposed to
form miasmata, which produce fevers. Upon this account I could wish the ri^^^
shirt was banished from our army. Besides accumulating putrid miasmata, it
conceals filth, and prevents a due regard being paid to cleanliness. The Roman
soldiers wore flannel shirts next to their skins. This was one among other
causes of the healthiness of the Roman armies. During the last war in America,
Genesis (then Col.) Gage obliged the soldiers of his regiment to wear flannel
shirts, from an accidental want of linen, and it was remarkable, during a
^ickly campaign on the Lakes, not a single solider, belonging to that regiment
was ever seen in any of the military hospitals. I have known several instances
where the yearly visits of the intermitting fever have been ^^aid in the State
of Pennsylvania, in places most subject to that disorder, by nothing else but
the use of flannel shirts.

The hair by being long uncombed, is apt to accumulate the perspiration of the
head, which by becoming putrid sometimes produces diseases. There are two
methods of guarding against this evil, the first is by combing and dressing the
hair every day; the second is by wearing it thin and short in the neck. The
former is attended with delays often incompatible with the duty of a soldier,
and therefore the latter is to be preferred to it. This easy mode of wearing
the hair is strongly recommended by Count Saxe, and by all modern writers on
the military art.

II. The DIET of soldiers should consist chiefly of vegetables. The nature of
their duty, as well as their former habits of life, require it. If every tree
on the continent of America produced Jesuits bark, it would not be sufficient
to preserve or to restore the health of soldiers who ^a^ one or two pounds of
flesh in a day. Their vegetables should be well cooked. It is of the last
consequence that damaged floor should not be used in the camp. It is the seed
of many disorders. It is of equal consequence that good flour should not be
rendered unwholesome by an error in making it into bread. Perhaps it was the
danger to which flour was always exposed of being damaged in a camp, or being
rendered unwholesome from the manner of baking it, that led the Roman Generals
to use wheat instead of flour, for the daily food of their soldiers Caesar fed
his troops with wheat only in his expedition into Gaul. It was prepared by
being husked and well boiled, and was eaten with spoons in the room of bread.
If a little sugar or melasses is added to wheat prepared in this manner, it
forms not only a most wholesome food, but a most agreeable repast.

What shall I say to the custom of drinking spirituous liquors, which prevails
so generally in our army? I am aware of the prejudices in favor of it. It
requires an arm more powerful than mine -- the arm of an Hercules to encounter
them. The common apology for the use of rum in our army, is, that it is
necessary to guard against the effects of heat and cold. But I maintain, that
in no case whatever, does rum abate the effects of either of them upon the
constitution: On the contrary I believe it always increases them. The temporary
elevation of spirits in summer, and the temporary generation of warmth in
winter, produced by rum, always leave the body languid, and more liable to be
affected with heat and cold afterward. Happy would it be for our soldiers, if
the evil ended here! The use of rum, by gradually wearing away the powers of
the system, (...) foundation of fevers, -- fluxes, -- jaundices, -- and the
most of diseases which occur in military hospitals. It is a vulgar error to
suppose that the fatigue arising from violent exercise or hard labor, is
relieved by the use of spirituous liquors. The principles of animal life are
the same in a horse as in a man, and horses, we find undergo the severest
labor with no other liquor than cool water. There are many instances where
even reapers have been forced to acknowledge that plentiful draughts of milk
and water have enabled them to go through the fatigues of harvest with more
pleasure and fewer inconveniences to their health, than ever they experienced
from the use of a mixture of rum and water.

Spirituous liquors were unknown to the armies of ancient Rome. The canteen of
every soldier was filled with nothing but vinegar, and it was by frequently
drinking a small quantity of this wholesome liquor mixed with water, that the
Roman soldiers were enabled to sustain tedious marches through scorching sands,
without being subject to sickness of any kind. The vinegar effectually (...)
tendency to putrefaction, to which heat and labor dispose the fluids. It
moreover calms the inordinate action of the solids, which is created by hard
duty. It would be foreign to my purpose, or I might ^^ew that the abstraction
of rum from our soldiers, would contribute greatly to promote discipline and a
faithful discharge of duty among them. Genesis Wolf, who was a Philosopher as
well as a General, never suffered a drop of spirits to be drank by his (...),
except when they served as centries or upon fatigue duty in rainy weather.
Perhaps these are the only cases in which a small quantity of rum may be
useful. It will be of the most essential service if it be mixed with three of
four times its quantity of water.

III. Too much cannot be said in favor of CLEANLINESS. If men grew as speedily
and spontaneously as (...) of grass on the Continent of America, the want of
cleanliness would reduce them in two of three campaign to an handful of men. It
should extend, 1. To the body of a soldier. He should be obliged to wash his
hands and face at least once every day, and his whole body twice or three times
a week, especially in summer. The cold bath was part of the military discipline
of the Roman soldiers, and contributed much to preserve their health. 2. It
should extend to the clothes of a soldier. Frequent changes of linen are
indespensably necessary, and unless a strict regard is paid to this article,
all our pains to preserve the health of our soldiers, will be to no purpose. 3.
It should extend to the food of a soldier. Great care should be taken that the
vessels in which he cooks his victuals should be carefully washed after each
time of their being used.

Too many soldiers should not be allowed on any pretense whatever to crowd into
the same tent or quarter. The gaol fever is the offspring of the perspiration
and respiration of human bodies brought into a compass too narrow to be
diluted, and rendered inert by a mixture with the atmosphere.

It has been remarked that the men are most healthy when the exigencies of a
campaign have made it necessary for an army to send off their tents. This must
be occasioned by the tents being rendered unhealthy from being too much
crowded, or from not being kept clean.

The straw or hay which composes the bed of a soldier, should be often changed,
and his blanket should be exposed every day to the sun. This will prevent the
perspiration from becoming morbid and dangerous by accumulating upon it.

The Commanding Officer should take the utmost care never to suffer a soldier
to sleep, or even to sit down in his tent with wet clo^ths, nor to lie down in
a wet blanket or upon damp straw. The utmost vigilance will be necessary to
guard against this fruitful source of disorders among soldiers.

The environs of each tent, and of the camp in general, should be kept
perfectly clean of the offals of animals and of filth of all kinds. They should
be buried or carefully removed every day beyond the neighborhood of the camp.

IV. The formation of an ENCAMPMENT is of the utmost importance to the health
of an army. It is to no purpose to seek for security from an enemy in the
wisest disposition of troops in a country where marshes and mill-ponds let
loose intermitting fevers upon them. Sometimes it may be necessary to encamp an
army upon the side of a river. Previous to this step, it is the duty of the
Quartermaster to enquire from what quarter the winds come at the season of his
encampment. If they pass across the river before they reach his army, they
will probably bring with them the seeds of bilious and intermitting fevers, and
this will more especially be the case in the fall of the year. The British
troops at Pensacola, by shifting their quarters every year, so as to avoid the
winds that come over a river in the neighborhood of the town, at a certain
season, have preserved their health in a manner scarcely to be paralelled in so
warm a climate.

Frequently changing the spot of an encampment has been found to contribute
greatly to the health of an army. It effectually guards the men against the
effects of those off^^ matters which are so small, or so concealed, as to elude
the vigilance of an officer.

It is the duty of the Commanding Officer of a division or detachment of the
army, to avoid as much as possible, exposing his troops to unnecessary fatigue,
or watchfulness. The daily exercises of the manual, and manoeavres, (which
contribute to the health of soldiers) as also all marches, should be performed
in the cool of the morning and evening in summer. Centries should always be
provided with watchcoats, and they should be often relieved in very hot, cold,
and rainy weather.

It is a good custom for a centry always to eat a hearty meal before he enters
upon duty in cold weather. The gentle fever excited by digestion contributes to
guard him in a degree against the effects of the (...).

V. Idleness is the bane of a soldier. It exposes him to temptations not only
to every kind of military vice, but to every species of military disorders. --
But his exercise should be regular, and performed at statedperiods; nor should
it be suspended during his recess from the toils of war in his winter quarters.
"We remark (says Montesquieu in his excellent treatise on the rise and fall of
the Roman Greatness) in modern times, that our soldiers perifh from immoderate
fatigue, notwithstanding it was by immense labor the Romans preserved their
armies. The reason I believe was, their labor was constant, whereas among us
our soldiers pass from the extremes of labor to the extremes of idleness, than
which nothing can be more destructive to the lives of men. We sometimes observe
officers and soldiers who have passed through the hardships of a campaign without
an hour's sickness, suddenly seized with a variety of disorders upon leaving
camp, and visiting their families. The reason is plain -- They suddenly
exchange constant exercise, the cold ground and a blanket, for indolence, a
warm room, and a feather bed.




The fire and smoke of wood, as also the burning of sulphur, and the explosion
of gunpowder, have a singular efficacy in preserving and restoring the purity
of the air. There was an instance in the last war between Britain and France,
of a ship in Sir Edward Hawke's fleet, that had above hundred men on board ill
with a putrid fever. This ship was obliged to bear her part in the well known
battle between Sir Edward and Monsieur Confl^ns. A few days after the
engagement, every man on board this ship recovered, and an entire stop was put
to the progress of the disorder. This extraordinary event was thought to be
occasioned by the explosion and effluvia of the gunpowder.

I shall conclude these Directions by suggesting a few hints which appear to be
worthy of the attention of the Gentlemen of the Army.

Consider in the first place, that the principle study of an officer, in the
time of war, should be to save the blood of his men. An heroic exploit is
admired most when it has been performed with the loss of a few lives. But if it
be meritorious to save the lives of soldiers by skill and attention in the
field, why should it be thought less so to preserve them by skill and attention
of another kind, in a march, or an encampment? And on the contrary, if it be
criminal in an officer to sacrifice the lives of thousands by his (...) in a
battle, why should it be thought less so to sacrifice twice their number in a
hospital, by his negligence?

Consider in the second place, that an attention to the health of your soldiers
is absolutely necessary to form a great military character. Had (...) not been
for this eminent quality, Xenophon would (...) have led ten thousand Greeks for
sixteen months through a cold and most inhospitable country; nor would (...)
kept that army together, without it, which conquer (...), and delivered Rome.

Consider thirdly, that the discipline necessary to make an army victorious,
requires that the principle of self-preservation should in some measure be
suspended in a soldier. If he be taught that it is a crime to have a single
thought about his life in the field* he will soon transfer the same
indifference about his life to the camp, or to his quarters. It argues
therefore a want of understanding in an officer to charge his men with
carelessness of their health and lives. Julius Caesar wanted nothing but
strength in a man to make him a soldier. He supplied every other want from his
own great f^nd of military qualities. Nature has given the Americans strength,
and the sacred cause of Liberty has given them principle above the common
soldiers of any other army upon the face of the earth. The blame, therefore,
will only be yours, (...) they are not made superior to them in all the arts
which improve and adorn a soldier's person and character.

Lastly. Consider that your country and posterity look up to you for the
preservation of the only means of establishing the liberties of America. The
wisdom and eloquence of writers and orators have long since yielded to the more
powerful oratory of the sword. All our hopes, therefore, are in our army. But
if any thing can be added to these motives, consider further, that there is
scarcely a soldier under your command who has not a mother -- a wife -- a
sister -- or a child. These helpless members of society made great sacrifices
to their country when they urged the beloved objects of their affection to
follow the recruiting drum to the camp. Whenever, therefore, your duty requires
that you should attend to the health of your men, imagine you see one or
perhaps ALL of their female and helpless connections standing at the door of
your tents or quarters, and beseeching you by the remembrance of the pleasures
you have enjoyed, and by the prospect of the pleasures you expect, in those
connections, to repair immediately to the tents or huts of your men, and to
attend to every thing which reason and conscience tell you are necessary for
the preservation of their health and lives.

FINIS.

