Mr. Tucker's SERMON AT THE ANNUAL DUDLEIAN-LECTURE, September 2, 1778.

The Validity of Presbyterian Ordination argued, from Jesus Christ's being the
Founder, the sole Legislator, and supreme Head and Ruler of the Christian
Church.

A DISCOURSE Delivered in the Chapel OF HARVARD-COLLEGE IN Cambridge,
New England, September 2, 1778.

At the LECTURE founded by the Hon. PAUL DUDLEY, Esquire

By JOHN TUCKER, A. M. Pastor of the first Church in NEWBURY;

BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: PRINTED BY THOMAS and JOHN FLEET, 1778.

A List of the Gentlemen who have preached the DUDLEIAN Lecture.
1755. The Rev. President Holyoke. 1756. Mr. Barnard of Marblehead. 1757. Dr.
Wigglesworth, Professor of Divinity. 1758. Dr. Appleton of Cambridge. Mr.
Prince of Boston was first chose, but declined on account of his ill state of
health. 1759. Mr. Gay of Hingham. Dr. Sewall of Boston first chose, but
declined on account of his Age. 1760. Mr. Wigglesworth of Ipswich. 1761. Mr.
Foxcroft of Boston. 1762. Dr. Chauncy of Boston. 1763. Mr. Clark of Danvers.
1764. Mr. Abbot of Charlestown. 1765. Dr. Mayhew of Boston. 1766. Dr. Pemberton
of Boston. 1767. Mr. Cook of Cambridge. 1768. Mr. Barnard of Salem. 1769. Dr.
Mather of Boston. 1770. Mr. Adams of Roxbury. 1771. Dr. Eliot of Boston. 1772.
Mr. Stevens of Kittery. 1773. Dr. Cooper of Boston. 1774. Mr. Webster of
Salisbury. 1775. President Langdon. 1776. Mr. Morrill of Wilmington. 1777. Mr.
Wigglesworth, Professor of Divinity.
Several of these Sermons were printed. It is desired by many, that the public
may be favored with the others, which are carefully preserved in the Archives
of the College.

A SERMON, etc.
JOHN XVIII. 36. Jesus answered, my Kingdom is not of this World. --


IT is a principle, in which Christians are generally agreed, "that the
declarations of Christ and his Apostles, which we have in the New Testament,
are of divine authority;" though they are not so fully agreed that these are the
only things, respecting christianity, which are so.

The Church of Rome have added hereto many of their own traditions, together
with many decrees of Popes and Councils, as infallible interpreters of the word
and will of God, to which they ascribe an equal degree of divinity.

Protestants profess, indeed, to reject these, in the general, as groundless
and unwarrantable additions to the christian system; yet Protestants are not
wholly without dissentions among themselves.

Whether it be that some, who have rejected the grosser corruptions of the
Romish Church, are still fond of retaining some of a smaller size, as less
hurtful, or more to their taste; or that length of time, and the mutable nature
of language, have led them to affix different ideas to the same things -- from
whatever cause it has proceeded, so it is, that their conceptions of the
Christian Church, and particularly of the officers Christ has appointed in it,
and of the powers with which they are vested, are, in some points, very
different.

But as the Gospel continues the same -- as the words of Christ and his
Apostles, there recorded, remain unchanged, however mutable men's opinions or
practice may be, it must be a good rule, for determining what is of divine
authority, and what is not, to recur to this original plan; and, by carefully
examining things by it, to form and settle our own judgment.

By thus tracing back, to its first principles, any system of religion, which
pretends to be founded on the Gospel, or to have Christ for its author, we are
most likely to distinguish what is true and genuine, from what is spurious or
apocryphal -- what is from heaven, and of divine authority, from what is of
this world, or the inventions of men -- to separate one from the other, and to
receive or reject accordingly.

It is agreeable to this method that I shall attempt, from the passage of
scripture now read, as the foundation of my discourse, to consider the
particular subject which is, at this time, to engage our attention; I mean "The
validity of Presbyterian Ordination."

But what can be farther said upon a subject so limited in its nature, and
which has now been so often handled in the rotation of this Lecture? It has
been already so thoroughly and fully examined and discussed, both with respect
to scripture and antiquity; and particularly by one of our venerable Fathers,
whose discourse has been made public, that little or nothing new can be added.

The most, it is hoped, that can now be expected, is, that the subject may be
still held up in some new points of view, whereby farther light may possibly be
cast upon it, and some additional weight given to the arguments already used to
support and vindicate the practice of these churches.

It will be readily granted, I presume, that by the kingdom of Christ,
mentioned in my text, is intended the Church of Christ. He is a King, though
not like earthly princes. The King of Zion is meek and lowly. He claims no
dominion over the states of this world, as such, nor does he assume any thing
of the outward splendour and magnificence of earthly potentates.

They who believe in him, as the Son of God, and the Savior of the world --
who openly acknowledge him under that important character, and sincerely submit
themselves to the government of his sacred laws -- All such, whether considered
at large, as scattered through the world, or as united together in distinct
societies, are his loyal subjects. Over these he reigns, and these are his
church or kingdom.

As divinely commissioned and appointed to that important business, he has
founded this kingdom. He is the supreme head over it, and sole legislator in
it. The officers of this kingdom are appointed -- their qualifications and
powers described and ascertained, and the duties of their office pointed out by
him: And to him alone the subjects of this kingdom are accountable in what
relates merely to their religious sentiments and eternal salvation.

These are things implied in the text, some of which I shall particularly
notice, and consider, as I. The being and constitution of the Christian Church
are of divine original. II. Jesus Christ, as the founder and supreme head of
this society, has the sole right and authority of making and establishing
laws, and appointing officers in it. And therefore, III. No laws or officers in
the Christian Church are to be esteemed, as of divine authority, any farther
than they are laws made and officers constituted and appointed by Christ; or
than as they are conformable to that original and divine plan he has left us.


The consideration of these things may lead to some proper view of the
particular point before us -- may set the evidence we have of the validity of
presbyterian ordination in a just light, and show the weakness of some
objections usually brought against it.

I. The being and constitution of the Christian Church are of divine original.

The justness of this observation from the text appears from the manner in
which our Savior expressed himself -- My kingdom is not of this world. It took
not its rise from the craft and subtilty, or from the ambition and power of
men. It was not founded by human policy and wisdom, but originated from heaven,
and is of a divine and spiritual nature.

That the Christian Church originated from heaven appears from the evidence we
have of Christ's divine mission into the world, who was the founder and framer
of it. And of the sufficiency of this evidence no one can reasonably doubt,
who, with a fair and candid mind, shall examine this evidence, as it arises
from the prophecies that went before concerning Christ, compared with the
corresponding events which happened, as to the time and place, and other
circumstances of his birth, and the manner of his life. As it arises likewise
from the many and incontestible miracles which he wrought, healing the sick by
a word, and raising the dead to life, etc. -- from the more than human wisdom
and knowledge he discovered -- from the predictions he delivered, and their
exact accomplishment, and particularly as to his own resurrection; and from
some other things which might be mentioned to the same purpose. -- No one, I
imagine, who shall consider these things, with a mind free from prejudice, and
open to conviction, can retain a reasonable doubt, but that Christ was what he
pretended to be -- the Son of God and Savior of the world. That he came down
from heaven, as he declared, commissioned and sent by the Father; and that God
was with him -- owned and approved of him in what he did.

And this being granted, it follows, that whatever Christ did, in prosecution
of his important ministry, was from divine authority, agreeable to what he
sometimes declared, that he spoke the words, and did the works of God.

As acting by divine authority then we are to conceive of him, when he chose
his Apostles -- appointed them to their important office, and sent them forth
as his ministers; therefore could he say with propriety -- As my Father has
sent me, even so send I you. John xx. 21.


And the divine appointment and mission of these prime ministers of the Gospel
was abundantly authenticated and confirmed by their being endued with the power
of working miracles themselves, to confirm the doctrines they should teach, and
the facts they should relate; and particularly by their being, according to
Christ's prediction and promise, filled with the Holy Ghost, on the day of
Pentecost, when they spoke a variety of languages, to the astonishment of those
who heard them.

Thus qualified for spreading the Gospel through the world -- for propagating
and establishing the kingdom of Christ, they received this commission from
their Master and Lord, introduced with a declaration of his divine power and
authority -- All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. Go ye and teach
all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and of the Son and of
the Holy Ghost. Teaching them to observe all things whatsoever I have commanded
you. Matt. xxviii. 18, 19, 20.


Thus commissioned, the Apostles set out on their ministry; and the surprising
success which attended their labors, may be justly viewed as an additional
evidence of their heavenly mission and of the divinity of that religion they
taught. For though they appeared as sheep in the midst of wolves -- Though they
had to encounter the ignorance and superstition -- the bigotry and malice of
this world, and met with great opposition -- with hardships and sufferings, yet
they triumphed over all, and soon spread the Gospel far and wide. Many believed
and turned to the Lord, and by baptism were gathered into the Church of Christ.

This society, small at first, and as a grain of mustard seed, presently
enlarged and spread itself through the nations. Particular societies were
formed in different places -- united under Jesus their common head, and
furnished with proper officers for their religious government, instruction and
edification.

Thus was the kingdom of Christ first set up in the world. Not, as I said
before, by human policy and power, but in opposition to these. It had not its
first rise from, nor any dependence upon this world. Its being and existence
were evidently from heaven. It was the work of God -- the effect of divine
wisdom, power and goodness.

And not only the first foundation and establishment of the Church of Christ,
but its whole frame and constitution, and the great end for which it was
erected, exhibit strong and convincing marks of its heavenly original. Of all
this we must be sensible, if we examine the New Testament, where the nature and
design of Christ's kingdom are represented.

Let us view there the laws and ordinances of this kingdom -- the sacred rules
and maxims by which the subjects of it are to be governed. They have nothing of
this world in view. They are not calculated to advance men in earthly riches
and greatness, nor to elevate some above others, in worldly pomp and dignity;
but they breath a celestial spirit and influence, and are manifestly designed
to rectify the disorders of our minds -- to improve and perfect our nature --
to make us like to the blessed God, and fit for those high and noble enjoyments
which are consonant to our rational and moral nature.

Let us view there the sanctions of these laws. They are not taken from this
world. The rewards promised to the obedient, are not any high and honorable
offices in this life, and lucrative posts and employments; nor the punishments
threatened, pecuniary mulcts, fines. imprisonment, or death.

The great motives by which the laws of Christ are enforced, lie above, and
beyond the present state and scene of things. They respect the favor or
displeasure of Almighty God, and everlasting happiness or woe in a future world.

Nor are the officers Christ has appointed in his kingdom like the rulers of
this world. They have no lordly power and authority over his subjects, like
what is exercised by the princes of the Gentiles. Instead of tyrannizing over
others, they are to be their servants, ministering to them in acts of kindness
and benevolence. It is their duty, indeed, to endeavor the enlargement of
Christ's kingdom, and to increase the number of his subjects, but not by any of
the hostile measures of this world -- the weapons of their warfare are not
carnal. But they are to endeavor this, by preaching up a crucified Savior,
and publishing the truths of his Gospel, in their purity and simplicity; -- by
enlightening men's minds, and convincing and persuading their judgments, not by
the absurd method of bodily tortures, or any other motives taken from this
world, but by arguments drawn from the sacred oracles, and suited to their
intellectual nature.

The business of Christ's ministers, who are officers in his kingdom, is to
seek especially the spiritual welfare and happiness of his subjects. To elevate
their minds above this world -- to raise their views to heaven, as their proper
home, and to endeavor their preparation for that blessed abode.

In a word. The whole frame and constitution of the Christian Church, as
delineated and set before us in the Gospel, as well as the manner in which it
was first founded and set up, declare its divine original. From heaven it took
its rise, and the great design of it is, to bring men to that glorious and
happy place.

From this account of the being and constitution of the Christian Church, I
proceed to the second thing noticed from the text.

II. Jesus Christ, as the founder and supreme head of this society, has the
sole right of making and establishing laws, and appointing officers in it.

Jesus answered, my kingdom, etc. He therefore is King of this ecclesiastical
society, which implies his sovereign dominion over it. And it seems essential
to his being possessed of such dominion, that the power of legislation and
government should be wholly in his hands.

This is not the case, indeed; I mean, it ought not to be the case, in civil
states, and cannot be, in free states, where subjects have a proper enjoyment
of their just rights. For as all human power must originally reside in and
proceed from the community, rulers, though elevated in office, yet, strictly
speaking, are the creatures and servants of the people.

And as the highest earthly rulers are but imperfect men -- liable to
misconduct through ignorance, avarice, ambition, etc. it is reasonable they
should never be possessed of absolute, uncontrollable authority. It is just,
and tends to the good of society, that the state should always have this check
upon the legislative and governing powers, to resume that authority which they
have parted with, only for the common good, whenever such authority is abused.

But in such respects as these, Christ's kingdom is not of this world. None of
his subjects ever stood upon a level with him, nor contributed any thing to
that supreme power of which he is possessed. His kingdom is of his own founding
and establishing -- It is his own property.

And besides, that on this account, he may appear to have a natural right to
sovereign dominion, he is eminently qualified to exercise such dominion,
without ever abusing it.

The absolute rectitude of his nature -- the perfection of his wisdom and
knowledge, and his consummate goodness, render it impossible but that his laws
and government should be always just and right, and calculated for the good and
happiness of his subjects.

And Christ being thus head over all things to the Church, a supposition that
any, besides him, may have power of legislation and government in it, is wholly
without foundation. For such must act either independently of him, and by an
authority of their own; or else as his delegates, and by a power derived from
him; neither of which can be the case.

For to suppose they act independently of him, is most obviously inconsistent
with his own supremacy. This is at once to dethrone him, and take his kingdom
out of his hands. And as to any one's acting by delegation, or as having
received power and authority from him, to make laws, and appoint officers in
his kingdom, of this we have not the least intimation in the New Testament.
Christ has constituted no such lawmakers and vicegerents in his church; and we
have abundant reason to conclude he never intended there should be any. He has
given it in solemn charge to all his subjects, not to assume or pretend to any
such authority, nor to submit to it if usurped, or claimed by others. Call no
man your Father upon earth -- neither be ye called Masters. One is your Father
who is in heaven -- One is your Master even Christ, and all ye are brethren.
Matt. xxiii, 8, 9, 10.


And this supreme dominion and authority of our exalted Redeemer must have
respect, not only to the simple acts of making laws and appointing officers in
his kingdom, but to whatever will have influence on the nature and operation of
laws; as for instance -- the particular sense in which they are to be
understood and obeyed. -- And to whatever will affect the business of officers
-- as their rank and dignity, and the powers committed to them. This will be
evident on a moment's reflection.

For, let it be supposed that any man, or body of men, have authority to
determine the sense of certain doctrines or laws of Christ, so as to oblige
others to receive them in their particular sense, it is obvious such men may,
by virtue of their own interpretation, alter the nature of these doctrines and
laws, just as they please; and may absolutely annihilate them, as to their
original intention. And these authoritative interpreters would, in effect, be
the legislators and rulers in Christ's kingdom, in contradiction to his own
acknowledged supremacy and dominion.

So likewise, if new officers should be added to those Christ has appointed in
his kingdom, or, which amounts to much the same, if those he has constituted
should be altered, and made different from what they were -- if, for instance,
that equality which, it is supposed, the New Testament clearly points out
between bishops and presbyters or elders -- if this equality should be
destroyed -- it some of these should be exalted above others in dignity and
power -- should be raised to distinguished honors and privileges, and
authorized to perform peculiar acts, from which others are excluded, as
incapable, it is manifest that by such changes and alterations in the Christian
Church, it would become quite a different thing from what it was when first
constituted. It could be, but in part, the kingdom of Christ; in part it must
be a kingdom of this world; or the kingdom of those men, who made these changes
and alterations in it.

But now, Christ being the supreme and sovereign Lord over his own Church or
kingdom -- being the sole legislator and authoritative ruler in it, must
entirely and forever exclude all others from any such authority and power --
from any authority to make new laws, or appoint new officers in his kingdom --
from all authority even to interpret any of his laws or doctrines, so as to
oblige others to receive and obey them, in their particular sense. And, as
entirely must this exclude all others from authority to make any distinctions
among the officers of his kingdom, which he has not made; -- to give powers to
some which he has not granted, or to deprive others of those with which he has
invested them.

And if this reasoning is just, it follows, I conceive, as an undeniable
consequence.

III. That no laws or officers now in the Christian Church are to be esteemed
as of divine authority, any farther than they are laws made and officers
constituted and appointed by Christ or, than as they are conformable to that
original divine plan he has left us.

This conclusion results from its being manifestly inconsistent with the
supreme dominion of Christ in his own kingdom, that any besides him, and
independent of him, should have authority to act as legislators and rulers in
it. Any laws, therefore, or officers, which have taken place in the Christian
Church, and appear not; or, so far as they appear not, to have been made and
constituted by Christ, we are not to look upon as properly belonging to his
kingdom, nor as of divine authority.

And this naturally brings us to consider and examine the particular point we
have in view, viz. "the article of presbyterian ordination."

I cannot persuade myself, indeed, but that, if all controversy was out of
sight, no one could reasonably doubt the validity of ordination by Presbyters
or Elders, who, with a fair and honest mind, should examine that plan of the
Christian Church the Gospel sets before us.

We, as Dissenters from the Church of England or rather, as forming our
sentiments by the sacred Scriptures, believe and assert this validity. The
Churches in this country, in general, with many elsewhere, practice upon this
principle; and, we doubt not, God approves our practice -- has greatly blessed,
and will continue to bless the ministrations of his servants thus ordained.

Episcopalians, as they are called, zealously oppose us in this point, and
represent our ordinations as null and void. And it is opposition from this
quarter, and not any doubtful circumstances, attending the subject itself, upon
a scripture view of it, which has rendered the defense of this article
important, and, it is likely, gave rise to this lecture, in the mind of the
honorable founder.

It is an avowed principle of the Church of England, and no immaterial part of
the foundation of its present grand hierarchy, that Bishops and Presbyters are
not the same, but two distinct officers in the Church of Christ; -- that
Bishops are an order superior in rank and dignity, and have, in particular, the
power of ordaining others, or separating them to the gospel ministry, which
Presbyters have not.

In support of these sentiments, some writers on that side the question have
laid great weight on what, they say were the opinions and practice of the
church in the early ages of it, and even from the Apostles days.

But any considerable acquaintance with the ancient history of the church must
satisfy the unprejudiced, that no argument of any force can be drawn from
thence. For it is manifest, and is acknowledged by some of the most learned and
judicious of Episcopalians themselves, that, in the earliest ages, the words
Presbyter and Bishop were used, as they were by the inspired writers, without
any discrimination; and intended persons of one and the same office.

In times more remote from the apostolic age, when, through length of time, and
the lusts of men, various corruptions had crept into the church, it is readily
acknowledged these words were used, by some writers, to point out different
officers; and the Bishop was then exalted above his brother Presbyter.

But this was not the only innovation which took place in the church, nor was
the exalted Bishop the only new officer who was constituted and set up in it.

There soon entered, and by the same door, Subdeacons, Archdencons,
Archbishops, Patriarchs, etc. with a long catalogue of religious rites and
ceremonies, which were introduced, not all at once, indeed, but gradatim et
paulatim, to beautify and adorn the church, and edify its members.

These all stand upon the same bottom with Bishops, as distinguished from
Presbyters, and were created by the same power, i. e. human power. They all are
the inventions and institutions of uninspired and fallible men.

Some of these might originate, it is probable, from pious views and designs, in
the weak and injudicious -- others from the pride and ambition of a corrupt
clergy, who imposed on the ignorance and superstition of the vulgar; and others
might spring from other causes.

But we mean not to settle the point before us by human authorities; and it
seems, indeed, but a useless kind of parade, to muster the Fathers, as they are
called -- to marshal them on opposite sides, and play them off against one
another.

Having the inspired writings for our instructor and guide, it is of but very
little consequence, in this controversy, what the Fathers, or other fallible
men, have wrote or practiced -- what opinions or customs they have approved or
condemned, especially since they have so often contradicted one another, and
themselves too.

As to all innovations upon the scripture plan, our Savior's remark,
respecting divorce, is a sufficient confutation of them -- But from the
beginning it was not so Matt. xix. 8.


Our appeal is to the sacred books of the New Testament, where we have, from
divine inspiration, the only account we can fully depend on, of the first
foundation and constitution of the Christian Church; -- of its laws,
ordinances, officers, etc. And there it appears, in a light sufficiently clear
and strong, that Bishops, and Presbyters or Elders, were the same officers in
the Church of Christ; -- that there was no difference in their qualifications,
their powers, or employments.

It will not be expected I should mention all those passages in the sacred
oracles, which might be pertinent on this occasion. I shall take notice only of
two or three, which may be sufficient to the present purpose. The first is in
Tit. i. 5, 7. where the Apostles Paul tells Titus he left him in Crete -- to
ordain Elders in every city. He then shows how these Elders were to be
qualified. If any man be blameless, etc. and immediately adds this reason of
his advice -- For a Bishop must be blameless. The word for there is evidently
causal, and shows the identity of office between an Elder or Presbyter, and a
Bishop.

Titus was to take care that the persons he ordained Elders were of blameless
character; and for this reason, because a Bishop must be so. But to what
purpose could this be said, or with what propriety, unless an Elder and a
Bishop were the same in office? And from his passage it appears, not only that
the office of a Bishop and Elder was the same, but that their qualifications
were the same likewise.

The next place I shall mention is in Acts xx. 17. Where we read that Paul
being at Miletus, sent to Ephesus for the Elders of the church, to take his
last leave of them, and to give them his solemn parting charge. To these Elders
he thus addressed himself in the 28th verse. Take heed unto yourselves, and to
all the flock over which the Holy Ghost has made you overseers ((...) bishops)
to feed the the Church of God, which he has purchased with his own blood.

Here it is manifest, not only that Elders were Bishops, or that their office
was one and the same, but that the work assigned them, in the execution of
their office, was the same also, viz. to feed the Church of God. The word (...)
here rendered to feed, is of somewhat extensive meaning, and may signify to
preside over, and govern the church by the laws of Christ, as well as to
minister to it in other respects. Elders and Bishops had therefore the same
power committed to them in the Church of Christ, and were authorized and
directed to perform the same ministerial service.

And this may appear still farther evident from one passage more I shall
mention, which is in I Pet. v 1, 2. The Elders which are among you I exhort,
who am also an Elder, etc. feed the flock of God which is among you, taking the
oversight thereof [(...) performing the office of Bishops] not by constraint,
but willingly, etc.

I am not insensible that some objections have been offered against the plain
and obvious sense of the above passages of Scripture: But these have been so
often considered, and so fully removed, that I shall take no notice of them;
nor of attempts which have been made to prove a superiority of rank and power
in Bishops above Presbyters, from the supposed Episcopacy of Timothy and Titus.
The supposition that these two Evangelists possessed episcopal powers, which
Presbyters did not, is so entirely without any scripture foundation, that it
merits not our consideration, any more than the doctrine of an uninterrupted
succession of Bishops, in the modern form, even from the time of the Apostles;
and some other things which over-zealous and whimsical men have laid stress
upon.

Our appeal, as I said before, is to the sacred books of the New Testament,
where we have the words of divine inspiration to determine our judgment and
practice.

And it appears, I conceive, with sufficient evidence, from the passages above
quoted, as well as from many others which might be mentioned, that, according
to the constitution and pattern of the Christian Church, left us by Christ and
his Apostles, the names Bishop and Presbyter or Elder, were used
indiscriminately, to signify or point out persons of one and the same office:
-- that their qualifications, their authority, and the work assigned to them,
were precisely the same.

They were equally authorized therefore to preach the word, to administer the
ordinances of the Gospel, to ordain, or solemnly to separate other meet
persons, to the gospel ministry; and to perform any other service which
belonged to their office as ministers of Christ. From all which we may very
justly and safely conclude the validity of ordination by Presbyters.

For if the office of these and of Bishops was the same, and the work appointed
to each of them, as ministers of Christ, was the same, it will then follow, as
a just conclusion, that ordination by Presbyters is scriptural and valid,
supposing that the Act of ordaining others was a part of the work assigned them.

True, our opponents may say, supposing this -- supposing the act of ordaining
others, to be a part of the work assigned to Presbyters, or even to Presbyters
and Bishops in common, then this conclusion might be just; but this is denied.

We grant that a power of ordination existed in the first ordinary and standing
ministers of the Gospel, and has descended down from them to others, by
Christ's appointment; but then this power was only in Bishops, as distinguished
from Presbyters.

To this objection, which rests wholly upon an arbitrary distinction between
the office and power of Bishops and Presbyters, it would be a sufficient
answer, to observe, that we have instances, in the New Testament, of ordination
performed by persons under the name of Presbyters, 1 Timothy iv. 13, 14. Acts
xiii. 1, 2, 3.
but not a single instance of any performed by persons under the name of
Bishops; from whence we might fairly conclude, that if there was any
distinction of office and power between these, Presbyters and not Bishops had
power to ordain.

But I choose to rest the point, at present, upon that identity of office, of
power, and of work or service we have fully proved between Presbyters and
Bishops.

There is no dispute between Episcopalians and us, as to Bishops having, in the
apostolic age, a divine right to ordain others. This we believe and assert
equally with them. And it being evident, to demonstration, that at that time,
the words Bishop and Presbyter were convertible terms, and used indifferently
for each other; -- that Bishops were Presbyters, and Presbyters Bishops; --
that their qualifications, their office, their power and business were the
same, the conclusion is fair and just, that ordination by Presbyters is
scriptural and valid.

And it follows likewise, from what has been said above, of the equality and
sameness of Bishop and Presbyter, that whatever distinction between these has
taken place since the apostolic age -- whatever superiority in rank, and
dignity of office, or of power in the Church of Christ, a Bishop is supposed
now to have, above a Presbyter, is a distinction and superiority without any
foundation. A Bishop, thus distinguished and elevated is no officer in the
church or kingdom of Christ, but merely of human invention and creation.

And in the same light we justly view a large number of others, as Canons,
Deans, Archbishops, Chancellors, etc. Of these, and of some other officers, tho
of high importance in the Church of England, we read nothing in the
New Testament. They have neither name, nor place, nor work assigned to them, in
the divine constitution and form of the Church of Christ which is there
exhibited. They are all officers of men's creating and setting up. Their
existence and authority are not from Christ, the divine founder and supreme
head of the Church, but wholly from this world.

But from this some may be ready to conclude, I am for cutting off the Church
of England, from being any part of the Church of Christ; -- for demolishing all
her officers, and nullifying all her administrations. But such conclusions as
these, from what I have said, would not be strictly just. Nor do I mean to
retaliate upon our episcopal brethren, by any hard and uncharitable reflections.

I sincerely wish the character of that Church may be ever supported, and
appear respectable in the eyes of all Christians, so far as it is built on the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief
corner stone.

I doubt not but great and good men -- sincere disciples of Christ, have, and
still belong to that establishment; and that some of its most dignified clergy
have been eminently servicable in promoting the true interest of the Redeemer's
kingdom: Nor do I doubt its being a part of the Church of Christ,
notwithstanding the many human additions which still adhere to it.

But then these additions -- all its deviations from the scripture pattern,
cannot be justly esteemed any part of its character, as a Church of Christ, but
so many corruptions it has unhappily received, and still retains; and which,
instead of adding to its true beauty and glory, really disfigure and deform it.
These are not gold, silver and precious stones, built on Christ, the only
foundation, but wood, hay and stubble, which the power of truth may in time,
purge and purify it from.

And though the Church of Christ knows no such officers as Bishops, of superior
rank and power to Presbyters, yet I charitable believe ordination by these may
be valid. Not indeed, as they are Bishops, in a prelatical sense, but as they
are Scripture Bishops, and the same in rank and office with Presbyters. For it
is only in this view of them, that they can justly be considered as officers in
Christ's kingdom, and as having any divine right to ordain: In the other view,
all their authority is from this world, and is, therefore, in reality, no
authority at all.

So that if our ordinations by Presbyters are not more valid than those by
Bishops, they certainly cannot be less so, unless an authority derived from men
-- merely from this world, may be supposed greater and better than an authority
derived from heaven.

I shall now beg your farther patience, only 'till I offer a few reflections
upon, or inferences from what has been said. And,

1. The Christian Church being of divine original, we should ever look on its
constitution as sacred and inviolable.

Every work of God is perfect in its kind, nor are we able to improve upon, and
mend, what was designed and executed by infinite wisdom. The most pious views
and motives will not justify us in attempting this, as we have neither
authority nor capacity for such business. Corruptions in the Church, it is
highly probable, were early introduced, by a disposition to mend it, or make
alterations to its advantage. Good men, but weak and injudicious, imagined that
an officer of higher rank and greater power, than a common Presbyter, would
have more influence in correcting abuses in the Church, keeping out heresies,
etc. Hence, it is likely, the office of a Bishop, as distinguished from, and
superior to Presbyter, first took its rise. Other alterations might proceed
from the same cause, and many from other causes much less justifiable.

Corruptions once begun, were carried from one degree to another, 'till, in
some places, what was called the Church of Christ, had very little of its
original form left, and became almost entirely a kingdom of this world.

Bishops, in particular, were not only raised above Presbyters, but their
elevation gradually increased. They were made Archbishops, Patriarchs, etc.
And, in some places, in addition to their episcopal dignities, they were
created Counts, Marquisses, Dukes; and have sometimes claimed and possessed all
the Regalia of sovereign Princes. They have given laws to nations, and battle
to their enemies, at the head of numerous armies of their own raising. This was
making the Church of Christ a church militant indeed.

But how unlike to the meek and benevolent Son of God, who came not to destroy
men's lives, but to save them, must these military heroes appear, who pretended
to be his disciples, and officers in his kingdom?

Now, as such gross corruptions proceeded from small alterations, at first, in
the scripture plan, how cautious should we be of ever attempting any thing of
this nature! How inviolable should we hold the institutions of heaven!

And it is by a close and steadfast adherence to that divine pattern left us by
Christ and his Apostles, that we may hope the truth, as it in Jesus, will, in
time, prevail over error and superstition, and, by its powerful efficacy,
remove, by degrees, all those human alterations, which have so greatly
mutilated and deformed the church; -- will restore it to its original purity
and glory, when it will appear again, to its friends, fair as the moon, and
clear as the sun; and to its enemies, terrible as an army with banners.

Again,

2. The supremacy of our Lord Jesus Christ, over his own church or kingdom; --
his being the sole legislator and authoritative ruler in it, as this should
caution us against aspiring at any lordly dominion over others. so it should
guard us against submitting to the authority of any, who would usurp and
exercise such dominion over us.

In all things which respect our religious faith and practice, we are to recur
to the sacred standard Christ has left us. We are to compare all things with
this, and to judge of all things by this.

It is of but little importance to us, what are the opinions or practice of
this or that fallible man, unless we can find them agreeable to the doctrines
and laws of Christ. He only is our Master in what relates to conscience, and
our eternal salvation. To him we stand or fall. And if we approve ourselves to
him, we need not be greatly anxious as to what men may judge or say of us.

3. Upon the principles which have been now laid down and established, our
dissent from the Church of England -- our rejection of her form of government
-- of her rites and ceremonies, must be forever justified.

We dissent from her in no article, but where we are well persuaded she herself
has dissented from the Scripture Plan. We reject nothing, but what we are well
persuaded had its rise and establishment from the inventions and power of men.
We separate from her, only so far as we believe she has deviated from the form
and constitution of Christ's kingdom, and is become a kingdom of this world.
And thus far, even our allegiance to Jesus Christ, as our only supreme head,
our lawgiver, our ruler and judge, obliges us to dissent.

Instead therefore of imagining our forefathers were guilty of schism, of
which they and their followers have been often accused, in separating from the
Church of England, and casting off the yoke under which they had groaned, we
ought to venerate and honor their memories, for that pious zeal and fortitude
they discovered, in asserting the liberty wherewith Christ had made them free:
And that from a regard to their own consciences, and the honor of their divine
Lord, they submitted to hardships and sufferings, in planting churches in this
land, more conformable to the gospel pattern.

And it certainly becomes us their descendents, who reap the happy fruits of
their trials, not to become again entangled with the yoke of bondage; but to
stand fast in that liberty they have transmitted to us.

And from the same principles which justify our dissent, in general, from the
episcopal form and government of the church, we conclude, and with the greatest
reason, the validity of ordination by Presbyters, or Scripture-Bishops.

For, by examining the constitution of the church, or kingdom of Christ -- its
doctrines and laws -- the officers he has appointed in it -- their
qualifications and powers, and the work he has assigned to them, as these
things are placed before us in the New Testament -- upon such examination, we
find it evident, beyond all reasonable doubt, that Bishops and Presbyters had
one and the same office, and equal authority to perform all ministerial
services, and therefore ordination among the rest. And the objections to this,
from our opponents, being grounded, mainly, on a supposed superiority of
Bishops to Presbyters, and resting on unwarrantable alterations in the Church
of Christ, and receiving therefore all their force from human authority, ought
not, in the decision of the present point, to have the weight of a feather.

And I cannot but recommend it to all -- to the young gentlemen of this Society
in particular, and especially to such of them as are designed for the gospel
ministry, to give close attention to the sacred Scriptures in their examination
of this subject. Your looking back into antiquity, will, indeed be no
disadvantage to you, nor to the practice or cause of these Churches, if you can
take a proper extensive view of what has been wrote relative to this
controversy.

But then remember that after all your researches, the sacred Scriptures ought
to be your guide. The words of Christ, and of his Apostles, are not only more
ancient than those of the Fathers, as they are called, and of later writers,
but they alone are of divine authority, and ought to determine and settle our
judgment, in all things of a religious nature.

And I am persuaded that the more the present point is viewed and examined by
the light of Scripture, the evidence for the validity of presbyterian
ordination will appear brighter and stronger, and triumph over all objection.

To conclude,

Let it be the concern of all, that they are the true and real subjects of the
kingdom of Christ. A religion so evidently divine as that which the Gospel
teaches, and the great design of which is so infinitely gracious, must, in the
highest degree, deserve our attention; and greatly solicitous should we all be,
that we experience its sanctifying and saving influence.

But our beloved sons, the students in this place, for whose welfare we feel a
parental tenderness, will suffer me, in a particular manner, to recommend this
to them.

Amidst all your studies of the liberal arts and sciences, and to acquire those
literary accomplishments, which may justly adorn your character, and render you
useful members of society, let me request it of you, not to neglect the study
of yourselves, and a proper cultivation of your own minds, in a moral view.

Converse much with the sacred classics. Make the doctrines and laws of Christ
familiar to you. Often compare yourselves with, and examine yourselves by them;
and be concerned that every thing yet amiss in your tempers or lives, be
rectified by the grace of the Gospel; -- that you are daily improving in the
true and solid virtues of Christianity, and ripening for that state of endless
glory and felicity, which shall be the portion of the righteous.

Believe me, my young friends, all the glittering charms of this present world,
so apt to engage and captivate the mind in early life, are but gilded dancing
bubbles, which vanish in a moment, compared with this.

And may we all so conduct through the present state, as to be accepted of our
great lawgiver, ruler and judge, and find our lot among his faithful subjects,
at that important time, when having put down all rule, and all authority and
power, and subdued all his and his church's enemies, he shall deliver up the
kingdom to the Father, and God shall be all and in all.


