THE ARTICLES, Published by CONGRESS, OF A TREATY of AMITY and COMMERCE, AND OF
A TREATY of ALLIANCE Between the CROWN of FRANCE And these UNITED STATES, Duly
entered into and executed at Paris, on the 6th day of February last, by a
Minister properly authorized by his Most Christian Majesty on the one part, and
the Commissioners of Congress on the other part. ALSO THE ARTICLES OF
CONFEDERATION and PERPETUAL UNION Between the United States of America, as
proposed by Congress to the Legislatures of the different States.

LANCASTER: Printed by JOHN DUNLAP.

In CONGRESS, MAY 6, 1778.
WHEREAS Congress have received, from their Commissioners at the Court of
France, copies of a Treaty of Amity and Commerce, and of a Treaty of Alliance,
between the Crown of France and these United States, duly entered into and
executed at Paris, on the 6th day of February last, by a Minister properly
authorized by his Most Christian Majesty on the one part, and the said
Commissioners on the other part: AND WHEREAS the said Treaties have been
maturely considered and unanimously ratified and confirmed by Congress. In
which said Treaty of Amity and Commerce are the Articles following, to wit.

ARTICLE VI. The Most Christian King shall endeavor, by all the means in his
power, to protect and defend all vessels and the effects belonging to the
subjects, people or inhabitants of the said United States, or any of them,
being in his ports, havens, roads, or on the seas near to his countries,
islands, cities or towns; and to recover and restore to the right owners, their
agents or attorneys, all such vessels and effects which shall be taken within
his jurisdiction; and the ships of war of His Most Christian Majesty, or any
convoy sailing under his authority, shall, upon all occasions, take under their
protection, all vessels belonging to the subjects, people or inhabitants of the
said United States, or any of them, and holding the same course, or going the
same way, and shall defend such vessels, as long as they hold the same course,
or go the same way, against all attacks, force and violence, in the same manner
as they ought to protest and defend the vessels belonging to the subjects of
the Most Christian King.

ARTICLE VII. In like manner the said United States, and their ships of war,
sailing under their authority, shall protect and defend, conformably to the
tenor of the preceding article, all the vessels and effects belonging to the
subjects of the Most Christian King, and use all their endeavors to recover,
and cause to be restored, the said vessels and effects that shall have been
taken within the jurisdiction of the said United States, or any of them.

ARTICLE XIV. The merchant ships of either of the parties, which shall be
making into a port belonging to the enemy of the other ally, and concerning
whose voyage and the species of goods on board her, there shall be just grounds
of suspicion, shall be obliged to exhibit, as well upon the high-seas as in the
ports and havens, not only her passports, but likewise certificates, expressly
showing that her goods are not of the number of those which have been
prohibited as contraband.

ARTICLE XV. If, by the exhibiting of the abovesaid certificates, the other
party discover there are any of those sorts of goods which are prohibited and
declared contraband, and consigned for a port under the obedience of his enemy,
it shall not be lawful to break up the hatches of such ship, or to open any
chest, coffers, packs, casks, or any other vessels found therein, or to remove
the smallest parcels of her goods, whether such ship belongs to the subjects of
France, or the inhabitants of the said United States; unless the lading be
brought on shore in the presence of the officers of the Court of Admiralty, and
an inventory thereof made, but there shall be no allowance to sell, exchange,
or alienate the same in any manner, until after that due and lawful process
shall have been had against such prohibited goods, and the Court of Admiralty
shall, by a sentence pronounced, have confiscated the same; saving always, as
well the ship itself, as any other goods found therein, which by this Treaty
are to be esteemed free; neither may they be detained on pretense of their
being as it were infected by the prohibited goods, much less shall they be
confiscated as lawful prize; but if not the whole cargo, but only part thereof,
shall consist of prohibited or contraband goods, and the commander of the ship
shall be ready and willing to deliver them to the captor, who has discovered
them, in such case, the captor, having received those goods, shall forthwith
discharge the ship, and not hinder her by any means freely to prosecute the
voyage on which she was bound; but in case the contraband merchandise cannot be
all received on board the vessel of the captor, then the captor may,
notwithstanding the offer of delivering him the contraband goods, carry the
vessel into the nearest port, agreeable to what is above directed.

ARTICLE XVI. On the contrary it is agreed, That whatever shall be found to be
laden by the subjects and inhabitants of either party, on any ship belonging to
the enemies of the other, or to their subjects, the whole, although it be not
of the sort of prohibited goods may be confiscated, in the same manner as if it
belonged to the enemy, except such goods and merchandise as were put on board
such ship before the declaration of war, or were after such declaration, if so
be it were done without knowledge of such declaration; so that the goods of the
subjects and people of either party, whether they be of the nature of such as
are prohibited or otherwise, which as is aforesaid were put on board any ship
belonging to an enemy before the war, or after the declaration of the same,
without the knowledge of it, shall no ways be liable to confiscation, but shall
well and truly be restored without delay to the proprietors demanding the same;
but so as that, if the said merchandise be contraband, it shall not be any ways
lawful to carry them afterward to any port belonging to the enemy; the two
contracting parties agreeing, that the term of two months being past after the
declaration of war, their respective subjects, from whatever part of the world
they come, shall not plead the ignorance mentioned in this article.

ARTICLE XVII. And that more effectual care may be taken for the security of
the subjects and inhabitants of both parties, that they suffer no injury by the
men of war or privateers of the other party, all the commanders of the ships of
his Most Christian Majesty and of the said United States, and all their
subjects and inhabitants, shall be forbid doing any injury or damage to the
other side; and if they act to the contrary, they shall be punished, and shall
moreover be bound to make satisfaction for all matter of damage, and the
interest thereof, by reparation, under the pain and obligation of their persons
and goods.

ARTICLE XX. If any ship belonging to either of the parties, their people or
subjects, shall within the coasts or dominions of the other stick upon the
sands or be wrecked, or suffer any other damage, all friendly assistance and
relief shall be given to the persons ship wrecked, or such as shall be in
danger thereof, and letters of safe conduct shall likewise be given to them for
their free and quiet passage from thence, and the return of every one to his
own country.

ARTICLE XXI. In case the subjects and inhabitants of either party, with their
shipping, whether public and of war, or private and of merchants, be forced
through stress of weather, pursuit of pirates or enemies, or any other urgent
necessity for seeking of shelter and harbor, to retreat and enter into any of
the rivers, bays, roads or ports belonging to the other party, they shall be
received and treated with all humanity and kindness, and enjoy all friendly
protection and help; and they shall be permitted to refresh and provide
themselves at reasonable rates with victuals, and all things needful for the
sustenance of their persons, or reparation of their ships, and convenience of
their voyage; and they shall no ways be detained or hindered from returning out
of the said ports or roads, but may remove and depart when and whither they
please, without any let or hindrance.

ARTICLE XXV. It shall be lawful for all and singular the subjects of the Most
Christian King, and the citizens, people and inhabitants of the said United
States, to sail with their ships with all manner of liberty and security, no
distinction being made who are the proprietors of the merchandise laden
thereon, from any port, to the places of those who now are or hereafter shall
be at enmity with the Most Christian King or the United States. It shall
likewise be lawful for the subjects and inhabitants aforesaid, to sail with the
ships and merchandises aforementioned, and to trade with the same liberty and
security from the places, ports and havens of those who are the enemies of both
or either party, without any opposition or disturbance whatsoever, not only
directly from the places of the enemy aforementioned to neutral places, but
also from one place belonging to an enemy to another place belonging to an
enemy, whether they be under the jurisdiction of the same Prince or under
several: And it is hereby stipulated that free ships shall also give a freedom
to goods, and that every thing shall be deemed to be free and exempt, which
shall be found on board the ships belonging to the subjects of either of the
confederates, although the whole laden, or any part thereof, should appertain
to the enemies of either, contraband goods being always excepted: It is also
agreed in like manner, that the same liberty be extended to persons who are on
board a free ship, with this effect, that, although they be enemies to both or
either party, they are not to be taken out of that free ship, unless they are
soldiers, and in the actual service of the enemies.

ARTICLE XXVI. The liberty of navigation and commerce shall extend to all kinds
of merchandises, excepting those only which are distinguished by the name of
contraband, and under this name of contraband or prohibited goods shall be
comprehended arms, great guns, bombs with their fuses, and other things
belonging to them, cannon ball, gun powder, match, pikes, swords, lances,
spears, halberts, mortars, petards, grenadoes, salt petre, muskets, musket
ball, bucklers, helmets, breast plates, coats of mail, and the like kinds of
arms, proper for arming soldiers, musket rests, belts, horses with their
furniture, and all other warlike instruments whatever. These merchandises which
follow shall not be reckoned among contraband or prohibited goods, that is to
say, all sorts of cloths, and all other manufactures woven of any wool, flax,
silk, cotton, or any other materials whatever; all kinds of wearing apparel,
together with the species whereof they are used to be made, gold and silver, as
well coined as uncoined, tin, iron, latten, copper, brass, coals, as also wheat
and barley, and any other kind of corn and pulse, tobacco, and likewise all
manner of spices, salted and smoaked flesh, salted fish, cheese and butter,
beer, oils, wines, sugars, and all sorts of salts, and in general all
provisions which serve for the nourishment of mankind and the sustenance of
life; furthermore, all kinds of cotton, hemp, flax, tar, pitch, ropes, cables,
sails, sail cloths, anchors, and any parts of anchors, also ships masts,
planks, boards and beams, of what trees soever, and all other things proper
either for building or repairing ships, and all other goods whatsoever, which
have not been worked into the form of any instrument or thing prepared for war
by land or by sea, shall not be reputed contraband, much less such as have been
already wrought and made up for any other use; all which shall be wholly
reckoned among free goods, as likewise all other merchandises and things, which
are not comprehended and particularly mentioned in the foregoing enumeration of
contraband goods, so that they may be transported and carried in the freest
manner by the subjects of both confederates, even to places belonging to an
enemy, such towns or places being only excepted* as are at that time besieged,
blocked up, or invested.

ARTICLE XXVII. To the end that all manner of dissentions and quarrels may be
avoided and prevented, on one side and the other, it is agreed, that in case
either of the parties hereto should be engaged in war, the ships and vessels
belonging to the subjects or people of the other ally must be furnished with
sea letters or passports, expressing the name, property and bulk of the ship,
as also the name and place of habitation of the master or commander of the said
ship, that it may appear thereby that the ship really and truly belongs to the
subjects of one of the parties; which passport shall be made out and granted
according to the form annexed to this treaty. They shall likewise be recalled
every year, that is, if the ship happens to return home within the space of a
year; it is likewise agreed, that such ships being laden, are to be provided
not only with passports as abovementioned, but also with certificates,
containing the several particulars of the cargo, the place whence the ship
sailed, and whither she is bound, that so it may be known whether any forbidden
or contraband goods be on board of the same; which certificates shall be made
out by the officers of the place whence the ship set sail, in the accustomed
forms; and if any one shall think it fit or advisable to express in the said
certificates the person to whom the goods on board belong, he may freely do so.

ARTICLE XXIX. If the ships of the said subjects, people or inhabitants of
either of the parties shall be met with, either sailing along the coasts, or on
the high seas, by any ships of war of the other, or by any privateers, the said
ships of war, or privateers, for the avoiding of any disorder, shall remain out
of cannon shot, and may send their boats on board the merchant ship which they
shall so meet with, and may enter her to the number of two or three men only,
to whom the master or commander of such ship or vessel shall exhibit his
passport concerning the property of the ship, made out according to the form
inserted in this present treaty; and the ship, when she shall have showed such
passport, shall be free and at liberty to pursue her voyage, so as it shall not
be lawful to molest or search her in any manner, or to give her chase, or force
her to quit her intended course.

Form of the passports and letters, which are to be given to the ships and
barques, according to the 27th Article of this Treaty.
To ALL who shall see these Presents, Greeting.
IT is hereby made known, that leave and permission has been given to (...)
master and commander of the ship called (...) of the town of (...) burden
(...) tons or thereabout, lying at present in the port and haven of (...) and
bound for (...) and laden with (...) after that his ship has been visited, and
before sailing, he shall make oath before the officers who have the
jurisdiction of maritime affairs, that the said ship belongs to one or more of
the subjects of (...) the act whereof shall be put at the end of these
presents, as likewise that he will keep, and cause to be kept by his crew on
board, the marine ordinances and regulations, and enter in the proper office a
list, signed and witnessed, containing the names and sir-names, the places of
birth and abode of the crew of his ship, and of all who shall embark on board
her, whom he shall not take on board without the knowledge and permission of
the officers of the marine; and in every port or haven where he shall enter
with his ship, he shall show this present leave to the Officers and Judges of
the Marine, and shall give a faithful account to them of what passed and was
done during his voyage; and he shall carry the colors, arms and ensigns of the
King, or United States, during his voyage. In witness whereof, we have signed
these presents, and put the seal of our arms thereunto, and caused the same to
be countersigned by (...) at (...) the (...) day of (...) Anno Domini (...)


NOW THEREFORE, to the end that the said treaty maybe well and faithfully
performed and kept on the part and behalf of these United States, RESOLVED,
That all Captains, Commanders, and other Officers and Seamen, belonging to any
of the vessels of war of these United States, or any of them, or of any private
armed vessels commissioned by Congress and all other the subjects of these
United States, do govern themselves strictly in all things according to the
above recited articles, and that they do afford the same aid and protection to
the persons, commerce and property of the subjects of his Most Christian
Majesty, as is due to the persons, commerce and property of the inhabitants of
these United States. AND FURTHER IT IS RECOMMENDED to all the inhabitants of
these States, to consider the subjects of his most Christian Majesty as their
brethren and allies, and that they behave toward them with the friendship and
attention due to the subjects of a GREAT PRINCE, who, with the highest
magnanimity and wisdom, has treated with these United States on terms of
perfect equality and mutual advantage, thereby rendering himself THE PROTECTOR
OF THE RIGHTS OF MANKIND.

Extract from the Minutes, CHARLES THOMSON, Secretary.

ARTICLES of CONFEDERATION and PERPETUAL UNION between the STATES of
New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island and Providence Plantations,
Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia,
North Carolina, South Carolina, and Georgia.
ARTICLE I. THE style of this Confederacy shall be "The United States of
America."

ART. II. Each state retains its sovereignty, freedom and independence, and
every power, jurisdiction and right, which is not by this Confederation
expressly delegated to the United States in Congress assembled.

ART. III. The said states hereby severally enter into a firm league of
friendship with each other, for their common defense, the security of their
liberties, and their mutual and general welfare, binding themselves to assist
each other, against all force offered to, or attacks made upon them, or any of
them, on account of religion, sovereignty, trade, or any other pretense
whatever.

ART. IV. The better to secure and perpetuate mutual friendship and intercourse
among the people or the different states in this union, the free inhabitants of
each of these states, paupers, vagabonds, and fugitives from justice excepted,
shall be entitled to all privileges and immunities of free citizens in the
several states; and the people of each state shall have free ingress and
regress to and from any other state, and shall enjoy therein all the privileges
of trade and commerce, subject so the same duties, impositions and restrictions
as the inhabitants thereof respectively, provided that such restriction shall
not extend so far as to prevent the removal of property imported into any
state, to any other state of which the owner is an inhabitant; provided also
that no imposition, duties or restriction shall be laid by any state, on the
property of the United States, or either of them.

If any person guilty of, or charged with treason, felony, or other high
misdemeanor in any state, shall flee from justice, and be found in any of the
United States, he shall upon demand of the Governor or executive power of the
state from which he fled, be delivered up and removed to the state having
jurisdiction of his offense.

Full faith and credit shall be given in each of these states to the records,
acts and judicial proceedings of the courts and magistrates of every other
state.

ART. V. For the more convenient management of the general interests of the
United States, Delegates shall be annually appointed in such manner as the
legislature of each state shall direct to meet in Congress on the first Monday
in November, in every year, with power reserved to each state, to recall its
Delegates, or any of them, at any time within the year, and to send others in
their stead, for the remainder of the year.

No state shall be represented in Congress by less than two, nor by more than
seven members; and no person shall be capable of being a Delegate for more than
three years, in any term of six years; nor shall any person, being a Delegate,
be capable of holding any office under the United States, for which he, or
another for his benefit receives any salary, fees or emolument of any kind.

Each state shall maintain its own Delegates in a meeting of the states, and
while they act as members of the Committee of the states.

In determining questions in the United State, in Congress assembled, each
state shall have one vote.

Freedom of speech and debate in Congress shall not be impeached or questioned
in any court, or place out of Congress, and the members of Congress shall be
protected in their persons from arrests and imprisonments during the time of
their going to and from, and attendance on Congress, except for treason,
felony, or breach of the peace.

ART. VI. No state without the consent of the United States in Congress
assembled, shall send any embassy to, or receive any embassy from, or enter
into any conference, agreement, alliance or treaty with any King, Prince or
state; nor shall any person holding any office of profit or trust under the
United States, or any of them, accept of any present, emolument, office or
title of any kind whatever from any King, Prince or foreign state; nor shall
the United States in Congress assembled, or any of them grant any title of
nobility.

No two or more states shall enter into any treaty, confederation or alliance
whatever between them, without the consent of the United States in Congress
assembled, specifying accurately the purposes for which the same is to be
entered into, and how long it shall continue.

No state shall lay any imposts or duties, which may interfere with any
stipulations in treaties, entered into by the United States in Congress
assembled, with any King, Prince or State, in pursuance of any treaties already
proposed by Congress, to the Courts of France and Spain.

No vessels of war shall be kept up in time of peace by any state, except such
number only as shall be deemed necessary by the United States in Congress
assembled, for the defense of such state, or its trade; nor shall any body of
forces be kept up by any state in time of peace, except such number only, as in
the judgment of the United States in Congress assembled, shall be deemed
requisite to garrison the forts necessary for the defense of such state; but
every state shall always keep up a well regulated and disciplined militia,
sufficiently armed and accoutred, and shall provide and constantly have ready
for use, in public stores, a due number of field pieces and tents, and a proper
quantity of arms, ammunition, and camp equipage

No state shall engage in any war without the consent of the United States in
Congress assembled, unless such state be actually invaded by enemies, or shall
have received certain advice of a resolution being formed by some nation of
Indians to invade such state, and the danger is so imminent as not to admit of
a delay, till the United States in Congress assembled can be consulted; nor
shall any state grant commissions to any ships or vessels of war, nor letters
of marque or reprisal, except it be after a declaration of war by the United
States in Congress assembled, and then only against the kingdom or state and
the subjects thereof against which war has been so declared, and under such
regulations as shall be established by the United States in Congress assembled,
unless such state be infested by pirates, in which case vessels of war may be
fitted out for that occasion, and kept so long as the danger shall continue, or
until the United States in Congress assembled shall determine otherwise.

ART. VII. When land forces are raised by any state for the common defense, all
officers of or under the rank of Colonel, shall be appointed by the legislature
of each state respectively, by whom such forces shall be raised, or in such
manner as such state shall direct, and all vacancies shall be filled up by the
state which first made the appointment.

ART. VIII. All charges of war, and all other expenses that shall be incurred
for the common defense or general welfare, and allowed by the United States in
Congress assembled, shall be defrayed out of a common treasury, which shall be
supplied by the several states, in proportion to the value of all land within
each state, granted to or surveyed for any person, as such land and the
buildings and improvements thereon shall be estimated according to such mode as
the United States in Congress assembled, shall from time to time direct and
appoint. The taxes for paying that proportion shall be laid and levied by the
authority and direction of the legislatures of the several states within the
time agreed upon by the United States in Congress assembled.

ART. IX. The United States to Congress assembled, shall have the sole and
exclusive right and power of determining on peace and war, except in the cases
mentioned in the sixth article -- of sending and receiving Ambassadors --
entering into treaties and alliances, provided that no treaty of commerce shall
be made whereby the legislative power of the respective states shall be
restrained from imposing such imposts and duties on foreigners, as their own
people are subjected to, or from prohibiting the exportation or importation of
any species of goods or commodities whatsoever -- of establishing rules for
deciding in all cases, what captures on land or water shall be legal, and in
what manner prizes taken by land or naval forces in the service of the United
States shall be divided or appropriated -- of granting letters of marque and
reprisal in times of peace -- appointing courts for the trial of piracies and
felonies committed on the high seas, and establishing courts for receiving and
determining finally appeals in all cases of captures, provided that no member
of Congress shall be appointed a Judge of any of the said courts.

The United States in Congress assembled shall also be the last resort on
appeal in all disputes and differences now subsisting, or that hereafter may
arise between two or more states concerning boundary, jurisdiction or any other
cause whatever; which authority shall always be exercised in the manner
following. Whenever the legislative or executive authority or lawful agent of
any state in controversy with another shall present a petition to Congress,
stating the matter in question and praying for a hearing, notice thereof shall
be given by order of Congress to the legislative or executive authority of the
other state in controversy, and a day assigned for the appearance of the
parties by their lawful agents, who shall then be directed to appoint, by joint
consent, commissioners or judges to constitute a court for hearing and
determining the matter in question: But if they cannot agree, Congress shall
name three persons out of each of the United States, and from the list of such
persons each party shall alternately strike out one, the petitioners beginning,
until the number shall be reduced to thirteen; and from that number not less
than seven, nor more than nine names as Congress shall direct, shall in the
presence of Congress be drawn out by lot, and the persons whose names shall be
so drawn, or any five of them, shall be commissioners or Judges, to hear and
finally determine

The United States in Congress assembled shall have authority to appoint a
Committee, to sit in the recess of Congress, to be denominated "A Committee of
the States," and to consist of the Delegate from each state; and to appoint
such other committees and civil officers as may be necessary for managing the
general affairs of the United States under their direction -- to appoint one of
their number to preside, provided that no person be allowed to serve in the
office of President more than one year in any term of three years; to ascertain
the necessary sums of money to be raised for the service of the United States,
and to appropriate and apply the same for defraying the public expenses -- to
borrow money, or emit bills on the credit of the United States transmitting
every half year to the respectiv, states an account of the sums of money so
borrowed or emitted, -- to build and equip a navy -- to agree upon the number
of land forces, and to make requisitions from each state for its quota, in
proportion to the number of white inhabitants in such state; which requisition
shall be binding, and thereupon the legislature of each state shall appoint the
regimental officers, raise the men, and cloth, arm and equip them in a soldier
like manner, at the expense of the United States; and the officers and men so
clothed, armed and equipped, shall march to the place appointed, and within
the time agreed on by the United States in Congress assembled: But if the
United States in Congress assembled shall, on consideration of circumstances,
judge proper that any state should not raise men, or should raise a smaller
number than its quota, and that any other state should raise a greater number
of men than the quota thereof, such extra number shall be raised, officered,
clothed, armed and equipped in the same manner as the quota of such state,
unless the legislature of such state shall judge that such extra number cannot
be safely spared out of the same, in which case they shall raise, officer,
cloth, arm and equip as many of such extra number as they judge can be safely
spared. And the officers and men so clothed, armed and equipped shall march to
the place appointed, and within the time agreed on by the United States in
Congress assembled.

The United States in Congress assembled shall never engage in a war, nor grant
letters of margue and reprisal, in time of peace, nor enter into any treaties
or alliances, nor coin money, nor regulate the value thereof, nor ascertain the
sums and expenses necessary for the defense and welfare of the United States,
or any of them nor emit bills, nor borrow money on the credit of the United
States, nor appropriate money, nor agree upon the number of vessels of war to
be built or purchased, or the number of land or sea forces to be raised, nor
appoint a commander in chief of the army or navy, unless nine states assent to
the same: nor shall a question on any other point, except for adjourning from
day to day be determined, unless by the votes of a majority of the United
States in Congress assembled.

The Congress of the United States shall have power to adjourn to any time
within the year and to any place within the United States, so that no period of
adjournment be for a longer duration than the space of six months, and shall
publish the journal of their proceedings monthly except such parts thereof
relating to treaties alliances, or military operations, as in their judgment
require secrecy; and the yeas and nays of the Delegates of each state on any
question shall be entered on the journal, when it is desired by any Delegate;
and the Delegates of a state, or any of them, at his or their request, shall be
furnished with a transcript of the said journal, except such parts as are above
excepted, to lay before the legislatures of the several states.

ART. X. The Committee of the states, or any nine of them, shall be authorized
to execute, in the recess of Congress, such of the powers of Congress as the
United States in Congress assembled, by the consent of nine states, shall from
time to time think expedient to vest them with; provided that no power be
delegated to the said committee, for the exercise of which, by the Articles of
Confederation, the voice of nine states in the Congress of the United States
assembled is requisite.

ART. XI. Canada acceding to this Confederation, and joining in the measures of
the United States, shall be admitted into, and entitled to all the advantages
of this union: But (...) other colony shall be admitted into the same, unless
such admission be agreed to by nine states.

ART. XI. All bills of credit emitted, moneys borrowed and debts contracted by,
or under the authority of Congress, before the assembling of the United States,
in pursuance of the present Confederation, shall be deemed and considered as a
charge against the United States, for payment and satisfaction whereof the said
united States, and the public faith are hereby solemnly pledged.

ART. XIII. Every State shall abide by the determinations of the United States
in Congress assembled, on all questions which by this Confederation are
submitted to them. And the Articles of this Confederation shall be inviolably
observed by every state, and the union shall be perpetual; nor shall any
alteration at any time hereafter be made in any of them; unless such alteration
be agreed to in a Congress of the United States, and be afterward confirmed by
the legislatures of every state.

THESE Articles shall be proposed to the Legislatures of all the United States,
to be considered, and if approved of by them, they are advised to authorize
their delegates, to ratify the same in the Congress of the United States; which
being done, the same shall become conclusive.

By Order of the CONGRESS, HENRY LAURENS, PRESIDENT.

List of the MEMBERS of the Honorable the CONGRESS of the UNITED AMERICAN
STATES.
The Honorable HENRY LAURENS, Esquire, President.

Chaplains.
Rev. Mr. GEORGE DUFFIELD, Rev. Mr. WILLIAM WHITE,
New Hampshire.
Nathaniel Folsom, George Frost, Esquires
Massachusetts Bay.
John Hancock, Samuel Adams, John Adams, Robert Treat Pain, Elbridge Gerry,
Francis Dans, James Lovel, Esquires.
Rhode Island.
Stephen Hopkins, Henry Merchant, William Ellery, Esquires.
Connecticut.
Roger Sherman, E^phalet Dyer, Oliver Welcott, Titus Ho^mer, Samuel Huntington,
Oliver Ellisworth, Andrew Adams, Esquires.
New York.
Philip Livingston, James Duane, Francis Lewis, Governuere Morris, William
Duer, Esquires.
New Jersey.
Reverend Doctor, John Witherspoon, Abraham Clark, Jonathan Elmore, Nathaniel
Scudder, Elias Boudinot, Esquires.
Pennsylvania.
Benjamin Franklin, Robert Morris, Daniel Roberdeau, Jonathan Bayard Smith,
William Clingan, Joseph Reed, Esquires.
Delaware.
George Read, Nicholas Vandyke, Esqrs.
Maryland.
Samuel Chase, George Plater, Charles Carrol, Thomas Stone, John Henry, jun,
James Forbes, Esquires.
Virginia.
Francis Lightfoot Lee, John Harvie, Thomas Adams, Richard Henry Lee, John
Bannister, Esquires.
North Carolina.
Thomas Burke, Cornelius Harnet, John Penn, Esquires.
South Carolina.
Henry Laurens, Arthur Middleton, Thomas Heyward, Charles Pinckney, Paul
Trapier, Esquires.
Georgia.
Nathan Brownson, Edward Langworthy, Joseph Wood, Lyman Hall, George Walton,
Esquires.
CHARLES THOMSON, Esquire, Secretary.

Members of the Supreme Executive Council of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
His Excellency THOMAS WHARTON, Junior, Esquire, President.

The Honorable GEORGE BRYAN, Esquire, Vice President.

MEMBERS of the Council.
Joseph Heart, John Mackey, John Bailey, Jacob Orndt, Jacob Morgan, James Edgar,
Jonathan Hoge, Thomas Urie, John Hambright, Thomas Scott, Esquires.
Timothy Matlack, Esquire, Secretary.

Members of the General Assembly of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
JAMES M'CLENE, Esquire, Speaker.

Philadelphia County.
John Bayard, William Co^ts, Frederick Antis, Robert Knox, John Thompson,
Robert Lollar, Esqrs.
Bucks County.
Joseph Kirkbride, Gilliam Carnel, John Folwell, John Keller, Arthur Wats,
Matthew Greer, Esqrs.
Chester County.
Joseph Gardner, Samuel Cunningham, Stephen Cochran, John Fulton, John
Culbertson, Lewis Gronow, Esqrs
Lancaster County.
William Brown, Alexander Lowrey, James Anderson, Philip Ma^steller, John
M'Mullan, Lodw. Lauman, Esqrs
York County.
David Dunwoody, James Dixon, Matthew Dill, John Agnew, Michael Hahn, John Orr,
Esqrs.
Cumberland County.
William Duffield, James Brown, John Harris, William Clark, Robert Whitchill,
Esqrs.
Berks County.
James Read, Benjamin Spycker, Daniel Hunter, Adam Whitman, Sebastian Levan,
Bal^zer Geh^, Esqrs.
Northampton County.
Peter Burkholder, Simon Dresbach, Peter Rhoads, William M Farren, John Van
Campen, John Ralston, Esqrs.
Bedford County.
Herman Husband, William M Coombe, John Stevens, Charles Cisna, John Burd, John
Stewart, Esqrs.
Northumberland County.
Samuel D^^l, James Murray, Simon Himrod, Robert Fruit, Robert Fleming, William
Irwin, Esqrs.
Westmoreland County.
Thomas Galbraith, John Carmichael, David Semple, Christopher Hays, John
Shields, James Smith, Esqrs.
JOHN MORRIS, jun. Esquire Clerk.


