PROCEEDINGS OF A GENERAL COURT MARTIAL, HELD AT WHITE PLAINS, IN THE STATE OF
NEW YORK, BY ORDER OF HIS EXCELLENCY GENERAL WASHINGTON, COMMANDER IN CHIEF OF
THE ARMY OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, FOR THE TRIAL OF MAJOR GENERAL ST.
CLAIR, AUGUST 25, 1778. Major General LINCOLN, President.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY HALL AND SELLERS, IN MARKET-STREET. MDCCLXXVIII.

PROCEEDINGS OF A GENERAL COURT MARTIAL, etc.
Major General LINCOLN, PRESIDENT. MEMBERS.
Brigadier General NIXON, Brigadier General CLINTON, Brigadier General WAYNE,
Brigadier General MUHLENBURGH, Colonel WILLIS, Colonel GREATON, Colonel PUTNAM,
Colonel M. GIST, Colonel RUSSEL, Colonel GRAYSON, Colonel STEWART, Colonel
MEIGGS.
JOHN LAURANCE, JUDGE ADVOCATE.
THE Judge Advocate produces His Excellency the Commander in Chief's Orders for
the Court to (...), which being read, are as follow:

Headquarters, White Plains, August 23, 1778.
A GENERAL Court Martial, whereof Major General Lincoln is appointed President,
will sit tomorrow morning at nine o'clock, at the New Dining Room, near Baron
De Kalb's quarters, for the trial of Major General St. Clair. Brigadiers
General Nixon, Clinton, Wayne, and Muhlenburgh. -- Colonels Grayson, Russel, M.
Gist, Greaton, Putnam, Meiggs, Stewart and Cortland, are to attend as members.

Headquarters, White Plains, August 24, 1778.
THE General Court Martial, whereof Major General Lincoln is President, will
sit tomorrow at the time and place mentioned in yesterday's orders. Members
the same, except Colonel Willis vice Colonel Cortland, who is absent on command.

AUGUST 25th.
THE President, Members and Judge Advocate being sworn, the Judge Advocate
prosecuting in the name of the United States of America, the Court proceed to
the trial of Major General St. Clair, who appears before the Court, and the
following charges, contained in a Report of a Committee of Congress appointed
to examine the evidence collected, and to state charges against the General
Officers who were in the Northern Department when Ticonderoga and Mount
Independence were evacuated, are exhibited against him.

First. With neglect of duty, under the 5th article of the 18th section of the
Rules and Articles of War.

Second. With cowardice, with treachery, with incapacity as a General,
respectively; under the 5th article of the 18th section of the Rules and
Articles of War.

Third. With treachery, under the 5th article of the 18th section of the Rules
and Articles of War.

Fourth. With inattention to the progress of the enemy, with treachery, with
incapacity as a General, respectively; under the 5th article of the 18th
section of the Rules and Articles of War.

Fifth. With shamefully abandoning the posts of Ticonderoga and Mount
Independence, in his charge; under the 12th article of the 13th section of the
Rules and Articles of War.

Major General ST. CLAIR pleads NOT GUILTY.

The Judge Advocate states the matters upon which the charges against the
General are founded, as follow:

Gentlemen,

IT is necessary (previous to my producing the requisite evidence on this
trial) that I should inform you of the matters, upon which the charges against
Major General St. Clair are founded. They are certain remarks, made by a
committee of the Hon. the Continental Congress, appointed to examine the
evidence collected, and to state charges against the general officers who were
in the northern department when Ticonderoga and Mount Independence were
evacuated.

Before I mention these remarks, I would inform you that Major General St.
Clair, on or about the 13th day of June, 1777, took upon him the command of
Ticonderoga and Mount Independence, and that these places were evacuated to the
enemy by his orders on the 6th day of July following.

The first remark is: That on the 13th day of June General St. Clair was
possessed of an information from two prisoners taken in Canada, that the
British forces, amounting to about 10,000 men, were proceeding as fast as
possible against him, and that he might expect their arrival in three weeks at
farthest. That as on the 18th of June four of the enemy's vessels were lying on
the hither side of Split Rock, and on the 24th seven of them were at
Crown-Point, and others four or five miles lower down, their forces then
encamped on both sides of Gilleland's Creek, and he was informed by his scouts
that they were very numerous; so from these circumstances it appears General
St. Clair had substantial reason to confide in what the prisoners had told him
relative to the intentions and strength of the enemy; and that he ought at this
time to have taken his final resolution, either to stand an attack, or to
retreat with his stores, the preservation of which was a principal object in
the determination of a council of war on the 20th of June. Therefore it appears
that General St. Clair's neglecting to form his decisive opinion at this time,
or at a later day, so as to allow him a sufficient opportunity to retreat with
his troops, sick, ammunition, cannon, provisions and clothing, and to deprive
the enemy of shelter at Ticonderoga, was a neglect of duty.

Second. That General St. Clair, on the 24th of June, was informed by his
scouts the enemy were very numerous and yet, nevertheless, on the next day he
wrote to Congress, that he was not able to discover whether the enemy were in
force or not.

Third. That if General St. Clair found small scouts could not acquire a
knowledge whether the enemy were in force or not, it was his duty in due time
to have sent out reconnoitering parties, in such force as might have assured
him whether or not the enemy were in strength, this being a most important
point, as upon this he was to regulate his motions; and therefore his failure
in sending out such parties in due time was a neglect of duty.

Fourth. That as Jesse Leavenworth swears General St. Clair did not annoy the
enemy in their advance against, and investiture of, the posts under his care,
although the troops were healthy, courageous, and (...) of action, it appears
the General did not to the utmost of his power oppose the operations of the
enemy; and therefore that he is liable to the charge of neglect of duty, of
cowardice, or of treachery, or of incapacity as a General.

Fifth. That as it was determined in a council of war on the twentieth of June,
approved by General Schuyler, the commanding officer in the department, that
the repairing the old and adding new works on Mount Independence ought to claim
immediate attention; and Jesse Leavenworth swears not a stroke was struck for
those purposes; and by the orderly book it appears the fatigue party was
decreased in number, and continued so at a time when it should have been
abundantly increased; so on these points the General is liable to be charged
with a neglect of duty, amounting to a breach of orders, and with treachery.

Sixth. That as on the 25th of May, the Deputy Commissary rated that 1400
barrels of flour would, at an allowance of one pound each man per diem, serve
4000 men 66 days, and that 661 barrels of beef would serve the same number of
men 75 days; and supposing that, from the twentieth of June to the fourth of
July inclusive, there were in Ticonderoga and Mount Independence 4739 men, and
there does not appear to have been at any time between these periods a greater
number; so estimating the consumption of 4739 men, from the twentieth of June
to the fourth of July inclusive, upon the 2015 barrels of flour, 195 barrels of
beef, and 784 barrels of pork, on the twentieth of June returned by Deputy
Commissary Yancey as then actually remaining on hand, there did on the fourth
of July remain, or ought, if provisions had been regularly and properly issued,
to be then remaining 1625 barrels of flour, 3 barrels of beef, and 784 barrels
of pork; a magazine of provisions sufficient to afford to the army on the fifth
of July, amounting, by the arrival of the militia of the Grants, to 5639 men of
all ranks, fall allowance of provision in flour for 52 days, and in beef and
pork for 32 days, exclusive of the considerable number of fat cattle that
arrived at Ticonderoga on the fifth of July, the teams of oxen necessarily
attending the post, and other stores specified in the Commissary's return on
the twentieth of June, and even supposing, as may not reasonably be done, that
no supply of flour had arrived after that day. And as this calculation has been
liberally made, upon the quantity of provisions actually in Ticonderoga on the
twentieth of June, for the expenditure of which General St. Clair, as commander
at the post, ought to be held responsible; therefore it clearly appears
Ticonderoga and Mount Independence were not abandoned upon the just principle
of a want of provisions.

Seventh. That as General St. Clair informed the Hon. Mr. Jay, that at the time
of holding the council of war on the 5th of July he knew it to be impossible to
defend the posts with his numbers, it is natural to conclude he was decided
upon this point as early as the 29th of June, the day that he sent his son and
private effects from Ticonderoga to Fort-George, as a place of safety: That
being decided upon this point, it was his duty then to have taken as effectual
measures for the preservation of the public property, at least equally with his
own, claiming his earliest attention: That on the 30th of June, the enemy being
advancing against him so near as the Three-mile-point, it is incredible that he
did not then know that they were in force: That it was his duty, at that point
of time, to have finally determined either to abide the operations of the
enemy, or to retire: That if the last resolution was taken, and, from his
sending off his son and baggage the day before, there is the strongest
presumption that this resolution was then fully taken, it was his duty then to
have proceeded to send off the public stores, to destroy the works, and to
evacuate the posts without losing a moment of time: And that by deferring to
take any measures to retire till the last moment when he could possibly retreat
even with his effective troops, a moment when the sick, ammunition, cannon,
provision and clothing of the army must be abandoned and lost, besides the
lives of many men in effecting a retreat from before an enemy immediately upon
him, General St. Clair appears chargeable with inattention to the progress of
the enemy, with treachery, or with incapacity as a General, and with shamefully
abandoning the posts of Ticonderoga and Mount Independence, in his charge. Nor
can the proving, as General St. Clair wishes to do, that the works of
Ticonderoga and Mount Independence were too extensive, and that the troops were
very badly armed, if such things can be proved, fail of placing General St.
Clair in a more reprehensible point of view, as the weakness of his defense
being more obvious, his retreat should have been the earlier determined upon.

The charge of neglect of duty is founded on the first, third, fourth and fifth
remarks respectively. -- Cowardice, treachery, incapacity as a General,
respectively, are founded upon the fourth remark. -- Treachery, founded upon
the fifth remark. -- Inattention to the progress of the enemy, treachery,
incapacity as a General, respectively, founded upon the seventh remark. --
Shamefully abandoning the posts of Ticonderoga and Mount Independence, in his
charge, founded upon the seventh remark.

Major General St. Clair requests that the Resolution of Congress of the 5th of
February last, appointing two Counselors learned in the law to assist and
cooperate with the Judge Advocate in the trial of the General Officers who
were in the Northern Department when Ticonderoga and Mount Independence were
evacuated, may be read; which, being read, is as follows:

IN CONGRESS, February 5, 1778.
THE Committee, appointed on the 27th of August, 1777, to collect evidence of
the state of the army in the Northern Department, and also the state of the
troops, military stores and provisions, at the posts of Ticonderoga and Mount
Independence, before and at the time when the evacuation was determined upon,
Report,

That they have made the fullest enquiry in their power into the several
articles enumerated in the resolve of Congress of the date above mentioned, and
have collected a variety of evidence, which they are ready to transmit to
General Washington: Whereupon

Resolved, That the Committee be directed to transmit the evidence by then
collected to General Washington, and that he be authorized and directed to
appoint a Court Martial for the trial of the General Officers who were in the
Northern Department when Ticonderoga and Mount Independence were evacuated,
agreeable to the Rules and Articles of War.

That two Counselors learned in the law be appointed, to assist and cooperate
with the Judge Advocate in conducting the trial.

The Gentlemen chosen. Jonathan D. Sergeant, Esquire Attorney General for the State
of Pennsylvania.

William Patterson, Esquire Attorney General for the State of New Jersey.

Extract from the Minutes, CHARLES THOMSON, Secretary.

Major General St. Clair requests the Judge Advocate to inform him what steps
have been taken respecting these gentlemen's attendance: -- The Judge Advocate
produces a copy of a letter written by him to his Excellency General
Washington, and the General's answer, which are as follow:

White Plains, August 24, 1778. SIR,
AS the Congress have resolved that two Counselors learned in the law should
assist and cooperate with me in the prosecution of the General Officers
respecting the evacuation of Ticonderoga, I am under the necessity, previous to
my proceeding to the trial of Major General St. Clair, of requesting your
Excellency to inform me whether those gentlemen have been desired to attend
agreeable to the Resolution of Congress.

I am, with much respect, Your Excellency's obedient Servant, JOHN LAURANCE,
JUDGE ADVOCATE.


Camp, August 24, 1778. SIR,
ON the 13th instant I wrote to William Patterson and Jonathan D. Sergeant,
Esquires, Attorney Generals for Jersey and Pennsylvania, by express, and
transmitted a copy of the Resolution which you mention, notifying them at the
same time, that General St. Clair's trial would come on today. I have received
an answer from Mr. Patterson, by which he declines attending. From Mr. Sergeant
I have not heard. The letter to him I enclosed to the care of Mr. Laurens,
President of Congress, with a request that it might be forwarded to him, as I
did not know in what part of Pennsylvania he then was.

I am, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, GEORGE WASHINGTON.
P. S. The President received my letter of the 13th, which enclosed Mr.
Serjeant's, and I am informed dispatched it by express.




The letters being read, Major General St. Clair addresses the Court as follows:

THE resolution that has just been read is of so singular a nature, that I
cannot pass it by without some observations.

The treatment I have received renders it necessary for me to submit to any
regulation that may have been prescribed, as an objection on my part would
probably be construed into the fear of a thorough investigation, and
consequently an evidence of guilt. I shall therefore make no objection to the
learned gentlemen, should they attend, assisting and cooperating with the
Judge Advocate in my trial: But, as I conceive this to be introducing a very
great change in the mode of proceeding before Courts Martial, I cannot consent
that Congress have any power to make that change.

Courts Martial were constituted by the first article of the 14th section of
the rules and articles for the government of the troops, and the mode of
proceeding in them by the third article of the same section. These articles
every officer is obliged to subscribe, whereby they become a compact betwixt
the army and the people, and cannot be altered but by common consent; and a
resolve of Congress has no more operation upon them than an edict of the Grand
Turk. But a power to alter the ordinary course of proceeding for a particular
case is big with consequences of the most dangerous nature, and might be made
an instrument of the most grievous oppression. I do therefore, on behalf of the
army, solemnly protest against my having submitted to this innovation ever
hereafter being drawn into precedent.

Major General St. Clair admits he took the command of Ticonderoga and Mount
Independence on or about the 13th day of June, 1777, and that these posts were
evacuated by his orders the 6th day of July following.

The Judge Advocate produces copies of letters from Major General St. Clair to
Major General Schuyler, dated June 13th, June 18th, and June 24th, 1777; also a
copy of a letter from Major General St. Clair to Congress, dated June 25th,
1777; a copy of a letter from General St. Clair to Major General Schuyler,
dated June 30th, 1777; the proceedings of a Council of Officers held at
Ticonderoga the 20th of June, 1777; a state of the guards and fatigue party,
June 15th, 1777, from a copy of General St. Clair's orderly book; also an order
from the said orderly book respecting the guards and fatigue party, June 23d,
1777: which, being read, are as follow:

Ticonderoga, June 13, 1777. Dear General,
HERE follows the substance of the information given by two men from Canada,
taken prisoners by one of our parties on Onion River.

That General Burgoyne it arrived in Canada, but has brought no troops with
him; that the British army is assembling as fast as possible at St. John's;
that the light infantry, which they call the flying army, commanded by General
Frazer, is already advanced to Point-au-Fer; that the whole army is said to
consist of about ten thousand men, a part of which, with Indians under the
command of Sir John Johnson, and Canadians under Captain Mackay, are to
penetrate the country by the Mohawk River whilst the rest of the army under
General Burgoyne crosses the Lake to attack this place; that their fleet (a
particular account of which is in the enclosed letter to General Sullivan) is
all in the Lake, and we may depend on their being here in a fortnight at
farthest.

From the nature and circumstance of the pass granted to one of the two, which
I here enclose, and his own account of the manner in which he was sent from
Montreal, viz. to search plans of the country which he pretended to know are
hid at Metcalf's, and his being possessed of a considerable sum of continental
money, and some gold and silver, I have the strongest suspicion of his being a
spy, and have secured him (...) such, and sent him down to you, both that you
might have an opportunity to examine him yourself, and that, if you should
think of him as I do, he might be tried at Albany, where, should he be found
guilty, the sentence will probably be more adequate to the crime than here; for
I find the officer, who lately suffered a spy he had in charge to escape,
through the grossest misconduct, has been honorably acquitted by a Court
Martial.

You will likewise find a letter from Col. Bailey, containing the intelligence
brought by two Frenchmen sent down by General Gates. Though their intelligence
differs very materially, they agree in the circumstance of General Burgoyne's
arrival; and if these fellows have really been sent by him to see what we were
about, there was no method more likely to procure them an easy reception than
that of giving an account of the preparations in Canada, and carrying, or
pretending to carry, letters from our friends. The letter to General Sullivan
may notwithstanding be genuine, and Amsbury says it was written by one Michael
Shannon. This name was found upon him on a separate piece of paper, in a fair
hand, which he seemed unwilling to part with, and which I suppose to have been
a private signal by which he was to be known upon his return.

If the enemy intend to attack us, I assure you, Sir, we are very ill prepared
to receive them. The whole amount of continental troops, fit for duty, is 1576
rank and file, exclusive of Baldwin's artificers and Whitcomb's 52 rangers.
Besides these there are three regiments of Hampshire militia, engaged for no
particular term, and who go off whenever they please, 150 are gone since last
return; two regiments of Massachusetts militia of 252 rank and file fit for
duty, engaged for two months from their arrival, three weeks of which with some
of them is already expired. Among the number returned sick there is no doubt
but many would be useful in case of necessity, but at any rate we cannot reckon
upon more than 2200 men. I am very much concerned to give you this disagreeable
detail, but I have something worse to add to it. -- We cannot increase our
numbers by calling in the militia without ruin; for by the Commissary's return
and the account of his weekly expenditure, there is meat for seven weeks only
on the ground, and he has no prospect of any supply of salt meat, but from some
place near Still-Water, nor of fresh, but by sending to New England for it. --
This I have desired him to do, but must own I have little prospect of advantage
from it; for be assured that, and indeed every other communication, may and
will very easily be cut off. -- I have heard of some cattle below Crown-Point,
which I shall send for tomorrow.

The bridge goes on tolerably well, but is indeed a very heavy troublesome job.
-- The cassoons, Col. Baldwin says, will be all sunk by the end of next week;
in the mean time I have ordered the floating bridge to be removed to the lower
side of them, which will serve as a kind of second boom, and retard at least,
if not prevent, the enemy's vessels from passing, should they attempt it.

A magazine of wood should be laid in immediately, but how to effect it I know
not, as there are no teams here of any kind, and not a stick upon the Mount. --
All the timber for the bridge is hauled out of the woods by hand, and employs a
much greater number of men than would otherwise be necessary, and might be
employed, and are wanted for other purposes. -- What can the Quartermaster
mean by leaving this place, where so many works are to be carried on, without
so necessary an article as draught cattle?

The tents here are in general very bad. I must beg you, my dear General, to
hasten up the new tents, for I shall get no good of the troops here in any way,
whilst they remain in barracks.

Our powder magazines are in so wretched a state, that I am told near fifty
pounds of powder a week is damaged. In short, every thing is so much out of
order, that I will add no more to this lift of grievances, than to tell you we
have no cartridge paper.

When I write again, I hope to have something more agreeable to entertain you
with, and am,

With much esteem, Your most obedient humble Servant, A. ST. CLAIR.

The Hon. Major General SCHUYLER.
I forgot to mention a paper in which Amsbury's money was wrapped and is also
enclosed; it is blurred and blotted, but you will observe it contains a letter
from Ephesians. Jones to his brother, dated June 2d, about the time Amsbury left
Montreal, and is a corroborating circumstance of the fellow's ill design.

I should have called upon the militia but for the state of our magazine. --
Should they come in fast, which I believe they would, they might eat us out
before either the arrival of the enemy or a supply. -- Please to give your
directions on this head as soon as possible.

The batteaus are in ruin for want of pitch and tar, which Col. May says he has
often wrote for.

Adams, the other of the prisoners, seems to be an innocent fellow, and whom
Amsbury brought off with him without knowing his errand; he was taken by
Mack^^y at the Sabbath Day Point.




Ticondorega, June 18, 1777. Dear General,
ENCLOSED you have the returns of the troops and stores at this place, all
except the cloathier's, which is so drained I thought it needless to ask for
any from him, as he has almost literally nothing.

Since my last I have had constant scouts out, but have made no discovery of
the enemy, save that four of their vessels are lying about a mile on the hither
side of the Split Rock; they consist of two ships, and two gondolas; and on
Friday last a schooner beat up within four miles of Crown-Point, but, without
landing any of her people, or coming to anchor, returned down the lake.

Yesterday about noon we had two men, who had strolled out of camp without
arms, taken by a party of savages, who had stole down to the road side betwixt
M'lntosh's and the bridge, and concealed themselves in the bushes; they were
immediately pursued as far as Putnam's Creek, but could not be over-taken;
unluckily, however, they fell in with a scouting party I had sent down to
discover the motions of the enemy, that were upon their return, and fired upon
them unexpectedly; the officer is wounded, one man killed and scalped, and one
missing, but whether taken or not is as yet uncertain.

Another party that I had ordered to proceed to Point-au-Fer, or wherever the
enemy might be, returned last night on discovering a large party of Indians on
the east side of the lake about four miles above Crown-Point. I think of
sending to feel their pulse tonight, as I am sure it would be of consequences
to give those fellows a drubbing.

I am at a loss to form a judgment of the designs of the enemy. If they mean to
attack us, one would think it indiscreet to put us on our guard by such a
trifling affair, and yet I cannot think they could prevail with any number of
the savages to come on, unless they had an army not far off to support them. Be
(...) as it will, I shall use every precaution possible against surprise and
will endeavor to penetrate their designs. The same reason, notwithstanding our
weakness, still prevails against calling for the militia as when I wrote last,
having as yet received no supply of meat either fresh or salt.

Do you know, Sir, any thing about the terms upon which Capt. Whitcomb's corpse
was raised. He informs me, that by General Gates's orders he promised his
people that they should have the same bounty as the troops of the state in
which they were raised, notwithstanding they were not part of their quota. This
promise has not been complied with, and they are held by a conditional
agreement only, which expires this day. I shall be able to retain them,
however, until you favor me with your answer.

I am making some improvement upon the Mount, but that and the Ticonderoga side
have such dependence upon, and connection with, each other, that in my opinion
it will be very dangerous to give up either, and yet it is certain we cannot
with our present numbers hold both. I design, however, to make the appearance
of doing it, and after defending Ticonderoga as long as possible retreat to
Mount Independence.

Our guards are crowded with tories; they are dangerous here, and cannot
properly be tried. I have ordered them to Albany.

I am, etc. A. ST. CLAIR.

Major General SCHUYLER.
The bridge goes on heavily, the cassoons not all sunk yet, but the timber is
almost all cut, and in the water.

The officers of the fleet have not received commissions, and are very uneasy
about it.




Ticonderoga, June 24, 1777. Dear General,
SERGEANT HEATH, who I sent down the Lake to make discoveries, returned last
night, and informs me, that on Tuesday last he saw two birch canoes going down
the Lake with sixteen Indians and three white men in them, and supposes it was
the party that had done the mischief near the lines the day before -- that,
from a place near the mouth of Otter Creek, he saw three vessels under sail
beating up, one at anchor about one mile above Split Rock, and the Thunderer
behind it -- from this place he likewise descried an encampment of the enemy on
both sides of Gilliland's Creek -- that from the appearance of it, and the
extent, he thinks it must contain a great body of men, and that a number of
smoaks arose at a distance back, which he supposed was from the encampment of
the Indians, -- that on Friday last, from Pointon, he saw twenty batteaus come
out of Gilliland's Creek, and sail up the Lake past the Split Rock toward
Ticonderoga -- that one of the inhabitants in whom he could place confidence
informed him the Indians were very numerous -- that they frequently cross to
the east side of the Lake, and that a party of them had been at his house a few
minutes before his arrival -- that he then returned to Otter-Creek, where he
proposed to have halted to refresh his party, but on being informed that a
large party of Indians were at one Briton's, he made the best of his way here
-- one of his party this day fell behind a little, and was either taken or
deserted; he suspects the latter, because he both waited for him, and sent back
to look for him -- that one Webb, another inhabitant, informed him that the
enemy had been four or five days at Gilliland's -- that they came up with a
vast number of batteaux and some gondolas -- that some of the troops come over
frequently, and say their whole army is there, and that they are only waiting
the arrival of the rest of their vessels and stores, when they are to attack
this place.

I have no doubt that a party of the enemy are at Gilliland's, nor that their
design is to come here, but not in my opinion to attack, but to harrass us, and
give confidence to their savages, who, it is more than probable, would not have
been prevailed upon to undertake it without being joined by some regular
troops. Were they in force, it is improbable they would waste their time at
such a distance, in a part of the country where they can find nothing to
refresh themselves; and I do not find that they have made any depredations on
the east side.

It is not easy to judge of the force at a distant view of an encampment, and
Heath must have been six miles or more distant from that on Gilliland's Point,
a distance too great to determine any thing with precision, although he had a
glass to assist his eye; besides, I think the ground is not capable of
encamping a great number (for he insists on it they are not upon the high
ground, but upon the beach only) but of this you are a much better judge than
me, as I never saw it but once: Be the matter as it will, I shall endeavor to
guard against surprise, and to discover both them and their designs; and, if
opportunity offers, feel their pulses a little.

I had all the ground between this and Crown-Point, from the Lake some distance
over the mountains, well examined yesterday with a heavy scout, but they
discovered no enemy, nor appearance of any: Whitcomb says he is certain there
has not been an Indian but three in that quarter since the prisoners were
taken, and that it was three or four days since these three had been there; so
that the Indians said to have been about us, and fired at, were, I believe, the
children of a disturbed imagination.

You had an exceeding bad time to cross the Lake, but I hope you got well over,
and without any injury to your health, though it must have been exposed, as I
doubt if you were not obliged to be out a second night. I shall write again to
you by express the moment I make any farther discoveries; and am, with much
respect and esteem,

Dear General, Your most obedient humble Servant, A. ST. CLAIR.

The Hon. General SCHUYLER.

Ticonderoga, June 25, 1777. SIR,
I ENCLOSE you a return of the troops at this post, by which you will see that
our effective numbers are very little more than two thousand, a force greatly
inadequate to its defense, which, should the enemy attack it in force, would
require at least four times that number. In that two thousand are included a
number of artificers, who are unarmed, and many of the soldiers are in the same
condition, and the whole in very great want of clothing, accoutrements and
bayonets.

The intelligence I have received of the enemy's approaching, I have from time
to time transmitted to General Schuyler, of which I make no doubt he has
apprised Congress. It is now past a doubt that they are moving toward us, but
whether in force or not I have not yet been able to discover. Seven of their
vessels came up to Crown-Point last night, and others of their fleet are about
three or four miles lower down, as we judge from their morning guns. They have
also landed some troops, who are encamped upon Chimney-Point, which lies on the
east side of the Lake, directly opposite to Crown-Point. If the militia were
called in, they might possibly enable us to keep possession, but I have not yet
ventured upon that step, on account of the low state of our provisions, there
not being more than thirty-five days meat tor the troops now here, and the
uncertainty in which we were with regard to the enemy's designs.

No army was ever in a more critical situation than we now are; and, supposing
that this motion is only a feint to favor the operations of General How,
which I still suspect it to be, we may, and probably will, be reduced to the
greatest distress, the supplies being derived from such a distance, and the
communication so difficult, that it is next to impossible to support it. The
extensiveness of our works adds greatly to our embarrassment, and will demand
so great constant guards, as must in a very short time wear down our troops,
and do the enemy's business for them; and should we give up one side of the
Lake, and confine ourselves to the defense of the other, they would infallibly
cut off our communication, and reduce us by famine.

My duty to my country, and to myself, obliges me to make these
representations; nevertheless, I shall leave nothing undone within my power to
frustrate the attempts of the enemy, nor leave any means untried to penetrate
their real designs. If I am happy enough to make any material discovery, I
shall take the earliest opportunity to give information to Congress; and
although I may at last be obliged to evacuate this place, I hope to make them
pay dear enough for it, to repent of their bargain.

I have the honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, A. ST. CLAIR.

The Hon. JOHN HANCOCK, Esquire President of Congress.

Ticonderoga, June 30, 1777, half past one. Dear General,
THIS morning some of the enemy's gun boats appeared at the Three Mile Point,
when the alarm was given. We could see them disembark a number of men, and the
boats increased to eighteen, which are now lying a breast from the hither side
of the point to about half way across the lake. The batteaus in which they
transported their troops are not come in sight, lying on the far side of the
point, under cover of it.

Soon after their landing a party, chiefly Indians and Canadians, pushed
toward our lines. As we had a scout down the lake at the time of their
arrival, I immediately sent out two parties to support and bring them off. The
scout fell in with the enemy, and after a few shot, in which they say some of
the Indians were killed, they, being overpowered by numbers, dispersed, and
part of them are got in, and I have little doubt but the greatest part of them
will yet make their appearance. It is probable, however, that some of them have
fallen into their hands. We have had one or two alarms before this, but it was
occasioned by their boats coming up near our guard boats, and their firing upon
them.

My people are in the best disposition possible, and I have no doubt about
giving a good account of the enemy, should they think proper to attack us; and
if the person I mentioned to you in my last pursues the opportunity that now
presents itself, they will go back faster than they came on. He has above a
thousand men.

I am, dear General, Your most obedient Servant, A. ST. CLAIR.

Hon. Major General SCHUYLER.

At a COUNCIL of General Officers, held at Ticonderoga, on Friday, the 20th day
of June, 1777.
PRESENT.
Major General SCHUYLER, Major General ST. CLAIR, Brigadier General FERMOY,
Brigadier General POOR, Brigadier General PATTERSON.
GENERAL SCHUYLER requested the Council to take into consideration the state of
this post, with respect to the number of troops necessary for its defense, the
disposition of the troops, and mode of defense, the state of the
fortifications, and the quantity of provisions that may be depended upon.

The Council, having taken into their most serious consideration the several
matters stated in the first article, are clearly and unanimously of opinion,

First. That the number of troops now at this post and Mount Independence,
which are under 2500 effectives, rank and file, are greatly inadequate to the
defense of both posts.

Second. That both posts ought, nevertheless, to be maintained as long as
possible, consistent with the safety of the troops and stores.

Third. That if it shall become necessary to evacuate one or other of the
posts, and that it remains in our election which, that it ought to be the
Ticonderoga side.

Fourth. That such cannon and stores as are not immediately necessary on the
Ticonderoga side be removed, without delay, to Mount Independence.

Fifth. That the fortifications and lines on Mount Independence are very
deficient; and that the repairing the old, and adding new works ought to claim
immediate attention; and that the engineers be directed to repair and make the
necessary fortifications.

Sixth. That the obstructions in the Lake to prevent the enemy's naval force
from getting into our rear, and thereby cutting off all supplies, or preventing
a retreat, if such a measure should unhappily become indispensably necessary,
ought to be completed with all imaginable dispatch.

Seventh.That so much remains to be done effectually to complete the
obstruction, that with the few troops we have, there is no great probability
that it can be done in less than six weeks.

Eighth. That although our force may be adequate to maintain our ground on
Mount Independence, yet, unless a sufficient stock of provision can be thrown
in before the arrival of the enemy, we having now only thirty-nine days
provision of meat kind, we think it would be imprudent to expose the army to be
made prisoners by the enemy; and that, therefore, it is prudent to provide for
a retreat, to effectuate which, that all the batteaus now at this post be
immediately repaired, and as many as can be spared out of the Lake George be
brought hither.

Ninth. That a quantity of provision of the meat kind should, if possible, be
immediately forwarded from Albany or elsewhere.

Tenth. That immediate application be made to his Excellency General Washington
for a reinforcement to be sent on with all expedition.

PHILIP SCHUYLER, ARTHUR ST. CLAIR, DE ROCHE FERMOY, ENOCH POOR, JOHN
PATTERSON.


Headquarters, June 15, 1777.
AFTER ORDERS.
THE Guards, in future to consist of 1 Captain, 5 Subalterns, 5 Sergeants, 9
Corporals, 2 Drums and Filet, and 128 Privates, are, till further orders, to be
furnished in the following proportions: Cap. Sub. Ser. D. and F. Cor. Privates.
Fermoy's Brigade, 1 2 2 1 4 36 Poor's Ditto. 0 1 1 1 2 53 Patterson's Ditto, 0
1 2 0 3 34 1 4 5 2 9 128

And are to be posted in the following Manner: Cap. Sub. Ser. D. and F. Cor.
Privates. Main Guard, 1 2 2 2 2 42 Jersey Redoubt Ditto, 0 1 1 0 2 30 French
Line Ditto, 0 1 1 0 2 30 Headquarters Ditto, 0 0 1 0 2 18 Quarter-Master's
Ditto, 0 0 0 0 1 8 1 4 5 2 9 128

A Picket Guard, consisting of 1 Captain, 3 Subalterns, 3 Sergeants, 3
Corporals, and 50 Privates, to be furnished in the following proportion till
further orders: Cap. Sub. Ser. D. and F. Cor. Privates. Fermoy's Brigade, 1 1 1
0 1 14 Poor's Ditto, 0 1 1 0 1 16 Patterson's Ditto, 0 1 1 0 1 20 1 3 3 0 3 50

They are to parade at sunset on the grand parade, and be posted on the
eminence to the right of the French Line. The Field Officer of the day is to
see that centries are posted from Lake Champlain to the communication with Lake
George.

The following Detail for Fatigue is to be furnished till further orders, and
to parade at 6 o'clock: Cap. Sub. Ser. D. and F. R. and F. Fermoy's Brigade, 1
3 3 1 87 Poor's Ditto, 1 4 4 2 136 Patterson's Ditto, 1 3 3 2 103 3 10 10 5 326

Headquarters, June 23, 1777.
General ST. CLAIR'S ORDERS.
THE Guards are to be posted in the following manner till further orders: Cap.
Sub. Ser. Cor. Drum. Privates. Main Guard, 1 1 2 2 2 30 Jersey Redoubt, 0 1 2 2
0 30 Headquarters, 0 0 1 2 0 15 French Lines, 0 0 1 2 0 12 Batteaus, 0 0 0 1 0
8 1 2 6 9 2 95 For Guards.
Poor's, Patterson's,
1 1 3 4 1 51 0 1 3 5 1 44 1 2 6 9 2 95

Details for Mount Independence: Cap. Sub. Ser. Cor. Dram. Privates. For Guards.
Fermoy's, Long's,
1 1 2 2 1 42 0 2 2 2 1 36 1 3 4 4 2 78 For Fatigue.
Fermoy's, Long's,
1 4 4 0 2 130 1 4 4 0 2 120 2 8 8 0 4 250

The Judge Advocate produces a copy of a return of provisions, etc. at
Ticonderoga the 25th of May, 1777, which the Court adjudge improper evidence,
on account of its being prior to the time Major General St. Clair took the
command of the posts of Ticonderoga and Mount independence.

The Judge Advocate produces a copy of a return of provisions and stores
remaining on hand at Ticonderoga and Mount Independence, June 20th, 1777; a
general return of the troops at Ticonderoga, June 14th, 1777; a general return
of the troops at Ticonderoga, June 28th, 1777; and the proceedings of a Council
of General Officers held at Ticonderoga, July 5th, 1777; which, being read, are
as follow:

A RETURN of Provisions and Stores, etc. remaining on hand at Ticonderoga and
Mount Independence.
Flour, 13 tierces and 2015 barrels; beef, 195 barrels; pork, 784 barrels;
brown sugar, 15 barrels; hog's lard, 3 barrels; coffee, 1 barrel; soft soap, 24
barrels; pot ash, half a barrel; pearl-ash, half a barrel; rum, 4 tierces;
molasses, 3 hogsheads; chocolate, 12 boxes; candles, 20 boxes; hard soap, 39
boxes; hard bread, 48 barrels; pease, 53 and two thirds skipples; salt, 4
hogsheads, 5 tierces and 3 barrels; wine, 3 barrels; Indian meal, 2 tierces.

By the last regular returns 4247 rations per day are issued, besides what are
issued by General Orders, and delivered the general hospital.

JAMES JANCEY, D. C.
20th June, 1777.
A GENERAL RETURN of the Troops at this Post, commanded by the Hon. Major
General ST. CLAIR.
Ticonderoga, June 14, 1777. Officers present. Rank and File. Wanting to compl.
Altera. ^^ace last Return. Commissioned Staff. Noncom. Regiments. Colonels
Lieut. Cols. Majors. Captains. Subalterns. Chaplains. Adjutants. Qr. Masters.
Surgeons. Matc^. Pay-Masters. Sergeants. Dr. and Fifes. Present, fit for Duty.
Sick Present. Sick, Absent On Command On Fur^^^gh Total Rank and File. Serj^
Di^^ and (...). Rank and File. ^^illed. Joined. D^^d. (...). Di^^largen Long's,
1 1 1 6 16 1 1 1 1 18 1 90 37 27 1^4 6 11 326 Marshall's, 1 1 7 12 1 1 1 1 21
1^ 143 39 3 103 1 289 7 4 352 1 Brewer's, 1 1 1 5 12 1 1 1 1 1 21 10 81 23 1
115 220 11 6 420 3 Francis's, 1 1 1 7 18 1 1 1 1 1 1 27 11 243 43 2 131 419 5 5
221 3 1 Jackson's, 1 1 4 1 13 3 40 12 8 26 86 19 1^ 554 Cilley's, 1 1 7 16 1 1
1 27 1^ 284 76 2 29 391 5 3 249 10 1 Scammel's, 1 1 1 6 13 1 1 1 23 13 217 50 2
77 346 7 1 19^ 26 1 1 Bradford's, 1 1 4 12 1 1 1 19 7 137 21 44 202 9 7 358 1 1
2 1 Hale's, 1 1 1 8 16 1 1 1 1 1 31 14 196 61 2 67 326 1 3 31^ 22 1 1 Warner's,
1 1 6 13 1 1 1 22 12 111 18 1 39 1 170 10 ^ 470 1 Baldwin's Artificers, etc. 2
1 3 1 1 1 121 3 1 2 127 Whitcomb's and Lee's Rang. 3 5 9 3 50 10 1 61 1
Leonard's Militia, 1 1 6 15 1 1 1 1 26 7 176 46 3 54 279 ^7 Wells's Ditto, 1 1
1 7 12 1 1 1 28 8 145 6^ 2 92 309 Bellows's Ditto, Total. 12 11 9 76 165 2 10
12 7 8 6 286 112 2034 507 29 305 4 3379 78 57 3557 ^5 2 ^ 2

RETURN of Artillery, commended by Major STEVENS.
Ticonderoga, June 14, 1777. Officers present. Matresses. Wanting to complete.
Altera since last Return. Commission. Staff. Non commis. Corpse. Major.
Captains. Capt. Lieuts. First Lieuts. Second Lieut. Chaplain. Adjutant. Qr.
Master Com. Stores. Surgeon. Conductors. Sergeants. Corporals. Bombardiers.
Gunners. Fifes. Drums. Present, fit for Duty. Sick. Present. Sick. Absent. On
Command On Furlough. Total. Sergeants. Corporals Bombardiers Gunners. Dr. and
Fifes. M^trosses. ^liste. Joined. Deserted. D^ged. Dead. Total. 1 4 4 4 10 1 1
2 20 20 16 17 3 4 103 10 6 4 123 4 3 8 7 2 30 1

A GENERAL RETURN of the Troops at this Post, commanded by the Hon.
Major General ST. CLAIR.
Ticonderoga, June 28, 1777. Officers present. Rank and File. Wanting to compl.
Altera since last Return. Commissioned Staff Noncom. Regiments. Colonels.
Lieut. Cols. Majors. Captains. Subalterns. Chaplains. Adjutants. Qr. Masters.
Pay-Masters. Surgeons. Mates. Sergeants. Dr. and Fifes. Present, fit for Duty.
Sick, Present. Sick, Absent. On Command On Furlough. Total. Sergeants. Drs. and
Fifes. Rank and File. Inlisted. Joined. Dead. Discharged. Deserted. Marshalls,
1 1 7 12 1 1 1 1 20 11 126 36 4 123 3 292 8 3 348 1 2 Hale's, 1 1 1 8 17 1 1 1
1 1 31 13 212 58 2 87 360 1 3 283 14 1 Bradford's, 1 1 6 15 1 1 1 27 10 265 17
51 333 5 6 307 104 Scammel's, 1 1 1 6 11 1 1 1 1 1 25 15 153 71 12 126 1 363 2
1 277 4 Cilley's, 1 1 1 7 14 1 1 1 1 1 1 24 12 193 88 2 113 396 3 2 244 5 1
Jacson's, 1 1 3 1 11 3 45 11 7 22 85 19 13 555 Brewer's, 1 1 1 8 13 1 1 1 1 1
21 10 144 15 1 92 252 11 6 388 27 Francis's, 1 1 1 8 20 1 1 1 1 1 30 13 206 49
4 161 420 2 3 220 3 Warner's, 1 7 15 1 1 1 1 24 10 99 25 1 48 173 8 6 467 7 1 1
Long's, 1 1 1 6 16 1 1 1 1 18 1 91 38 25 154 6 11 326 Leonard's Militia, 1 6 15
1 1 1 1 26 7 192 63 2 22 279 Wells's Ditto, 1 1 1 7 ^1 1 1 1 28 8 197 44 4 64
309 Whitcomb's Rangers, 2 4 6 3 19 14 2 3^ 1 2 7^ Lee's Rangers, 1 2 3 1 23 23
20 Baldwin's Artificers, etc. 2 1 4 1 1 2 124 3 1 2 130 1 Total. 10 11 10 84
169 3 10 12 7 10 8 296 117 2089 532 39 937 6 3604 66 55 3506 162 2 7 1

Artillery and Artificers, commanded by Major STEVENS.
Ticonderoga, June 2^, 1777. Orders present. Matr^sses Wanting to complete.
Altera, since last Return. Commission. Staff. Non. Commis. Corpse. Major.
Captains. Capt. Lieut. First Lieut. Second Lieut. Chaplain. Adjutant. Qr.
Master Play Master. Com. Sto^es. Surgeon. Sergeants. Corporals. Bombardiers.
Gunners. Conductors. Dr. and Fi^es. Present, fit for Duty. Sick, Present. Sick,
Absent. On Command On Furlough, Total. Sergeants. Corporals. Bombardiers.
Gunners. Dr. and Fifes. Matr^sses. Inlisted. Joined. Dead. Deserted.
Discharged. Establish. Artillery, 1 3 2 3 ^ 1 1 17 16 16 16 2 7 51 ^ 3 3 6 2 2
1 17 ^ 3 Temp. Draughts, 1 1 1 8 10 11 2 1 1 199 1 200 Carriage-makers, etc. 1
2 33 5 38 Total. 1 5 3 4 19 1 1 2^ 27 18 17 2 8 283 14 3 3 238 6 2 2 1 17 1 3

JAMES WILKINSON, Deputy Adjutant-General.

At a COUNCIL of General Officers, held at Ticonderoga, July 5th, 1777.
PRESENT.
Major General ST. CLAIR, Brigadier General FERMOY, Brigadier General POOR,
Brigadier General PATTERSON. Colonel Commandant LONG.
GENERAL ST. CLAIR represented to the Council, that as there is every reason to
believe that the batteries of the enemy are ready to open upon the Ticonderoga
side, and that the camp is very much exposed to their fire, and to be enfiladed
on all quarters; and as there is also reason to expect an attack upon
Ticonderoga and Mount Independence at the same time, in which case neither
could draw any support from the other; he desired their opinion, whether it
would be most proper to remove the tents to the low ground, where they would be
less exposed, and wait the attack at the Ticonderoga lines, or whether the
whole of the troops should be drawn over to Mount Independence, the more
effectually to provide for the defense of that post. At the same time the
General begged leave to inform them, that the whole of our force consisted of
2089 effectives, rank and file, including 124 artificers unarmed, besides the
corpse of artillery, and about 900 militia who have joined us, and cannot stay
but a few days.

The Council were unanimously of opinion, that it is impossible with our force
to defend Ticonderoga and Mount Independence, and that the troops, cannon and
stores, should be removed this night, if possible, to Mount Independence.

Second. Whether, after the division of the army at Ticonderoga have retreated
to Mount Independence, we shall be in a situation to defend that post; or, in
case it cannot be defended, if a retreat into the country will be practicable.

The Council are unanimously of opinion, that, as the enemy have already nearly
surrounded us, and there remains nothing more to invest us completely but their
occupying the neck of land betwixt the Lake and the East Creek, which is not
more than three quarters of a mile over, and possessing themselves of the
Narrows betwixt and Skeensborough, and thereby cutting off all communication
with the country, a retreat ought to be undertaken as soon as possible, and
that we shall be very fortunate to effect it.

ARTHUR ST. CLAIR, Dr. ROCHE FERMOY, ENOCH POOR, JOHN PATTERSON, PIERSE LONG.


Mr. Avery, Deputy Commissary General in the Northern Department, being sworn,

Q. What Quantity of provision was at Ticonderoga and Mount Independence the
13th of June, 1777?

A. I cannot particularly ascertain the quantity of provision, as I had no
particular return at that time, but to the best of my recollection General St.
Clair wrote me the 15th or 16th of June, that there was seven weeks provision
on hand at Ticonderoga, Mount Independence and its dependencies.

General St. Clair's question. What was the general purport of my letter to you?

A. The general purport was informing me that there was such a quantity of
provision there. That you thought it too small a quantity; and if I did not
forward on more, you would leave me to judge what the consequence would be to
myself.

General St. Clair's question. Did you receive a letter from General Schuyler
about the same time, and upon the same subject?

A. Yes.

General St. Clair's question. Do you recollect the purport?

A. Much the same as yours was; complaining of the quantity of provision at
that post being too small, and urging an immediate supply.

Mr. Yancey, who superintended the Issuing Commissary's Department at
Ticonderoga and Mount Independence, being sworn,

Q. Were any supplies of provision received at Ticonderoga or Mount
Independence between the 20th of June and 6th of July, 1777?

A. I left Ticonderoga the 21st of June in order to purchase cattle. I
purchased myself twenty-one cattle, and sent forward to Ticonderoga twenty of
them. The other I sent forward, with thirty oxen and steers delivered me by Mr.
Avery's order, all to Ticonderoga. There were a few cattle also sent on in
company with these for the hospital. I do not know their number. The first was
sent on the 26th of June; the place from where they were sent was called
Paulett. The next was the 27th of June, place called Manchester.

Q. Do you know whether these cattle arrived at Ticonderoga or Mount
Independence?

A. Not from my own knowledge. I understood that one, two or three of the
cattle were made use of by Colonel Warner, who took them under his care to
drive them into Ticonderoga, and I understood that they arrived there, but only
from information.

Q. Court. What quantity of provision was issued the 20th of June as a ration?

A. I do not, at present, exactly know what quantity was issued as a ration at
that time. The artificers received one ration and a half.

Q. Court. What quantity of provision was daily issued by the General's orders,
and to the general hospital?

A. I do not know. The general hospital was sometimes supplied by my magazine,
but not steadily. The general officers and their families, and several of the
field and some other officers, drew what they pleased on account.

General St. Clair's question. Where could the general hospital have been
supplied with provision, unless it was from your magazine?

A. I do not know from any place with respect to fresh provision, unless they
sent out and purchased it. The salt provision and flour could be got from me
only.

General St. Clair's question. Was there any country in the neighborhood from
which they could have been supplied?

A. None nearer than the Hampshire Grants.

General St. Clair's question. When you made the return of the 20th of June,
did you count the barrels of provision yourself, or did you make up your return
from the returns made to you?

A. I did not count the barrels of provision. I made the return from the
entries of my peoples receipts and deliveries.

Q. Court. When did the book of accounts commence from which you made your
return?

A. I believe the first of December* 1776.

General St. Clair's question. Had there not been, from time to time, a
considerable quantity of provision condemned at this post?

A. I sent some packers to Ticonderoga in March, 1777, to repack the provision.
They returned to me I think in April, and I saw when I got up to Ticonderoga an
account of damaged provision amongst my papers, amounting to about twenty-eight
barrels of beef or pork, but I am pretty confident the twenty-eight barrels of
beef or pork were not included in the general return of the 20th of June, but I
cannot undertake to say there was no damaged provision amongst the quantity
mentioned in the return of the 20th of June.

General St. Clair's question. Did you know, when you were sent to purchase
fresh provision, of any magazine of salt provision in the vicinity of
Ticonderoga, from which you could have supplied that garrison?

A. I knew of salt provision having been carried forward from Bennington and
William's-Town to St. Coack, but I do not know the quantity.

General St. Clair's question to Mr. Avery. Did you order salt provision from
St. Coack or Stillwater to Albany?

A. I ordered a small quantity from Stillwater, the magazine at Albany being
empty of salt provision at the time. It was some time in the month of June, as
near as I can recollect.

Question to Mr. Avery. How long did the magazine at Albany remain empty, and
did any supply of provision arrive between that time and the 6th of July?

A. There was some provision arrived at Albany, but what quantity I cannot
tell, but not much more than was sufficient for the supply of the troops that
were there.

General St. Clair's question to Mr. Avery. Did you write to General Schuyler,
that you were deceived by your Purchasing Commissaries?

A. I do not remember that I did; but I do not know but I might have wrote to
General Schuyler that they had not collected the quantity that I expected.

The Court adjourned till tomorrow, nine o'clock.

AUGUST 26th.
The Court met according to adjournment.

The Judge Advocate produces several extracts from a copy of General St.
Clair's orderly book, which, being read, are as follow:

Headquarters, June 25, 1777.
General St. CLAIR'S ORDERS.

THE troops are ordered to be under arms on their respective alarm posts
tomorrow morning at gun fire, where they are to remain till they are dismissed.

AFTER ORDERS.
All the troops who have their muskets loaded are ordered to discharge them
immediately after roll-call; the officers will see the arms properly cleaned.

Headquarters, June 26, 1777.
In case of an alarm on Mount Independence, two cannon are to be fired from the
upper battery; and in case of an alarm at the French lines, two pieces are to
be fired there; the signal from the advanced boats is to be answered by one
cannon from the Jersey redoubt, which is to be followed by a discharge from
Mount Independence, that is to be answered by the French lines.

Headquarters, June 29, 1777.
A scout, consisting of a subaltern, sergeant, and twenty privates, to be
alternately furnished by the brigades on each side of the Lake, and to be sent
out every morning, one hour before gun fire.

Detail for Fatigue.
Cap. Sub. Ser. Cor. Drum. Privates. Fermoy's Brigade, 1 3 3 0 2 100 Poor's, 1
2 2 0 1 60 Patterson's, 1 2 2 0 1 50 Long's, 1 3 3 0 2 100 4 10 10 0 6 310

The fatigue, till further orders, is to go on duty precisely at six o'clock,
to return at eleven o'clock, to parade again at two, and work till six.

Mr. Leavenworth, being sworn, says: I arrived at Ticonderoga the 9th of March,
and tarried there until the retreat. About three weeks before the retreat, as
near as I can remember, it was reported that the enemy were at Split Rock, and
I heard guns some days that were said to be their evening and morning guns. I
also heard General St. Clair give out he thought that the enemy were between
six and seven thousand strong. On the 26th of June I made report to General St.
Clair of the tallow in my possession, the quantity being great. He said he
would give directions about it, and said also that the Commissary ought to have
taken care of it, and had it worked up. General St. Clair took occasion to
mention that the Commissary had not only neglected his duty in that instance,
but also had neglected it in not sending on the supplies of provision. I did
not hear any thing more about it, and on Wednesday before the retreat I went to
General St. Clair respecting it, who said it was the Commissary's business, and
he ought to have taken care of it, and blamed him again on account of
provision, and said there were but a few days provision. I told him I thought
there was more. All the provision had been removed from Ticonderoga to Mount
Independence, and on Thursday or Friday I went to Mount Independence to satisfy
myself respecting the quantity of provision there, and I think there were full
three thousand barrels of beef, pork and flour there, from the appearance of
them. I did not count them. This was a larger quantity than appeared to be
there on the twenty-sixth of June. On Wednesday before the retreat I was at
Headquarters, and observed it was entirely stripped of the baggage, and in
consequence of it I put my baggage in a boat, and sent it to Mount
Independence. Having received no orders about the tallow, I desired some
gentlemen to speak to the General about it, and on Saturday morning the enemy
made their appearance on Mount Defiance, when, talking to some gentlemen
respecting the tallow, one of them said I had done enough to exculpate myself
respecting it, and gave me to understand that we were to retreat that evening,
and told me not to let it be known by words or actions, and told me not to
regulate my conduct by it so that it might be known. It was General Poor who
told me of it. On Saturday evening, at gun firing, I went into my boat with my
people, and went to the south-west point of Mount Independence, and I continued
in my boat and on the point of Mount Independence all night. Between eleven and
twelve o'clock at night, one Sergeant Bond came down, who told me that he came
down to see what boats were there. That between twelve and one o'clock, a party
of men came down to the Scotchman's, and took the boats up to the Crane, as
they said, to load with provision, and at day light began to return, and I went
off with my boat in company with the first boats. The cannon began to be
removed (when General Schuyler was present) from Ticonderoga to Mount
Independence, and continued to be removed after General Schuyler's departure,
as were quantities of artillery stores.

Q. Did any quantity of provision arrive at Ticonderoga or Mount Independence
from the 20th of June to the time of the evacuation, either from Fort George or
Skeensborough!

A. Not to my knowledge.

Q. Did any number of cattle arrive at Ticonderoga or Mount Independence
between the 20th of June and the time of the evacuation?

A. I saw cattle that Colonel Warner said he brought in with him. I thought I
saw (from the idea I now have) about forty head.

Q. Were any parties sent out to annoy the enemy, by order from General St.
Clair, in their advance against, and investiture of, the posts under his ca^e,
to your knowledge?

A. The enemy came to Three Mile Point, and I have seen parties go out of about
twenty men in a party. I know of none sent out to oppose the enemy's progress.

Q. Court. What kind of ground was it between Three Mile-Point and Ticonderoga?

A. I have not been over the whole of the ground, but over part of it; there
are some cleared fields next to the Lake, and woods back. This is all the
description I can give of the ground.

Q. Were the troops under General St. Clair healthy, courageous, and desirous
of improving every advantage against the enemy?

A. Yes.

Q. Court. What reason had you to think the troops were healthy, courageous,
and desirous of improving every advantage against the enemy?

A. In the first place, with regard to their being healthy, I had occasion to
be at the hospital several times after the enemy came near to us, and I did not
see many sick there, and it was generally reported that the army was healthy.
After I was apprehensive that we were to retreat, I took pains to enquire of a
number of officers of my acquaintance, indirectly, whether the troops were
courageous, and determined to fight, should the enemy come on, and they all
answered in the affirmative.

Q. Court. Was it your opinion, and the opinion of the officers you indirectly
asked whether the troops were courageous and determined to fight, that the
place was defensible?

A. I did not ask any of the officers whether the place was defensible. It was
my own opinion that the place was not defensible in the circumstances it then
was.

Q. Court. What do you mean by the circumstances it was then in?

A. In the first place, the lines were very extensive, so that there were not
men enough on the ground to man them: Another circumstance was, the enemy had
got possession of the heights about us: Another was, the heavy cannon,
artillery stores, and all the provision, were removed from Ticonderoga to Mount
Independence; and the reason why Mount Independence could not be defended was,
that there were not works thrown up suitable to cover the men. Great part of
the provision that was carried over to the Mount was, at the time of the
retreat, at the foot of the Crane. The distance from the place the provision
lay, to the top of the Mount, was about two hundred feet.

Q. Was any thing done at Mount Independence between the 20th of June and the
6th of July, 1777, toward repairing the old works there, and adding new works?

A. I was not at the south end of Mount Independence, but I heard there were
some small works flung up there. The north end of Mount Independence appeared
to me as usual on the Thursday or Friday preceding the evacuation. I saw no new
fortifications on it, nor any additional works. I know there were no new
fortifications where I expected there would have been some built.

Q. Did General St. Clair send his son and baggage to Fort George, as a place
of safety, before his evacuation of the posts of Ticonderoga and Mount
Independence?

A. I don't know that he did of my own knowledge.

Q. Were the sick, the public stores of ammunition, cannon, provision and
clothing left behind, when the posts of Ticonderoga and Mount Independence
were evacuated?

A. Some of the sick were carried off, which I saw. I know nothing respecting
the other particulars.

Q. What time was it you heard General St. Clair give out that the enemy were
between 6 and 7000 strong?

A. It was said by General St. Clair while the enemy lay at Split Rock. I
believe about a fortnight before the evacuation.

Q. Court. Would the provision be (lying at the foot of the Crane) under the
enemy's fire, after Ticonderoga should be in their hands?

A. They were within cannon shot of Ticonderoga, and the enemy must have
commanded the Lake.

General St. Clair's question. Were there not parties constantly at work,
getting up the provision from the bottom to the top of the Mount?

A. There was a party at work when I went to see what provision was there, and
I suppose there was a party constantly at work. It was reported so.

General St. Clair's question. At what time of the day was it on Saturday that
General Poor gave you the information of the evacuation being likely to take
place?

A. It was in the morning before breakfast. I don't know the time of the day. I
took it General Poor was going to Headquarters.

General St. Clair's question. What quantity of tallow had you in your
possession?

A. One hundred and fifty-four barrels. If I remember right, there were 34* 345
lbs.

General St. Clair's question. Had you ever made any report of the tallow to me
before the 26th of June?

A. No.

General St. Clair's question. You have mentioned several times that I gave out
that the enemy were between 6 and 7000 strong. I should be glad to know whether
it was to you I told it, or how you came to be acquainted with it?

A. I don't recollect the circumstances but at one time; that was on the day it
was said the scout returned from Split Rock. I was at Headquarters, and I
heard you observe to several officers who were there, that the enemy were
between 6 and 7000 strong.

General St. Clair's question. Do you recollect the company who were there?

A. I cannot recollect any person particular, but I think General Patterson was
there.

General St. Clair's question. Did you ever hear me say that the enemy were
lying at Split Rock, to the amount of any number of troops?

A. You did not say that the enemy lay at Split Rock, but that they consisted
of about the number beforementioned.

General St. Clair's question. Do you know of any (...) between any of the
parties from Ticonderoga and the enemy?

A. I heard of some people being killed and scalped between the breast-work and
Ticonderoga landing, and I think there was a scalp brought in by some of
Whitcomb's people.

General St. Clair's question. Do you know of any larger parties than twenty
men being sent out?

A. I don't recollect any.

General St. Clair's question. You have mentioned Headquarters being stripped
of baggage. I should be glad to know what kind of baggage you observed had been
removed from thence?

A. I don't recollect particular things.

General St. Clair's question. What kind of baggage* had you ever observed
there?

A. I had observed utensils, such as drinking glasses, one chair, a table and a
vallefe; but all the utensils I saw in the room at this time was one bowl,
except a table and stools.

General St. Clair's question. Did you ever see any thing removed from
Headquarters?

A. I cannot say absolutely that I did.

General St. Clair's question. Do you know whether there were parties employed
in forming an abbitis about Mount Independence, at any time between the 20th of
June and the evacuation?

A. I do not.

General St. Clair's question. Did you ever see parties of axe-men sent over
there?

A. I saw parties of axe-men go off the parade often, but I did not know where
they went, nor did I ask them to my knowledge.

General St. Clair's question. Do you know whether the parties of axe-men you
saw go off the parade were employed on the Ticonderoga side?

A. I do not.

General St. Clair's question to Mr. Yancey. Did you ever report to me that
there was an ounce of tallow at Ticonderoga, or did it appear in any return of
yours?

A. I don't believe that I ever told you any thing about it, or made any return
to you of it.

The Court adjourn to the house of Capt. Rathburn, in King Street, until Friday
next, at nine o'clock.

AUGUST 28th.
The Court met at Captain Rathburn's, in King's-street, according to
adjournment.

Major General St. Clair admits that he wrote a letter to the Hon. John Jay,
dated July 25th, 1777, in which there was a sentiment, in substance, that if
the General Officers had been against the evacuation of the posts of
Ticonderoga and Mount Independence, it would have taken place, as he knew it
would be impossible to defend the posts with his numbers.

Lieutenant Colonel Hale being sworn,

Q. Were you at Ticonderoga or Mount Independence when the evacuation of those
posts took place?

A. I was on Mount Independence.

Q. Did you command a regiment?

A. I was Lieutenant Colonel of Colonel Leonard's regiment of Massachusetts
militia.

Q. Was the time of service of this regiment nearly expired when the evacuation
of Ticonderoga and Mount Independence took place?

A. It was nearly expired, as they viewed it, and I think within two or three
days from the time of the evacuation.

Q. What do you mean by the terms, as they viewed it?

A. I mean the men viewed their time of service to have commenced from the time
they were raised, and the time they drew pay from. They, I understood, founded
this belief from the order of the Brigadier, which was that they were raised
for two months service; which, when I showed General St. Clair, he said it was
different from the order of the Court. The order of the Court was, that they
should serve two months from the time of their being on the ground, to the best
of my remembrance.

Q. Did you inform General St. Clair that the men viewed their time of service
to be nearly expired, and when it took place were determined to go home?

A. After I had heard something said among the people that they viewed their
time of service as nearly out, and it was talked among them if they staid they
should get no pay, I spoke to them that the enemy were near, and that was the
only time, if they came to do any thing, that it was to be done. I also spoke
to some of the officers, with regard to the time of service being nearly out,
and told them I would inform the General of the circumstances. After this, on
Saturday preceding the evacuation, I waited on General St. Clair, to let him
know what the regiment thought respecting these matters, and invited Lieut.
Colonel May, the Colonel of the other Massachusetts regiment, to go with me. We
went, and I informed General St. Clair of the circumstances I have related, and
told him their uneasiness with respect to drawing their money on the ground;
who told me, that if they made up their rolls their money was ready for them.
Lieutenant Colonel May and myself showed the General the Brigadier's order, and
the General said it was different from the order of the Court. The men also
made an excuse that they had not been invited to stay. When we informed General
St. Clair of the circumstances, he said the men must not go away by any means
if they were disposed to go, and told me to write a certificate of the matter,
and said perhaps I shall give them a small bounty, and said your certificate
will justify me for so doing. The General said he would let the matter rest
till morning and think on it, and would send word to me in the morning what
proposals to make to the regiment. I went and told the officers of it that
night, who appeared to be well satisfied. It was near night when we parted from
the General.

General St. Clair's question. Do you not recollect your mentioning to me, or
Lieutenant Colonel May, that the men considered their time nearly out, and were
determined to go home when it was out, and suggested to me that probably a
small bounty might induce them to stay?

A. I do not recollect it.

General St. Clair's question. What do you conceive the men understood by their
saying that they were not invited to stay?

A. Upon some of the men saying that their times were nearly out, I told them
they must stay longer if there was an occasion for it. They said they had not
been invited to stay, and supposed, if they staid, they should get no pay for
it. I considered it only as an excuse of theirs, that they should not get pay
if they staid after their time was out.

Q. Court. Had you ever before the Saturday informed General St. Clair of the
men's opinion of the short time they had to stay?

A. I had not.

Q. Court. What was your inducement for going to the General that day?

A. Upon hearing what I have before related amongst the men, that they
considered their time of service as nearly out, and that some of them talked of
going home, and to remove all uneasiness about it.

Q. Court. What Reasons have you to suppose the men would have staid, had
General St. Clair given them an invitation?

A. The conversation I had with them induced me to think so.

General St. Clair's question. Were you at Castle-Town the day after the
evacuation?

A. I was.

General St. Clair's question. Did not both yours and Colonel May's regiment
determine to leave the army that day?

A. Not that I know of.

General St. Clair's question. Were you present when I had the two militia
regiments drawn up, and spoke to them on that subject?

A. No; but I knew that you were speaking to one of the regiments. I was at a
distance, and saw a parade of men, and you amongst them. The regiments were
intermixed, and some of my men likely were there.

Q. Court. Did you know at the time what General St. Clair said to them?

A. I was unwell at a distance at the time, and did not know, but I understood
afterward, but don't know from whom, that he was saying something to them
about keeping with the army.

Q. Court. When did the regiments leave the army?

A. I believe it was the fourth day at Manchester.

Q. Court. Did the regiments go off by order?

A. We were marching rather in disorder, when General St. Clair asked me
whether I commanded that regiment? I told him I did, part of them; and he said,
By God, I wish you would embody them, and march them home.

General St. Clair's question. Did I not, in the course of the march,
frequently complain of the disorder of the two regiments, and reprove them for
it?

A. Not in my hearing?

General St. Clair's question. Were they not disorderly on the march?

A. They did not keep rank and file.

General St. Clair's question. Do you remember of Colonel May's having reported
to me that the men were willing to stay, but the officers were not?

A. I do not.

General St. Clair's question. Did your regiment keep their station that was
assigned them in the line of march?

A. I know of no station that was assigned them but one day: Whether they kept
it that day or not I don't remember.

General St. Clair's question. Did not your regiment break the line of march,
and were you not halted by General Poor just after leaving the picketted fort,
who said he would turn out a party of men, and order them to fire upon them?

A. I do not remember it.

Q. Was the regiment Colonel May belonged to in the same situation with respect
to the opinion of the men, that their time of service was nearly expired, as
yours was?

A. Much the same.

Q. When Colonel May went with you to General St. Clair, did he inform him that
his men viewed their time of service nearly expired, and were determined to go
as soon as it was expired?

A. We related what I have before mentioned.

The Court adjourn till to morrow, nine o'clock.

AUGUST 29th.
The Court met according to adjournment.

Major General St. Clair produces part of a resolution of Congress, dated April
29th, 1777, which, being read, is as follows:

IN CONGRESS, April 29, 1777.
Resolved, THAT General Washington be directed to write to the ea^^ern State,
from whence the troops to be employed at Ticonderoga are expected* and to
request them, in the name of Congress, to adopt and pursue every means,
particularly those recommended by Congress in their resolutions of the 14th of
this month, for completing and forwarding the regiments which he has already
ordered for that service, it being the opinion of Congress that a delay in this
matter will be attended with the loss of that important pass.

Major General St. Clair desires Major General Gates, and several other
gentlemen, may be sworn.

Major General Gates being sworn, says, Some time in April, in the year 1777, I
made a requisition from Congress for the defense of the Northern Department,
and estimated the troops necessary for that service as follows: Two Major
Generals; six Brigadiers; one battalion of artillery, 600; twenty-five
battalions of infantry, 12,500; two companies of rangers, 100; staff,
batteau-men, etc. 400; total 13,600. At that time I did not expect General
Burgoyne would have landed between 10 and 11,000 men. If I had, I should have
required more men for the defense of that department.

General St. Clair's question. During the time I had the honor of serving
under you, did you ever discover in me cowardice, treachery, or incapacity as a
general officer?

A. From my long acquaintance with you as an officer, and particularly your
usefulness to me as a Brigadier General in the campaign of 1776, it excites my
astonishment that there should be such charges as cowardice, treachery, or
incapacity, exhibited against you. From any knowledge of you, both as an
officer and a gentleman, I have the highest opinion of your courage, honor,
capacity and fidelity.

Q. What proportion of these troops ought to be at Ticonderoga and Mount
Independence?

A. At Fort Schuyler, 500. The intermediate posts between Albany and Fort
Schuyler inclusive, 500. The posts between Albany and Fort George inclusive,
600. At Fort Ann and Skeensborough, 300. The remainder at Ticonderoga and its
dependencies. Besides these, I expected aid from the Militia of the country,
having unlimited powers from Congress for that purpose.

Q. Court. What number of men would you have thought necessary, had you been
fully possessed of the force of General Burgoyne?

A. Three to two.

Dr. Brown being sworn,

General St. Clair's question. Were the sick removed from the hospital at the
time of the evacuation?

A. All except four, whom it was unsafe to remove, as there was a chance of
their recovery by remaining, and if they were removed, it was my opinion they
would not have survived to have reached Skeensborough.

General St. Clair's question. Was any part of the medicines and hospital
stores removed?

A. A day or two days before the communication was cut off with Fort George,
all were removed, except what was wanted for an immediate supply, which were
all saved.

General St. Clair's question. Was any part of what was left at Ticonderoga
sent off?

A. There was; but I cannot say what proportion was saved. There was an officer
and fifty men given us, and boats sufficient, and had they done their duty, it
is my opinion we could have saved all the medicines and stores.

Q. Court. How long before the evacuation took place were the sick sent off?

A. There were a number of sick sent off some days before the evacuation took
place; about the time the enemy appeared at Three Mile Point: The rest, except
the four, were removed at the time of the evacuation.

Q. Court. Do you know whether there was a magazine of flour appropriated for
the use of the hospital, separate from the general magazine?

A. I believe there was none.

Q. Did any provision arrive for the hospital, particularly, some days before
the evacuation?

A. There were some sheep, beeves and milch cows. I do not recollect the number.

Q. In what situation was the army at the time of the evacuation, with respect
to health?

A. There were very few in the hospital, not above 100; a great proportion of
them wounded. There were a number in the regiments not fit for duty, on account
of the measles, and the consequences of that disorder, which had prevailed
much; but not proper objects for the general hospital.

Dr. Townshend being sworn,

General St. Clair's question. Were the sick removed from the hospital at the
time of the evacuation?

A. All that could be removed with any degree of safety to themselves.

General St. Clair's question. Was any part of the medicines and hospital
stores removed?

A. A day or two before, to the best of my remembrance, the communication with
Fort George was closed, there was a large proportion carried over to the store
there, and only what was judged sufficient was left for those that remained on
the ground.

General St. Clair's question. Was any part of what was left at Ticonderoga
sent off?

A. Yes. Early in the evening, about dark, preceding the evacuation, we had a
number of men sent to carry the stores down to the landing on the south side of
Mount Independence. They worked very industriously the first of the evening,
and packed nearly the whole, and the chief of them was carried to the landing,
myself assisting; but the men, when they found the place was to be evacuated,
deserted us. We got the greater part into the boats, and went off to
Skeensborough in the morning.

Q. Court. How long before the evacuation took place were the sick sent off?

A. About the time the medicines were sent off to Fort George. The sick, that
were not likely to recover in a few days, that could be sent off without
injuring them by transportation, were sent to the hospital at Fort George.

Q. Court. Do you know whether there was a magazine of flour appropriated for
the use of the hospital, separate from the general magazine?

A. There was not.

Q. In what situation was the army at the time of the evacuation, with respect
to health?

A. The army was healthy, except with respect to the measles, which had
prevailed very generally through the camp. They had recovered of the measles at
the time of the evacuation, but they had left many of them languid with coughs.

Q. What situation was the army in a few days previous to the evacuation, with
respect to health?

A. Much in the same situation as they were at the time of the evacuation,
except a number more had the measles then than had at the time of the
evacuation. I examined a number of regiments a little before the evacuation
particularly, and there were in general between thirty and forty unfit for
duty, but not fit objects for the general hospital.

Question to Dr. Brown. What situation was the army in a few days previous to
the evacuation, with respect to health?

A. I believe they were not quite so healthy as at the time of the evacuation,
and not so many fit for duty, as they were recovering daily from the measles
and its effects. I examined the regiments myself a few days before the
evacuation, and the prescriptions of the surgeons, and found but very few but
had from twenty to thirty unfit for duty. Some had more.

General St. Clair's question to Dr. Brown. Were not the hospital surgeons
frequently required to inspect into the state of the sick in each regiment, and
was it not done with a view that I might not be imposed on by the regimental
returns?

A. They were desired to do it frequently, and I have some idea of some
conversation passing between Dr. Potts and myself about the intention of doing
it, but I do not recollect the particulars of it.

General St. Clair's question to Dr. Townshend. The same as the last to Dr.
Brown.

A. We were directed to do it frequently, and there was scarcely a day passed
but some of the regiments were examined by some of the surgeons of the general
hospital.

Colonel Hay, who acted as Deputy Quartermaster General for the army at
Ticonderoga and Mount Independence, being sworn, says: On Saturday, about three
o'clock in the afternoon, the day preceding the evacuation, I was sent for by
General St. Clair, who informed me that a Council of General Officers had been
held, and they had determined to evacuate the garrison next morning. I then
took the liberty of asking the General if he had received orders from General
Schuyler? He told me he had not. To which I took the liberty of saying I was
extremely sorry for it. The General said he knew very well what I meant, and he
had seriously considered the consequences of the step he was taking. If he
remained there, he would save his character and lose the army; if he went off,
he would save the army and lose his character; the last of which he was
determined to sacrifice to the cause in which he was engaged. The General then
desired me to prepare every thing for the removal of as many of the stores as
possible. I then told the General, that as the wind blowed hard from the
north-east, and the batteaus were lying at the south end of Mount Independence,
it would be impossible to get them round to remove the greatest part of the
stores. The General said it must at all events be attempted; for if the enemy
knew of our design to evacuate the place, they would certainly cut off our
retreat; but, on further consideration, said he would take the opinion of the
General Officers, and let me know the result. In the mean time, that I was to
prepare every thing possible for carrying off the stores, which I did as far as
the wind, which rose much higher, would permit. I saw the General afterward at
sunset, who told me that Generals Poor and Patterson were of opinion the
evacuation ought not to be retarded. What few boats were near Ticonderoga side
were then given to the artillery men, and the most valuable stores on that side
carried down to the wharff on that side. About nine the General sent for me
again, and having asked what I had done, desired me to go as soon as possible
to Mount Independence, order as many boats as could be brought from the south
side of the Mount to bring off the provisions that were lying near the Crane,
leaving a proper proportion for the medicines, ammunition, and other most
valuable stores, which were to be carried down to the south side. About, I
think, one o'clock, I saw the General again on Mount Independence, who begged
that we would make all the dispatch possible, and carry off all that we could
in boats by day light. I then went down to where the provision laid, and got a
very considerable number of boats loaded, which at break of day were taken
round to the south end of the Mount by the General's order. When I got there I
found the soldiers in the utmost confusion, and could not by threats or
promises prevail on them to unload from the wagon, and embark on board the
boats the most valuable part of the General's baggage. Nearly about sunrise
the General himself came up, and begged, if possible, I would save his papers,
and pay no attention to the rest of his baggage I spoke to Colonel Long, who, I
understood afterward had received orders from the General, was to command by
water, and went off himself after the army that had marched some short time
before. Some days before the evacuation, being at Head Quarters after dinner,
there were three field officers there (I think Colonels, but am not certain)
who had lately arrived with a strong reinforcement of militia. Being asked by
the General what time they could possibly stay? they replied, it would be
impossible to detain them but a very few days, as they had not a second shirt
to their backs, having first turned out with no other view than driving a party
of the enemy from Otter-Creek. I went off by water.

General St. Clair produces a return made to him by Colonel Hay, which Colonel
Hay acknowledges was made by him to General St. Clair, and which Colonel Hay
thinks must have been made by him about the 21st of June, 1777; which, being
read, is as follows:

A RETURN of a number of men under the command of Lieut. Colonel Udrey Hay, A.
D. Q. M. G. the regiments they belong to, and employments they are engaged in.
Regiments they belong to. Employments. Number of Man. Colonel Long's,
Batteaumen, 2 Millmen, 5 Teamsters, 6 13 Colonel Hale's, Batteauman, 1 At
Skeensborough 7 8 Colonel Francis's Batteauman, 1 Constant Fatiguemen, 17
Millmen, 5 Tinman 1 At the Landing, 2 26 Colonel Bradford's, Batteauman, 1
Constant Fatiguemen 7 Gardeners, 2 10 Colonel Jackson's, Batteauman, 1
Gardeners, 3 4 Colonel Cilley's, Batteauman, 1 At Skeensborough, 2 Millmen, 6 9
Colonel Warner's Batteauman, 1 Colonel Scammel's, Batteauman, 1 Colonel
Marshall's, Batteauman, 1 Constant Fatiguemen, 3 At Skeensborough, 1 Gardeners,
7 12 Colonel Brewer's, Millmen, 2 Constant Fatiguemen, 13 Teamsters, 8
Gardeners, 3 26 Colonel Wells's Millmen, 4 Unknown, At Skeensborough, 20 134

UDREY HAY, D. Q. M. G.

General St. Clair's question. Do you know whether the men, returned by you as
constant fatigue-men, were not included in the daily details for fatigue?

A. I am certain they were not included in the daily details for fatigue, being
appropriated entirely to my department, and under my direction.

Q. Do you know whether the greater part of the provision and stores were got
off from the garrison?

A. The greater part of the provision, I am certain, was not. I cannot answer
with respect to the stores, as when we arrived at Skeensborough I had no time
to examine them.

Q. Do you know the number of the body of the militia that arrived some days
before the evacuation?

A. I do not know the number.

General St. Clair's question. Do you know of more than one body of militia
arriving?

A. Not that I remember.

Q. Court. Was there a sufficient number of boats at the post to carry off all
the provision?

A. There was not a sufficient number to have carried off the provision and the
other stores.

Q. Do you know how many ox-teams were employed at Ticonderoga and Mount
Independence at the time of the evacuation.

A. I cannot tell, having lost all my returns; but the number was not large, as
in that wilderness there was not grass to maintain them.

General St. Clair's question. In what condition were the ox-teams that were
employed at these posts?

A. The oxen were in poor working order, but might probably have brought the
provision from the landing, had they no other garrison duty to do.

Q. Court. Do you know of any parties having been sent out by General St. Clair
to discover the enemy's numbers, or to annoy them in their progress against the
garrison?

A. To discover their numbers, I know of parties having been frequently sent
out, and the General complained they were in such dread of the savages, he
could not get proper intelligence from them. I know of none sent out to annoy
the enemy in their progress, but the regular pickets that were sent out.

Q. How large were these parties that were sent out to discover the enemy's
numbers?

A. I cannot answer with any exactness.

Q. Court. Do you know whether the troops were courageous, and had a desire to
improve every advantage against the enemy?

A. Their own words, and the facts which arose when they were sent out, were so
very different, that it was difficult to judge, as they were generally beat
back again.

The Court adjourn till tomorrow, nine o'clock.

The Court adjourn, by his Excellency's desire, until Thursday next, at nine
o'clock.

The Court adjourn, by his Excellency's desire, until Monday, nine o'clock, to
meet in camp.

SEPTEMBER 7th.
The Court met in Camp according to adjournment.

Colonel Koseiuszko being sworn,

General St. Clair's question. Do you recollect what the strength of the
fatigue parties was, that were employed on Mount Independence on or about the
23d day of June, 1777?

A. About five or six hundred men were employed on the batteries at Mount
Independence as fatigue men, after General Schuyler had been at Ticonderoga,
and had given directions to put new works on Mount Independence. There was also
a party employed in front of the works, in a thick wood, cutting abbatis; I do
not recollect the number. I remember that General Fermoy's brigade was employed
in the wood cutting abbatis. General Fermoy himself was there two or three
days. Besides these, I always sent a fatigue party to cut the abbatis.

General St. Clair's question. Do you know whether there was a fatigue party
likewise employed at the time on the Ticonderoga side?

A. I know there was a fatigue party employed on the breast-work.

General St. Clair's question. Did you not, by my orders, make some additions
to the works on the Ticonderoga side?

A. Yes; between the west end of the French lines and the Lake. It was not
quite finished at the time of the evacuation.

General St. Clair's question. Supposing Ticonderoga to have been abandoned,
and the enemy to have been in possession of it, would it have been possible to
have maintained the works on the point of Mount Independence, that were made
for the command of the Lake and the defense of the bridge?

A. No; as the ground overlooked them about fifty feet.

General St. Clair's question. Do you recollect where the place from which we
got our water was, on Mount Independence side, and the situation of it?

A. On the west side of Mount Independence, on the low ground, near the Lake.

General St. Clair's question. Could we easily get at the water?

A. No; It was very steep, and I think about one half a mile distant from the
fort.

General St. Clair's question. Supposing the enemy had passed some of their
vessels into South-Bay, would it not have been wholly in their power to have
cut us off from the water?

A. The spring would have been exposed to the fire of the enemy.

General St. Clair's question. Do you recollect the distance from the Lake to
East-Creek, beyond the south end of Mount Independence?

A. About one half a mile or three quarters.

General St. Clair's Question. Would it not have been in the enemy's power to
have annoyed, from the vessels from South-Bay, any troops that might have been
marching across the Isthmus to the relief of Mount Independence?

A. It would have been in the enemy's power to have done it on account of the
passage being narrow, a thick wood, and the possession of the Lake.

General St. Clair's question. Do you recollect whether any works were begun to
improve the redoubt on the high ground, on the point of Mount Independence?

A. Yes; by your order I marked out the lines, and prepared the fascines; which
was after General Schuyler left Ticonderoga.

General St. Clair's question. In what condition was the fort upon Mount
Independence?

A. It was a picketted fort, only for small arms. Picketted all round, some
good and some bad.

General St. Clair's question. How many men could the fort contain with
convenience for the defense of it?

A. About 1000 men.

General St. Clair's question. What batteries had the enemy erected against
Ticonderoga at the time, or before the evacuation took place?

A. One battery was erected against the Jersey redoubt on the opposite side of
the Lake, about half a mile distant, and on higher ground. They had made some
works where they had an encampment against the French lines, about half a mile
or three quarters distant. The enemy had also taken possession of Mount Hope, a
retrenched camp, which had been occupied by us the campaign before, by which
the communication with Lake George was cut off. They had taken possession of
the mill, burnt the block-house, and passed on the other side of the creek,
where they took possession of a hill which commanded all Ticonderoga and Mount
Independence, and had begun a firing on the sloop that was stationed for the
defense of the passage from Lake George. They had also begun some works on a
point on the east side of the Lake, opposite to the bridge.

General St. Clair's question. Do you recollect Colonel May's having told me,
after I had spoke to the militia at Castle-Town, that the men would stay, but
the officers would not?

A. I do not recollect Colonel May's having told you of it, but I met some of
the militia on the retreat, and having expressed my surprise at their not
staying to fight for their country, they answered, they were willing to stay,
but their officers would not.

Q. Court. Could the enemy's vessels lie in South-Bay, in a situation to
command the spring, and not be exposed to our batteries on Mount Independence?

A. There was high ground, and batteries could have been placed there to
prevent them.

Q. Court. Could the enemy's ships lie in South-Bay, in a situation most to
annoy a reinforcement going to Mount Independence, without being exposed to the
fire of our batteries from Mount Independence?

A. They could.

Q. Court. Was there any other spring on Mount Independence, out of the enemy's
fire, that the garrison could have been supplied with water from?

A. No other lasting one.

Q. Court. What kind of ground was it on the height on Mount Independence.
Whether stony, difficult of raising a parapet on. or of sinking a ditch?

A. Very stony and rocky ground, and would require a great deal of labor to
put on the works. A ditch could not be sunk to any proper depth without blowing
the rocks.

Brigadier General Wilkinson being sworn,

General St. Clair's Question. Do you recollect what means were taken by me to
gain intelligence of the approach of the enemy, and their numbers?

A. By scouts and detachments, both by land and by water.

General St. Clair's Question. Were not there scouts and detachments sent out
frequently?

A. There was an established daily scout, as well as I recollect, besides many
that were sent out occasionally.

General St. Clair's Question. Do you recollect the distance from Ticonderoga
to Gilliland's Creek?

A. I cannot ascertain the distance.

General St. Clair's Question. Do you recollect the nature of the ground
between Ticonderoga and Gilliland's Creek?

A. I can judge of it only from observation as I passed up and down the Lake.
On the west side it is a mountainous craggy country, the mountains in many
places jutting in full upon the Lake. On the east side a flat low country
covered with wood.

General St. Clair's Question. Could large detachments of troops, had our
garrison been in a situation to have afforded them, march through that country
on the west side of the Lake?

A. Not without great difficulty and probable loss, on either side of the Lake.

General St. Clair's Question. Was there not, notwithstanding the difficulty of
the country, frequently small parties sent out toward Gilliland's Creek, to
discover the approach and strength of the enemy, and were there not parties
sent out on the east side of the Lake with the same view?

A. There were.

General St. Clair's Question. If large detachments had been sent out at such a
distance that they could not have been supported with the whole force of the
garrison, could they have retarded the progress of the enemy, or must they not
have fallen into their hands?

A. They might have given a momentary check, but must inevitably have been out
off.

General St. Clair's Question. Do you recollect my sending out sergeant Heath,
with a party, previous to any account we had of the embarkation of the enemy on
the Lake, with orders to proceed to Point au-Fer, or whenever he should find
the enemy, endeavor to make a prisoner, and bring me an account of them?

A. I do not recollect the officer's name, but I recollect a scout was sent out
for that purpose.

General St. Clair's Question. Do you recollect the account he brought?

A. I recollect, that he informed that he discovered the enemy somewhere about
Gilliland's Creek, encamped, and that he conceived them to be in force.

General St. Clair's Question. Do you recollect in what part of the country he
was when he made the discovery?

A. I think he was on the east shore, opposite to Gilliland's Creek. I do not
recollect the distance.

General St. Clair's question. Did you hear of any other debarkation of the
enemy than at Gilliland's Creek, from the time of their embarkation at
Point-au-Fer to their landing at or near the Three Mile Point?

A. We were informed of their approach to Crown Point, and of their being
encamped there. I don't recollect any other particular debarkation until their
arrival at or near Three Mile Point.

General St. Clair's question. Had we not information of numerous parties of
the savages being in the country, on the west side of the Lake?

A. We had, and found them so very numerous that our parties could scarce ever
get in view of the enemy, though many attempts were made to discover their
situation.

General St. Clair's question. Were there actions several times between our
parties and the savages?

A. There were, and I remember our parties on those occasions were routed.

General St. Clair's question. Do you recollect the strength of the fatigue
parties that were detailed on or after the 20th of June?

A. I cannot particularly ascertain the number. I remember that the fatigue
parties and guards generally amounted to about one fourth of the number of
effectives fit for duty in the garrison, and some times one third.

General St. Clair's question. Besides the number of men for fatigue that was
detailed, was there not a constant fatigue party with the Quarter Master
General, and a regiment of militia also employed in constant fatigue?

A. The Quartermaster General had a constant fatigue party, besides the number
that was furnished him by the details. There were besides, 100 men employed on
daily duty from two regiments of militia.

General St. Clair's question. Do you recollect my having ordered the fatigue
on Mount Independence to be done by a brigade at a time, under the command of a
Brigadier; and was not this number also exclusive of the detail for fatigue?

A. I recollect there was, and they were exclusive of the detail for fatigue,
except the proportion from the brigade ordered on duty.

General St. Clair's question. Do you recollect the diminishing the camp
guards, and was it not done on account of the severity of duty, by having so
many men on fatigue?

A. I recollect it, and it was done upon that principle.

General St. Clair's question. As you lived with me, you must be acquainted
with the baggage I had. I wish you would mention it.

A. You had a portmanteau, and a chest which contained your baggage; also some
kitchen furniture.

General St. Clair's question. Was any part of my baggage sent off from
Ticonderoga previous to the evacuation?

A. No.

General St. Clair's question. What age was my son, who left Ticonderoga?

A. He was a mere child; about ten or twelve years of age.

General St. Clair's question. Was any part of my baggage sent off with him
when he was sent to Fort George?

A. No part of it.

General St. Clair's question. Could any of my baggage have been removed
without your being acquainted with it?

A. I don't think it possibly could.

Q. Court. Was any part of the furniture belonging to Headquarters removed to
any other place previous to the evacuation?

A. None.

General St. Clair's question. Do you recollect what orders were given to the
troops on the evacuation being determined upon?

A. I do not, as I was then employed in fixing an occasional picket, but I
believe the orders were given to the Brigadiers.

General St. Clair's question. Was there a strong picket advanced of the French
lines, and the other pickets reinforced, so as to form a chain of sentinels the
night of the evacuation?

A. I don't know it of my own knowledge, as I was ordered to Mount Independence
to give orders about loading the battea^^; but, from every information I
received, I am induced to think there was.

General St. Clair's question. Was not the order for the march of the troops,
the striking their tents, and loading their baggage, delivered by you to some
of the regiments on Mount Independence?

A. The order for striking their tents and loading their baggage was delivered
by me, and dispersed to all the regiments about twelve o'clock at night.

General St. Clair's question. How was the retreat conducted?

A. The troops pushed out of Mount Independence without order or regularity, in
a great deal of confusion. I remember that, after you had got them stretched,
you rode from the rear to the front, in order to halt and throw them into some
form, but your orders were directly disobeyed, and the militia would not halt,
but pushed on, and drew after them many of the continental troops. When we
arrived at Hubbarton, the army halted, and was refreshed as well as our
circumstances would admit. After waiting a length of time, two or three hours,
for the rear guard and stragglers, you moved on with the main body, leaving the
command with Colonel Warner, with orders to follow as soon as the whole came up.

General St. Clair's question. Were not many of the continental regiments got
into good order soon after they left Mount Independence, and did not the rear
guard come off in very good order?

A. There were several regiments got into tolerable good order by your halting
them, and other attempts, and the rear guard under Colonel Francis came off in
very good order.

Q. How large was the daily scout that was sent out to gain intelligence of the
enemy's approach and strength?

A. From fifteen to twenty-five. It was a subaltern's light command.

Q. Do you know the strength of those that were sent out occasionally for that
purpose?

A. Their numbers varied. I remember one which amounted to 100.

Q. Do you recollect the time this scout, consisting of 100, was sent out?

A. I do not recollect the day, but the occasion was the enemy had made a
couple of prisoners, and fell in with a returning scout of ours which they
routed; in consequence of which this party was detached to come up with them if
possible.

Q. Do you recollect where the enemy lay at the time?

A. I cannot recollect particularly, but believe at Gilliland's Creek.

Q. After the enemy had landed at Three Mile Point, were any parties sent out
to annoy them in their approach toward the garrison?

A. There were.

Q. How large were these parties?

A. There were two small parties sent out. I believe they might have been about
60 men. They were routed and pursued by the Indians.

Q. Were any orders given for the destruction of the barracks at the time of
the evacuation of the garrisons of Mount Independence and Ticonderoga, or
before?

A. Not to my knowledge. The reason General St. Clair assigned for not setting
them on fire was, it would have betrayed our movement to the enemy.

Q. Court. Do you suppose it would have had that operation?

A. It most certainly would.

Q. Was the number of men returned on command in your return of the 28th of
June, on command in the garrison, or where?

A. There were many of them on command in the garrison. I do not recollect the
number. Some were on command at Fort Schuyler; some at Albany, and on the
communication to Ticonderoga; at Skeensborough, Fort-Ann, Lake-George landing,
and at the block-house at the saw-mill.

General St. Clair's question. During my command at Ticonderoga, or at the time
of the evacuation, did you perceive any instances of cowardice in me?

A. No; but I have upon every occasion observed a direct contrary conduct.

General St. Clair's question. Were you with me at Princeton and Trenton, and
did you observe any instance of cowardice in me there?

A. I was. I observed no instance of cowardice in you, but, on the contrary,
upon every occasion of danger, you manifested the utmost coolness and
intrepidity.

General St. Clair's question. At the affair of Princeton do you recollect your
riding up to me, and informing me that our troops had given way in the center;
and do you recollect what passed between me and you upon that occasion?

A. I recollect your begging me to take no notice of it, left it should
communicate a pannic to the troops we were with.

General St. Clair's question. At the time the picket was attacked at
Ticonderoga, which occasioned some firing from the lines, and at every other
time when there was firing, did I not transport myself to the place with the
utmost expedition?

A. You did; and your positive injunctions to the officers and exhortations to
the soldiery were, to reserve their fire until the enemy came within a very
certain shot.

General St. Clair's question. Were there any other pickets placed by you
besides those mentioned in the orderly book?

A. There was an additional picket of 50 men posted on the left of the French
lines, without them, every night, which came off in the morning; and a similar
picket, subject to the same orders, was posted on the point to the right of the
Jersey redoubt.

Q. Court. During the time you were with General St. Clair at Ticonderoga, did
you observe any conduct of his that induced you to think him treacherous to the
United States?

A. No; but he did, upon every occasion, manifest the most enthusiastic zeal
for the good of the cause of the United States.

Q. Court. Do you know the particular period when General St. Clair had
complete information of the number and designs of the enemy?

A. The first information of their number and design which he received, that
could be relied on was, I think, two days before the evacuation. This
intelligence was by stratagem obtained from a prisoner.

The Court adjourn till ten o'clock tomorrow.

SEPTEMBER 8th.
The Court met according to adjournment.

The judge Advocate produces copies of letters from Major General St. Clair to
Major General Schuyler, dated July 1st, July 2d, and July 3d, 1777; also a
letter from Major General St. Clair to the Hon. John Hancock, dated July 14,
1777; which, being read, are as follow:

Ticonderoga, July 1, 1777. Dear General,
NOT finding a convenient opportunity to send off my letter, I have the
pleasure to acknowledge the receipt of your letter of the 28th. The success of
General Washington over General How is an event of such importance, as must
destroy every prospect of the enemy's carrying their plans into execution,
should they succced here. I have ordered a feu-de-joye upon the occasion, and
will find some way to communicate the intelligence to the enemy. We have now
two ships, eighteen gun boats, and three sloops, lying off the Three Mile
Point, and they are forming a camp upon the point, and retrenching it. This
does not look like their being strong. Other matters I hope to manage tomorrow
morning, but cannot be particular for fear of accidents.

I am, dear General, Your most obedient Servant, A. ST. CLAIR.
This moment I have discovered that they are throwing a boom across the river
-- bravo!




Ticonderoga, July 2, 1777. Dear General,
YESTERDAY at noon, in the very instant of the feu-de-joye, which consisted of
thirteen pieces of cannon (the musketry might have discovered to the enemy our
numbers) forty-one batteaus appeared of me Three Mile Point, crossed the Lake,
and landed troops on the east side, in the Bay formed behind the Long Point,
opposite to the Three Mile Point. I observed them very attentively, and am
certain they did not contain on an average above twenty men. It is not
improbable, however, that part of the troops transported in them from Canada
may have landed on the western side, so low down as to be out of our sight, and
I am rather inclined to think this the case, from their camp extending a
considerable distance down the Lake, and its being much too large for the
number of men we saw debark at the Point.

I am in great pain for the batteaus and stores at the Landing. We cannot
possibly get them over (the enemy having possessed themselves of Mount Hope)
without risking such large detachments as might oblige us to come to action in
the open field, which would not be altogether prudent. I had ordered a party to
bring them off this morning, but the escape of some of the cattle, and the
stupidity of the drivers, retarded us so much that day appeared, and it was
then too late to attempt it. The design was therefore laid aside, and a party
sent to reinforce the party at the Landing, with orders to take back the stores
to Fort-George, and all the batteaus, destroying the block-house, and such
batteaus as they might not be able to carry off. At the same time I sent orders
to the block-house at the mills, which has been attacked several times, and was
surrounded yesterday all day, for the officer to set fire to it and the mills,
and to retire to camp, which he has this moment effected. The party gone over
with the boats I have desired to return by Skeensborough. It will be of the
utmost importance to secure that communication, which I have no doubt of your
being able to do; and when the Grant people come in, I hope to keep open that
by Castle-Town. A party of them, with cattle, should have been here yesterday.
I hope no accident has happened them.

The inhabitants who live between this and the bridge, I found it necessary to
bring within the lines, and have now sent them to Skeensborough, with
directions to Captain Gray to forward them to Albany by the first opportunity.
I do not know that they are our enemies, but they are certainly not our
friends; and when the enemy first presented themselves they were through their
houses, and they gave us no intelligence of them

I am still of opinion that the enemy have no great force here, but whether the
whole of their army may as yet be come up I am not certain, but last night they
tired their evening gun from three different places, farther down the Lake than
their post at Three Mile Point. A little time will clear up this matter.

I am not sufficiently acquainted with this country to form any judgment how a
body of men can be sent out to our relief, in case the enemy possess themselves
of the shores of the Lake above Mount Independence, which they certainly will
by means of their savages; but if they can be brought by land in their rear, a
small party would oblige them to quit the Lake, and consequently leave the
communication Open.

I am, with great respect, dear General, Your most obedient Servant, A. ST.
CLAIR.

The Hon. Major General SCHUYLER.

Ticonderoga, July 3, 1777. Dear General,
OUR picket was attacked yesterday two or three times, in which we lost five
men killed, and two or three wounded. The enemy's loss we are not apprized of,
but we have one prisoner of the 47th regiment, and two deserters from the corpse
of Jagers. The prisoner was very sulky, and would give no information whatever;
but by disguising an officer, a countryman of his, and confining him in the
same room with him, with the help of a little rum, we got out all he knew,
which have here enclosed, as also the examination of the deserters. Two men
came in from the Grants last night, and returned. I have wrote very pressingly
for the people to come on, and for the present leave the cattle to be brought
up by those who succeed them. I think it is probable Warner will fall in with
the foreigners, who are all on the east side of the Lake. The British troops
upon the west. Excuse this scrawl. I am so much in want of sleep, that I am
nodding as I write.

I am, dear General, Your very humble Servant, A. ST. CLAIR.

Hon. General SCHUYLER.

Fort-Edward, July 14, 1777. SIR,
CONGRESS may probably think it extraordinary that so much time should have
elapsed before they heard from me, after a step of such consequence as the
evacuation of the posts that had been entrusted to my care, but it was not in
my power to write whilst on the march to this place. I am sorry to find that my
letter to General Schuyler, the night the evacuation took place, has not come
to his hands; as, for want of that, though he has doubtless informed Congress of
the matter, he could not give them the reasons that induced it. They were these:

Seeing that the posts of Ticonderoga and Mount Independence were nearly
invested, and having intelligence by my spies that they would be completely so
in twenty-four hours, when we should be cut off from all possibility of
succor; that the batteries of the enemy were ready to open, and the whole of
our encampment, on the Ticonderoga side, exposed to their fire; considering, at
the same time, the weakness of the garrison, that the effective numbers were
not sufficient to man one half of the works, and that, consequently, the whole
must be upon constant duty, which they could not possibly long sustain, and
that of course the places, with the garrison, must inevitably in a very few
days fall into the enemy's hands; I saw no alternative but endeavoring to
evacuate them and bring off the army. Whereupon I called the General Officers
together, to take their sentiments. They were unanimously of opinion that the
places should be evacuated without the least loss of time; and it was
accordingly set about that night, the 5th instant, after embarking in boats as
much of our cannon, provision and stores, as was possible.

With the boats, which were ordered to Skeensborough, I sent Colonel Long, an
active, diligent, good officer, to take the command there, with his regiment
and the invalids, until I should join him with the army, which was to march to
that place by Castle-Town. The body of the army reached Castle-Town the next
evening, thirty miles from Ticonderoga, and twelve from Skeensborough; but the
rear guard, under the command of Colonel Warner, which, with the stragglers and
infirm, amounted to near 1200, stopped short of that place six miles, and were
next morning attacked by a strong detachment the enemy had sent to hang upon
our rear and retard our march. Two regiments of militia, who had left us the
evening before, and halted about two miles from Colonel Warner, were
immediately ordered to his assistance; but, to my great surprise, they marched
directly down to me. At the same time I received information that the enemy
were in possession of Skeensborough, and had cut off all our boats and armed
vessels. This obliged me to change my route, that I might not be put betwixt
two fires, and at the same time be able to bring off Colonel Warner, to whom I
sent orders, if he found the enemy too strong, to retreat to Rutland, where he
would find me to cover him, that place lying nearly at an equal distance from
both. Before my orders reached him his party was dispersed, after having for a
considerable time sustained a very warm engagement, in which the enemy suffered
so much, that they pursued but a very small distance. Our loss I cannot
ascertain, but believe it does not exceed 40 killed and wounded. About 200 of
the party have joined me at Rutland and since, but great numbers of them are
still missing, and I suspect have got down into New England by the way of No.
Four. After a very fatiguing march of seven days, in which the army suffered
much from bad weather and want of provision, I joined General Schuyler the 12th
instant.

It was my original plan to retreat to this place, that I might be betwixt
General Burgoyne and the inhabitants, and that the militia might have something
in this quarter to collect to. It is now effected, and the militia are coming
in, so that I have the most sanguine hopes that the progress of the enemy will
be checked, and I may yet have the satisfaction to experience, that, although I
have lost a post, I have eventually saved a State.

Perhaps I may be censured, by those who are unacquainted with the situation I
was in, for not sooner calling the militia to my assistance. I think I informed
Congress that I could not do that for want of provision; and as soon as I got a
supply I did call for them, and was joined by near 900 the day before the
evacuation, but they came from home so ill provided, that they could not, nor
did not, propose to stay with me but a few days. The two Massachusetts
regiments of militia likewise, which composed part of the garrison, gave me
notice that their time expired in two days, and they intended then to go home.
In vain did I beg of their officers to exert every influence they had over
them, and, from their subsequent behavior, I am fully persuaded the officers
are most to blame. They kept with me, however, for two days on the march, but
their conduct, was so licentious and disorderly, and their example beginning to
affect the continental troops, I was constrained to send them off.

Enclosed is a copy of the Council of War, in which you will find the
principles upon which the retreat was undertaken. As I found all the General
Officers so fully of opinion that it should be done immediately, I forbore to
mention to them many circumstances which might have influenced them, and which
I should have laid before them, had they been of different sentiments. For I
was, and still am, so firmly convinced of the necessity, as well as the
propriety of it, that I believe I should have ventured upon it, had they been
every one against it.

I have the utmost confidence in the candor of Congress, and persuade myself,
notwithstanding the loss they have sustained, when they have impartially
considered that I was posted, with little more than 2000 men, in a place that
required 10,000 to defend it -- that these 2000 were ill equipped and worse
armed, not above one bayonet in ten, an arm essential in the defense of lines
-- that with these 2000 I have made good a retreat from under the nose of an
army at least four times their numbers, and have them now betwixt the enemy and
the country, ready to act against them -- that my conduct will appear at least
not deserving censure.

I have the Honor to be, Sir, Your most obedient Servant, A. ST. CLAIR.

Hon. JOHN HANCOCK, Esquire
The enemy's force, from the best accounts, is 3500 British, 4000 Brunswick and
Hosse-Hanau, 200 Indians, and 200 Canadians.




Lieutenant Colonel Varrick being sworn,

Q. Did you muster the troops at Ticonderoga and Mount Independence in the
month of June, 1777?

A. Yes; except Colonel Long's regiment, which was mustered before I arrived
there.

Q. In what condition was the continental troops with respect to arms?

A. Some of them very indifferent. The three New Hampshire regiments, Colonel
Scammel's, Colonel Cilley's and Colonel Hale's, had pretty good French arms,
and chiefly bayonets. I believe a majority of the other regiments had not
bayonets. The militia regiments had arms, but very indifferent, but no bayonets.

Q. Had the corpse of artillery or artificers any arms?

A. None.

Q. Were the lines and redoubts at Ticonderoga furnished with spears?

A. They were furnished with some spears and sharp pointed poles, but whether
there were sufficient or not for them I cannot tell.

Q. Did General St. Clair inform you on or about the 26th or 27th of June,
1777, of the quantity of provision he had in the garrison?

A. I think he mentioned to me he had about thirty-six days of the meat kind.
Flour, I do not know what quantity he had.

General St. Clair's question. Were there not a great many boys amongst the
troops?

A. There was a number of boys, old men and negroes. I dismissed at the muster
50, as positively unfit for any kind of service, and would have dismissed more,
had you not desired me to be very tender, as you had so few troops in garrison.

General St. Clair's question. Did not my son pass the Lake from Ticonderoga
with you?

A. Yes; he passed the Lake at my request. I urged the matter to you.

General St. Clair's question. Did any part of my baggage go over when he went
with you?

A. None. Some of your son's clothes were left behind.

Major Hull being sworn,

General St. Clair's question. How was the retreat in General from Mount
Independence conducted?

A. The general plan of the retreat, I think, was very well, though there was
some part of the troops that behaved disorderly.

General St. Clair's question. During the time of my command at Ticonderoga,
did you ever observe any kind of cowardice, treachery, or inattention to the
progress of the enemy in me?

A. Not the least appearance of either.

General St. Clair's question. Do you recollect the circumstance of my ordering
a strong picket out the night of the evacuation under Colonel Francis, and that
it was directed to be of picked men?

A. Yes.

Q. Court. What was the general plan of the retreat?

A. General Poor's brigade was ordered in front, the militia next, General
Patterson's brigade next, General Fermoy's brigade after him, and the rear
guard, consisting about 450 men, under the command of Colonel Francis. Over the
first part of the ground we marched in file, owing to the nature of the
country; where the ground would admit of it we marched in platoons. General
Poor's brigade, as far as I was capable of seeing, when they first marched off
from Mount Independence, marched off in good order.

Q. Court. How were the invalids disposed of at the time of the evacuation?

A. Those who were not able to march were sent by water. The others marched
with their respective regiments.

General St. Clair's question. What quantity of provision was ordered for the
troops to take with them before they left the garrison?

A. I think eight days; principally pork and flour, and some hard bread.

Brigadier General Poor being sworn,

General St. Clair's question. Do you know what means were taken to discover
the approach and strength of the enemy?

A. By continually sending scouts by land on both sides of the Lake, and by
water.

General St. Clair's question. Did you ever hear of any landing the enemy made
but at Gilliland's Creek, until they came to Crown-Point?

A. No.

General St. Clair's question. Do you recollect my sending out sergeant Heath,
with a party, to make discoveries?

A. No; but I recollect your sending out Lieutenant Lifer, who returned with
two prisoners. I remember your sending out a person with orders to proceed to
Point-au-Fer, or wherever the enemy were, who brought intelligence that the
enemy were on the well side of the Lake at Gilliland's Creek.

General St. Clair's question. Do you recollect the general strength of the
parties that were sent out?

A. Sometimes a Subaltern's command, sometimes a Captain's command, Captain
Whitcomb being out frequently; sometimes by twos and threes, merely as spies.

General St. Clair's question. Would the sending of larger parties have
answered a better purpose than of sending the parties that were sent, and could
larger parties have been sent without great danger of losing them?

A. For the sake of gaining intelligence of the approach of the enemy, or to
ascertain their numbers, could have been much better attained by small parties
than by large ones, as any considerable number of men marching in that woody
country, where the ground is covered with moss, might easily be discovered, and
of consequence would be exposed to have been cut off by the enemy.

General St. Clair's question. Do you recollect whether the working parties
were increased on or after the 20th of June?

A. If I remember right, the detail was taken off, and we were ordered to work
by brigades, to turn out in the brigade every officer and man who were off duty
and able to work, to throw up lines on Mount Independence, and also to fell the
trees on the sides and at the bottom of the hill. Near twenty acres of trees
were felled.

General St. Clair's question. Was there any wood on Mount Independence, to
have supplied the garrison in case of a siege, or was there a magazine of wood
laid in?

A. There was no magazine of wood laid in. There was some scattering logs upon
the top of the hill, and so much upon the sides, that I believe we should not
have been put to any difficulty in getting wood, in case we had been besieged.

General St. Clair's question. How long do you suppose the wood that was on the
Mount would have furnished firing for the garrison we had?

A. At that season of the year it might have lasted us a fortnight.

General St. Clair's question. Could we have spared men from the works that we
were engaged in, to have laid in a further supply of wood, or had we a number
of draught cattle sufficient to have brought it from any distance?

A. At that time we had not half men enough to man our works. I never
understood we had many teams, but I do not recollect the number. What few teams
we had were employed in transporting the stores from Lake George Landing to
Lake Champlain.

General St. Clair's question. Do you recollect, after the enemy landed at
Three Mile Point, and before they broke ground, my ordering the men to lie a
night or two on their arms?

A. I do.

General St. Clair's question. Did you not understand the reason of that order
was, that though I did not think the enemy were in force, yet I thought they
might attempt to carry us by a coup-de-main?

A. I don't recollect it.

General St. Clair's question. Was our force in any degree adequate to the
defense of the places?

A. No; I think that the places could not have been maintained unless with at
least 10,000 good troops, and we ought to have had possession of two hills
without the French lines, as also the one on the other side of the Lake, known
by the name of Mount Defiance.

Major General St. Clair produces a paper, and asks General Poor whether the
matter therein contained was the order of march and distribution of batteaus,
that was agreed upon at the Council on the 5th of July? -- The paper is as
follows:

160 from General Poor's brigade, commanded by Lieut. Col. Read and Major
Durborn -- 150 from General Patterson's, commanded by Col. Francis -- 6
Captains, 12 Subalterns, and non-commissioned in proportion -- to advance as a
picket in the front of the French lines.

ORDER OF MARCH.

General Poor to lead the column with his brigade; General Patterson to follow;
Colonel Long; General Fermoy; Robison to march with his regiment on the left
flank; and Colonel Bellows, with Williams's regiment, on the right.

Hospital, 6 batteaus; Artillery, 20 batteaus; Quartermaster and Engineers, 10
batteaus; Clothier, 4 batteaus; Provision, 30 batteaus.

A. I very well remember the orders, and I think it to be the paper.

General St. Clair's question. Do you recollect a picket to be advanced,
consisting of the number of men, and under the officers mentioned in the paper?

A. I well remember it. I was desired by you, when this picket was paraded, to
post them with the other picket, which I think was 150 men, as near the enemy
as I could without bringing on an action, and to give them particular orders in
the morning, when I was to call them in, that they were to compose the rear
guard, which I did.

General St. Clair's question. Did you not understand that the reason of
ordering out that picket was, to prevent any surprise happening to us while the
men were employed in carrying the stores and baggage to the landing place?

A. Yes; and likewise to form a chain of sentinels from water to water, to
prevent any of our men deserting to them, and giving them any information.

General St Clair's question. Do you recollect the burning of General Fermoy's
house?

A. Yes; before I called in the pickets on Ticonderoga side I saw that house in
flames, which laid the hill that his brigade was on open to the view of the
enemy, as I could see every movement they were making, striking their tents and
loading and carrying off their baggage, which induced me to order in the
pickets one half an hour sooner than I should otherwise have done, as the
principal part of the troops on Ticonderoga side had crossed the bridge, in
order to embark their baggage on board the boats, the wind being so high the
boats could not be brought over.

General St. Clair's question. Were not orders given not to set fire to any of
the buildings?

A. Yes: You gave me particular orders, as soon as I had posted the pickets, to
communicate your orders with respect to the evacuation of the place to the
commanding officers of regiments in my brigade, and desired, as soon as the
baggage was packed up, that every light, both from fire and from candle, might
be put out, previous to striking the tents and putting the baggage on board the
boats. I understood the reason was, to prevent the enemy from making any
discovery of our intentions; and had not the wind been so very high, which
obstructed the moving of the boats, we should have been able to have left the
place by two o'clock, as was determined on.

General St. Clair's question. Was not the confusion of marching off the troops
from Mount Independence occasioned by that house of General Fermoy's having
been set on fire?

A. I believe that was the principal occasion of it.

General St. Clair's question. How far did the troops march before that
confusion was, in a great measure, remedied?

A. I marched in front. I frequently fell back to the rear of my brigade, to
examine into their situation, and before we had marched many miles I got them
nearly all together; I can say nothing with respect to the others; and the
first halt we made the brigades were all formed in order, and marched so during
the whole retreat, excepting Colonel Leonard's and Colonel Wells's, two militia
regiments, who behaved with the greatest disorder.

General St. Clair's question. Do you recollect of one or both of these
regiments having broke the line of march?

A. The day after the evacuation, when we arrived at Otter Creek, we were
alarmed by a report that the enemy were just in our rear. I, being in front,
was ordered to cross the bridge, and draw the men up upon the most advantageous
ground I could find. I posted the regiment that Lieut. Colonel Hale commanded
at a ford; he left it, and went off. In the evening, on our march, about a mile
and a half from that place, I came up where Colonel Hale was with his regiment.
The regiment had four oxen killed and skinned. I asked him how he came there
without leave? he said he came to get some provision, to prevent his men from
starving. I ordered him to cut up his meat, to be ready to fall into the line
of march, which he might be in a few minutes; if not, we should march but about
a mile and a half, and make a halt. I moved on, and in about ten minutes found
his regiment running by my brigade, and he nearly at the head of them. He, with
about forty of his men, passed the brigade. I rode forward, and halted him till
part of one regiment of my brigade had passed him; he came up again, and
insisted on passing, as he would not be left in the rear. I turned out about
forty men, and ordered them to fire upon them, unless they would remain on the
ground till the line of march came up, where they were to fall in, which halted
them. Both regiments frequently broke the line of march.

General St. Clair's question. Do you recollect, whether the troops, at the
time of the evacuation, were ordered to take five days provision with them?

A. They were ordered to take several days provision with them, which was
judged sufficient to have carried them to the North River, had we pursued the
route we expected to take.

General St. Clair's question. During my command at Ticonderoga, did you
discover any thing that had the appearance of cowardice in me, or induced you
to think me treacherous, or inattentive to the progress of the enemy?

A. I was once with you where you were in danger, and sundry times when we have
expected an immediate attack, and never discovered the least discomposure of
mind, but you always appeared with the greatest bravery and steadiness,
becoming the character of an officer. From your close application to your duty
by day, before the enemy made their appearance at Ticonderoga, and your
constant application both by day and night, after they came there, gave me
every reason to imagine you left nothing undone that was in your power to
contribute to the strength of the garrison; therefore I had not the least
reason to induce me to think you either treacherous or neglectful of your duty,
I remember your observing to me, if I evacuate the place, my character will be
ruined; if I remain here, the army will be lost; but I am determined to
evacuate it, although it will give such an alarm that has not happened in the
country since the war commenced.

General St. Clair's question. At what time did this conversation happen. Was
it previous to the resolution that was entered into by the Council of War, or
posterior to it?

A. It was after it. You gave your reasons for it, and said that it was to
throw this body of troops between the country and Burgoyne, that the militia
might have a body to collect to; which, if this body was cut off, they would
have none, and of course Burgoyne would pursue his operations without any
obstacle, or words to that effect.

General St. Clair's question. Were you with me at Trenton or Princeton, and
what was my conduct at those places with respect to courage?

A. I was with you at both places. We were not brought to close action at
either place, but you behaved with the greatest spirit, and with as much
coolness as at any other time.

Q. Court. At what time did General St. Clair receive the first complete
intelligence of the strength and designs of the enemy?

A. I don't recollect any that was obtained before the prisoner was taken; he
was the first person that gave us intelligence who commanded the enemy's army,
of their strength and designs, and that not until the next day after he was
taken.

Q. Court. Was there any other intelligence received, between the time of the
prisoners being taken and the time of the evacuation?

A. There was a report in camp, that some of the inhabitants said they were
clearing a road through the wood to get into our rear. The Jagers also
mentioned that they were clearing a road.

Q. Court. Do you know whether it was a prevailing opinion, that nothing
serious would be attempted against Ticonderoga that campaign, and whether it
was not expected that the enemy's troops would have been sent round from Quebec
to the southern army?

A. A little before General St. Clair arrived at Ticonderoga the enemy made a
movement up the Lake, with a number of boats and one or two vessels, tarried a
few days, and returned. I acquainted General Gates of it, and further
acquainted him that I was informed they were making preparations at St. John's
to proceed with their whole army. He wrote me, that he had the strongest
assurances from Congress that the King's troops were all ordered round to
New York, leaving only a sufficient number to garrison their forts, and
desire me to be getting every thing in readiness, that if the enemy went out
of one door, we must enter the other. He farther mentioned in his letter, that
we might daily expect alarms, as they commanded the Lake, and might come up
with their shipping, and that the intelligence he had by a spy that came from
Canada corroborated the sentiment of Congress.

Q. Court. What orders had the commanding officer of the rear guard, and did he
obey the orders he received?

A. He was ordered upon his coming in to sweep every thing off the ground upon
Ticonderoga side, to bring every man and beast, which I understood he effected,
and then to fall in the rear of General Fermoy's brigade, as a rear guard to
the army.

Q. Court. What orders did the officer of the rear guard receive at Hubbarton?

A. The first halt that was proposed to be made was at Lacey's camp, which was
the first cleared land we came to after we left Mount Independence. When I got
within about a mile of the place, I met an inhabitant, who informed me there
was a large number of the enemy and Indians at Hubbarton, which was two miles
farther, which induced me to continue the march until I arrived at Burnam's, in
Hubbarton, where it was said the enemy were. Upon our arrival we were told that
about 500 of the enemy had been there, and had gone to Castle-Town. There I
marked out the ground for each brigade, posted officers to fall in with his
brigade and regiment as they came up. We had then made a march of about twenty
miles, which had fatigued many of our feeble men; so that the officer
commanding of the rear guard thought proper to halt at the place first
proposed, Lacey's camp, two miles in our rear. General St. Clair sent several
times to order the rear guard up; the last messenger came and said they were on
their way up. As we tarried there about three or four hours, General St. Clair
said he would march to Castle-Town with his army, and would leave Colonel
Hale's and Warner's regiments to cover his retreat, with orders for them to
move on moderately. Some time in the evening I heard the General express a good
deal of uneasiness and concern that Colonel Francis did not come up with the
rear. Toward morning he sent one of his Aids up to order them down
immediately; and, if I mistake not, sent a second time. They did not join the
army, but remained until they were attacked by the enemy the next morning.

General St. Clair's question. Do you know whether the rear guard had orders to
move on to Castle-Town that night?

A. I cannot say positively that they had, but I understood they had.

General St. Clair's question. Do you recollect my having sent orders to
Colonel Pellows and Colonel Halcott's militia regiments, who were halted two
miles from Hubbarton, to march up and support them upon being attacked?

A. Yes.

General St. Clair's question. Was that order obeyed?

A. It was not. The regiments came directly to us at Castle-Town.

Major General St. Clair produces a map of Ticonderoga, Mount Independence and
the adjacent country, with references, which Colonel Koseiuszko, on his oath,
says is a true one, to the best of his knowledge and judgment, except as to the
distances, it not having been made from actual survey, but taken from view.

The Court adjourn till tomorrow, ten o'clock.

SEPTEMBER 9th.
ALL the members not attending, the members present, being a majority of the
Court, adjourn till tomorrow, at ten o'clock.

SEPTEMBER 10 th.
The same as yesterday.

SEPTEMBER 11 th.
The same as yesterday.

SEPTEMBER 12 th.
THE Court met according to adjournment.

Captain Woolcott being sworn,

General St. Clair's question. Do you recollect the orders that were given to
Colonel Warner at Hubbarton?

A. I was in front when we arrived at Hubbarton, laid down, and got a sleep.
When I waked, I found the party were nearly all gone. I asked Captain Smith
where they were gone to, who said to Castle-Town; and having asked him whether
we were to march, he said it was General St. Clair's orders, delivered by
General Patterson, that we were to march to Castle-Town. I went into the house
where Col. Warner, Col. Francis and Col. Hale were, and having asked Col.
Warner whether he determined to march any farther, he said he did not that
night; though there were orders to march to Castle-Town, he did not intend to go
on any farther, because the men were much fatigued.

Q. Court. What time did the rear guard arrive at Hubbarton?

A. I believe it was about three or four o'clock in the afternoon.

Q. Court. What time did they leave it the next morning?

A. They commenced their march about eight o'clock, but before the whole got in
motion they were attacked by the enemy.

Q. Was Colonel Warner the commanding officer of the rear guard at the time?

A. He was.

Colonel Baldwin, being sworn, says, On the 5th of July, 1777, about nine
o'clock in the evening, General St. Clair sent for me, and told me that he had
determined to abandon the place that night; he would have me with the
artificers, get all the intrenching tools, and the carpenters and smiths tools
on board of batteaus that were assigned me for that purpose, and be ready by
two o'clock in the morning to leave the place. I left him and went to my men,
got every thing on board belonging to my department agreeable to order, on
Ticonderoga side, by twelve o'clock. I then went to the stone redoubt, and
asked Captain Winslow if he wanted any assistance? He told me that every thing
was out of the magazine and on board the boats, there was nothing left but his
tents, that were to be carried. I then went to Headquarters, and was informed
that General St. Clair was gone over to the Mount. I rode over, and met him
near the fort, told him what I had done, and asked him if he had any further
orders? He said that the people were all asleep on this side, wished that I
would go and wake General Fermoy. I went, called him up, and returned. General
St. Clair then desired I would go, and see to get the stores away from the
magazine that was not then open. I soon got a large party of men, went to the
magazine, and rolled the barrels from it to the landing (I believe about 100
large barrels of powder.) I then went to the landing, where I found the men in
great confusion, contending about boats. The wind was high, and it was bad
loading them; the men very cross, and hard to be prevailed with to do their
duty. About sunrise the army was past and the boats put off. There remained
only a few barrels of powder and rum, with a small matter of baggage on shore,
and there were only two batteaus that lay at a little distance. I promised
Captain Nicholls, that if he could get these boats with his carpenters, and
carry off what remained at the landing, I would give him a barrel of the rum
when he got to Skeensborough; he immediately brought them in, got all on board
(except about eight old tents that were not worth carrying, and a howitzer that
we run into the Lake and left, with some carriages for cannon and General St.
Clair's wagon) just as the enemy came into the works on the hill and fired
upon us. The boats pushed off, and I rode away with Captain Buckland. We saw
none of our people (except General St. Clair's waggoner with his horses;
Captain Buckland rode one of them, and we brought off the other) until we came
to the last house; there we found four soldiers partly drunk. We made them run
until we soon came up with others that were too heavy loaded, and who had
stopped to throw away a part. We endeavored to bring all up with us, until we
came to Colonel Francis, which was about two miles, as near as I can guess. He
had then fell some small distance in the rear, by reason of people stopping to
lighten their packs. I marched some time with him, but he found the front
marched too fast for him. He desired I would ride forward to the General, and
desire him to make a small halt till he could come up, which was done. We
marched to Hubbarton, where the front halted two or three hours. We were
informed that a large body of the enemy was just gone from the place where we
halted as the front came up, and were gone toward Castle-Town. After the army
had refreshed themselves the General ordered Colonel Warner, with some others,
to wait until Colonel Francis came up with the rear guard, and then march on
with them; and then General St. Clair marched with the army to Castle-Town, and
took twenty-six prisoners on the way -- there halted for that night, the men
very much fatigued. On the morning of the seventh the rear, with Colonel Warner
and Colonel Francis, was attacked at Hubbarton; we heard the guns. General St.
Clair immediately sent one of his Aids to order Colonel Bellows, with two
militia regiments (that lay two miles on the road toward the rear) to
reinforce Colonel Francis, and cover his retreat if it was necessary; but those
regiments soon came down to us, and I heard the Aid say that he could not by
any means prevail with the men to obey the order, and Colonel Bellows did all
in his power to get the men to go with him to meet the enemy. The General this
morning heard our boats were cut off at Skeensborough, which caused him to
alter his route, and go by the way of Rutland.

General St. Clair's question. Do you recollect whether the working parties at
Ticonderoga and Mount Independence were increased or decreased on or about the
23d day of June, 1777?

A. They were considerably increased. There were several works that were not
finished that were ordered to be done, besides a number of new ones laid out
that the men were ordered to work upon, and we continued at these works both at
Mount Independence and Ticonderoga until the day we came away, besides a
considerable reinforcement to the party at work upon the bridge. As the troops
increased the working parties increased, we having almost every man upon the
ground on duty of one kind or another. There was a regiment of militia
constantly on duty in the woods, under my direction, providing timber for the
bridge, that was not included in the details. I had about 100 men, besides the
militia on duty with me there, that were not included in the details. I had
about 30 out of the militia also making shingles, and a party making brick, not
included in the details.

General St. Clair's question. Was the boom that was laid below the bridge in
the Lake fixed in such a manner, that it would have been able to have resisted
the shock of a vessel?

A. The anchors were chiefly lost from it, the cables having been broken by the
ice. I rather think it would not have stopped their heavy vessels, though it
might their smaller ones.

General St. Clair's question. Did you receive directions for building a
general hospital at Ticonderoga, and were you not employed on that work?

A. I did, from General Schuyler. I was at work on it about the 23d of June,
and the greater part of the fatigue-men were then taken from that work to be
put on other works. Some of the artificers were taken off, though the greater
part of them continued at work on it.

General St. Clair's question. What distance is the last house you have
mentioned from Mount Independence?

A. I believe not more than a quarter of a mile from the landing upon the south
side of the Mount.

Captain Winslow being sworn.

General St. Clair's question. What part of the artillery, and at what post,
did you command at Ticonderoga?

A. I commanded in a stone redoubt, where there were thirteen pieces of
artillery.

General St. Clair's question. Were the artillery and stores that were in that
redoubt removed at the time of the evacuation.?

A. The stores were all removed, and six of the pieces of artillery. I loaded
the cannon in a flat bottomed boat that was given me to load them in, and was
ordered, I think by General Poor, afterward to take them out to put the
baggage in. There were also 40 barrels of powder there, which, with the stores,
I loaded myself in the boats to go to Skeensborough, after I had got those
articles down. I was then ordered by General St. Clair, as I was coming up from
the boats, to spike up the remainder of the cannon, to go to the old fort to
assist in removing the stores from thence.

General St. Clair's question. Were the stores generally removed from the old
fort?

A. Every thing of any consequence was. They were all carried down to the boats
at least, if they were not put on board.

General St. Clair's question. Were the cannon all spiked that were left?

A. I spiked all that I had the care of, and some more that were at the shore
that were brought from the French lines, that could not be embarked.

General St. Clair's question. Were you Paymaster to the troops at Ticonderoga?

A. I was.

General St. Clair's question. Was the military chest saved?

A. It was. I sent it away the morning of the evacuation, about three o'clock,
with four of my men. You ordered me to send it away sooner, but I could not get
a boat to do it.

Q. Did the stores that were sent from Ticonderoga and Mount Independence, at
the time of the evacuation, fall into the hands of the enemy afterward?

A. They did, after they arrived at Skeensborough; though there might have been
some boats that fell into their hands before they got up to Skeensborough.

Q. To Colonel Hay. Did the stores that were sent from Ticonderoga and Mount
Independence, at the time of the evacuation, fall into the hands of the enemy
afterward?

A. They did at Skeensborough, after an engagement between the enemy's vessels
and ours.

General St. Clair's question to Col. Hay. Was not a great part of them
destroyed by fire by our people?

A. One of the vessels was blown up.

General St. Clair's question to Col. Hay. Do you recollect the number of
batteaus that were at Ticonderoga, fit for service?

A. Not positively, but I imagine they were about 70

General St. Clair's question to Col. Hay. Was the boom below the bridge so
secured, that it could resist the shock of a vessel?

A. It was secured with several anchors and cables. It would have stopped a
vessel's way, so far as to have exposed her to the fire from on both sides, and
made it difficult for her to get back again; but if a vessel came against it
with a full wind, I never thought it would have resisted her.

General St. Clair's question to Col. Hay. Was the wind fair the night of the
evacuation for vessels to come up against it?

A. It was, and blowed very hard.

General St. Clair's question to Col. Hay. If the enemy had attempted it that
night, was it not probable they would have broke through every obstruction?

A. I am of opinion they would have carried away our boom and broke our
floating bridge, but must probably, by that means, have been thrown athwart
some of the caffoons, and thereby exposed to the fire of our batteries on both
sides, until the cannon were removed or spiked up.

Lieutenant Colonel Stevens being sworn,

General St. Clair's question. Did you command the artillery at Ticonderoga at
the time of the evacuation?

A. I did.

General St. Clair's question. Do you recollect what orders were given to you
at the time of the evacuation?

A. About seven o'clock in the evening of the 5th of July was the first of my
hearing of the intended evacuation. You waited on me at my quarters (as I was
unwell) and informed me that the retreat was to take place that night. On the
information, I told you I had reason to curse the day I ever put my feet into
the country, there being so much retreating. Yoy said that you had the greatest
reason to curse the day, and intimated that more blame would fall on you than
on me for losing the artillery. You then advised with me what artillery to
bring off, and was anxious for bringing the whole off, and offered me what
assistance I wanted. I told you it was impossible to bring the whole off, on
account of the deficiency of boats; and 500 men were turned out to my
assistance. You had agreed to move all the pieces except the eighteen pounders,
and those above them, which I got to the landing, but the scarcity of boats was
the occasion of my leaving some of them there. I did make out to get a number
of them to Skeensborough, but they were lost there. I should have got the whole
there, had not the boats been taken up by General Poor for the men's baggage,
into which the pieces were to go. The boats with the ammunition and powder had
reached almost to Skeensborough before the enemy came up with them. One of them
we set fire to, with fifteen tons of powder, which blew up; the rest fell into
the hands of the enemy.

General St. Clair's question. Were not orders given to spike up all the cannon
tha could not be removed?

A. There were.

General St. Clair's question. Was that done?

A. It was. You advised with me about knocking the trunnions off, but being
fearful it would make too much noise and alarm the enemy, as they were so near,
it was omitted.

General St. Clair's question. Was there any artillery ordered to be fired that
night, to amuse the enemy?

A. There were two eighteen pounders in the Jersey battery fired every seven
minutes at their shipping, and at a battery that the enemy were raising
opposite to the Jersey battery, which continued till near sunrise the next
morning, to amuse them.

General St. Clair's question. At the time the enemy moved up with their gun
boats, as if they meant to attack the Jersey battery, do you recollect what
passed at the time between you and me?

A. You seemed to be angry at me for firing without your positive orders, and
said you would rather give fifty pounds than I should have fired.

General St. Clair's question. Do you recollect my explaining to you the reason
of my saying so?

A. I do not recollect your explaining to me the reason. You expressed in your
discourse to me, that you wished they would come nearer, that we might have a
fairer chance to sink them; and I judged that it was on account of your
thinking they were not near enough.

General St. Clair's question. Did you receive any orders for dismounting and
moving the cannon at Ticonderoga?

A. I did about the latter end of June, or beginning of July, from General
Schuyler, and moved all the cannon above a twelve pounder, except the two
eighteen pounders which were left at the Jersey battery, to Mount Independence,
and laid them on skids, with their vents down, which induced the soldiers to
think that a retreat was intended from Ticonderoga to Mount Independence. I
moved also the ammunition by your orders, except about one hundred rounds, to
Mount Independence.

General St. Clair's question. Was all the fixed ammunition removed at the time
of the evacuation?

A. I have the greatest reason to think that all was brought off.

General St. Clair's question. Was there any annoyance given by the artillery
to the enemy in their approaches to the place?

A. They were fired upon from the French lines, and from every quarter where
they made their appearance, by heavy artillery, from the first of their
approach to the evacuation.

Mr. Boyer being sworn, General St. Clair's question. In what station did you
act at Ticonderoga?

A. As an Assistant Commissary of Provision.

General St. Clair's question. When I called on you on the 5th of July for a
return of provision, what quantity did you report to me to be on hand?

A. I imagine there were two thousand barrels of flour, and eight hundred
barrels of beef and pork, the greater part was pork, and it was about that
quantity I reported to you there was.

General St. Clair's question. Do you recollect what quantity of provision was
issued as a ration at Ticonderoga?

A. I think, but am not positive, there was issued for a ration, one pound of
bread, one pound of beef, or three quarters of a pound of pork in lieu of beef.
That was all they daily drew. The other parts of a ration I do not remember.

General St. Clair's question. Was there any allowance made to the men for the
small articles you could not furnish them with?

A. They had briefs given them for them.

General St. Clair's question. How long were you Assistant Commissary at that
place?

A. About six weeks.

General St. Clair's question. Had you received any directions from any of the
principals in the department, what quantity of provision to issue as a daily
ration?

A. I do not remember that I had.

General St. Clair's question. Did you not issue the same ration that had been
issued before you came into office?

A. I issued the same quantity that had been issued before I came into the
office.

The Court adjourned till tomorrow, ten o'clock.

SEPTEMBER 13th.
THE Court met according to adjournment.

Major General St. Clair produces a certificate, signed by Lieutenant Colonel
Hale and Lieutenant Colonel May, which Lieutenant Colonel Hale acknowledges to
have been written by him, and signed by him and Lieutenant Colonel May; which,
being read, is as follows: Mount Independence, July 5, 1777.
THESE may certify, that Colonel Leonard's and Colonel Wells's regiments of
militia from the Massachusetts Bay, raised to reinforce at Ticonderoga for the
space of two months, do consider the term expired two months after their
engaging in said service, or at furthest from the time of their march from home.

JONATHAN HALE, Lieut. Colonel. EZRA MAY, Lieut. Colonel.





Major General St. Clair produces returns of the state of the arms and
accoutrements in Colonel Francis's regiment, Colonel Scammell's regiment,
Colonel Warner's regiment, Colonel Hale's regiment, and Colonel Marshall's
regiment; and return of the state of the arms in Colonel Samuel Brewer's
regiment, and Colonel Cilley's regiment; also a return of the arms wanted in
the artillery; a certificate from Major Hull; and copies of two letters from
him (General St. Clair) to General Schuyler, dated Ticonderoga, June 25th, and
June 26th, 1777; which, being read, are as follow: A RETURN of Non-commissioned
Officers and private Soldiers in a Battalion of the Massachusetts Bay Forces,
commanded by Colonel EBENEZER FRANCIS; together with a true State of their
Equipments.
Companies. Number of Men. Arms. Iron Ramrods. Bayonets. Gun-slings. Bayonet
Belts. Knapsacks. Blankets. Cartridge boxes. Drums. Fifes. Brushes.
Priming-wires. Screws. Oil-cloths. Wanting to complete. Arms. Iron Ramrods.
Bayonets. Gun-slings. Bayonet Belts. Knapsacks. Blankets. Cartridge-boxes.
Drums. Fifes. Brushes. Priming-wires. Screws. Oil-cloths. Capt. Porter's, 58 36
40 34 10 12 5^ 56 54 6 6 2 18 24 48 49 8 2 4 1 1 52 52 54 58 Capt. Page^s, 41
40 38 35 1^ 33 39 23 3^ 1 8 5 3 6 26 8 2 18 8 1 33 36 40 40 Capt. W^e's 65 63
4^ 35 ^ ^ 20 6 62 23 28 59 59 45 59 1 1 1 36 36 63 63 Capt. M^^bury's, 75 73 67
67 2 61 53 61 53 61 72 1 6 6 71 12 20 14 1 1 73 75 73 C. Wh^^^right's, 49 49 34
37 12 18 32 44 40 15 12 37 31 17 5 9 1 1 49 49 49 49 Capt. Gr^^^afe's, 62 62 51
36 3 17 2^ 5^ 55 11 26 59 45 42 7 7 1 1 62 62 62 62 Capt. Th^^'s, 63 6^ 2^ 26 ^
15 17 61 ^ 2 39 37 59 48 16 63 1 1 61 61 63 63 Total 4^^ 4^6 294 2^^ 5^ 16^ 261
2^5 382 2 ^^ 1^ ^ 115 139 3^9 252 150 168 30 5 7 ^66 ^69 4^^ 40^

N. B. One Company on command at Fort Ann, which is not inserted in the above
Return.

EBENEZER FRANCIS, Colonel.

A Return of Arms and Accoutrements belonging to the Third New Hampshire
Battalion, in the Service of the United States, commanded by ALEXANDER
SCAMMELL, Esquire
Good Bad Wanting Arms, 408 14 0 Bayonets, 413 0 9 Cartridge-boxes, 294 0 128
Priming-wires and Brushes, 17 0 405 Horns, 144 0 278 Pouches, 31 0 391

Ticonderoga, June 18, 1777. ALEX. SCAMMELL, Colonel.

A RETURN of Arms and Accoutrements of Colonel SETH WARNER's Regiment.
Good Bad Wanting Firelocks, 140 40 18 Bayonets, 46 1 151 Ramrods, 107 55 36
Cartridge-boxes, 153 7 38 Pouches, 6 1 191 Waist-belts, 63 0 1^5 Slings, 6 0
192 Sc^bbards for Bayonets, 48 2 148

Ticonderoga, June 17, 1777. SETH WARNER, Colonel.

A STATE of the Arms and Accoutrements in Colonel HALE's Regiment.
Good Bad Wanting Muskets, 355 15 0 Bayonets, 359 0 11 Cartridge-boxes, 347 0 8
Printing-wires and Brushes, 21 0 334 Horns, 91 0 264 Pouches, 28 0 327

Ticonderoga, June 17, 1777. WILLIAM ELLIOT, Adjutant.

A STATE of the Arms and Accoutrements in Colonel MARSHALL's Regiment.
Good Bad Wanting Muskets, 258 68 18 Bayonets, 156 0 188 Cartridge-boxes, 267 0
77 Prickers and Brushes, 49 0 295 Horns, 60 0 284 Pouches, 51 0 293

Ticonderoga, June 17, 1777. THOMAS WEEKS, Adjutant.

A RETURN of the Arms in Colonel SAMUEL BREWER's Regiment
Good Bad Wanting Muskets, 126 121 10

Ticonderoga, June 17, 1777. SAMUEL BREWER, Colonel. TIM. WHITING,
Quartermaster.

A RETURN of the State and Condition of the Arms in the First New Hampshire
Battalion, commanded by Colonel JOSEPH CILLEY, Esquire
Arms in good Order, with Bayonets, 336 Arms in bad Order, with Bayonets, 24
Arms in good Order, without Bayonets, 40 Arms out of Repair, without Bayonets,
11 Arms wanting, 2

Ticonderoga, June 17, 1777. C. STARK. Adjutant.

A RETURN of Arms wanted in the Corpse of Artillery, commanded by Major EBENEZER
STEVENS.
Arms wanted, 50

Major Stevens's compliments wait on General St. Clair, begs him to give an
order for the above number of new arms, as his men had all of them Four Pounds
Ten Shillings, lawful money, stopped for this purpose; and as his men now mount
guard, they stand in absolute need of them.

Your Honor's most obedient humble Servant, EBENEZER STEVENS.

Major General ST. CLAIR.

Albany, August 13, 1777.
THIS may certify, that the detachment of Colonel Michael Jackson's regiment,
which was under my command at Ticonderoga at the time of its evacuation, was
very poorly clothed, many of their arms out of repair, and about one third of
them destitute of bayonets.

WM. HULL, Major.


Ticonderoga, June 25, 1777. Dear General,
I INFORMED you yesterday that an encampment of the enemy had been discovered
at Gilliland's Creek. I ast night two of their vessels came up to Crown Point,
and this morning there are seven lying at that place; the rest of their fleet
is probably but a little lower down, as we heard their morning guns distinctly
at different places. They have also debarked some troops, and encamped upon
Chimney Point. Whether they have landed at Crown Point my scout-boat did not
discover, not daring to venture far enough down the Lake for that purpose, on
account of their shipping; but I have sent a party on this side the river,
which, I doubt not, will bring a just account of their situation.

I cannot help repeating to you the disagreeable situation we are in, nor can I
see the least prospect of our being able to defend the posts, unless the
militia come in; and should the enemy protract their operations, or invest us,
and content themselves with a simple blockade, we are infallibly ruined. I have
thoughts of calling for the Berkshire militia, which are nearest to us, and
will probably be the most alert to come to our assistance, because they are in
some measure covered by this post; but on that I shall consult the other
General Officers. This, however, is clear to me, that we shall be obliged to
abandon this side, and then they will soon force the other from us; nor do I
see that a retreat will in any shape be practicable. Every thing, however,
shall be done, that is possible, to frustrate the designs of the enemy; but
what can be expected from troops ill armed, naked and unaccoutred. I shall
write you again as soon as the scout returns,

And am, dear General, etc. A. ST. CLAIR.

The Hon. Major General SCHUYLER.

Ticonderoga, June 26, 1777. SIR,
THIS moment I have received information from Hoite, of Otter Creek, that a
large party of Indians and Tories are gone up that creek, supposed to be five
hundred, and are designed to cut off the communication by Skeensborough. They
took a pair of oxen from one of the inhabitants, and drove them to about two
miles above Middlebury Falls, where they halted the day before yesterday, and
killed and dressed the cattle; and it is supposed that tonight they will be at
the new road near Castle-Town, which is twenty-eight miles from hence, and
twelve or fourteen from Skeensborough. They reported that a very large party
were gone on the west side of the Lake, to fall on Fort George. That is said to
consist of 1000 Indians and Canadians.

We have also had just now another attack at the mills; we have two men killed,
two taken, and two wounded, one mortally. The scene thickens fast, and Sunday
next, it seems, is fixed for the attack on this place. We must make the best we
can of it, and I hope at least to cripple them so as they may not be able to
pursue their fortune, should it declare in their favor.

I sent a party down last night to reconnoitre them, who are not yet returned,
which gives me some uneasiness. I hope, however, they are safe, and will bring
me some intelligence of consequence. I have some thoughts, if they are not
numerous, of attacking them. If they get the worst, it will oblige them to
recall their parties. If not, there will be too many still left, to become
prisoners.

I have sent to the Grants to inform them of the Otter Creek party, and to
desire that all they can possibly spare of the militia may be ready to march at
a minute's warning.

I am, dear General, Yours, etc. A. ST. CLAIR.

The Hon. Major General SCHUYLER.

Major General Schuyler being sworn,

General St. Clair's question. What troops had you estimated for the defense of
the garrisons of Ticonderoga and Mount Independence?

A. Ten thousand continental troops. I do not know that I mentioned in my
letter to General Washington and to Congress that they should be continental
troops, but I intended them to have been continental troops.

General St. Clair's question. Did you think the posts tenable with the force I
had?

In answer to this question, General Schuyler produces an extract from a copy
of a letter to Congress, dated the 8th of June. 1777, which he says was sent by
express to Congress, and was received by them about the 13th of June, but he
did not receive any answer to the letter till late in July. The extract is as
follows: Extract of a Letter from Major General Schuyler to the Honorable the
Continental Congress.
Albany, June 8, 1777. SIR,
I DO myself the honor to advise you that I arrived here on Tuesday, the 3d
instant, and found an account, which I received on my way up, that the enemy
were approaching Ticonderoga, to be without foundation.

I enclose you, Sir, a return of the troops at Ticonderoga and this place. As
soon as I procure those from the other posts, I shall make out a general
return, and do myself the honor to transmit copies to you and his Excellency
General Washington.

You will perceive, by the return of the Commissary of Provision, which I also
enclose, that only 337 barrels of provision, of the meat kind, have been
forwarded to Ticonderoga since the 26th of March, and no fresh beef; so that
the stock of salted provision since that time is considerably diminished, nor
is there any considerable quantity provided in the country. I have, therefore,
directed the Commissary to forward an immediate supply of fresh beef, that as
much of the salted beef and pork may be saved as possible, in order to have a
stock on hand, in case the enemy should be able so to interrupt the
communication, as to prevent cattle being sent on.

Enclose you copy of the instructions I have given General St. Clair: I have
directed that Mount Independence should be the primary object, of attention.

First. Because, if the lines on the west side should be perfectly completed,
it will not be in our power to man them properly with the whole force destined
for this department, if it could be all collected at Ticonderoga, which it
cannot; for the several posts on the Mohawk river, and those on the
communication between this and Ticonderoga, will take at least 2000 men. I have
in view the drawing part of the army to this side of the Lake.

Second. Because I think it rather imprudent that the greater part of our army
should occupy a post, which, if the enemy should be able so to invest, as to
cut off the communication with the country on this side, we might possibly
experience a disaster similar to that at Fort Washington.

Third. I am fully convinced that between 2 and 3000 men can effectually
maintain Mount Independence, and secure the pass.

Fourth. If the whole army was at Mount Independence, it is possible that a
want of provision might oblige us to abandon that important post.

Fifth. If the enemy should attempt to draw their boats over land into Lake
George from beyond the Three Mile Point, our naval strength on Lake George will
prevent their progress: If it did not, we shall have a body of troops to oppose
them with.

Sixth. Because, if Mount Independence should be invested, the militia will
readily join when they have an army to join, and the seige may be raised.

Seventh. Because, if they should attempt to march a body of troops from Crown
Point, leaving Ticonderoga on their left (by the road last year cut by the
tories who joined General Carlton) to interrupt the communication, there will
be a force to meet them, and to prevent the evil consequences of such a
maneuver of their's.

Eighth. Because, if a sudden irruption should be made on the Mohawk River, or
from New York by Hudson's River, a force will be at hand to face them. Besides
these considerations, there are oeconomical ones also to induce me to this
disposition of the army, if it can be done without injury, which I am fully of
opinion it may, and will certainly be so, if General Carlton sent part of the
troops, from Canada to New York or ^^^^where.

I have mentioned the matter to General St. Clair, and although I did not
adduce to him all the reasons given above, yet he is in sentiment with me on
the subject. May I be permitted to entreat the direction of Congress.

PHILIP SCHUYLER. [ True Copy.]




General Schuyler says further, in answer to the question, that when he
mentioned in the letter to Congress that between two and three thousand men
were sufficient to have maintained Mount Independence, he conceived the ^ort,
about which orders had been given the beginning of February to Colonel Baldwin,
was far advanced; that the obstruction in the Lake was completed; that there
were carriages provided for the cannon; that the lines were completed, and not
by one half so extensive as he found them.

General St. Clair's question. Did you ever give me any orders for evacuating
these garrisons?

A. No. The reason why I did not give you any orders for evacuating these
garrisons was, because I had wrote this letter to Congress, and they did not
give me any orders about it; and as the continent conceived them of great
importance, and very strong, I did not think myself at liberty to give any
orders for an evacuation of them.

General St. Clair's question. Was the defective state in which you found the
works at Ticonderoga and Mount Independence owing to any negligence in me, or
disregard to the orders I received from you?

A. It could not be owing to any negligence in you, or disregard to the orders
you received from me, as you had arrived there but a few days before; not was
it owing to the negligence of any officer who had commanded there in the winter
or spring before; nor to the commanding officer of the artiliery or the
engineer. I conceive it to be owing to a want of men and a want of materials.

General St. Clair's question. Do you know of any steps taken by the eastern
states to reinforce these posts, after their investiture?

A. Immediately on my return from Ticonderoga, I wrote to the eastern states to
hasten on the remainder of the continental troops. Some troops came up in
consequence of my application, but did not reach Albany till some time after
the evacuation of Ticonderoga. Upon receiving the first letter from you after I
returned from Ticonderoga, I applied to the eastern states, and to this, for
reinforcements of militia. The militia from the Massachusetts arrived at
Fort-Edward, I believe, between the 4th and 7th of July. A few from Connecticut
did not join us until toward the latter end of July. Those from this state got
up much about the same time that the Massachusetts did. The Massachusetts
militia were up as soon at Fort-Edward, and those from this state, as I could
reasonably expect them to be. Connecticut, as I was informed by Governor
Trumbull, had a call for the militia from General Washington, to go to the
Highland, or Peeks-Kill. That was the reason that their militia did not join us
sooner.

General St. Clair's question. Did the force you had collected, supposing the
garrisons to have held out, put you in a situation to have raised the siege?

A. I believe that, with all the troops you brought with you, with the
reinforcement with General Nixon, and including all the militia, I had not at
Fort-Edward, about the 20th of July, more than five thousand men. If the
garrison had remained, I should have had no more than three thousand militia,
before I was joined by General Nixon, to have marched to its relief, which
number I conceive very inadequate to have raised the siege. General Nixon, I
believe, arrived about the 12th or 13th of July; but if I had had a force which
I might think was sufficient, yet I should not have been able to have raised
the siege for want of provision, there being scarcely any provision of the meat
kind in the department; flour was plenty. Nor was there any stock of provision
of the meat kind laid in, not even a sufficiency of salted meat to have
furnished the scouts with. We had not lead in the department sufficient for an
army any thing like to have raised the siege with. At Fort-Edward, on the 7th
of July, we were obliged to strip the men that were there of every cartridge
they had, to send them to Fort-Ann, and were left without any lead for some
days, excepting a mere trifle I got from Albany, a very small quantity brought
up by the militia, and by stripping the windows.

General St. Clair's question. Do you know the usual weight of a barrel of beef
or pork in that country?

A. Barrels of beef or pork should weigh, when they are well packed, about 200
weight; but I have frequently complained that the barrels of beef or pork of
the Commissary's were not in well packed as they ought to be, owing to their
making use of soldiers and others, whom I supposed did not understand the
business so well, so that the barrels were but slighty packed. I have seen some
that I suppose a quarter of meat might have been put in more, others that the
deficiency was less. I should imagine, if the rest of the barrels were the same
as those I inspected into, they would not have averaged more than 170 pounds
each.

General St. Clair's question. Did I not, when it was determined in the Council
of Officers that was held the 20th of June, 1777, respecting the holding Mount
Independence and evacuating Ticonderoga, express my opinion that it would be
impossible to hold that post, when the other side of the Lake should be
abandoned?

A. I remember perfectly well you did.

Colonel Scammell being sworn,

General St. Clair's question. Do you know any instance of cowardice,
treachery, or inattention to the progress of the enemy, that I was guilty of
during my command at Ticonderoga?

A. I do not.

Major General St. Clair admits, that in the number of men returned on command
the 28th of June, there were about 457 on command in the garrison.

The Court adjourn till tomorrow, ten o'clock.

SEPTEMBER 14th.
THE Court met according to adjournment.

Major Dunn, Aid de Camp to General St. Clair, being sworn, says:

I arrived at Ticonderoga about the 18th of June, 1777. A day or two after my
arrival I went round the lines on Ticonderoga, and found them much in the same
situation as they were in November, 1776, excepting the redoubts on the low
ground, which were evacuated, and a chain of new ones erected on the height
between the old sort and the right of the French lines. These were nearly
completed. In some cannon were mounted, and a party of fatigue at work on the
rest. On Mount Independence I found a party of about 100 men, under the
direction of Colonel Koseiuszko, erecting three redoubts in the rear of the
Mount, and forming an abbatis, the old one having taken fire some time before,
and was chiefly destroyed. One other party of about 150 men, under Colonel
Baldwin, sinking a number of piers in the passage between the two posts. One
other fatigue party, employed daily in bringing stores and provision from Lake
George Landing. Besides these, Colonel Hay, the Quartermaster General, had a
party of Negroes, taken from the different regiments, as a constant fatigue,
independent of the daily detail. There were two regiments of militia cutting
logs for the piers then sinking, these were likewise independent of the daily
detail, and exempt from all other garrison duty. All these parties of fatigue
were continued as above, with very little alteration, till the evacuation took
place. Being the only Aid de Camp belonging to General St Clair's family, most
of the orders delivered were through me, and therefore I had the greatest
opportunities of seeing all parties that were sent out; and after my arrival, I
do not remember a day that parties were not sent out on the east or west, and
frequently on both sides of the Lake Champlain, to reconnoitre the Lake and
woods. Those parties consisted from 15 to 50 men. I do not recollect exactly
the time the enemy first made their appearance on the Lake, but remember
perfectly, after their appearing with their fleet at Split-Rock, that no party
could be persuaded (because of the savages) to approach near enough to discover
any thing of consequence. They frequently fell in with the enemy's parties, but
were always obliged to retire. In this state we remained till the enemy landed
on Three Mile Point, I think on the 30th of June; and on this occasion I heard
the General complain that his garrison was not in force to risque a party large
enough to do them any damage. This occasioned the parties being reduced;
sometimes not more than one officer, and two or three men, was thought the most
eligible mode to discover the movements of the enemy. A look-out boat was also
stationed between the enemy's fleet and the Jersey redoubt, to apprize the
garrison of any movement in the fleet. On the enemy's landing at the point, the
General ordered all the provision and stores at Lake George Landing immediately
removed into the lines; the batteaus and boats to be in readiness to move to
Fort George on the shortest notice. The enemy, advancing toward the lines, on
the first or second day of July took possession of the heights between the
landing and the old French lines. The boats were ordered to move to Fort
George, and the troops posted at the landing and saw-mills ordered into the
garrison, which was effected without any loss. The communication between the
garrison and Lake George was now effectually cut off, the enemy being in
possession of the heights in our front. Their light parties made frequent
attacks on our picket, which consisted of fifty men, posted some distance in
front of the lines. On those occasions, and every other alarm that came to my
knowledge (and I believe none escaped me) the General always appeared at the
lines, going from right to left encouraging the troops, putting them in mind of
the cause they were engaged in, telling them to keep themselves cool, and not
to throw away their fire if the enemy should approach; that he wished for
nothing more than a serious attack, and did not doubt but we should repulse
them if they did attack. Such was the General's personal attention to the
posts, and the movements of the enemy, after they landed at Three Mile Point,
that I do not believe he slept one hour in four and twenty, on an average, till
the evacuation took place. As to the quantity of provision I can say but
little; but I recollect, soon after my arrival. General Schuyler's expressing
great surprise that no magazines were formed at Albany, or any other place
nearer than that, for the supply of the garrison. He sent Mr. Yancey
immediately to the country, and pressed him in the strongest terms to spare no
pains in obtaining provision for the post; that if the enemy should come on, we
should be reduced by famine; adding, at the same time, that the neglect of the
Commissaries had been such, that he believed it would be serving the public to
hang at least one of the department. -- The following are the particulars I
recollect respecting the retreat. About eight o'clock in the evening, July 5. I
saw the ammunition and cannon removing on board the vessels and to Mount
Independence. I was at this time ignorant of the retreat. About nine o'clock
the same evening General St. Clair sent me with orders to General Fermoy, that
he should direct all the stores, ammunition, cannon, baggage, etc. to be taken
to the foot of the hill on the east side of the Mount, where they were to be
put on board batteaus for Skeensborough. I returned, after delivering the
order, to Ticonderoga, and was sent by the General with orders to the Officer
in the Jersey redoubt, to continue firing his cannon every half hour toward
the battery the enemy were erecting opposite to the redoubt till further
orders. About twelve o'clock the same evening I was again sent to Mount
Independence. I found General Fermoy near his house, with his own baggage. I
went to the landing, where I found Colonel Hay directing the loading the boats,
with between three and four hundred men carrying down the stores, etc. but, for
want of proper orders and attention from General Fermoy, every thing appeared
in the greatest confusion. About this time they began to strike their tents on
Mount Independence, all of which, I believe, were put on board the boats. At
two o'clock General St. Clair left Ticonderoga, all the stores, ammunition,
artillery and camp equipage from that side being removed, except the heavy
cannon, which, from our small number of men and want of draught cattle, could
not then be removed. All the tents and hospital stores, most of the ammunition
and light cannon, were also removed from Mount Independence. Some provision, I
cannot say what quantity, and most of the heavy cannon, were left; all the
batteaus and boats were however loaded. About three o'clock in the morning the
troops were put in motion for the evacuation, but General Fermoy having set
fire to his house (contrary to positive orders) which lighted the whole Mount,
and gave the enemy an opportunity of seeing every movement we made, it damped
the spirits of our own troops; the militia regiments pushed out of the Mount in
disorder, and were followed by a number of continental troops; the guards from
Ticonderoga had also to pass the light, and rushed forward in confusion. The
General at this time rode to the front, and obliged them to halt, and formed a
line of march in rank and file, the roughness of the country and badness of the
road permitting no other. Having effected this, he returned to the rear, which
still remained at the foot of the Mount. It was near four in the morning when
the rear began to march. Colonel Francis, who commanded the rear guard,
followed immediately after, and the line continued in good order till we
arrived at Hubbarton, where the whole were halted to refresh. The halt was near
two hours. Most of the stragglers and rear guard having joined us, the army was
again put in motion. The rear guard here was given to Colonel Warner, with
orders to halt about one and a half mile short of the main body, which would
remain that night at Castle-Town, about six miles from Hubbarton, and to march
in the morning by four, and join the main body. In the morning the General
paraded the army, and waited near two hours for the rear guard. About seven
o'clock a firing began on Warner's party, and on enquiry found he had halted at
Hubbarton. The General expressed his surprise that his orders were disobeyed.
He dispatched myself and Major Livingston to order two militia regiments, that
had halted between the main body and Warner, to reinforce him (these regiments
were commanded by Colonel Bellows) and if the enemy should appear in much
superior force, that Warner should retreat to Rutland, where the main body
would be to cover him. Those regiments of militia refused to go up, though
positively commanded, and afterward entreated, by Colonel Bellows. This delay
occasioned Warner's retreat to Rutland, where the main body received him. The
militia regiments returned, and although myself on horseback, and three miles
from the main body, they arrived there with me. I rode express.

Q. Court. Besides the parties you have mentioned on fatigue, do you recollect
whether there was a brigade ordered for fatigue on Mount Independence about the
23d of June?

A. I do recollect there was a brigade ordered for fatigue on Mount
Independence about that time, which was exclusive of the parties for fatigue I
have mentioned.

Q. Do you know the time General St. Clair received information of the strength
and designs of the enemy?

A. I do not know the time.

Q. Did General St. Clair remove any of his baggage from Ticonderoga at any
time previous to the evacuation?

A. No part of it. His son went off, I believe, about a week before, but did
not even carry all his own baggage with him. About the time General St. Clair's
son went away, General Fermoy's baggage was removed from Headquarters to Mount
Independence, he having lived with the General until that time.

Q. What distance is Split-Rock from Ticonderoga?

A. About thirty-seven miles.

Q. What distance is Gilliland's Creek from Ticonderoga?

A. About forty-two miles.

Lieutenant Colonel Livingston, Aid de Camp to General Schuyler, being sworn,
says:

About the middle of June, 1777, General St. Clair (agreeable to orders from
General Schuyler) took upon himself the command of Ticonderoga and Mount
Independence. A few days after I went to Ticonderoga, in company with General
Schuyler. After being there a few days. General Schuyler found it necessary for
the service to return to Albany, and the command in that department continued
in General, St. Clair, with whom I had the honor of serving during the siege
and on the retreat. Previous to the enemy's appearance before Ticonderoga,
every method was made use of to gain intelligence of their movements and
intentions. For this purpose scouting parties, properly officered, were kept
out on the east and west sides of Lake Champlain. These parties were generally
selected from a corpse of rangers, who had been accustomed to services of this
kind. The General did not confine his attention to the article of intelligence
alone. No measures were neglected to strengthen the works on both sides of the
Lake. Fatigue parties were daily employed in this duty, and the direction of
them generally committed to Colonel Koseiuszko, an active officer, who acted as
an assistant engineer in the northern department. The obstructions of the
navigation at Lake Champlain was also attended to. Besides a very slight boom,
which had been thrown across the Lake during the command of General Gates,
large cassoons were sunk between Mount Independence and Ticonderoga, although
this arduous work was not completed when the evacuation took place. On the
26th of June, or thereabouts, our scouts observed an encampment of the enemy at
Crown-Point, fifteen miles from Ticonderoga. From this time it became
exceedingly difficult to procure any intelligence of the strength or movements
of the enemy, as the woods between us and Crown-Point were so infested with
savages as to render it exceedingly hazardous to send small parties that way,
and the force of the garrison was too weak to justify the detaching a large
number. Not many days after, I think it was on the last of June, the enemy's
gun-boats appeared off Three Mile Point. The same day there was a skirmish
between a scout from the garrison and the enemy. Our party were worsted, and
obliged to retire with a little loss. A considerable body of the enemy then
took possession of Mount-Hope. This height commanded the road between
Ticonderoga and the North Landing of Lake George. It had been fortified by us
the preceding year, but was dismantled long before General St. Clair's arrival
in that quarter. The old block-house at the north end of Lake George was still
in our hands. A subaltern's guard was left in it, to protect the public stores
which were lying at that landing. The enemy did not suffer this officer to
remain long in peaceable possession; they attacked him with small arms, and
were repulsed. The General, aware of the dangerous situation of the
block-house, and that the small garrison there must soon be overpowered by
numbers, or be obliged to submit on the appearance of artillery, judged it
necessary to order them within the lines. This was effected just in time, and
without loss. The Communication between Ticonderoga and Lake George, by the
main road, was now entirely cut off, which rendered it impracticable to bring
the stores from the Lake within the fort. There was now great danger of their
falling into the enemy's hands. To prevent a loss of this kind, the General
ordered the stores to be immediately put on board the batteaus, and carried
back to Fort George, on the south side of the Lake. This service was executed
without loss, and no further communication possible between Ticonderoga and the
country by the way of Lake George. The enemy continued to make their approaches
on the Ticonderoga side of the Lake. It was impossible, from the weakness of
the garrison, and the great extent of works we had to defend, to give them much
interruption in their approaches. But the movement of the enemy, which gave the
greatest alarm to the garrison, was the very rapid progress they made in
clearing a road, and getting artillery on Sugar Hill or Mount Defiance. This
proceeding was the more surprising, as it had been in agitation during the
command of General Gates (in the fall of 1776, after our misfortune on Lake
Champlain, when an attack on Ticonderoga was daily apprehended) to occupy that
height with artillery, but was judged to be impracticable. This hill had such
an entire command of Ticonderoga, that the enemy might have counted our very
numbers, and enfiladed every part of our works. After possesing themselves of
this commanding height, it would have required but a few hours more to invest
us on all sides. This might have been effected by only occupying the ground on
the east side of Lake Champlain below Mount Independence, where the pass from
the Lake to East Creek is very narrow. Had this taken place, our communication
with the country had been at an end, no further supplies of provision or men
could have reached us, nor would a retreat, in case of necessity, then been
practicable. But before this was effected, it was determined in a Council of
War to retire from Ticonderoga and Mount Independence. This resolution was
entered into on the evening of the 5th of July, and very early in the morning
of the 6th the troops left the ground. Measures for the evacuation were
concerted with the greatest secrecy, to keep the enemy ignorant of our designs.
The sentinels within the works were ordered to challenge no person that night.
This order I carried myself to the guards on Ticonderoga, though I was ignorant
of the reason of such an order. The guns at the French lines were spiked; but,
to amuse the enemy, the Jersey battery kept up a regular fire during the night.
The General also sent me to the old French redoubt, which commanded the bridge
between Ticonderoga and the Mount, to order the officer commanding the
artillery there not to spike the guns in that redoubt until further orders, as
this redoubt might have been of service in covering our troops on their passage
across the bridge; but I found that through some mistake those guns had already
been spiked. What stores it was possible to remove in the course of one night,
or rather in the space of a few hours, were put on board the vessels and
batteaus in Lake Champlain, and sent for Skeensborough under Colonel Long, with
the invalids and sick of the hospital. Many barrels of powder, in particular, I
remember were taken from the magazine, and put on board the vessels, though
they afterward fell into the enemy's hands, or were blown up. The remainder of
the army, under General St. Clair himself, retired by land. The rear guard was
under the command of Colonel Francis. The army the first day reached
Castle-Town, about thirty miles from Mount Independence. We made a halt of
between one and two hours at Hubbarton, twenty odd miles from the same place.
Before our leaving that town, the General ordered the rear guard to halt a mile
or two short of Castle-Town, where he intended to stay with the army that
night. The General had no reason to doubt but these orders would have been
attended to, and therefore was not a little surprised to find early the next
morning that the rear guard was still at Hubbarton, which is six miles distant
from Castle-Town. At this distance from the army, they were attacked by General
Frazer's corpse. The rear guard was increased by many who at first did not
belong to it. This was owing to the excessive bad roads and very heavy
marching, which prevented many, who were more feeble than others, from keeping
pace with their regiments. These were picked up by the rear guard, agreeable to
orders. At the time of the engagement, I imagine it could not amount to less
than 1000 men. The moment the firing was heard at Castle-Town, the General
determined to support the rear guard at Hubbarton. The troops at Castle-Town
were already under arms, and ready to march when the firing was first heard.
They were then ordered to keep their ground, and Major Dunn and myself were
dispatched with orders from the General to Colonel Bellows, who lay with his
and another militia regiment between Castle-Town and Hubbarton. Our orders were
to direct Colonel Bellows to march with those two regiments immediately to the
assistance of Colonel Francis, and to assure Colonel Bellows at the same time
that they should be farther supported, if necessary. In riding toward
Hubbarton we were met by these regiments which were marching with speed toward
Castle-Town. We delivered our orders, but could not prevail upon either
regiment to reinforce the rear guard; though, in justice to Colonel Bellows, it
must be said, he was in the rear of the regiment, and warmly persuaded them to
go to the field of action. an unaccountable panic had seized his men, and no
commands or entreaties had any effect on them. Finding it impossible to turn
these regiments to this necessary piece of service, we rode on toward the
seen of action, to find how matters were situated there, and report to the
General; but we had not proceeded far before we were met by Capt. Chadwick,
with about 30 men. Capt. Chadwick had just left the field, and informed us that
the action was at an end, that our men were dispersed, that the communication
between us and Hubbarton was cut on, so that we should run the greatest risque
of being made prisoners if we proceeded any further that way, and that the
enemy were in possession of the field of battle, in great force. The firing
(which had heen very smart) having ceased, countenanced this intelligence, and
we returned to Castle-Town and apprized the General of it. General St. Clair
now thought it unnecessary to send any further reinforcement to Hubbarton, and
prepared to pursue his march. But here I must not forget to mention the conduct
of the General toward two eastern regiments of militia, commanded, I believe,
by Hale and Learned. These regiments had showed much discentent on the march
the preceding day, and began now to be very clamorous to be dismissed. The
General, apprized of this spirit of discontent in these regiments, ordered them
to be paraded at Castle-Town, on the morning of the action at Hubbarton, and
addressed them in person. He spoke on this occasion in so forcible and pathetic
a manner, that the regiments, ashamed of their conduct, consented to remain
with the army as long as there was any prospect of immediate danger from the
enemy; but the plundering disposition they discovered on the march, and their
other disorderly behavior, obliged the General a day or two afterward to
dismiss them from the army with disgrace. The army after this continued their
route through several towns, east of Castle-Town, without any further
interruption from the enemy, to Hudson's River. I am very well persuaded that
it was General St. Clair's intention at first to have marched by Skeensborough
to Fort Edward; but an officer of one of our galleys on the Lake arrived at
Castle-Town before we left it, and informed the General that the enemy were
pursuing in force that way, who would reach Skeensborough before he could
possibly get there, and that some vessels had already fallen into their power.
This determined the General to change his intended route, and take the road he
afterward did. Before we reached Hudson's River, General St. Clair dispatched
me to inform General Schuyler of the situation of his army. So far as I had an
opportunity of observing General St. Clair's conduct, it reflects high honor
on him. Previous to, during the siege, and on the retreat, he gave proofs of
his attention, activity and courage. The garrison were always under arms at
their proper posts before sunrise, and frequently before daybreak. The
General was always out on these occasions himself, and was an example of
vigilance to the soldiery. I do not remember, though I lived in the same quarters
with him the greater part of the time during the siege, that he ever undressed
himself at night. All night, indeed, he would scarcely ever permit himself to
sleep. If he did, it was not above an hour or two, though the gentlemen about him
would frequently observe that he would certainly injure his health unless he
indulged himself with more sleep. In case of alarms, which were very frequent,
he always appeared at the lines, encouraging the soldiery by his presence and
exhortations. On the retreat, he preserved as much order in the army as was
possible through such bad roads, and so rough a country.

Q. Do you know the time General St. Clair received information of the strength
and designs of the enemy?

A. I do not.

Major General St. Clair, having concluded the testimony in his behalf, desires
the Court to give him time to make his defense.

The Court, taking into consideration the General's desire, do give him till
the 21st instant for that purpose.

The Court adjourn till the 21st instant.

Major General Lincoln's Quarters, near Quarter-Hill, September 28th.
THE Court were to have met, by order of his Excellency General Washington, at
this place. Not a sufficient number of members attending, the members present,
being a majority of the Court, adjourn till tomorrow, nine o'clock.

Major General Lincoln's Quarters, near Quaker-Hill, September 29th.
THE Court met.

Major General St. Clair produces a letter from him to Major General Schuyler,
dated the 10th of June, 1777; and extracts from a letter to General Schuyler
from him, dated June 28, 1777; which are as follow:

Fort George, June 10, 1777. Dear General,
I GOT to this place yesterday, having met with nothing on the communication
necessary to inform you of, except that at Fort-Edward there is neither beef
nor pork, but what it brought from hence. It seems to me a very extraordinary
proceedure, to be transporting provision from Fort Edward to the Lake, and then
bringing it back for the use of that garrison, and must arise from the greatest
inattention in the Commissary. The commanding officer informs me he wrote
repeatedly to Mr. Avery about this matter, and that this is the third time he
has been in the same predicament.

A considerable quantity of provisions are still here, which are getting over
as fast as possible. I believe they will be all over before we see the enemy,
who, by General Poor's letters, are making no motions that indicate a sudden
approach.

General de Fermoy presents his compliments, and begs you would send him a
German, of the name of Chapman, he took out of goal in Albany. He wants him for
some particular purpose, for which he thinks he can depend upon him; but if you
are suspicious of him, that you would order him up with a file of men.

I shall pass the Lake this morning, and after my arrival shall send you the
state of Ticonderoga as soon as possible. With every sentiment of esteem, I am,

Dear General, Your most obedient humble Servant, A. ST. CLAIR,

The Hon. Major General SCHUYLER.

Extracts from a Letter to General SCHUYLER, dated Ticonderoga, June 28, 1777.
Dear General,
MY scout, on which I depended much for intelligence, is not yet returned, nor
I fear ever will now. It consisted of three men only, the best of Whitcomb's
people, and picked out by him for the purpose. The woods are so full of Indians
that it is difficult for parties to get through. I shall send off Whitcomb
himself presently, for intelligence I must have, although I am very loath to put
him upon it, left he should fall into the hands of the enemy, who have no small
desire to have him in their power.

I sent Colonel Warner to the Grants yesterday, to raise a body of men to
oppose the incursions of the savages that are gone by Otter-Creek, and have
ordered him to attack them, and join me again as soon as possible. I am very
happy to find the country was apprized of the march of that party before
Colonel Warner got to Skeensborough, as it will probably prevent their success,
and may end in their ruin.

We are going on with the necessary works on the Mount as fast as possible, and
have removed the most valuable of the stores and provision to that side. The
bridge is in very little more forwardness to appearance than when you left this
place, but they tell me this day will finish the getting timber for it. The
boom is likewise placed, but very feebly secured, for want of cables.

I could wish the batteaus were all over soon, or that you would not send them.
I am extremely apprehensive the enemy will possess themselves of the Landing,
in which case they might fall into their hands. We cannot venture the teams now
without a strong guard, and so many parties as we are obliged to make, with the
fatigues, will very soon wear down our men.

We can do nothing but form conjectures about the force of the enemy, for I
cannot find a single person, on whom I can depend, to venture amongst them for
intelligence; but, from their manner of beginning the campaign, I conclude that
they are either in full force, or very weak, and hope by letting loose the
Indians to intimidate us. I incline to believe the last, but have as yet no
certain rule to go by; however, we must know soon, and it is said they have
marked tomorrow to attack. I beg leave (...) refer you for further particulars
to Colonel Varrick, who takes the charge of this, and am,

Dear General, A. ST. CLAIR.

The Hon. Major General SCHUYLER.

Major General St. Clair, being requested to make his defense, says as follows:

HOWEVER disagreeable it may be to appear before a Court, a prisoner, and in
the light of a criminal, I am happy that my conduct, which has been so much
censured at large, is at last to be enquired into by a proper judicatory, and
that, after so long a delay, and so injurious a discrimination, public justice
will be done upon a full, an impartial, and dispassionate examination, and that
it will be passed upon by men equal to the task of investigating the truth,
however artfully concealed, and determining upon the intrinsic merit of
military actions, stripped of the glare that is sometimes thrown upon them by
success, or the false lights in which they are often placed by consequences. If
I am guilty of all, or any of the charges against me, I wish not to escape
punishment; but, conscious of no crime, I hope by your sentence, upon a candid
comparison of the testimony, to have those stains wiped from my character, with
which it has been suffered to remain too long blotted, and to be restored with
honor to the arms of my friends and of my country. I say a proper judicatory,
in contra-distinction to that before which the matter has been so long hung up,
and which, from the proceedings, seems to have considered itself as analogous
to a grand jury, and has strictly followed the ill example of grand juries in
latter times; I mean their calling for, or admitting, such evidence only as
might serve to criminate, not considering how much the bare accusation affects
the reputation, or, where the person has any sensibility, how deeply it cuts
into the soul.

The instances of discrimination are so many, it is painful to mention them.
But has it not taken place in the cases of General Sullivan. General Wayne,
General Maxwell, General Putnam, and others? They have all been accused of
misconduct, but General Schuyler and myself only have been forced to languish,
in torpid inactivity, under the weight of the accusation.

The charges against me are of a very general and criminal nature, and have
been stated by a Committee of Congress, upon the evidence collected by another
Committee, appointed for the purpose of collecting evidence against the General
Officers, who were in the northern department when Ticonderoga and Mount
Independence were evacuated. Sir, all this formal interference of Congress, or
Committees of Congress, gives the matter an air of vast importance, and
impresses on the public an idea of great criminality. It will, therefore, be
necessary for me, whilst I defend myself against the charges directly, to take
some notice of the reasonings of the Committee, and to show in some instances
their fallacy, in others their futility. For which reason I beg leave to read
the report.

THE Committee, appointed to examine the evidence collected, and state charges,
against the General Officers, who were in the northern department when
Ticonderoga and Mount Independence were evacuated, Report.

That, having examined the papers to them committed, relative to the subject in
question, they find

That, on or about the 13th day of June, 1777, Major General St. Clair took
upon him the command at Ticonderoga and Mount Independence, and that those
posts were, by his orders, evacuated to the enemy on the 6th day of July
following.

That, by Deputy Commissary Avery's return of provision at Ticonderoga on the
25th of May, 1777, there were at that post 1400 barrels of flour, and 661
barrels of beef; which he stated as sufficient provision in flour for 4000 men
during 66 days, and in beef for 75 days.

That, by Deputy Commissary Yancey's return of provision remaining on hand at
Ticonderoga the 20th of June, 1777, there were 2015 barrels of flour, 195
barrels of beef, 784 barrels of pork, and 48 barrels of hard bread, besides
pease, Indian meal, sugar, coffee, chocolate, molasses, wine, rum, salt,
candles and hog's-lard.

That, on or about the 5th of July, 1777, as appears by Jesse Leavenworth's
affidavit, a considerable number of fat cattle arrived at Ticonderoga.

That, by the general return of the troops on the 14th of June, 1777, present
at Ticonderoga and on command, and which we suppose to be in the environs,
there were Commissioned Officers, 273 Staff, 45 Non commissioned, 398 Rank and
File, 3346 Commissioned Officers of Artillery, 23 Staff, 4 Non commissioned, 80
Matrosses, 117 4286 Sick, 517 Total Effectives, including Officers, 3769

That, by the general returns of troops on the 28th of June, 1777, present at
Ticonderoga and on command, and which we suppose to be in the environs, there
were Commissioned Officers, 284 Staff, 50 Non commissioned, 413 Rank and File,
3559 Commissioned Officers of Artillery, 32 Staff, 2 Non commissioned, 99
Matrosses, 300 4739 Sick, 556 Total Effectives, including Officers, 4183

That General St. Clair informed the Council of War held on the 5th of July,
1777, that 900 militia had joined him. That Jesse Leavenworth swears they were
of the Grants; and General St. Clair, in his letter to Congress, July 14, says
they joined on the 5th. That the whole force in Ticonderoga, on the 5th of
July, 1777, was 5639 men and officers, of which a number, not exceeding 639,
could be considered as sick.

That, on the 13th of June, 1777, General St. Clair wrote to General Schuyler,
the commanding officer in the department, that two men from Canada, taken
prisoners, informed him that the British army in Canada were assembling, to the
amount of about 10,000 men, as fast as possible, to cross the Lake, and attack
Ticonderoga; and that he might depend upon it their fleet would appear in a
fortnight at farthest.

That, on the 18th of June, General St. Clair wrote to General Schuyler, that
four of the enemy's vessels were lying within a mile of the hither side of
Split-Rock; that on the day before the enemy's Indians had taken two prisoners,
who had strolled from his camp unarmed; and that he thought the enemy's main
army was not far off.

That, on the 14th of June, General St. Clair wrote to General Schuyler, that
the evening before he had received information, from a scouting party, the
enemy were encamped on both sides of Gilliland's Creek, and that they were very
numerous.

That, on the 25th of June, General St. Clair wrote to Congress, that he was
not able to discover whether the enemy were in force or not; that seven of
their vessels arrived at Crown-Point the preceding evening; and that others of
their fleet were four or five miles lower down.

That, on the 30th of June, General St. Clair wrote to General Schuyler, that
the enemy having advanced to the Three Mile Point, the alarm was given; that
his people were in the best disposition possible; and that he had no doubt of
giving a good account of the enemy, should they think proper to attack him.

That it does not appear the enemy did attack General St. Clair; yet,
nevertheless, on the 5th of July he called a Council of War, and desired their
opinion, whether he should wait the attack at the Ticonderoga lines, or whether
the whole of the troops should be drawn over to Mount Independence, the more
effectually to provide for the defense of that post. Whereupon the Council were
unanimously of opinion, that it was impossible, with their force (then stated
by General St. Clair to be 2089 rank and file, besides the corpse of artillery,
900 militia, and 124 artificers unarmed) to defend Ticonderoga and Mount
Independence, and that the troops, cannon and stores should be removed that
night, if possible, to Mount Independence. That the General also put another
question, whether, after a retreat to Mount Independence, they should be in a
situation defend that post? or, in case it could not be defended, whether a
retreat into the country would be practicable? Upon these points, the Council
unanimously concluded that a retreat ought to be undertaken as soon as
possible, and that they should be very fortunate if it could be effected. And
in pursuance of this determination Ticonderoga and Mount Independence were
abandoned between two and three o'clock in the morning of the 6th of July,
1777, General St. Clair having, as appears by Jesse Leavenworth's affidavit,
eight days before sent his son and baggage from Ticonderoga to Fort George.

That General St. Clair, in his letter to the Hon. John Jay, Esquire dated July 25,
1777. writing of the evacuation of Ticonderoga and Mount Independence, says,
That had the opinion of the Council been contrary to what it was, it (meaning
the evacuation) would nevertheless have taken place, as he knew it to be
impossible to defend the posts with their numbers.

That the sick at Ticonderoga, and the public stores of ammunition, cannon,
provision and clothing, were (...) behind, or lost upon the precipitate
retreat of the 6th of July.

That on the 20th of June, 1777. a Council of War was held at Ticonderoga,
Generals Schuyler and St. Clair being present, wherein it was determined, that
Ticonderoga and Mount Independence ought to be maintained as long as possible,
consistent with the safety of the troops and stores; that, if either of those
posts must be evacuated, the former should be evacuated; that the
fortifications and lines on Mount Independence were very deficient; and that
repairing the old and adding new works ought to claim immediate attention.

That, by Jesse Leavenworth's affidavit, it appears there was not a stroke
struck to fortify Mount Independence; that no parties were sent to annoy the
enemy, though the troops were healthy, courageous, and desirous to improve
every advantage against them.

That, by the determination of the Council of War on the 5th of July, it
appears the enemy had then nothing more to do to complete their investiture of
Ticonderoga and Mount Independence, than to occupy the neck of land, a space of
three quarters of a mile between the Lake and the East Creek, and to possess
themselves of the Narrow, between them and Skeensborough.

That, by General St. Clair's orderly book, it appears, that on the 15th of
June (...) were issued for the following guards: Cap. Sub. Ser. D and F. Cor.
Privates. Main Guard, 1 2 2 2 2 42 Jersey Redoubt, 0 1 1 0 2 30 French Line
Ditto, 0 1 1 0 2 30 Head Quarters, 0 0 1 0 2 18 Quartermaster, 0 0 0 0 1 8
Total. 1 4 5 2 9 128

A picket guard, of 1 Captain, 3 Subalterns, 3 Sergeants, 3 Corporals, and 50
Privates, posted to the right of the French lines.

For fatigue, 3 Captains, 10 Subalterns, 10 Sergeants, 5 Drums and Fifes, 326
Rank and File. The whole to continue till farther orders. Total privates for
guards, 178; for fatigue, 326.

That, on the 23d of June, the abovementioned guards were reduced from 178 to
95 men; the fatigue party from 326 to 250 men; and 78 privates, under proper
officers, were ordered for the detail of guards at Mount Independence; all to
continue till further orders.

That the 26th of June was the first day the troops were drawn up at their
alarm-posts, ordered to discharge their loaded pieces, and to clean them; and
it was but on this day that a signal was given in orders, in case of an attack
at the French lines, or at Mount Independence.

That, on the 29th of June, it was ordered that a scout, consisting of a
subaltern, a sergeant, and twenty privates, should be sent out every morning,
one hour before gun-fire; the fatigue party being then increased to 310
privates, the other guards continuing as before, 173 privates, without any
addition till the evacuation of the posts.

Upon which state of evidence, your Committee, in order to ground their charges
against Major General St. Clair, beg leave to remark;

First. That, on the 13th of June, General St. Clair was possessed of an
information, from two prisoners taken in Canada, that the British forces,
amounting to about 10,000 men, were proceeding as fast as possible against him,
and that he might expect their arrival in three weeks at farthest. That as, on
the 18th of June, four of the enemy's vessels were lying on the hither side of
Split-Rock, and on the 24th seven of them were at Crown Point, and others four
or five miles lower down, their forces then encamped on both sides of
Gilliland's Creek, and he was informed by his scouts that they were very
numerous; so from these circumstances it appears General St. Clair had
substantial reason to confide in what the prisoners had told him relative to
the intentions and strength of the enemy, and that he ought at this time to
have taken his final resolution, either to stand an attack, or to retreat with
his stores, the preservation of which was a principal object in the
determinations of the Council of War on the 20th of June. Therefore it appears
that General St. Clair's neglecting to form his decisive opinion at this time,
or at a later day, so as to allow him a sufficient opportunity to retreat with
his troops, sick, ammunition, cannon, provision and clothing, (...) deprive
the enemy of shelter at Ticonderoga, was a neglect of duty.

Second. That General St. Clair, on the 24th of June, was informed by his
scouts the enemy were very numerous, and yet, nevertheless, on the next day he
wrote to Congress, that he was not able to discover whether the enemy were in
force or not.

Third. That it General St. Clair found small scouts could not acquire a
knowledge whether the enemy were in force or not, it was his duty in due time
to have sent out reconnoitring parties, in such force as might have assured him
whether or not the enemy were in strength, this being a most important point,
as upon this he was to regulate his motions; and therefore his failure in
sending out such parties in due time was a neglect, of duty.

Fourth. That as Jesse Leavenworth swears General St. Clair did not annoy the
enemy in their advance against, and investiture of, the posts under his care,
although the troops were healthy, courageous, and desirous of action, it
appears the General did not to the utmost of his power oppose the operations of
the enemy; and therefore that he is liable to the charge of neglect of duty, of
cowardice, or of treachery, or of incapacity as a General.

Fifth. That as it was determined in the Council of War on the 20th of June,
approved by General Schuyler, the commanding officer in the department, that
the repairing the old and adding new works on Mount Independence ought to claim
immediate attention; and Jesse Leavenworth swears not a stroke was struck for
those purposes; and by the orderly book it appears the fatigue party was
decreased in number, and so continued at a time when it should have been
abundantly increased; so on these points the General is liable to be charged
with a neglect of duty, amounting to a breach of orders, and with treachery.

Sixth. That as on the 25th of May, the Deputy Commissary rated that 1400
barrels of flour would, at an allowance of one pound each man per diem, serve
4000 men 66 days, and that 661 barrels of beef would serve the same number of
men 75 days; and supposing that, from the twentieth of June to the fourth of
July inclusive, there were in Ticonderoga and Mount Independence 4739 men, and
there does not appear to have been at any time between those periods a greater
number; so, estimating the consumption of 4739 men, from the twentieth of June
to the fourth of July inclusive, upon the 2015 barrels of flour, 195 barrels of
beef, and 784 barrels of pork, on the twentieth of June returned by Deputy
Commissary Yancey as then actually remaining on hand, there did on the fourth
of July remain, or ought, if provisions had been regularly and properly issued,
to be then remaining 1625 barrels of flour, 3 barrels of beef, and 784 barrels
of pork; a magazine of provisions sufficient to afford to the army on the 5th
of July, amounting, by the arrival of the militia of the Grants, to 5639 men of
all ranks, full allowance of provision in flour for 52 days, and in beef and
pork for 32 days, exclusive of the considerable number of fat cattle that
arrived at Ticonderoga on the fifth of July, the teams of oxen necessarily
attending the post, and other stores specified in the Commissary's return on
the twentieth of June, and even supposing, as may not reasonably be done, that
no supply of flour had arrived after that day. And as this calculation has been
liberally made, upon the quantity of provision actually in Ticondero on the
twentieth of June, for the expenditure of which General St. Clair, at commander
at the post, ought to be held responsible; therefore it clearly appears
Ticonderoga and Mount Independence were not abandoned upon a just principle of
a want of provision.

Seventh. That as General St. Clair informed the Hon. Mr. Jay, that at the time
of holding the Council of War on the 5th of July, he knew it to be impossible
to defend the posts with his numbers, it is natural to conclude he was decided
upon this point at early at the 29th of June, the day that he sent his son and
private effects from Ticonderoga to Fort-George, as a place of safety: That
being decided upon this point, it was his duty then to have taken at effectual
measures for the preservation of the public property, at least equally with his
own, claiming his earliest attention: That on the 30th of June, the enemy being
advanced against him so near as the Three Mile Point, it is incredible that he
did not then know that they were in force: That it was his duty, at that point
of time, to have finally determined either to abide the operations of the
enemy, or to retire: That if the last resolution was taken, and, from his
sending off his son and baggage the day before, there is the strongest
presumption that this resolution was then fully taken, it was his duty then to
have proceeded to send off the public stores, to destroy the works, and to
evacuate the posts without losing a moment of time: And that by deferring to
take any measures to retire till the last moment when he could possibly retreat
oven with his effective troops, a moment when the sick, ammunition, cannon,
provision and clothing of the army must be abandoned and lost, besides the
lives of many men in effecting a retreat from before an enemy immediately upon
him, General St. Clair appears chargeable with inattention to the progress of
the enemy, with treachery, or with incapacity as a General, and with shamefully
abandoning the posts of Ticonderoga and Mount Independence, in his charge. Nor
can the proving, as General St. Clair wishes to do, that the works of
Ticonderoga and Mount Independence were too extensive, and that the troops were
very badly armed, if such things can be proved, fail of placing General St.
Clair in a more reprehensible point of view, at the weakness of his defense
being more obvious, his retreat should have been earlier determined upon and
made.

Your Committee, having thus stated the points principally resulting from the
evidence collected against General St. Clair, recommend that a general
court martial be ordered to fit for the trial of Major General St. Clair, for
the loss of Ticonderoga and Mount Independence, with the public stores; and
that he be charged

First. With Neglect of Duty; under the 5th article of the 18th section of the
rules and articles of war -- and that the charge be founded upon the first,
third, fourth and fifth Remarks, respectively.

Second. With Cowardice, with Treachery, with Incapacity as a General,
respectively; under the 5th article of the 18th section of the rules and
articles of war -- and that the charge be founded upon the fourth remark.

Third. With Treachery; under the 5th article of the 18th section of the rules
and articles of war -- and that the charge be founded upon the fifth remark.

Fourth. With inattention to the Progress of the enemy, with Treachery, with
Incapacity as a General, respectively; under the 5th article of the 18th
section of the rules and articles of war -- and that the charge be founded upon
the seventh remark.

Fifth. With shamefully abandoning the Posts of Ticonderoga and Mount
Independence, in his charge; under the 12th article of the 13th section of the
rules and articles of war -- and that the charge be founded upon the seventh
remark.

Finally, upon the case of Major General St. Clair, your Committee recommend
that authenticated copies of the returns, letters, and determinations of
courts-martial, referred to, be transmitted to the Judge-Advocate-General; that
Elisha Avery, James Yancey, Richard Varrick, Jesse Leavenworth, and the
Colonels commanding the two battalions of Massachusetts militia, whose time of
service was nearly expired at the evacuation of Ticonderoga, be summoned to
give evidence at the trial of Major General St. Clair; and that he be furnished
with a copy of the remarks and charges against him.

The first observation that naturally offers is, that the charges which have
been exhibited to this Court have all been founded upon the ex part affidavit
of a Mr. Leavenworth, which (in most instances) he has contradicted in open
Court, and consequently is entitled to no degree of credit, and upon my own
letters to Congress and to General Schuyler, the Officer who commanded in chief
in the northern department. It is singular, however, that charges of so high a
nature against an officer of my rank should be attempted to be supported (for
supported I trust they are not) by no other living witness than Mr.
Leavenworth, a private man! a follower of the army! in some of the lowest and
vilest occupations! who, if he had had capacity to judge, could not possibly
have had proper information; that not an officer, of any rank whatsoever, has
been called upon; and yet, had treachery, had neglect of duty, been committed,
-- had I been inattentive to the progress of the enemy, -- had the posts in my
charge been shamefully abandoned, -- or had I been guilty of cowardice, -- they
could not have escaped their notice altogether; nay, it was by them only they
could probably hate been discovered. But this by the bye. Previous to any
remarks upon, or application of, the testimony, I beg leave to inform the
Court, that, before I left Philadelphia to take upon me the command of
Ticonderoga, Congress had received information, which they credited, that the
principal part of the enemy's troops in Canada were ordered round by St.
Lawrence to join General How; that no serious attempt would be made upon
Ticonderoga; at most, it would be a diversion only. This was communicated to me
by Mr. Hancock, then President, and I have his authority to mention it to this
Court. This circumstance will serve as a key to many of my letters, and will
account for my doubts about some intelligence I received after my arrival at
Ticonderoga. And it appears from General Poor's testimony, that General Gates
had likewise, from them, received the same account.

The first charge is neglect of duty, founded upon the first, third, fourth and
fifth remarks, respectively.

The first remark is, "that on the 13th of June I was possessed of an
information, from two prisoners taken in Canada, that the British forces,
amounting to about 10,000 men, were proceeding as fast as possible against me,
and that I might expect their arrival in three weeks at farthest; that as, on
the 18th of June, four of the enemy's vessels were lying on the hither side of
Split Rock, and, on the 24th, seven of them were at Crown-Point, and others
four or five miles lower down, their forces then encamped on both sides
Gilliland's Creek, and that I was informed by my scouts they were very
numerous; so, from these circumstances, it appears I had substantial reason to
confide in what the prisoners had told me relative to the (...) and strength of
the enemy, and that I ought at this time to have taken my final resolution
either to stand an attack, or to retreat with my stores, the preservation of
which was a principal object in the determinations of the Council of War on the
20th; therefore it appears, that neglecting to form my decisive opinion at this
time, or at a later day, so as to allow myself a sufficient opportunity to
retreat with my troops, sick, ammunition, cannon, provision and clothing, and
to deprive the enemy of shelter at Ticonderoga, was a neglect of duty."

It is true, that on the 13th of June I was possessed of an information, from
two prisoners, that the British army amounted to about 10,000 men, and that
they were making every preparation to cross the Lake, to attack my posts; but
it is also true, that I considered these persons as spies; that their
information was contradicted by two Frenchmen, who had been sent into Canada by
General Gates, for the express purpose of gaining intelligence of the enemy's
designs; that the information of these Frenchmen arrived at the same time, and
was transmitted by the same conveyance to General Schuyler; as appears from my
letter to him of June 13th.

The information, Sir, of prisoners is generally doubtful; but that of persons
considered as spies must always be suspected. I would therefore have been
justifiable in not giving them credit, if I had not received contradictory
intelligence. But when the Court consider the opinion of Congress
abovementioned, and that the persons actually were spies (the letter from Mr.
Livius to General Sullivan, that has been published by the General, having been
found upon one of them) and that their intelligence was contradicted by persons
of credit, they will think the conclusion I drew the natural and proper one --
that they were sent to deceive us, and were unworthy of belief. They will think
that the enemy's advancing their vessels to Crown-Point and Split Rock, and
forming an encampment at Gilliland's Creek, as they did on the 18th and 24th of
June (that place being at a distance, out of the reach of our parties, but not
out of the way of observation) thereby to induce the division of our troops, to
reinforce the places on which they had no design, and to lessen the opposition
where their army was to act effectually, was the very thing they ought to have
done; and we all know the appearance of a great encampment can be made with
very few troops. And this sentiment at cofortified by the position of their
camp, which was a sandy beach upon the shore of the Lake, where the creek falls
into it, forty-two or three miles distant from Ticonderoga, as has been proven
by General Wilkinson, Major Dunn, and others, with a rough, broken, woody
country betwixt them.

But it seems I ought then, or at a later day, to have taken my decisive
resolution to retreat, saving to myself a sufficient opportunity to bring off
my troops, and every thing that was at the posts, and to deprive the enemy of
shelter at Ticonderoga, and that the not doing so was a neglect of duty.

I suspect, Sir, the Committee, who formed these charges, had no idea of the
nature of a subordinate command. They would otherwise have known, that I had no
power to form or execute any such resolution, and that my justification for
evacuating the posts at all must depend upon the necessity of the case. I did
what my duty required me. I gave the earliest notice to the Commanding Officer
of the department, and stood ready to execute his commands. But I am persuaded
that, had it been in my power to have taken my final resolution then, and upon
the intelligence I had received I had abandoned the posts, although every thing
had been saved which has since been lost, the charges of treachery and
cowardice would have been rung much louder, and pressed home more strongly, and
with more virulence, if possible, than in the present case. I should have
heard, that no decisive operation should be founded on the vague report of
prisoners or deserters, often ignorant, almost always ill informed; but that to
abandon a post on the information of persons I suspected to be, and actually
were, the enemy's spies, or from the view of an encampment upwards of forty
miles off, and that only seen across a lake six or eight miles broad, could
proceed from no other than one of those sources, or from perfect stupidity; and
this Court, from whom I expect a very different decision, would have joined in
that opinion, and condemned me to the punishment I had justly merited. But,
besides all this, if the Council of War was to guide, it was out of my power to
take any such measure; for the resolution of the Council is, that both
Ticonderoga and Mount Independence are to be held as long as they can be,
consistent with the safety of the troops and stores. When the safety of the
troops and stores became doubtful, Ticonderoga, not Mount Independence, was to
be evacuated.

The second article upon which the charge of neglect of duty is founded is,
"That if I found small scouts could not acquire a knowledge whether the enemy
were in force or not, it was my duty, in due time, to have sent out
reconnoitring parties, in such force as might have assured me whether or not
the enemy were in strength, and that this was not done."

Had not the Committee been totally ignorant of the nature of the country in
which these parties were to act -- had they given any attention to the returns
of my army, which were before them, or credit to my letters to General
Schuyler, of which they had the perusal, this article would never have made its
appearance. Had it ever occurred to them that the enemy proceeded by water, and
that the only debarkation we hear of was at Gilliland's Creek, forty miles and
upwards from Ticonderoga, and that they proceeded from thence by water again,
we should not have heard this story of reconnoitering parties, of which, I am
morally certain they themselves had no determinate idea. My whole army would
not have formed one party such as they seem to think ought to have been sent
out frequently. I have proven that small parties were sent out, not only
frequently but constantly; and although they were but small parties, they were as
strong as the state of my garrison, and the works in hand, would allow. It is
true, indeed, I obtained by them no certain intelligence of the enemy's force
until they landed at Three Mile Point, nor was it possible before; they
possessed neither the gifts of divination, nor walking upon the water; but they
could give me information if any part of the enemy's army were advancing by
land, and this was all I could expect from them, except that, in that case,
they might have brought off some prisoners.

The returns prove the strength of my army -- the orderly book the daily guards
-- and I have proven, by General Poor, Colonel Baldwin, Colonel Koseiuszko,
General Wilkinson, and almost every witness, the numerous fatigue parties and
pickets. I leave it to the Court to judge if larger parties could have been
spared to make discoveries. But supposing, for argument sake, that my army
would have afforded stronger reconnoitring parties, I contend that, until the
enemy were landed, they would have been useless, and afterward highly
improper; and that the sending such would have argued great want of Judgment.
It would have been sending two or three hundred men (and that number would
perhaps have been thought a pretty good reconnoitring party) to certain
destruction. They could not have marched through thick woods and rank herbage
without being discovered, if the enemy's parties were the least vigilant. If
they were attacked at a distance, as they could not be supported, they must
inevitably have fallen into the enemy's hands; if attacked within supporting
distance, they must still have fallen, or a general action been brought on; for
they could no otherwise have been supported, but by marching out to sustain
them, and then all the expense and time that had been laid out on the
fortifications were thrown away. A General, entrusted with the defense of a
post, who reduces himself to the necessity of fighting the enemy to support his
detachments, or who, by making large detachments and losing them, puts it out
of his own power to maintain his post, certainly discovers very little
knowledge, and would justly be the object of censure at least, if not of
punishment. Had such detachments been made from my army, one or other of these
consequences must have followed; they must have been when* or I must have
risked an action to bring them off: But I had not a force sufficient for the
defense of my posts, much less to cope with the enemy in the field, therefore
no such detachments, as should lay me under the necessity of attempting it, or
be of any great moment if a misfortune happened to them, were made. But
further, as very small parties, three men for example, can approach an enemy
without much danger of being discovered, which large parties cannot, and that
these small parties, from that circumstance, have a better chance to make
prisoners, to take off a sentinel for example, to which they are fully
adequate, and that the intelligence to be obtained from reconnoitring parties
must depend, in a great measure, upon the prisoners they make, it follows that
small parties are the most proper, and fully answer every purpose of gaining
intelligence that can be derived from the larger, without being subject to the
same dangers. It likewise follows, that there was no neglect of duty in this
instance, but, on the contrary, that the most proper methods for obtaining
certain intelligence of the motions and force of the enemy were taken and
pursued.

The charge of neglect of duty is further grounded upon the affidavit of Mr.
Leavenworth, who, the (...), swears that the enemy were not annoyed by me in
their advance against, and investiture of, the posts under my care, though the
troops were healthy, courageous, and desirous of action, and therefore I am
liable to the charges of neglect of duty, of cowardice, or of treachery, or of
incapacity as a General. The Committee seem to be in doubt on which of the four
to six, it is one or the other, but, to make sure of the matter, and swell the
black list, they have directed that I be prosecuted upon each. It has been
proven by Dr. Brown and Dr. Townshend, the hospital surgeons, that the troops
were not healthy, and their testimony will have weight. The Court will please
to observe the contradiction betwixt what the Committee say Mr. Leavenworth
swore, and what he actually swears before this Court; here he swears that he
has seen parties go out of about twenty men, and that he once heard of a scalp
being brought in; there he swore that they were not annoyed at all; perhaps he
thought killing and scalping the savages employed by the enemy no annoyance!
But it is needless to dwell upon this man's testimony, as, from his station, he
could not know much, and, from his observation, he actually knows very little.

It is in proof to the Court, by a number of witnesses, that parties were
constantly out, and that they frequently were engaged with the enemy; and, by
Colonel Stevens, that every annoyance was given to the enemy by the artillery,
from every quarter, from the first of their appearance until the evacuation.
But if the Committee meant that no large detachments were sent to annoy the
enemy, it is granted; and the reasons that have been already given for not
sending out large reconnoitring parties apply so directly, it would be
trespassing on the patience of the Court to repeat them.

The last ground for the charge of neglect of duty is, "that, notwithstanding
it had been determined in a Council of War on the 20th of June, that the
repairing the old works, and adding new ones on Mount Independence ought to
claim immediate attention, Mr. Leavenworth swears not a stroke was struck for
these purposes." Here Mr. Leavenworth gives the Committee the slip again; for
he swears before the Court, not that there was not a stroke struck for these
purposes, but that he has heard there were many strokes struck; he has heard of
what he calls some small works flung up on the south end of Mount Independence;
and it appears by the map, and explanation by Colonel Koseiuszko, these were
lines and three redoubts, for 1500 men at least. But, forsooth, there were none
erected where he expected, and he did not think the works suitable to cover the
men. He acknowledges he has seen parties of axe-men sent from the parade. He
could not suppose they were sent to strike no strokes; and it is scarce
conceivable that a person, who on other occasions, as much out of his way, was
so very inquisitive, should not have had the curiosity to ask some one what
those men were going to do with their axes, if his occupation as a suttler had
not given him an opportunity to know it.

These palpable contradictions betwixt the evidence this man has given to the
Committee, and what he has declared to the Court, will, I hope, put a stop to
all ex part enquiries for the future; in which case, I shall the less regret
the injuries I have myself sustained from them. But the Committee go on, and
say, in further support of the charge, "that from the orderly book it appears
the fatigue party was decreased, and continued so at a time when it ought to
have been abundantly increased." It is true the parties furnished by the daily
details were decreased; but I have proven, by a cloud of witnesses, that
circumstance notwithstanding, that the fatigue parties were abundantly
increased, and continued so; nay, that almost my whole army were constantly
employed in repairing the old and constituting new works; and that, so far from
being guilty of a neglect of duty, amounting to a breach of orders, in that
respect, I did every thing in my power to put the posts in a proper posture of
defense.

The second charge is cowardice, treachery, and incapacity as a General,
directed to be tried upon the 5th article of the 18th section of the Rules and
Articles of War, and founded on the fourth remark of the Committee.

By Mr. Leavenworth's testimony again are these horrid accusations to be
supported; not in a direct manner, but by inference and deduction from that
part of it, which the Committee in the above remark say he gave them* viz.
"that the enemy were not annoyed in the advance to, and investiture of, the
posts;" but which he, in part, has contradicted here, as I observed before, and
which, by Colonel Stevens, General Wilkinson, Colonel Livingston, Major Dunn,
and others, I have proven to be false. The inferences of consequence are false
likewise, and of course the charges groundless. But I believe it is the first
instance where charges of a capital nature have been brought against an officer
by deduction, without a shadow of proof to support them; and cowardice and
treachery are capital crimes, although the Committee have directed them to be
tried by an Article of War to which no capital crime whatever can be referred,
having been expressly provided for crimes not capital. I wave, however, any
advantage that might be taken of this. My reputation, or my safety, shall never
depend upon the blunders of any set of men who may think proper to accuse me;
but, when proof is wanting, candor will never attribute actions to the worst
cause from which they could possibly flow; goodnature will ever ascribe them
to the best. Hitherto, however, I have experienced very little of either. But
my birth, Sir, my education, my connections, both in this country and in
Britain, my station in life, my children (if to these had not been added the
habitudes of early life) as they were the best pledges, so they should have
secured me from the imputation of those most shameful vices, from which the
meanest of the people are generally free. But my reputation rests not on that
bottom. I am happy in the general good opinion of the army, which is never
bestowed upon cowards, nor has all the calumny that I have been loaded with
shaken me a single friend. The Court have the fullest evidence, that on every
occasion I have given demonstrations of an active, as well as passive, courage;
my conduct in that respect has been uniform on all occasions; and this is
confirmed by the concurring testimony of many of the principal officers of the
army, with some of whom I have been, personally, in almost every action that
has happened during the war. From thence they must conclude, that, whatever
might have been the motives for my evacuating Ticonderoga, it could not have
been owing to cowardice, and chat the charge is false, malicious and scandalous.

Treachery, Sir, is a crime it is impossible to prove, positively, not to have
been committed. It is therefore necessary, in order to fix it, that some actual
commission should be proven; but as this has not been attempted, it is enough
alone to overthrow the charge. But I beg leave to inform the Court, that when
Congress appointed me to the command of a regiment, I considered it as the call
of my country, that could admit of no refusal. I reflected that some knowledge
acquired by study, and the service of the whole last war (during which I was in
almost every siege and every action of consequence) put me in a situation to be
of some use to our army in its infant state. My country, I thought, had a right
to my services, and to every advantage that could be derived from my
experience. I therefore, without hesitation, resigned an honorable and
profitable employment I then held under the crown, to qualify myself for that
offered to me by Congress, notwithstanding it was not of one half the yearly
value. I quitted die sweets of a retirement I was fond of, the pleasures of
domestic life, and the care of the education, and provision for a rising
family, (both of which claimed my closest attention) for the toils, the
hardships, and the extraordinary expenses of war. Had this the appearance of
treachery? And yet, for these, I have met with the ungracious return of those
cruel accusations, though, surely, they were not the natural returns to such a
conduct. What farther promotion Congress were pleased to confer upon me was
totally unsolicited. I received it with gratitude, determined that my actions
should be the best proof of the sense I had of the honor they had done me; nor
have I been therein disappointed. My country now reaps the solid advantages of
my conduct, whilst I am loaded with obloquy and abuse. I forgive it, however,
but I can never forget that the channels of justice have been shut against me,
and that for thirteen long, long months, I have been hung up to be stung by the
envenomed tongue of malice, and pointed at by the finger of folly. But the
sentence of this Court will, I trust, place me once more in that honorable
point of view, from which I have not deserved to be removed, having been
careful to observe that maxim of Horace, Nil conscire sibi, nulla pallescere
culpa.

How incapacity came to be a crime, unless in those who made the appointments
(for I must repeat it, no office I have ever held, or now hold, under Congress,
was ever solicited by me) or by what Article of War it is triable, I own I do
not know. But this charge, with the others, has been made upon a supposition
that I did not do every thing in my power to oppose the operations of the enemy
in their advance against, and investiture of, the posts in my charge; but it is
in full proof to the Court that every thing was done, which prudence dictated,
and circumstances would allow. It follows, that this is equally groundless with
the others.

The third charge is treachery again, under the same Article of War, to which,
at I observed before, it cannot be referred, and grounded upon the fifth remark
of the Committee, which is, "that as it had been determined in a Council of War
on the 20th of June, that the repairing the old and adding new works on Mount
Independence claimed immediate attention, and Jesse Leavenworth swears not a
stroke was struck for these purposes; and by the orderly book it appears the
fatigue party was decreased in number, and so continued, at a time when it
should have been abundantly increased, I am liable to be charged with
treachery." I have already so fully refuted these matters in the charge for
neglect, of duty, which is founded on the same allegations, that I think it
unnecessary to take up the time of the Court with a repetition of the same
arguments. But as it may, perhaps, appear odd, that the number of men actually
employed on these duties differs so widely from the orderly book, I will here,
once for all, account for it. I never approved of putting all orders into the
book. Accidents frequently happen to the copies; deserters carry them off to
the enemy, who thereby become perfectly acquainted with every thing you are
doing; to prevent which, as our works were so very incomplete, a great many of
my orders were verbal. Yet I dare say, had the Committee attended to it, they
would have found in the orderly book frequent orders for whole brigades
(besides the daily details) to parade at certain hours, and take their orders
from their respective Brigadiers; and had they called upon any officer of the
army, they would have been informed these brigades were sent upon fatigue,
repairing the old and constructing new works, which has been proven to the
Court in the fullest manner.

The fourth charge is, inattention to the progress of the enemy, treachery, and
incapacity as a General again, founded on the seventh remark of the Committee;
which is, "that as General St. Clair informed the Honorable Mr. Jay, that, at
the time of holding the Council of War on the 5th of July, he knew it to be
impossible to defend the posts with his numbers, it is natural to conclude he
was decided upon this point as early as the 29th of June, the day that he sent
his son and private effects from Ticonderoga to Fort George, as a place of
safety. That, being decided upon this point, it was his duty then to have taken
as effectual measures for the preservation of the public property, at least
equally with his own, claiming his earliest attention. That on the 30th of
June, the enemy being advanced to Three Mile Point, it is incredible that he
did not then know they were in force. That it was his duty, at that point of
time, to have finally determined to abide the operations of the enemy, or to
retire. That if the last resolution was taken, and, from the sending off his
son and baggage the day before, there is the strongest presumption that this
resolution was then fully taken, it was his duty then to have proceeded to have
sent off the public stores, to destroy the works, and to evacuate the posts
without losing a moment of time; and that by deferring to retire till the last
moment when he could possibly retreat even with his effective troops, a moment
when the sick, ammunition, cannon, provision and clothing of the army must be
lost, besides the lives of many men in effecting a retreat from before an enemy
immediately upon him, he appears to be chargeable with inattention to the
progress of the enemy, with treachery, or with incapacity as a General." They
appear to be again uncertain upon which charge to fix; but, to make sure work
of it, direct, as in the former case, that I be prosecuted for each, and upon
the beforementioned Article of War, which certainly cannot be applied to
treachery. Bnt let us examine what all this amounts to. The Committee say that
because I wrote to Mr. Jay, that on the 5th of July I knew it to be impossible
to defend the posts with my numbers, it is natural to conclude that I knew it
to be impossible to defend them with my numbers so early as the 29th of June;
for that they must mean (if they mean any thing) by being "decided upon this
point." But this is by no means the natural conclusion; the natural and candid
conclusion is, that circumstances might have changed betwixt these periods, and
matters have come to my knowledge on or before the 5th of July, of which I was
ignorant on the 29th of June, and which would fully justify a change of
measures. But the reason they conclude in that manner is, that on that day I
sent my son and private effects to Fort George, as a place of safety; and this,
I find by a former part of their report, is also the information of Mr.
Leavenworth upon oath. Now it happens that, although I sent my son on that day
to Fort George, I sent no part of my baggage there then, or at any other time;
and this very respectable witness, Mr. Leavenworth himself, swears that I did
not, to his knowledge. The account he has given of Headquarters being
stripped, as he calls it, is so absurd, that was there no other testimony to
disprove it, it would destroy itself. But his testimony before the Court
contradicts, in almost every instance, that the Committee say he has given to
them. My son was a boy betwixt eleven and twelve years of age, who, on the
information I have mentioned to have received from the President of Congress,
that there was no probability of an active campaign* I had taken with me, that
I might superintend his education. He remained with me at Ticonderoga until
matters wore a gloomy aspect, and was then sent to Fort George, on his way to
Albany, where he was put to school. In case of an attack, he would naturally
have distressed me, and divided my attention; and this is the dreadful affair
of sending my son, that has been so often repeated, and upon which so many base
ungenerous comments have been made. I have proven beyond the possibility of a
doubt, that I never sent away sixpence worth of my private effects, and that I
took the most effectual measures for the preservation of the public property,
great part of which was brought off, whilst my own was left a prey to the
enemy. But it seems it is incredible that the enemy should be at the Three Mile
Point, where some of their vessels arrived on the 30th of June, and that I
should not then know whether they were in force or not. The Committee have
again forgot that the enemy were water-borne, and that at this time they had
not debarked. Had that occurred to them, they would not have thought the matter
so very incredible. I believe they would have thought it very probable. But
they seem to have viewed one side of the picture only. I have proven to the
Court, that from the number of savages, who kept my parties at a distance from
the shores of the Lake, it was impossible to obtain any satisfactory account of
the enemy's numbers until they were landed, which they began to be on the 30th
of June, and with so much caution, as appears by my letter of that date to Genesis
Schuyler, that I had very good reason to conclude they were not in force, and
to exult in that consideration too, hoping for an opportunity not only to have
served my country, but in some measure to have filled the expectations I knew
the public had formed from me. The resolution to retire was therefore not "
then fully taken." But what idea of military movements must these gentlemen
have? who conclude that an enemy at three miles distance is not immediately
upon you, or who imagine that works may be destroyed, and stores, ammunition
and cannon, etc. removed, under the eye of a superior and collected force. Sir,
had a retreat been attempted upon the enemy's landing at Three Mile Point, and
the steps pursued which the Committee have enumerated above, it is impossible,
in the nature of things, but the army must have been cut off, or fallen
prisoners into their hands. But, by our putting a good face upon the matter,
and showing a determination to hold both posts, they were induced to divide
their force, in order to invest us and reduce us by the more slow, but certain,
method of regular approach; not that this method was necessary to them, for
they might most certainly have carried us by assault at any time: But assaults
are frequently very bloody things! and on that circumstance I chiefly depended
for rendering my small garrison serviceable to their country. I was in hopes
the enemy would assault us, and some accounts that I had, that they were short
of provisions, gave me some reason to expect it. I depended upon my troops -- I
was persuaded they were brave, and I believe they too had confidence in me.
Every order and every advice I gave them pointed directly to that object -- and
I still believe that, had they attempted it, we should have given so good an
account of them, that the conquest of Ticonderoga would have terminated the
operations of that campaign -- but conquered it would have been, after all our
exertions. Every letter I have wrote holds up the same idea, and I always speak
of an attack as contra-distinguished from a siege; and the character of the
General I was opposed to gave me reason to expect something by assault or
surprise. I mentioned to Congress, so early as the 25th of June, the great
deficiencies in troops and provision, and the probability of my being obliged
from these circumstances to evacuate. The moment I was informed, with any
tolerable degree of certainty, of their numbers, which I was not until the 3d
of July from a prisoner and some deserters (their information was confirmed by
a spy I sent into their camp the 3d and returned the 5th) and saw that they
meant a regular siege, I was certain the defending the posts effectually was
impossible. The moment, however, which I chose for the retreat, as it was the
only one was ever in my power to choose, so it was almost the only one after the
enemy's landing at Three Mile Point in which the retreat could have been
effected. I have fully proven that the sick were not left behind nor lost, that
great part of the cannon, all the ammunition, the baggage and tents of the
army, the hospital stores and part of the provision, were removed from
Ticonderoga -- as much as could at once have been removed at any prior time.
Every boat was loaded. I think I have proven it to have been necessary and well
conducted, and that the confusion, occasioned principally by the burning of
General Fermoy's house, and his not circulating the orders to his brigade in
proper time, was soon remedied. -- I beg the Court to reflect one moment upon
what was to be done, and now short the time to do it in! -- for, though the
evacuation was resolved on about three o'clock in the afternoon, we could not
begin to carry it into execution until night came on, the enemy being in
possession of a high hill on the opposite side of the Lake, from whence they
could see our every movement, -- that it was the season when the nights are at
the very shortest, and that it was moreover moonlight, -- and that the
necessity of keeping the matter a secret, until the very moment of evacuation,
prevented any preparatory steps being taken to expedite the business, and they
will be of the opinion that more was never done, caeteris paribus, in equal
time; and if, in the different embarkations, some irregularities did happen,
when every circumstance is taken in -- the suddenness of the thing -- the
disposition every man would naturally have to save perhaps his little all --
the confusion the night alone is apt to occasion -- the distance every thing
had to be carried, and their variety, the candid mind will be more apt to
wonder that any order could be preserved, than that some irregularities
supervened. On this occasion it would be great injustice not to acknowledge,
that the officers were in general diligent and attentive, and the men silent
and obedient to a wonder; the continental troops I mean; for the militia,
Bellows's and Robeson's regiments excepted, held a very different conduct.
Colonel Bellows exerted himself greatly in removing the cannon from the lines
and embarking them, which he effected, notwithstanding some difficulties that,
I have since heard, were thrown in his way by an officer of the artillery. I
was in a very particular manner obliged to General Poor, Colonel Long, Colonel
Hay, and Colonel Stevens, to whose pains and assiduity it was chiefly owing
that so much of the public property was taken off. It is true, however, the
greatest part of it fell afterward into the enemy's hands at Skeensborough,
but not from any fault of mine. That was the only place to which they could
have been removed; and had not my march been delayed, as has been shown, by
Colonel Warner's unfortunately taking upon himself to judge of and disobey his
orders, I should have arrived at Skeensborough time enough to have protected
the stores, and probably to have cut off that party of the enemy which pursued
them. I agree perfectly with the Committee, that the posts, as the proper
number of men for their defense were not sent to them, should have been
evacuated earlier. But I did my duty. I apprized both Congress and General
Schuyler of my situation, and the probable consequences; and from one or other
of them, if it was thought proper to evacuate the posts, my orders were to
come* From these circumstances, it appears that I have not been guilty of
treachery or incapacity. But it is truly surprising that gentlemen, who had the
perusal of my letters to General Schuyler, should have alleged inattention to
the progress of the enemy, as in every one of them, viz. those of the 13th,
18th, 24th, 25th, 26th, 28th and 30th of June, and 1st, 2d and 3d of July, I
make particular mention of their progress, and the steps taken to obtain a
knowledge of it.

The fifth and last charge is, "Shamefully abandoning the posts of Ticonderoga
and Mount Independence, in my charge," and this is directed to be founded upon
the seventh remark, which has just been under consideration. The punishment of
this crime, Sir, is death, without alternative. No presumptive evidence,
therefore, can be admitted, no construction can be allowed, to fix it; but the
fact must be proven in the clearest and most positive manner. But in the remark
of the Committee referred to, I do not find a single circumstance that relates
to it, except a loose assertion, for which I am bold to say they had no warrant
either from reason or evidence. It is this: "Nor can the proving, as General
St. Clair wishes to do, that the works of Ticonderoga and Mount Independence
were too extensive, and that the troops were very badly armed, if such things
can be proved, fail of placing General St. Clair in a more reprehensible point
of view; as, the weakness of his defense being more obvious, his retreat should
have been earlier determined upon and made." I have proven by General Gates,
General Schuyler, General Poor, and Colonels Baldwin and Koseiuszko, the
engineers, and a number of other witnesses, that the works were much too
extensive for my numbers; by General Gates, that the numbers were not one
fourth of what he demanded, and Congress had voted, at a time he did not expect
the enemy would have come on with 10 or 11,000 men, and not much more than a
fifth of what he would have demanded in that case, exclusive of the militia,
which he had powers to call for, in any number he thought proper; by General
Schuyler and General Poor, that they would at least have demanded 10,000 good
troops; by Major Hull's certificate, and the returns of arms from the officers
commanding regiments, that many of the men were very badly armed. And, with the
Committee's good leave, although the weakness of my defense was certainly from
these circumstances the more obvious, yet, as proper notice thereof was in due
time given both to Congress and General Schuyler, neither of whom gave any
directions about the matter, and I had no power of myself to order the
evacuation until the last extremity, I cannot thereby be placed in a point of
view reprehensible in any degree whatsoever. As the proof here fails entirely,
the charge must fail with it. But, Sir, the posts were not shamefully
abandoned. The retreat was undertaken upon the justest principles, and, I hope
the Court will bear with me when I say, upon the most honorable and ingenuous
motives; the measures to effect it were taken with judgment; the orders were
pertinent and clear; and the whole, notwithstanding some cross accidents, which
it was not possible to foresee, was conducted with a degree of art, that
reflects some credit upon both the General and the troops. I need not tell this
honorable Court that a retreat, with an inferior army, from before a superior
one, is perhaps the mo^^ delicate and dangerous undertaking in the whole circle
of military operations, and that it never will be effected without prudence,
fortitude and secrecy. I hope I have satisfied the Court, that I could not
order the evacuation until the last moment, when I saw no alternative betwixt
that and the certain loss of the army. I think I have proven that that moment
was arrived, as one day more would probably have completed the investment of
the posts, and then it would have been impossible. I have proven that my motive
was not to avoid the enemy, but to save the army, and by removing them to a
place where reinforcements could reach them, to make them serve as the basis of
a force sufficient to cover the country, and check the progress of the enemy;
and this I did with the certainty of a loss of reputation, a price few people
are willing to (...) for the prosperity of their country! I indeed expected it
would be a temporary loss of reputation only, nor will it be more, though it
has already been of much longer duration than I looked for; and I fear the
(...) long delaying to afford me an opportunity to vindicate my character, is
not very likely to induce others who may happen in like circumstances to make a
similar sacrifice. My letter to Congress. of the 14th of July, proves, that I
foresaw the events that would probably happen, and which must have had some
effect upon my determinations.

Indeed, from the knowledge I had of the country through which General Burgoyne
had to advance, -- the difficulties I knew he would be put to ^o subsist his
army, -- and the contempt he would naturally have for an enemy, whose retreat I
concluded he would ascribe to fear, I made no doubt but he would soon be so far
engaged, as that it would be difficult for him either to advance or retreat.
The event justified my conjecture, but attended with consequences beyond my
most sanguine expectations. A fatal blow given to the power and insolence of
Great Britain, a whole army prisoners, and the reputation of the arms of
America high in every civilized part of the world! But what would have been the
consequences had not that step been taken, and my army had been cut to pieces
or made prisoners? Disgrace would have been brought upon our arms and our
counsels, -- fear and dismay would have seized upon the inhabitants, from the
false opinion that had been formed of the strength of these posts, -- wringing
grief and moping melancholy would have filled the now cheerful habitations of
those whose dearest connections were in that army, -- and a lawless host of
russians, set loose from every social tie, would have roam'd at liberty through
the defenseless country, whilst bands of savages would have carried havoc,
devastation and terror before them! Great part of the state of New York must
have submitted to the conqueror, and in it he would have found the means to
enable him to prosecute his success. He would have been able effectually to
have co-operated with General How, and would probably have soon been in the
same country with him -- that country, where our illustrious General, with an
inferior force, made so glorious a stand, but who must have been obliged to
retire if both armies came upon him at once, or he might have been forced,
perhaps, to a general and decisive action in unfavourable circumstances,
whereby the hopes, the now well-founded hopes of America, of liberty, peace and
safety, might have been cut off for ever. Every consideration serves to prove
the propriety of the retreat, that I could not undertake it sooner, and that
had it been delayed longer it had been delayed too long. But it may justly be
matter of wonder why Congress, who, so early as the twenty-ninth of April,
declared their opinion, as appears by the resolve of that date, which has been
read, that unless certain measures were pursued by the eastern states for
completing and forwarding without delay the troops ordered for that service,
the important posts of Ticonderoga and Mount Independence must inevitably be
lost, and who must have known from the returns, if it can be supposed they knew
through no other channel, that no such, measures had been pursued, nor even any
taken to replace the corpse of militia whose times of service had expired, and
had left the posts, it may be justly matter of wonder, I say, that they should
not have ordered the evacuation, in proper time to have saved every article of
public property. It has been proved that my numbers were greatly inadequate to
the defense of the posts. But I must acknowledge a mistake I made with respect
to these numbers. At the Council of War held on the 5th of July, I stated them
at 2089 rank and file, fit for duty; to which should have been added 457 of
those returned on command, and who were within the garrison, which brings them
up to 2546. I took the account from the general return, and did not recollect
that the regiments had a custom of returning men on particular duties in camp
as on command, nor was this noted at the foot of die general return. It was a
mistake, but not such a one as would have made any alteration, had it not
happened. It has been proven by General Schuyler, that, had the garrison held
out, he could not have raised the siege, as he had not been able to collect a
sufficient force, and that, if a sufficient force had been collected, the siege
could not have been raised for want of ball. But, had the posts been evacuated
sooner, I am persuaded there would have no little been said about the vast
numbers of militia that would have come to my assistance, had the posts been
held longer; and these reports would have been believed, and added no little to
the opprobrium under which I should have lain. I am, however, of the same
opinion with my late worthy friend Mr. Livingston, then a Member of Congress,
who used to say -- that, had I left Ticonderoga one week sooner, I should
certainly have been hanged, and probably without the ceremony of a
court martial. But, Sir, if it is shameful for an inferior army to retreat
before a superior one, we must begin and unlearn what we have been spending
years in reading to acquire; and history, instead of being a faithful guide to
the unexperienced, has been hanging out false lights for many centuries, to
mislead the unwary traveller. According to this doctrine, some of the most
famous actions of antiquity, and which we have been taught to consider as
masterpieces of skill, were shameful retreats, and founded in cowardice,
treachery or incapacity. The famous retreat of Brafidas, with his Lacedaemonians
-- the retreat of the Consul Attilius Colatinus, amongst the Romans -- Marshal
Banier, amongst the Sweedes -- Marshal Belleisle, amongst the French -- and, to
add to the catalogue one of our times, that of his Excellency General
Washington from New York -- were all shamefully abandoning posts. But impartial
posterity, as it formed a better judgment of those, so will it also do of that;
and whilst the candid historian dwells with rapture upon the many shining
events that have been produced by that distinguished Chief, he will point to
that retreat, as the beginning of a system that has ensured the Liberties of
(...)

"And while along the Stream of Time is Name,
"Expanded, flies, and gathers all its Fame:
"Oh! may my little Bark, attendant, sail,
"Pursue the Triumph, and partake the Gale:
"When Envy, stung to Death, shall grant Repose,
"And Sons shall blush their Fathers were his Foes."
I have now got through the main body of the charges, but there are still some
light parties of Commissaries and others, intended to act, I suppose, as
irregulars, with whom there must be some skirmishing; for though their
testimony has not the least connection with any of the charges, it has taken up
the time of the Court, and makes a considerable figure in the proceedings. The
provision returns I suppose are meant, indirectly, to strengthen the charges or
to create a suspicion of carelessness or waste in that article.

I have admitted Mr. Yancey's return of the 20th of June, which states that
there was on hand at Ticonderoga and its dependencies at that time 2015 barrels
of flour, 195 barrels of beef, and 784 barrels of pork; on which the Committee,
having taken an estimate of Mr. Avery's (which states that 1400 barrels of
flour, and 661 barrels of beef, would afford sufficient provision in flour for
4000 men for 66 days, and in beef for 75) for a foundation conclude, that there
did on the 4th of July remain, or ought to be, if provisions had been properly
and regularly issued, then remaining, 1625 barrels of flour, 3 barrels of beef,
and 784 barrels of pork; which, they say, was a magazine sufficient to afford
full allowance of provision to 5659 men of all ranks for 52 days in flour, and
32 days in beef and pork.

But Mr. Avery's statement is egregiously wrong; 1400 barrels of flour,
averaging them at 200 lbs. and 651 barrels of beef, averaging them at 212 lbs.
supposing the ration to be a pound of each, will afford 4000 rations of flour
for 70 days, and of beef for 35 days only. But in 4000 men there will be 322
officers (I have taken the proportionate number of officers to the troops at
Ticonderoga as the foundation) who, on an average, are entitled to draw three
rations, and consequently for 4000 men, who have that proportion of officers,
4644 rations must be issued daily, which the stock abovementioned would afford
no longer than 60 days of flour, and 30 days of meat.

But the ration at Ticonderoga was a pound and a half of flour, and a pound of
flesh (beef or pork) the addition having been made in lieu of vegetables and
other articles, to which the soldier was entitled, but which the Commissary
could not furnish. This Mr. Avery must have been acquainted with, and should
have taken into the account; and this reduces the magazine to 40 days flour
instead of 66, and 30 days meat instead of 75. As these are matters in which
there is not the least intricacy, depending upon the most simple calculation,
the Committee should certainly have satisfied themselves Mr. Avery's estimate
was right, before they adopted it as a principle: As the principle is false,
all the superstructure they have raised upon it falls to the ground. But the
quantity is still over-rated; for it is certain, that in the division and
distribution of provision they suffer considerable waste. -- I believe an
allowance of five per cent. is made to the Commissaries on that account,
therefore five per cent. is to be deducted from the whole quantity, viz. Flour.
Beef. 280000 140132 Five per cent. 14000 7006 266000 133126 Deduct from the
flour, for the lb. added to the ration, 88666 Leaves 177333 and 133126 to be
divided by 4644, the number of rations issued daily, the quotient is 37 days
flour, and 28 days meat nearly. In this manner Mr. Avery's estimate ought to
have been made, and it was imposing upon the public, and the officers who
commanded at these posts, to make it otherwise.

But the Committee go on, and in their sixth remark, still taking Mr. Avery's
estimate for a groundwork, say that, supposing the number of men to have
averaged 4739 from the 20th of June to the 4th of July, there ought to have
remained of the quantity returned as on hand by Mr. Yancey on the 20th of June,
provision at full allowance, for men of all ranks, for 52 days in flour, and 32
in beef and pork, when the garrison was increased to 5639. Let us see what
light a little arithmetic will throw upon this matter.

2015 barrels of flour, at 200 lbs. each, amount to 403000 Deduct five per
cent. for waste, 20150 Leaves 382850 From which deduct 15 days provision for
4739 men from June 20 to July 4, 107627 5639) 275223 (49 days nearly. 195
barrels of beef, at 212 lbs. 41340 784 barrels of pork, at 224 lbs. 175616
216956 Deduct five per cent. for waste, 10847 206109 Deduct 15 days provision
for 4739 men from June 20 to July 4, 71085 5639) 135124 (24 days nearly. These
sums, as appears by the operation, divided by 5639, the supposed number of men,
leaves flour for 49 days nearly, and meat for 24 days nearly; so that the
calculation is all wrong here likewise; but let us examine what it ought to be.

In 5639 men there will be, according to the first proportion, 454 officers,
and consequently 908 rations will be drawn daily beyond the whole number,
making the amount, 6547 But there were at Ticonderoga five General Officers,
who with their families, would draw per diem, 60 124 artificers, at one and an
half rations, 186 Their officers eleven, 33 Commissaries, assistants and women,
100 Extra to parties, 74 Makes the whole, 7000 and the above quantities of
flour and beef, divided by 7000 for the beef, and 10,500 for the flour (one
half must be added for the half-pound) leaves of flour for twenty-nine days,
and of beef for nineteen nearly; an ample provision for a siege! Neither is
this calculation made upon a liberal plan, with respect to Ticonderoga, but a
very narrow one, indeed a very narrow one any where, as neither the hospital,
the sailors, the batteau-men, or any followers of the army are taken into the
account; nor any notice taken of the inhabitants who had been driven from their
houses, and were necessarily furnished with provisions at that post, to enable
them to reach the inhabited parts of the country; neither is there any notice
taken of the real weight of the barrels, which, from the manner of packing
them, fall greatly short, both flour and meat, of what I have calculated upon.
I have proved by General Schuyler that the barrels of meat are generally about
170 pounds, which would reduce that article to about ten days provision. I have
never pretended, for all this, that the want of provision obliged me to
evacuate the posts, but the low state of the magazines, and the little prospect
which it has been proven I had of an effectual supply, prevented me from
calling in the militia: The Court will judge if it would not have been madness
to have done it in these circumstances, and they will please to recollect that
it is in proof, that although some provision was forwarded from Fort George
after the 20th of June, the greatest part of it was sent back, the enemy having
cut off the communication betwixt Ticonderoga and the landing previous to its
arrival. I grant that an officer commanding at a post is in some measure
responsible for the expenditure of the provision; and I am bold to say, that
during my command, as far as it depended upon me, provision was issued with
great ^conomy.

Mr. Avery says that he did not know what quantity of provision was on hand at
Ticonderoga on the 13th of June, the time I took the command there, but that on
the 15th or 16th of June I wrote to him that there was provision at the posts
for seven weeks. From his manner of mentioning this, one would imagine I had
wrote merely for his information, and all was well; but the fact is, and he has
owned it, though with apparent reluctance, that the design of my letter to him
was, to complain of the small quantity of provision, and press a further supply
in a decent, at the same time the strongest manner, by putting him in mind of
the ill consequences to himself that might attend a failure. This letter he
never thought proper to answer, or give me the least satisfaction whether I
might expect supplies or not. It has been proven that the magazine at Albany
was empty, and part of the provision that had been forwarded to Still Water, on
its way to Ticonderoga, was carried back for the supply of that post. Upon my
way from Albany to Ticonderoga I found the magazine at Fort Edward in the same
case, and the provision that had been forwarded from thence to Fort George
bringing back to supply the troops at that post; as appears by my letter to
General Schuyler of the 10th of June, from Fort George. Mr. Yancey indeed says,
he had heard of salt provision having been sent from Bennington to St. Coak,
but is ignorant of the quantity, but does not pretend to say there was any
magazine from which the posts at Ticonderoga could have been supplied. That
very provision sent from Still Water to Albany was part of that which came from
Bennington; but why should I multiply words, Mr. Avery acknowledges he was
deceived by the people he had employed to purchase provision, "they did not
collect the quantity he expected." It is true, some cattle arrived at
Ticonderoga the day before the evacuation, I believe about forty, -- they
arrived too late to be of any use in the garrison, but they were of great use
on the retreat.

I have said the ration at Ticonderoga was a pound and a half of bread and a
pound of beef or pork, but I am not able to prove it. The march of a part of
the army has deprived me of several witnesses I intended to have examined. I
know it, however, to have been the case. The Commissaries whose business it was
to be perfectly acquainted with what was issued as a ration, know nothing about
the matter, neither Principal nor Deputy. Mr. Avery knows nothing about it, for
he was at Albany; Mr. Yancey knows nothing about it, for he was purchasing
cattle; and Mr. Boyer, the Issuing Commissary on the ground, is not certain
what it was: He says, he believes it to have been a pound of bread and a pound
of beef, or three-quarters of a pound of pork. He acknowledges the men did not
receive the other component parts of a ration. They got briefs for them. He
likewise acknowledges, that during the time he was at the post the same
quantity of bread and meat war issued as a ration, that had been customary
before and at the time he came into office. Now it is certain that a pound of
bread and a pound of beef, or three-quarters of a pound of pork, is not a
sufficient allowance for a soldier, especially when, as was the case at
Ticonderoga, he is kept constantly to hard labor; his brief he cannot eat; and
it is also certain that the Commissaries did not furnish them with vegetables
and the other small articles; it is therefore probable that the quantity of
bread and meat was increased. But in June, 1776, in Canada, General Sullivan
ordered that, where milk could not be procured, the troops should have a pound
and a half of beef or eighteen ounces of pork per diem, besides molasses, rice,
Indian meal and pease; and this continued to be the allowance in meat until
some time after General Gates took the command, who altered it from a pound and
a half of beef, or eighteen ounces of pork, to a pound of either, and added
half a pound to the quantity of bread; and this alteration was induced,
chiefly, by the prevalence of bilious complaints, which it was expected
lessening the quantity of animal and increasing the quantity of vegetable food
would help to abate: That continued to be the ration at these posts until the
evacuation, some temporary alterations excepted, when the troops were supplied
with vegetables. And this reasoning is confirmed by General Wayne's orderly
book, by which it appears, that on the 30th of December he reduced the quantity
of flour to one pound and a quarter, and of meat to one pound, vegetables being
then issued by the Commissary, agreeable to the resolve of Congress of the 28th
of December, 1776; and, doubtless, when these were expended, the ration
returned to its former standard.

Headquarters, June 11, 1776.
Parole, St. Lawrence. -- Countersign, Sorrel.

THE General orders the several Commissaries to deal out the following rations
in future, viz. corned beef and pork four days in a week; salt fish one day,
and fresh beef two days, if it can be procured. Where milk cannot be procured,
the people must have one pound and an half of beef, or eighteen ounces of pork,
per day; half a pint of rice, or one pint of Indian meal, per week; one quart
of spruce-beer per day, or nine gallons of molasses to 100 men per week; six
pounds of candles for 100 men per week; three pints of pease or beens per man
per week, to be calculated at six shillings per bushel, and where the same
cannot be procured, the men to receive it in such articles as they choose.

Extract from General Sullivan's orders, which, according to the best of my
knowledge, is a copy of the General Order which established the ration, and
parts of a ration, in the grand army at Cambridge, which was afterward issued
at New York, and ordered to be issued by General Schuyler at Albany some time
in May, 1776.

ALEX. SCAMMELL, Adjutant General.

Monday, December 30, 1776.
THE Commissary is to issue one pound and a quarter of flour, and one pound of
beef, per man per diem, until further orders.

December 28, 1776.
RESOLVED, That the Comimssary-General be directed, without fail, to supply the
northern army this winter with vegetables, twice in every week, or more
frequently, if possible; and to take effectual measures that they be well
supplied with vinegar.

The attention of the Court has been a good deal taken up with a quantity of
tallow that was in the possession of Mr. Leavenworth. He says, I think, that he
informed me of it on the 26th of June, and it may be that he did so; but as I
knew Leavenworth to be a private person, and as I had no official account of
any tallow, I concluded it was altogether a private affair, some money-making
job betwixt him and the Commissary. Reflecting, however, on the quantity, which
was surprizingly great, 34,345 pounds, and finding it was public property, I
determined to have sent it to Fort George by the first opportunity; but before
any opportunity offered, that communication was cut off. Mr. Yancey
acknowledges he had never made any return of this tallow, though it must have
been great part of a year on hand. If he had, I should not have suffered it to
remain there; though it might perhaps have been worked up at that place more to
his profit, had he been allowed to employ soldiers, which seems to have been
his expectation. As he never did make any return of it, and the only account I
ever had was from a private person, a very short time before the communication
with Fort George was stopped, the loss of it is justly chargeable to his
negligence, and he ought to be responsible for it.

The second remark of the Committee is a misrepresentation of my letter to
General Schuyler of the 24th of June. They say I was on that day informed by my
scouts that the enemy were very numerous, and on the next wrote to Congress
that I was not able to discover whether the enemy were in force or not. Let the
letter speak for itself. "Sergeant Heath, who I sent down the Lake to make
discoveries, returned last night, and informs me that, from a place near the
mouth of Otter-Creek, he descried an encampment of the enemy on both sides of
Gilliland's Creek; that, from the appearance and the extent, he thinks it must
contain a great body of men; and that a great many smokes arose at a distance
back, which he supposes was from the encampments of the Indians;" and again,
"that one of the inhabitants, in whom he could place confidence, informed him
the Indians were very numerous;" and in another place, "that another inhabitant
informed him, that some of the enemy's troops had said their whole army was
there," that is, at Gilliland's Creek. Now, Sir, is there any thing in all this
like positive intelligence that the enemy were very numerous? No, Sir, there is
not. The encampment was seen from a very considerable distance, across the
Lake, and the sergeant thinks that, from the appearance of it, it might contain
a great body of men. An inhabitant, indeed, told him the Indians were very
numerous. Four or five hundred, Sir, is a large body of Indians, and what the
inhabitants any where would call very numerous, but ten times that number is
not a great body of troops; and for aught I knew, and had reason to believe,
the whole of their army left in Canada did not amount to that number. There was
therefore no inconsistency in my writing to Congress on the 25th of June, that
I was not able to discover whether the enemy were in force or not,
notwithstanding the information I received by my scouts on the 24th. But, in
the same letter, I gave General Schuyler my reasons for not believing that
there was a great body of men in that encampment (of which the Committee do not
think proper to take any notice) viz. that it was improbable the enemy would
waste their time at such a distance from the object against which they were to
act, in a country that afforded them nothing (the inhabitants had all left that
side of the Lake the year before) and they had been there four or five days;
and I thought the ground, on which Heath described the encampment to be,
incapable of containing a great number of men. Therefore it was more probable
that it was a party only sent to amuse, and to give confidence to the savages.
Had I given Congress other information than I did on the 25th of June, it had
been a falsehood.

I have now got through the whole of this matter, and it clearly appears there
is not the smallest foundation for all, or any of the charges against me. -- On
the contrary, it has been proven beyond the possibility of a doubt, that I did
every thing which my duty required, and that circumstances would allow. I have
therefore good reason to expect the decision of this Court in my favor. Yet I
still shall have it to regret, that the accusations have spread far and wide,
and been greedily swallowed for truth, whilst few, comparatively very few, will
ever hear of the honorable acquittal.

If in the course of this business I have appeared with confidence, I hope I
have not with arrogance; and though I have examined the report of the Committee
of Congress with freedom, I have not forgot to do it with decency. No man can
have a higher sense than I have of the respect in which Congress ought to be
held; but a dignified conduct can alone secure respect to any man, or body of
men. That conduct this Congress will, no doubt, ever preserve. But should some
future Congress depart from the great business of watching over the affair of a
whole continent, to hunt down an individual -- should factions arise amongst
them, and local interests take place of the general interest -- should their
time be wasted in frivolous and endless disputes, where the object is a mere
boyish desire of victory, whilst the public service stands still, and its
honest servants tired out with tedious and expensive waiting -- and should they
create offices with great salaries, where those who hold them may rob the
public at their pleasure, without a possibility of detection, and cabal amongst
themselves for the disposal of them -- and should they pass resolves,
ridiculous in themselves and impossible to be carried into execution -- then
will Congress sink into contempt, nor will all the importance they may
endeavor to assume, nor the fastidious pomp they may display, support them,
and then will the misfortunes of America begin.

THE Court, having duly considered the charges against Major General St. Clair,
and the evidence, are unanimously of opinion that he is NOT GUILTY of either of
the charges against him, and do unanimously acquit him of all and every of them
with the highest honor.

B. LINCOLN, PRESIDENT.



The Court adjourn without day.

MY reputation having suffered by a misrepresentation of the directions
relative to Fort Mercer, given by me, in conjunction with the Baron de Kalb and
General Kucx, to General Varnum and Commodore Haz^wood, I beg leave to subjoin
a copy of those directions to this Defense. It may serve to set the public
right with respect to that matter, and to show the baseness of these who have
endeavored to turn them to my prejudice. I believe, indeed, the principal
agent has been a very reverend gentleman, a Member of Congress, Doctor
Witherspoon I mean, who, forgetting the strict regard to truth his clerical
character required, and the impropriety of a Member of Congress publicly
pre-judging a matter that must ultimately be referred to Congress, has been
taking every opportunity (and has had the meanness to do it in taverns as he
has been passing through the country) to misrepresent the whole of my conduct,
and, as far as in him lay, to prevent a fair trial and acquittal, should that
follow, from wearing off the prejudices against me, which I have good reason to
think were raised in the same manner; at the same time endeavoring to impress
an idea of the injustice and partiality of Courts Martial. SIR, Fort Mercer,
November 18, 1777, half past nine at night.
IN consequence of his Excellency General Washington's instructions to us to
enquire, in concert with General Varnum and other officers, into sundry matters
relating to Fort Mercer and the disposition of the troops under General
Varnum's command, and their having informed us that the enemy have landed at
Billing's-Port with a force greatly superior to General Varnum's, and that
there is reason to expect an attack upon his post tomorrow, it is our opinion
that General Varnum should remove his troops to some convenient post on the
upper side of Timber Creek, as soon as it can be done, governing himself by the
circumstances that arise, with regard to the withdrawing the garrison of Fort
Mercer. And if he should be reduced to the necessity of withdrawing the
garrison, that the works should be blown up. But as the holding the fort is a
matter of the utmost consequence, it ought to be retained to the last moment,
consistent with the safety of the garrison, or until he receives his
Excellency's orders on that head.

Signed, A. ST. CLAIR, Major General, BARON DE KALB, Major General, HENRY KNOX,
Brigadier General of Artillery.


To the Hon. Brigadier General VARNUM.

Fort Mercer, November 18, 1777, half past nine at night. SIR,
IN consequence of His Excellency General Washington's orders to us to enquire,
in conjunction with General Varnum, the officers of Fort Mercer, and of the
fleet, into the practicability of defending the cheveaux-de-frize, and
preventing the enemy from raising them, and its being the unanimous opinion of
the officers, and of the Commodore, and of Captain Robinson (the eldest
continental officer of the navy) that the fleet can be of no service when
batteries are erected on Mud Island, in the defense of either the river or the
fort: We recommend it to the Commodore, with the first favorable wind, to
attempt passing up the river, with the fleet, by the city of Philadelphia, to
such place as he shall judge most proper, endeavoring in his way to destroy
the Delaware frigate with the fireships.

Signed, A. ST. CLAIR, Major General, BARON DE KALB, Major General. HENRY KNOX,
Brigadier General of Artillery.


To Commodore HAZLEWOOD.

EXPLANATION of the DRAUGHT annexed.
A Old fort in very bad condition, wanting repair; could not be defended with
less than 500 men. B Stone redoubt, about 200 men would defend it, overlooketh
the line Y, opposite the Lake, in Fort Independence. C Block-house for 100 men.
D French redoubt upon the low ground for about 200 men, commanded by the
opposite side. E New breast-work for 200 men. F New fleche for 100 men. G New
redoubt for 150 men. H New redoubt for 100 men. I Redoubt upon the low ground
for 250 men, commanded by the opposite side. K Jersey redoubt upon the low
ground for 300 men, commanded by the opposite side. L Redoubt upon the low
ground for 100 men. M Redoubt upon the low ground for 100 men. N French lines
upon the high ground, overlooks all the works on Ticonderoga side, for 2000
men, and not less, considering the great length and importance of the place. R
P ^ O New works, in addition to the French lines. S High ground, occupied by
the enemy, and overlooks the French lines. T Mount Hope, overlooks ground S,
occupied by the enemy. U Block-house, burnt by the enemy. V V High hill,
overlooks Ticonderoga and Mount Independence. X The bridge.
MOUNT INDEPENDENCE.
Y Line upon the low ground, commanded by the opposite side B, for 800 men. Z
Barbet battery. 2 Line only marked upon the ground. 3 Picket sort for 600 men.
4 Block-house for 100 men. 5 6 Line, with three new made batteries, for 1500
men, and not less. 7 Block-house for 100 men. 8 Battery made by the enemy. 9
Road made by the enemy to cut off the communication from Mount Independence to
Skeensborough.



