Mr. Wigglesworth's DUDLEIAN LECTURE.

THE AUTHORITY OF TRADITION considered, AT THE LECTURE Founded by the Hon.
Judge DUDLEY, IN HARVARD COLLEGE, November 5, 1777.

By Edward Wigglesworth, M. A. HOLLIS- Professor of Divinity.

BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: PRINTED BY THOMAS and JOHN FLEET, 1778

The Reader is desired to make the following marginal Corrections.

Page 19. m 2 Timothy Page 20. n Chapter xx. 31. Page 26. u 2 Timothy i. 13. Page 30. g 2 Timothy Page 31. h 2 Epist.
The AUTHORITY OF TRADITION considered.
Matthew xv. 6. THUS HAVE YE MADE THE COMMANDMENT OF GOD OF NONE EFFECT BY YOUR
TRADITION.


THE Business assigned by the honorable, learned and pious Founder for the
third in the quadrennial course of his Lectures, is "to be for the detecting,
and convicting and exposing the idolatry of the Romish Church, their tyranny,
usurpations, damnable heresies, fatal errors, abominable superstitions and
other crying wickednesses in their high places; and finally to prove that the
Church of Rome is that mystical Babylon, that man of sin, that apostate church,
spoken of in the New Testament."

The Gentlemen who have preceded me in this Lecture, have considered and
confuted the arguments urged by the Romanists in proof of the infallibility of
their Church, Dr. Wigglesworth, A. D. 1757.
and of the supremacy of the Bishop of Rome. Mr. Foxcroft, A. D. 1761.
The charge of idolatry, Dr. Mayhew, A. D. 1765.
which the Protestants bring against the Romanists, has been supported. The
papal religion has been shown to be a complex falsehood. Dr. Mather, A. D. 1769.
And the characters of the man of sin, Dr. Cooper, A. D. 1773.
as they are given by St. Paul, have been clearly evinced, to be applicable to
the Church of Rome.

The part which I shall take in this controversy, will be to consider one of
the grand sources of the fatal errors, and gross corruptions of the Romish
church. The words of my text will naturally lead me to consider the AUTHORITY
which the church of Rome assigns to TRADITION, and to point out some of the
fatal consequences of it. They are the reply of our Savior to the Pharisees,
who found fault with his disciples for sitting down to their meals, without
taking care previously to cleanse themselves from any pollutions they might
have contracted. This conduct of his disciples the Pharisees charge with being
a transgression of the tradition of the Elders. Our Savior from thence takes
occasion to reprehend them for the superstitious regard they paid to those
traditions. He charges them with transgressing, by means of that regard, the
commandment of God. In support of the charge he instances in their tradition
respecting the conduct of children toward their parents. "God, says he, has
commanded by Moses, saying, honor thy father and thy mother;" and has
enforced this precept by that awful sanction, "Whosoever curses his father or
mother, let him surely die." "But ye say, Whosoever shall say to his father or
his mother, that, by which thou might be prosited by me, is a gift," devoted
to some pious purpose, and neglects "to honor his father or his mother,"
either by not paying them that respect which is due from children to their
parents, or by refusing to afford them that relief which their necessitous
circumstances may require, "he shall be free" from the obligation of the divine
command. In this manner the Pharisees made the commandment of God of none
effect by their tradition.

To show, that the charge which Christ brings against the Pharisees, may, with
equal justness, be brought against the church of Rome, I shall, by divine
assistance, endeavor at this time,

Faithfully to state the tenets of that church, respecting tradition: -- then,

Consider the force of the arguments, urged in support of those tenets: -- and
lastly,

Show that the setting up oral tradition as of equal authority with the sacred
Scriptures, has opened the door for the admission of doctrines and precepts
into that church, subversive of those delivered by Christ and his Apostles.

The first thing to be done, is saithfully to state the tenets of the church of
Rome, respecting tradition. -- Before the Council of Trent, the Word of God
contained in the canonical books of sacred Scripture, was received by the
Christian Church, and acknowledged, as the only rule of faith and practice. All
the doctrines to be believed by Christians, and all the duties to be practiced
by them, were confessedly, either expressly contained in the holy Scriptures,
or else plainly to be proved by them, by just and necessary consequence. But
when the Pope and Council of Trent were resolved not to reform the errors and
corruptions of the church, which were grown to an amazing height before the
Reformation; and when they found that their doctrine of transubstantiation, of
purgatory, of seven sacraments; and their practice of worshipping saints,
images, and relics, of reading the Scriptures and the service of God in an
unknown tongue, were not to be proved by the Scriptures, they deemed it
expedient to stretch and enlarge the rule of faith and practice beyond its
ancient limits. Such absurd doctrines and superstitious practices not being
warranted by the Scriptures, they judged it expedient to augment the Canon of
Scripture, by the addition of several apocryphal books to the Old Testament;
books never received by the Jewish church, to which were committed the ancient
Oracles of God; because they were compositions merely human, written by
uninspired persons, after the spirit of prophecy had ceased in that church. And
after the rule of their faith and practice had received this addition, lest it
should not yet be large enough for their purpose, they were pleased to add to
it the unwritten word, or oral tradition. This the Council of Trent has
declared to be of equal authority with the sacred Scriptures themselves, and
that it ought to be received with the same pious reverence and affection. Pari
pietatis affectu ac reverentia suscipit, ac veneratur.
To justify their setting up oral tradition as equal in authority with the
written word of God, the Romanists tell us, that the books of the New Testament
were occasionally written, and not with a design of making them the only rule
of faith and practice. Many things, say they, were orally delivered by the
Apostles, which they did not commit to writing; things of equal authority, and
entitled to the same respect that is due to their writings. That we may not be
at a loss where to find the things orally delivered, but not written, the
Romanists inform us, that their church, which is the keeper, and as occasion
may require, the publisher of them, has safely and infallibly conveyed them
down to us by tradition. These traditions, say they, were in the church long
before such occasional publications of them. They have, from age to age, been
handed down, by the church, from the very Apostles themselves. And the evidence
of their being apostolical, is as good as that which respects the things that
the Apostles committed to writing. Besides all this, some of the Romish church
maintain, that it appears from the Scriptures themselves, that we ought to
submit to the testimony of the church, when she declares what things are to be
received as articles of faith. We must, therefore, believe she truly dispenses
the traditions received from the Apostles; even though the particulars she
declares are not to be proved by Scripture. The Council of Trent having, in
this manner, fitted a rule for their particular purpose, laid a foundation for
proceeding with ease in confirming and proving whatever doctrines and practices
they had a mind to establish, let them be ever so superstitious, absurd or
impious.

Those who embrace the Reformation agree with the Romanists, that the Apostles
taught the Christians of their day several things which we do not find in their
writings. Could these be ascertained, they would be equal in authority, and
entitled to the same reverence and respect with the apostolic writings: But not
being committed to writing, they are now lost. From the Scripture itself it is
evident, that some things taught by the Apostles, were not written by them.
From St. Paul's telling the Thessalonians, 2 Epist. ii. 6.
that "they knew what withheld the revelation of the man of sin," it is
manifest that he, or some other inspired person, had made known to them what
was the obstacle to his being revealed. But this is no where expressly declared
in the sacred Scriptures. It would be vain to imagine this to be the only
instance of apostolic instruction, not committed to writing: It is highly
probable there were other instances now lost. Uncertainty is always the
concomitant of those things, which have only oral tradition for the means of
their conveyance down so long a tract of time, as from the apostolic age to the
present day.

Protestants are also ready to acknowledge, that the christian writers of the
first ages of the church may sometimes give light, and lead to the probable
sense of some text of Scripture, which without such help would be quite
obscure. From the writings of some of the Fathers it is probable, that it was
the strength and greatness of the Roman empire, which hindered the revelation
of the man of sin. The dissolution of that empire was to open a door of
entrance to him, when he made his appearance in the world.

Protestants allow further, that the general practice of the church, where it
can be accurately ascertained, is a good commentary on those texts which treat
of the government, discipline or practice of the primitive, christian church.

But notwithstanding these concessions, Protestants are far from agreeing with
the Council of Trent, which declares that the oral traditions of the catholic
church meaning the Roman, were to be received with equal reverence and respect,
as the books of the old and new Testament; and that he, who despises those
traditions, is ACCURSED. On the other hand, the Protestant churches maintain
the Scriptures of the old and new Testament to be a PERFECT RULE of faith and
practice. They do not indeed pretend, as has been noticed already, that every
thing which was said or done, by our Savior or his Apostles, is contained in
them; or that they lay down particular rules for the management of all the
prudential affairs of the christian church. With respect to our Savior, the
Evangelist John informs us, Ch xx. ver. 30.
"that many other signs were done by Jesus in the presence of his disciples,"
which are not recorded in the Gospel. And from St. Paul's direction to the
Corinthians, 1 Epist. xiv 4^.
to "let all things be done decently and in order," it is evident that some of
the affairs of that church were lest to be managed as their prudence should
direct. In like manner, every christian church is at liberty to provide for
itselt, where no provision is made in the Scriptures. Care, however, must be
taken that such provision be decent and orderly; that it does not transgress
any of the rules of the Gospel; nor enjoin any thing as necessary, either to
church communion, or to salvation, which is not made so by Christ, the only
Legislator of the christian church. Protestants only maintain that every thing
necessary to salvation, whether it relates to faith or practice, is either
expressly contained in the Scriptures, or may by just consequence be deduced
from them. As to oral tradition, it is esteemed by them a way of conveyance,
from an age so distant as the apostolic, too uncertain to be depended on;
especially in conveying down the knowledge of such doctrinal truths, or
practical precepts, as are necessary to solvation. And though it must be
allowed that the revelations made in one age of the world have been less
perfect than those made in another; the earlier revelations containing fewer
articles, and being often less perspicuous than the later, yet the necessity of
adding oral tradition cannot, from this cause, be conclusively argued. For God
has in every age of the church revealed ALL that was necessary to be believed
and practiced in each particular age. And he has made his revelations with that
degree of perspicuity which was necessary completely to answer all his purposes
in making them. The christian dispensation, being the last which is to take
place in the world, every article of faith, and every rule of duty, is either
expressly contained in the sacred Scriptures of the old and new Testament, or
may fairly and conclusively be deduced from them. No single person, nor any
collective bodies of men, have a right to prescribe any other articles of faith
or rules of duty than what are contained in those sacred writings. Every
person, whose lise is properly influenced and governed by the doctrine, and
precepts of the holy Scriptures, will obtain the mercy of God to eternal life;
notwithstanding he totally disregards all those oral traditions which the
church of Rome pretends she has conveyed down from Christ and his Apostles,
with as much certainty as the sacred Scriptures have been transmitted to us.

That the Protestant churches have sufficient reason for abiding by their
opinion, respecting the perfection of the sacred Scriptures, in every thing
that concerns our eternal salvation; and for rejecting the authority of oral
tradition, as it is maintained in the Romish church, may be fairly evinced. --
For,

Oral tradition has, from experience, been found a very uncertain way of
conveying the knowledge of doctrinal truths, or matters of fact, through a long
succession of ages. The longevity of the Antediluvians gave them the greatest
advantage for conveying the knowledge of the doctrines and duties of religion
to posterity. Two persons might have conveyed it down from Adam to Abraham. For
at the death of Adam, Methuselah was above three hundred years old. And
Methuselah did not die, till Shem was almost an hundred, who lived above an
hundred years after the birth of Abraham. Besides their longevity, the fewness
of religious truths to be conveyed, gave them every advantage of doing it, with
as much certainty as can attend oral tradition. But notwithstanding these
advantages, a dissoluteness of manners had spread itself universally among the
Antediluvians. And by the time of Abraham, the tradition of those few things,
in which religion was then comprehended, was so corrupted, that God saw it
necessary to correct it by making an immediate revelation to him; And that
Abraham might not be corrupted by the idolatry, which was beginning to prevail
in his father's family, God commanded him to forsake his kindred and his
country. -- Further,

The mosaic institution was attended with many advantages, peculiarly
favorable to tradition. The law was short; and it was promulged at Mount Sinai
with solemnities, that excited the wonder and astonishment of the whole
congregation of Israel. There were many rites and several festivals appointed
to keep up the remembrance of it. All the main acts of their religion were to
be performed in one place, and by persons of one family, who were devoted to
this particular service. And all the males were obliged to attend the service
at the temple three times a year, which kept up a constant intercourse among
them. But, notwithstanding these and many other advantages in favor of
tradition, that were peculiar to the mosaic institution, God did not see sit
certainty of tradition. For the commanded Moses to write the whose law, as he
himself had, with his own finger, written the ten commandments on tables of
stone.

The traditional method of conveying a revelation, must necessarily be liable
to much uncertainty, arising both from involuntary mistakes, and from designed,
wilful and malicious falsifications. The credit of a report which passes
through many hands, depends on the integrity and sufficiency of all the
relators. Wherever there is a suspicion that any of them are desicient in
either of these qualifications, a proportional doubt will be entertained with
respect to the things reported by them. The effect of an unrecorded revelation
can neither be extensive, nor permanent. It can reach but few persons; and it
cannot retain its full credibility, but for a short time. Was the knowledge of
religious truths to be communicated orally, for many centuries together, by an
innumerable multitude of persons, differing in their capacities, tempers,
designs and interests, it would be morally impossible to arrive at any
certainty about them.

Protestants further allege, that the conveyance of the doctrines of
Christianity by tradition, would have been attended with difficulties, peculiar
to itself. The christian religion was not, like the mosaic, confined to one
country and nation. It was early propagated into countries very remote from
each other, whose inhabitants, differing in language as well as situation,
maintained but little intercourse with one another. In such circumstances, had
history been silent, it might reasonably have been presumed, that some persons
in those distant countries would have corrupted the doctrines of Christianity.
When this had taken place, the remoteness of the countries, and the different
languages of the inhabitants, would have rendered it extremely difficult to
have rectified such mistakes; had the knowledge of Christianity been wholly
dependent on tradition. During the lives of the Apostles, a remedy might have
been had in such a case. On application to some of them, the question in
controversy, might have been decided. But after the decease of the Apostles,
had not all the doctrines of christianity been committed to writing, whenever a
controversy arose respecting any article of the christian religion, it must
have remained undecided; unless it could be proved from the Scriptures that
Christ had vested some one person, or some body of men, with power to decide
all controversies that should arise in the Church, in an authoritative manner.
But that he has done so, Protestants are not able to find sufficient evidence;
notwithstanding all that the Romanists have offered to evince that the Pope, or
a General Council, or both, are clothed with such authority. Indeed, the
proofs of Christianity are of so complicated a nature, that, were we altogether
dependent on tradition for our knowledge of them, they could not have been made
out, in so clear and satisfactory a manner, as is requisite to establish
articles of faith, and persuade men to embrace them.

Protestants further object, that our Savior and his Apostles, in their
controversies with the Jews, do not ever appeal to tradition, but always to the
Scriptures. Our Savior never submitted to tradition, though it was on many
occasions urged against him. On the contrary, he reproached the Jews with
making the commandment of God of none effect by their traditions. He told them
plainly, that they worshipped God in vain, when they taught for doctrines, the
commandments of men. In all his disputations with them, he invariably referred
them to the Scriptures, and enjoined it on them to search the Scriptures;
founding his injunction on the justness of the persuasion they entertained
concerning them. John v. 39.
"In them, said he, ye think ye have eternal life, and they are" the very books
"that testify of me." Our Savior never once appeals to tradition, when he is
justifying himself, or his doctrine, against the cavils of the Jews. -- In like
manner, the Apostles constantly make their appeal to the Scriptures, in all
their disputes with them. They set a high character on the Bereans for their
examining the Scriptures, and comparing with them the very doctrines, preached
among them by the Apostles themselves. In the epistles to the Romans, Galatians
and Hebrews, the Apostle Paul pursues a chain of arguments in opposition to the
prejudices the Jews had imbibed against Christianity. But we do not find him,
in these epistles, deducing so much as a single argument from tradition. On the
contrary, the merit of the cause, contested between them, is rested wholly on
evidence, derived from the Scriptures. This same Apostle, when he is
enumerating to Timothy the advantages he derived from a religious education,
mentions it as an eminent one, ^ Epist. iii. 15
"that from a child he had known the HOLY SCRIPTURES, which were able to make
him wise to Salvation, through faith in Jesus Christ." If the Scriptures have
been handed down from the Apostles to the present time, without corruption in
those articles that are necessary to salvation, either the Apostle, or the
Church of Rome, must be miserably mistaken. The Apostle tells Timothy, they are
able to make him wise to salvation. The Church of Rome says they are not so,
without the help of those traditional articles, which she has been so happy as
to convey down to us with infallible certainty. Which is entitled to the
greatest credit, the Apostle or the Church of Rome, will scarcely be called in
question by any who have not learned the art of believing that an Apostle,
writing under the guidance of the Holy Ghost can commit an egregious blunder.
-- When the apostle Peter knew that his death was approaching, he wrote his
second epistle for this very end, that his christian brethren "might have these
things," namely, the doctrines and precepts taught by him and the other
Apostles, "always in remembrance." But why need he have been so solicitous to
commit those things to writing? Perhaps he never heard, that the Church of Rome
was so highly privileged as to be the keeper and conveyancer of those
instructions which the Apostles, either through hurry of business, or through
carelessness, had neglected to commit to writing. But to be serious, neither
our Savior, nor his Apostles, give the least hint of their having left any
"unwritten word," with the Church, to be by her conveyed down to succeeding
ages by oral tradition: Much less have they given the least intimation of their
having lest any articles necessary to salvation, to be in this manner conveyed
down by the Church.

Were these the only reasons for rejecting the traditions of the Church of
Rome, Protestants would esteem themselves fully justified in totally
disregarding them. -- But this brings me to observe,

That the very supposal of a necessity of adding oral tradition to scripture
revelation, implies some imperfection in the Scriptures. On this supposition
the Scriptures must, either not contain all things necessary to be believed and
practiced, in order to obtain salvation, or else not deliver the articles of
faith and practice with that degree of perspicuity, which was necessary
completely to answer all the divine purposes in delivering them. Both of these
have been openly taught and avowed by the Romanists, even in a Protestant
country, while they have been attempting to make proselytes to their Church. In
a pamphlet dispersed in England in the former part of the present century, it
is asked, " Why should not the Scripture ALONE be the rule of faith?" To which
the answer given is, " Because several NECESSARY ARTICLES are either NOT AT ALL
CONTAINED in Scripture, or at least are NOT PLAIN in the Scripture without the
help of tradition." But these are positions, which Protestants think ought not
to be laid down, in order to establish the authority of oral tradition. -- For,

It may be clearly evinced, that every article of faith and practice, necessary
to salvation, is contained in the Scriptures; even from a concession of the
Church of Rome itself. For that Church allows, "that the Scriptures are to be
received by all christians as the INFALLIBLE word of GOD" Now this infallible
word declares, 1 Timothy iii. 16, 17.
"that all Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable for
doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness; that
the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished to all good works." If by
the man of God is to be understood a Pastor or Teacher in the christian Church,
then the Scripture is given to perfect him for his office; and thoroughly to
furnish him to all good works, belonging to his station. Or should the man of
God be supposed to refer to a private christian, then the design of the
Scripture is to make him perfect, and thoroughly to furnish him to all good
works; completely qualifying him for the faithful discharge of all the duties
of his christian profession. On either supposition it will follow, that all
necessary articles of faith and practice are contained in the Scriptures. For
they are profitable for doctrine, teaching us to form just thoughts of the
divine Majesty and of ourselves. They also teach us the way in which sinful man
may become reconciled to God. They are profitable for reproof, for all the
errors and false doctrines which have at any time been propagated, may be
confuted by them. They are profitable for correction, for they lay the
strictest prohibition on every kind of wickedness and on every degree of
immorality. By convincing men of their sins and their faults, they become the
means of correcting them. They are profitable for instruction in righteousness,
teaching all the rules of righteousness, even all the duties incumbent on
christians. The Scriptures are so perfect for all these ends, as fully to
answer the design of God in giving them; which was, that the man of God,
whether he be a teacher in the church, or only a private Christian, may be made
perfect, thoroughly furnished to all good works. Now, should it be admitted,
that the Scriptures do not contain every article of faith and practice,
necessary to salvation, it will follow, either that the man of God may be
perfect without the knowledge of some necessary articles of christianity; or
else, that God did not know what would be sufficient to make him perfect. The
former is a self-evident contradiction. To suppose the latter of Him whose
understanding is infinite, would be as foolish as it is blasphemous.

Indeed from the whole current of the Scriptures we are led to conclude, that
all the necessary articles of faith and practice are contained in them. The
Apostle John informs us, in the close of his gospel, Chapter xx. 30.
that "these things were written, that we might believe that Jesus is the
Christ, the Son of God; and and that believing we might have life through his
name." So again in his first epistle Chapter v. 13.
he says, "these things have I written unto you -- that ye might know that ye
have eternal life." Now, since the disign of the Scriptures is to make known
the way to eternal life; and since from them we may be certain that we are
entitled to it, it is evident that they must contain all the articles necessary
to salvation. There can be no occasion for the help of oral tradition, to add
any thing to their perfection.

Should any thing then be taught by a minister of the gospel, or decreed by a
particular church, as necessary to salvation, which is not to be found in
express words in the Scriptures, nor to be deduced from them by just
consequence, it may safely be rejected; it cannot be an article of our holy
religion. All such additions are mere perversions of the gospel of Christ. The
gospel was so fully preached by the Apostles themselves, that St. Paul scruples
not to denounce a most solemn curse against either an Apostle, or an Angel from
Heaven, who should presume to preach a gospel different from that which had
been preached by him. Gal. i. 8.
"Though we, says he, or an Angel from Heaven, preach any other gospel, than
that which we have preached unto you, let him be ACCURSED." To impress this the
more, on the minds of the Galatians in the first place, and then on the minds
of all who should read this epistle, it is immediately repeated, verse 9.
"As we said before, so say I now again, if any man preach any other gospel
unto you, than that which ye have received, let him be ACCURSED." Surely then
those of the Romish communion, who declare there are several necessary things,
not contained in the Scriptures, have reason to fear lest this apostolic curse
should come upon them. Till they can prove that such additional articles were
orally delivered by the Apostles themselves; that they stand on as good
evidence, as those articles do, which the Apostles committed to writing; and
that the church has handed them down from the Apostles, pure and free from
corruption, Protestants will esteem themselves fully justified in rejecting
them.

Should the Romanists, to free themselves from the charge of inconsistency and
self-contradiction, reply, "That the church of Rome allows the sufficiency of
Scripture to perfect the man of God, provided Scripture be interpreted as the
catholic, meaning the Roman church, directs; and that there be also a holding
fast those traditions, to which the written word refers," it will not answer
their purpose. This written word declares, that as written it is profitable for
all the before mentioned purposes. The Romanists affirm there are other
articles, not contained in it, preserved by the church and handed down by
tradition, which are equally necessary to those ends. Now to assert, that the
written word of God is infallibly true, which declares that the Scriptures are
able to make men wise to salvation through faith in Jesus Christ, and to make
the man of God perfect; and at the same time to assert, that they are not able,
without the addition of some other NECESSARY articles, carries so much the
appearance of absurdity and self-contradiction, that it will require no small
share of the art and subtilty of a Jesuit to free such assertions from it.

To palliate this inconsistency, the Romanists plead, 'that the Scriptures
themselves refer to traditions, which are to be held fast, as well as the
things that are written.' To this purpose they quote a passage from the second
epistle to the Thessalonians: Chapter ii. 15.
"Therefore, brethren, stand fast, and hold the traditions which ye have been
taught, whether by word, or our epistle." Upon this passage one of their
writers makes this observation. "Hence it is clear, that some traditions were
delivered to the Thessalonians by word of mouth, and those of EQUAL authority
with what was written, if not more; for the Holy Ghost does name them first, as
they were indeed the first in being." Touchstone of the reformed Gospel.
And Bellarmine says, "that the Apostle commands that they no less observe
what they had received WITHOUT writing, than what they had received by
epistle." To justify their interpretation of this text, and to show its
pertinency to the point for which it is alleged, it is incumbent on the
Romanists to make it evident, that the traditions which the Thessalonians were
taught by word, were different from those taught by epistle; and that those
verbal traditions were never committed to writing, by persons under the
guidance of the holy Spirit; but left with the church to be carefully preserved
and delivered down orally to succeeding ages, as circumstances may require. To
set the matter in a just point of light, it may be observed, that whatever
traditions necessary to salvation the Apostle delivered to the Thessalonians by
EPISTLE, the same he had before delivered to them by word of mouth. Bellarmine
himself is constrained to acknowledge, "that without doubt the Apostle had
fully preached the whole gospel to them." The traditions, then, referred to in
the text, were such as the Thessalonians had been taught before, by the same
Spirit and by the same person, who indicted this epistle. Whereas the Romanists
refer to traditions of which no traces can be found for several hundred years
after the whole canon of Scripture was completed. Now it is readily granted,
that where the things spoken are the same with those afterward written, they
are of equal authority. For the authority of divine truths is not at all
affected by the manner in which the knowledge of them is communicated. The
Apostle, however, by joining word and letter together, does not design to
insinuate that the things taught them by letter were different from what he had
before taught them by word of mouth. For in the 5th verse of this very chapter,
wherein he charges them to hold fast the traditions they had been taught, he
expressly asserts that what he was then actually writing, he had told them
before. "Remember ye not, says he, that when I was yet with you, I told you
these things." Whereas the Romanists bring this text to support the authority
of such traditions as enjoin things not commanded in Scripture, or else such as
alter the plain sense of it, and even such as expressly contradict it.

Should it be admitted that the passage under consideration refers to
traditions, which at that time were not committed to writing; yet it will not
serve the purpose, for which the Romanists allege it. For, at the time the
Apostle gave this injunction to the Thessalonians, there was but a small part
of the New Testament committed to writing. Probably the epistle to the church
of Antioch, recorded Acts XV. the two epistles to the Thessalonians, and the
gospels of Matthew and Mark, were the only books of the New Testament extant at
that time. Now, it will not, surely, follow because, when things were in such a
situation, the Apostle commanded the Thessalonians to hold fast what they had
been taught by word, that other things, necessary to salvation, were left
unwritten, to be handed down by oral tradition, after the canon of Scripture
was complete.

Should the modern Romanist reply with Cardinal Perron. "We must not answer
that St. Paul speaks here only of such traditions, which, though not in his
epistle to the Thessalonians, yet were afterward written, and in other books
of Scripture; because it is upon occasion of tradition touching the cause of
the hindrance of the coming of Antichrist, which was NEVER WRITTEN, that this
injunction is laid down;" should the Romanist make this reply, the Protestant
is ready to rejoin, that if the tradition there referred to, which the
Thessalonians had such a solemn charge to hold fast, be yet LOST, because it
was not committed, to writing, we can have little or no reason to pay any
regard to other oral traditions, which are no ways concerned in the apostolic
injunction. This very plea of the Cardinal furnishes us with a good reason why
the church of Rome or even the catholic Church, should not be esteemed a sure
preserver of oral traditions. It is, indeed, a conclusive argument against all
pretensions of that kind. This text, then, can never be admitted by Protestants
as evidence sufficient to convince them, that "the traditions of the Romish
Church are to be received with equal piety and reverence as the books of the
old and new Testament."

In like manner the other texts urged by the Romanists in favor of the
traditions of their Church, are sar from proving that any obligation lays on
christians to pay the least regard to them. These texts relate only to the
things delivered by the Apostles themselves; and have no concern with the
traditions of after-ages. The bare reading them is sufficient to confute the
Popish interpretation of them. St. Paul says to the Corinthians, 1 Epist. xi. 2.
"I praise you, brethren, that you remember me in all things, and keep the
ordinances [or traditions] as I delivered them unto you." According to the
Romanists, instead of remembering the Apostle, we must remember and reverence
the authority of the church; and instead of keeping the traditions which the
Apostle delivered, who on another occasion tells them, that what he delivered
to them, he received of the Lord, we must keep those traditions which the
Church delivers. -- Again, St. Paul says, 2 Thessalonians. iii. 6.
"We command you, brethren, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that you
withdraw yourselves from every brother that walks disorderly, and not after
the tradition which he received of US." This US the Romanists apply to their
Church, and urge this text in proof that Christians ought to receive their
traditions; such as were delivered to them; not indeed by the Apostles, but by
Councils and Popes several hundred years after the canon of Scripture was
settled -- The same Apostle charges Timothy 2 Timothy i. 23.
to "hold fast the form of sound words which thou have been taught of ME, in
faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus." By the form of sound words the
Romanists understand all the traditionary articles of faith in their Church,
though they are not to be found in the Apostle's writings. And instead of
holding them in faith and love, they are to be held without love or mercy to
all such as differ from them. -- Once more, the Apostle directs Timothy,
saying, 2 Timothy ii. 2.
"The things which thou have heard of ME among many witnesses, the same commit
thou to faithsul men, who shall be able to teach others also." These thing the
Romanists pretend were committed to them ONLY. If so, either Timothy, or the
persons to whom he committed the things which he heard of the Apostle, were
miserably mistaken in making choice of those of the Romish church, as faithful
men, fit to be entrusted with the things taught by the Apostle. For the Romish
clergy have abundantly proved themselves quite unfaithful to the trust reposed
in them. They have done so by withholding what is truly apostolical; and by
delivering for apostolical, things that are most directly opposite to the
Scriptures.

Till the Romanists are able to produce some better evidence than any that has
yet been offered by them, Protestants will find it hard to persuade themselves,
that several articles necessary to salvation are NOT ^T ALL CONTAINED IN THE
SCRIPTURES: Much less will they be convinced by the evidence adduced by them,
that the traditions of the church of Rome merit equal reverence with the sacred
Scriptures.

The other reason assigned by the Romanists, "Why the Scripture alone ought not
to be the rule of faith," is, "because several necessary articles are NOT PLAIN
in the Scripture without the help of tradition." In proof of this they allege
the authority of St. Peter, who has assured us, 2 Pet. Iii. 16.
"there are some things in St. Paul's episties hard to he understood, which
they that are unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do also the other
Scriptures to their own destruction" From this text the Romanists conclude,
that the unlearned part of mankind are in more danger of being hurt by having
the Scriptures to read, than by being denied the use of them. Such stress has
been laid upon it by some of their writers, that on the authority of this
passage alone, they have determined "the Scriptures not to be sufficiently
clear in all points wherein our salvation is concerned; but that the
misunderstanding and misinterpreting them, may endanger our eternal salvation."

On the other hand, Protestants allow that an equal degree of perspicuity does
not attend all parts of the sacred Scriptures; that they contain some things of
a very abstruse nature, which after all our care and pains, we shall not be
able fully to comprehend. They do not, indeed, maintain that the articles
necessary to salvation are treated with an equal degree of plainness in every
place, where they are mentioned. For it sufficiently answers all the purposes
of religion, if those things which are handled but obscurely in some places,
are treated of with perspicuity in others. Neither do they pretend, but that
persons of corrupt and vicious dispositions, who study the Scriptures under
such a biass, though they do it with considerable attention, may fall into some
sundamental errors or mistakes. Neither do they affirm, that the things
necessary to salvation, are delivered in so plain a manner, as to be understood
without using such helps as are necessary to understand other books and things
of equal antiquity. -- But Protestants do, indeed, maintain that every article
of faith and practice, necessary to salvation, is delivered in so clear and
intelligible a manner in the sacred Scriptures, that every person who studies
them with a firm resolution to yield his assent to every doctrine, plainly
revealed in them, and to practice all the duties they enjoin, will be preserved
from every fatal error, and led into the knowledge of all necessary truth:
Provided he uses all the helps which God in his providence affords him, and
joins his fervent and persevering prayer to God for a blessing on his
endeavors.

Protestants are fully persuaded they do not ascribe this degree of perspicuity
to the sacred Scriptures without sufficient reason. For the moral precepts of
Christianity contain every thing of the kind to be found in the writings of the
Heathen^ without any of the imperfections that attended them; and they are
delivered with so much plainness as to exclude all doubt, respecting the duties
incumbent on us. Those doctrines of Christianity, which we are able fully to
comprehend, are consonant to our natural notions of the Deity; and those which
are too sublime to be fully comprehended, appear, as sar as we are able to
apprehend them, worthy of God to reveal. Both one and the other have a direct
tendency to inculcate holiness; and by that means to qualisy mankind for the
enjoyment of everlasting felicity. If the articles of faith and practice,
nenessary to salvation, are not clearly and intelligibly revealed in the sacred
Scriptures, mankind have yet to learn the way to everlasting life.

Protestants are also fully persuaded, that the perspicuity of the Scriptures
in all necessary articles, may be fairly argued from the design of God in
making a revelation of his will. From a passage already cited it appears, that
the express design of God in giving the holy Scriptures by divine revelation,
was "that the man of God may be perfect thoroughly furnished to all good works."
Now should it be granted that the Scriptures, considered as a rule of faith and
practice, are absolutely perfect; yet if this rule be delivered in such dark
and intricate terms, as to be unintelligible to the very persons, for whose use
it was designed, it certainly can be no rule to them. On such a supposition,
neither their faith, nor their practice, could be regulated by it. It cannot be
imagined that God, who is not only our Master, but our kind and compassionate
Father, should give us a rule of conduct, incapable of being comprehended. To
ascribe such a conduct to him, would be to suppose him either incapable of
revealing the things that concern our salvation in an intelligible manner; or
else, mistaken in thinking he had revealed them with sufficient clearness, when
he had done it in a manner above our comprehension. The former supposition
would be a direct impeachment of the power of God, and the latter of his wisdom.

Protestants further argue the perspicuity of the Scriptures from the testimony
of the Scriptures concerning themselves. To this purpose are the words of Moses
to the Israelites. Deuteronomy. xxx. II, 14.
"This commandment, says he, which I command thee this day, is not hidden from
thee, neither is it far off. But the word is very high thee, in thy mouth and
in thy heart, that thou may do it." The royal Psalmist assures us, Pf. xix. 8.
that "the statutes of the Lord are right; the commandment of the Lord is pure,
enlightening the eyes; Pf. cxix. 105.
that the word of God was a lamp to his feet and a light to his path; v. 99.
and that through meditating on the divine law, he had more understanding than
all his teachers." The apostle Peter 2 Epist. i. 19.
enjoins it on us to "give heed to the word of prophecy, as to a light shining
in a dark place, till the day dawn and the day star arise in our heart." The
evangelist John tells us, Chapter xx. 31.
that "his gospel was written that we might believe that Jesus was the Christ;
and that believing, we might have life through his name." And the Apostle Paul
affirms 1 Timothy iii. 25.
that "the holy Scriptures are able to make us wise unto salvation." Now unless
the Scriptures are clear enough to be understood, we cannot be the wiser for
them; and unless they are so, in all necessary points, they cannot make us wise
unto salvation.

From these evidences of the perspicuity of sacred Scriptures, the presumption
is strong that the Romanists make a false inference from the words of St Peter,
who savs 2 Timothy iii. 16.
that "in the epistles of Paul there are some things hard to be understood,
which the unlearned and unstable wrest, as they do the other Scriptures, to
their own destruction;" when they conclude from them, that the Scriptures are
not sufficiently clear in all points, wherein our salvation is concerned; but
that "the misunderstanding and misinterpreting them, may endanger our eternal
salvation." And that they have actually made a false inference, will appear
from an attentive consideration of the passage itself. For,

The very thing which the Romanists bring this text to disprove, is evidently
implied in the words of the Apostle. It is only some things in the epistles of
Paul and in the other Scriptures, that are hard to be understood. The other
things, therefore, are clear and intelligible. There is no danger of
misunderstanding them; provided they are studied with care and attention,
together with a sixed determination to do, as well as to know the will of God.
There is not the least occasion of keeping the Scriptures from the common
people; for the Apostle allowed the free use of them to the unlearned otherwise
they could not have wrested them. -- Further,

Those who are called unlearned and unstable by the Apostle, were not such as
are called so by the Romanists in this controversy. They were not such persons
as, in modern times, are esteemed unlearned; namely, persons unacquainted with
the liberal arts and sciences: But they were such as had not learned the
fundamental points of religion, and were unsettled in the principles of
Christianity. They were persons of the same character with those whom St. Paul
compares Ephesians. iv. 14.
to "children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
doctrine." Such unstable persons may easily be supposed capable of
misunderstanding, and even of wresting the Scriptures to their own destruction;
notwithstanding that every article, necessary to salvation, is delivered with
all needful plainness. To apply the words, therefore, to the illiterate part of
mankind in general, and not to those who are unlearned and unsettled in the
principles of Christianity, is a shameful perversion of them.

It is worthy of notice, that the Apostle does not forbid these very men the
use of the Scriptures, or even the reading the things hard to be understood.
Their destruction was not owing to their reading them, but was wholly
occasioned by their wresting and abusing them. Now, since the Apostle does not
order the Scriptures to be kept from persons, who so grossly abused them, we
may safely conclude that he never intended they should be kept from the common
people in general; merely because some persons in every age might probably
abuse them, as the unstable then did. The true inference to be drawn from this
text is directly contrary to the conclusion of the Romanists. Instead of
denving the common people the free use of the Scriptures, they ought rather to
be exhorted to study them with the greater care, diligence and humility; lest
they should be left to pervert them to their own destruction, as the unlearned
and unstable did in the days of the Apostle.

It may be observed further, that the things which the Apostle says are hard to
be understood, and which were wrested by some to their destruction, are things,
of which Christians may in some measure be ignorant, without endangering their
salvation. They are not, as the Romanists maintain, things necessary to
salvation, which are spoken of, either with respect to Paul's epistles, or to
the other Scriptures. Peter had been treating, in the context, of the new
heavens and the new earth, and of the dissolution of the world at the second
visible coming of Christ. Concerning these subjects, which are also treated of
in the other Scriptures, there are several things confessedly hard to be
understood. But then, it is not necessary, that the humble, believing Christian
should fully understand them, in order to this being saved at Christ's second
appearance. A general expectation of those things, where there cannot be a full
comprehension of them, will so influence the heart and life of a pious
Christian, that he will be found of his Judge in peace.

Further, there being some things in the Scriptures hard to be understood,
ought not to be made an objection against their perspicuity and utility. Some
subjects, in their own nature, are more difficult than others; and require more
study and attention to understand them. Notwithstanding such subjects are
handled with justness and propriety, and with as much perspicuity as they will
admit, yet to hasty and inconsiderate persons there may be some things
concerning them, hard to be understood. This is frequently the case with the
most judicious and accurate compositions. But then it must be remembered, that
the oftener and the more carefully such compositions are read, the better will
they be understood, and the more will they be admired. And this is a glory that
does, by way of eminence, belong to the sacred Scriptures.

It is also worthy our observation, that the difficult passages of Scripture
which have been abused by some, have had a very good effect on others, even in
the lower classes of life. By endeavoring to attain a competent knowledge of
such passages, they have been led into a more thorough acquaintance with the
Scriptures in general; and have had their lives suitably influenced by the
important truths contained in them. Since these have been the happy effects of
studying the abstruse parts of Scripture, we may safely abide by the Protestant
doctrine, that THE SCRIPTURES ARE SUFFICIENTLY CLEAR AND PERSPICUOUS IN ALL
POINTS THAT IMMEDIATELY CONCERN OUR ETERNAL SALVATION.

Were the tenets of the Church of Rome, respecting tradition, merely the
private sentiments of some speculative men in that church, they would not have
deserved the notice we have taken of them. But when they are considered as the
chief supports of that amazing sabrick of worldly policy, which the Pope and
his clergy have reared upon the foundation of Christ and the Apostles, they
cannot undergo too strict an examination. Tradition, or traditive
interpretations of Scripture, lie as the foundation of all the distinguishing
tenets of Popery. The Church of Rome, finding that, in many instances, she
failed of plain scriptural evidence to prove her avowed articles of faith and
to justify the practices she had adopted, has discovered her worldly wisdom, by
declaring tradition to be of equal authority with the Scriptures. However, by
doing so, she has admitted to her bosom, doctrines and precepts, subversive of
those inculcated by Christ and his Apostles. By means of her traditions, she
has made the commandment of God of none effect.

In the bull of Pope PIUS IV. bearing date at Rome. A.D. 1564. printed with the
acts of the Council of Trent, a FORM OF FAITH is drawn up, which was extracted
from the decrees of that Council. This form of faith, every one, who enters
into holy orders, is bound by solemn oath not only to believe, but to maintain
and defend, and teach the people under his charge; and that under pain of the
displeasure of Almighty God, and his holy Apostles Peter and Paul. This creed
is the standard of modern Popery, and the last twelve articles of it contain
the distinguishing tenets of the Romish Church. These I shall now rehearse: For
the rehearsal of them, without any commentary, will be sufficient to justify
the charge we bring against that church, of making the commandments of God of
none effect by her traditions. The articles are as follows.

"Article XIII. I most firmly admit and embrace apostolical and ecclesiastical
traditions, and all other observations and constitutions of the same church.

XIV. I do admit the holy Scriptures in the same sense that holy mother church
does, whose business it is to judge of the true sense and interpretation of
them; and I will interpret them according to the unanimous consent of the
fathers.

XV. I do profess and believe that there are seven sacraments of the new law
truly and properly so called, instituted by Jesus Christ our Lord, and
necessary to the salvation of mankind, though not all of them to every one,
viz. Baptism, Confirmation, Eucharisst, Penance, Extreme Unction, Orders,
Marriage; and that they do confer grace; and that of thesse, Baptism,
Consirmation and Orders, may not be repeated without sacrilege. I do also
receive and admit the received and approved rites of the catholic church in her
solemn administration of the abovesaid sacraments.

XVI I do embrace and receive all and every thing that has been defined and
declared by the holy Council of Trent concerning original sin and justication.

XVII. I do also profess, that in the Mass there is offered unto God a true,
proper, and propitiatory sacrifice for the quick and the dead, and that in the
most holy sacrament of the Eucharist there is truly, really, and substantially
the body and blood, together with the soul and divinity of our Lord Jesus
Christ; and that there is a conversion made of the whole substance of the bread
into the body, and of the whole substance of the wine into the blood; which
conversion the catholic church calls TRANSUBSTANTIATION.

XVIII. I consess that under one kind only, whole and entire Chrisst, and a
true sacrament, is taken and received.

XIX. I do firmly believe that there is a Purgatory, and that the souls, kept
prisoners there, do receive help by the suffrages of the faithful.

XX. I do likewise believe, that the Saints reigning together with Chrisst, are
to be worshipped and prayed unto; and that they do offer prayers unto God for
us; and that their relics are to be had in veneration.

XXI. I do mosst firmly assert, that the Images of Chrisst, of the blessed
Virgin, the Mother of God; and of other Saints, ought to be had and retained;
and that due honor and veneration ought to be given to them.

XXII. I do affirm, that the power of Indulgences was lest by Chrisst in the
Church; and that the use of them is very beneficial to christian people.

XXIII. I do acknowledge the holy, catholic, and apostolic Roman Church, to be
the Mother and Mistress of all Churches; and I do promise and swear true
obedience to the Bishop of Rome, the successor of St. Peter, the Prince of the
Apostles and Vicar of Jesus Chist.

XXIV. I do undoubtedly receive and profess all other things, which have been
delivered, defined and declared by the sacred Canons and ecumenical Councils,
and especially by the holy Synod of Trent; and all things contrary thereunto,
and all heresies condemned rejected and anathematised by the Church, I do
likewise condemn, reject and anathematise."

Including these articles, there are above 100 points of doctrine laid down by
the Council of Trent, of which no traces can be found in the Scriptures. To be
consistent with itself, the Council has denounced an anathema upon all such as
do not believe them. To point out the repugnancy of the aforementioned articles
to the sacred Scriptures, would exceed the limits assigned to this discourse.
It must, therefore, be left for the employment of some future lecturers.

The present discourse cannot be closed better, than by reciting a memorable
passage from Chillingworth's proof that Protestants are no heretics.
Chillingworth, who had been converted from Popery by STUDYING THE SCRIPTURES,
addressing himself to a writer of the Roman Church, does, in this summary
manner, plead the Protestant cause.

"Know then, Sir, that when I say the religion of Protestants is in prudence to
be preserred before yours; as on the one side I do not understand by your
religion the doctrine of Bellarmine or Baronius, or any other private man
amongst you, nor the doctrine of the Sorbonne or of the Jesuits, or of the
Dominicans. or of any other particular company among you; but that wherein you
all agree, or protess to agree, the doctrine of the Council of Frent: So
accordingly on the other side, by the religion of Protestants. I do not
understand the doctrine of Luther, or Calvin, or Melancton, nor the confession
of Augusta, or Geneva, nor the Catechism of Heidelberg, nor the articles of the
Church of England, no nor the harmony of Protestant confessions; but that
wherein they all agree, and which they all subscribe with greater harmony, as a
perfect rule of their faith and actions, that is the BIBLE.

"The BIBLE, I say, the BIBLE only, is the religion of Protestants, whatsoever
else they believe besides it: And the plain, irrefragable, and indisputable
consequences of it, well may they hold as matter of opinion; but as matter of
faith and religion, neither can they with coherence to their own grounds
believe it themselves, nor require the belief of it of others, without most
high and schismatical presumption. I for my part, after a long, and (as I
verily believe and hope) impartial search of the true way to eternal happiness.
do profess plainly that I cannot find any rest for the sole of my foot, but
upon this rock only.

"I plainly see, and with mine own eyes, that there are Popes against Popes,
Councils against Councils, some Fathers against others, the same Fathers
against themselves, a consent of Fathers of one age against a consent of
Fathers of another age, the Church of one age against the Church of another
age: Traditive interpretations of Scripture are pretended, but there are few,
or none to be found: No tradition but only of the Scripture, can derive itself
from the fountain, but may be plainly proved to be brought in, in such an age
after Christ, or that such an age it was not in. In a word, there is no
sufficient certainty but of SCRIPTURE only, for any considering man to build
upon. This therefore, and this only, I have reason to believe: This I will
profess, according to this I will live, and for this, it there be occasion, I
will not only willingly, but even gladly, lose my life, though I should be
sorry that Christians should take it from me.

"Propose me any thing out of this book, and require whether I believe it or
no, and seem it never so incomprehensible to human reason, I will subscribe it
with hand and heart, as knowing no demonstration can be stronger than this, GOD
HAS SAID SO, THEREFORE IT IS TRUE. In other things, I will take no man's
liberty of judging from him; neither shall any man take mine from me. I will
think no man the worse man. nor the worse christian, I will love no man the
less, for differing in opinion from me. And what measure I mete to others, I
expect from them again. I am fully assured that God does not, and therefore men
ought not to require any more of any man than this, to believe the Scripture to
be God's word, to endeavor to sind out the true sense of it, and to live
according to it."

That all, who receive their education in this place, may do so, God of his
infinite mercy grant, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.


