AN ADDRESS of the CONGRESS To the INHABITANTS of the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.
FRIENDS AND COUNTRYMEN,
THREE years have now passed away, since the commencement of the present war. A
war without parellel in the annals of mankind. It has displayed a spectacle,
the most solemn that can possibly be exhibited. On one side, we behold fraud
and violence laboring in the service of despotism; on the other, virtue and
fortitude supporting and establishing the rights of human nature.

You cannot but remember how reluctantly we were dragged into this arduous
contest; and how repeatedly, with the earnestness of humble entreaty, we
supplicated a redress of our grievances from him who ought to have been the
father of his people. In vain did we implore his protection: In vain appeal to
the justice, the generosity, of Englishmen -- of men, who had been the
guardians, the assertors and vindicators of liberty, through a succession of
ages: Men, who, with their swords, had established the firm barrier of freedom,
and cemented it with the blood of heroes. Every effort was vain. For, even
whilst we were prostrated at the foot of the throne, that fatal blow was
struck, which has separated us for ever. Thus spurned, contemned and insulted
-- thus driven by our enemies into measures, which our souls abhorred -- we
made a solemn appeal to the tribunal of unerring wisdom and justice. To that
Almighty Ruler of Princes, whose kingdom is over all.

WE were then quite defenseless. Without arms, without ammunition, without
clothing, without ships, without money, without officers skilled in war; with
no other reliance but the bravery of our people, and the justice of our cause.
We had to contend with a nation great in arts and in arms, whose fleets covered
the ocean, whose banners had waved in triumph through every quarter of the globe.
However unequal this contest our weakness was still farther increased by the
enemies which America had nourished in her bosom. Thus exposed, on the one
hand, to external force and internal divisions; on the other, to be compelled
to drink of the bitter cup of slavery, and to go sorrowing all our lives long;
in this sad alternative, we chose the former. To this alternative we were
reduced by men, who, had they been animated by one spark of generosity, would
have disdained to take such mean advantage of our situation; or, had they paid
the least regard to the rules of justice, would have considered with
abhorrence, a proposition to injure those, who had faithfully fought their
battles, and industriously contributed to rear the edifice of their glory.

But, however great the injustice of our foes, in commencing this war, it is by
no means equal to the cruelty with which they have conducted it. The course of
their armies is marked by rapine and devastation. Thousands without distinction
of age or sex, have been driven from their peaceful abodes, to encounter the
rigours of inclement seasons; and the face of Heaven has been insulted by the
wanton conflagration of defenseless towns. Their victories have been followed
by the cool murder of men, no longer able to resist; and those who escaped from
the first act of carnage, have been exposed, by cold, hunger and nakedness, to
wear out a miserable existence in the tedious hours of confinement, or to
become the destroyers of their countrymen, of their friends, perhaps, dreadful
idea! of their parents or children. Nor was this the outrageous barbarity of an
individual, but a system of deliberate malice, stamped with the concurrence of
the British legislature, and sanctioned with all the formalities of law. Nay,
determined to dissolve the closest bonds of society, they have stimulated
servants to slay their masters, in the peaceful hour of domestic security. And,
as if all this were insufficient to slake their thirst of blood, the blood of
brothers, of unoffended brothers, they have excited the Indians against us; and
a General, who calls himself a christian, a follower of the merciful Jesus,
has dared to proclaim to all the world his intention of letting loose against
us whole hosts of savages, whose rule of warfare is promiscuous carnage, who
rejoice to murder the infant smiling in its mother's arms, to inflict on their
prisoners the most excruciating torments, and exhibit scenes of horror from
which nature recoils.

WERE it possible, they would have added to this terrible system, for they have
offered the inhabitants of those States to be exported by their merchants, to
the sickly, baneful climes of India, there to perish. An offer not accepted of,
merely from the impracticability of carrying it into execution.

NOTWITHITANDING these great provocations, we have treated such of them as fell
into our hands, with tenderness, and studiously endeavored to alleviate the
afflictions of their captivity. This conduct we have pursued so far, as to be
by them stigmatized with cowardice, and by our friends with folly. But our
dependence was not upon man. It was upon Him, who has commanded us to love our
enemies, and to render good for evil. And what can be more wonderful then the
manner of our deliverances? How often have we been reduced to distress, and yet
been raised up? When the means to prosecute the war have been wanting to us,
have not our foes themselves been rendered instrumental in provided them? This
has been done in such a variety of instances, so peculiarly marked almost by
the direct interposition of Providence, that not to feel and acknowledge his
protection, would be the height of impious ingratitude.

AT length that God of battles, in whom was our trust, has conducted us through
the paths of danger and distress, to the thresholds of security. It has now
become morally certain, that, if we have courage to persevere, we shall
establish our liberties and independence -- The haughty Prince, who spurned us
from his feet with contumely and disdain, -- and the parliament which
proscribed us, now descend to offer terms of accommodation. Whilst in the full
career of victory, they pulled off the mark, and avowed their intended
despotism. But, having lavished in vain the blood and treasure of their
subjects, in pursuit of this execrable purpose, they now endeavor to ensnare
us with the insidious offers of peace. They would seduce you into a dependence,
which necessarily, inevitably leads to the most humiliating slavery. And do
they believe that you will accept these fatal terms? Because you have suffered
the distresses of war, do they suppose that you will basely lick the dust
before the feet of your destroyers? Can there be an American so lost to the
feelings which adorn human nature? To the generous pride, the elevation, the
dignity of freedom! Is there a man who would not abhor a dependence upon those,
who have deluged his country in the blood of its inhabitants? We cannot suppose
this; neither is it possible that they themselves can expect to make many
converts. What then is their intention? Is it not to lull you with the
fallacious hopes of peace until they can assemble new armies, to prosecute
their nefarious designs? If this is not the case, why do they strain every
nerve to levy men throughout their Islands? Why do they meanly court each
little tyrant of Europe to sell them his unhappy slaves? Why do they continue
to embitter the minds of the savages against you? Surely this is not the way to
conciliate the affections of America. Be not, therefore, deceived. You have
still to expect one severe conflict. Your foreign alliances, though they secure
your independence, cannot (...) your country from desolation, your habitations
from plunder, your wives from insult or violation, nor your children from
butchery. Foiled in their principal design, you must expect to feel the rage of
disappointed ambition. Arise then! To your tents! And gird you for the battle.
It is time to turn the headlong current of vengeance upon the head of the
destroyer. They have filled up the measure of their abominations and like ripe
fruit, must soon drop from the tree. Although much is done, yet much remains to
do. Expect not peace, whilst any corner of America is in possession of your
foes. You must drive them away from this land of promise, a land flowing indeed
with milk and honey. Your brethren, at the extremities of the Continent,
already implore your friendship and protection. It is your duty to grant their
request. They hunger and thirst after liberty. Be it yours to dispense to them
the heavenly gift. And what is there now to prevent it!

AFTER the unremitted efforts of our enemies, we are stronger than before. Nor
can the wicked emissaries, who so assiduously labor to promote their cause,
point out any one reason to suppose that we shall not receive daily accessions
of strength. They tell you, it is true, that your money is of no value; and
your debts so enormous they can never be paid. But we tell you, that if Britain
prosecutes the war another campaign, that single campaign will cost her more
than we have hitherto expended. And yet these men would prevail upon you to
take up that immense load, and for it to sacrifice your dearest rights. For,
surely, there is no man so absurd as to suppose, that the least shadow of
liberty can be preserved in a dependent connection with Great Britain. From the
nature of the thing it is evident, that the only security you could obtain,
would be, the justice and moderation of a parliament, who have sold the rights
of their own constituents And this slender security is still farther weakened,
by the consideration that it was pledged to rebels (as they unjustly call the
good people of these States) with whom they think they are not bound to keep
faith by any law whatsoever.

Thus would you be east bound among men, whose minds (by your virtuous
resistance) have been sharpened to the keenest edge of revenge. Thus would your
children, and your childrens children, be by you forced to a participation in
all their debts, their wars, their luxuries, and their crimes. And this mad,
this impious system they would lead you to adopt, because of the derangement of
your finances.

IT becomes you deeply to reflect on this subject. Is there a country on earth,
which has such resources for the payment of her debts as America? Such an
extensive territory? So fertile, so blessed in its climate and productions?
Surely there is none. Neither is there any, to which the wise Europeans will
sooner confide their property. What then are the reasons that your money has
depreciated? Because no taxes have been imposed to carry on the war. Because
your commerce has been interrupted by your enemy's fleets. Because their
armies have ravaged and desolated a part of your country. Because their agents
have villainously counterfeited your bills. Because extortioners among you,
inflamed with the lust of gain, have added to the price of every article of
life. And because weak men have been artfully led to believe that it is of no
value. How is this dangerous disease to be remedied? Let those among you, who
have leisure and opportunity, collect the moneys which individuals in their
neighborhood are desirous of placing in the public funds. Let the several
legislatures sink their respective emissions, that so, there being but one kind
of bills, there may be less danger of counterfeits. Refrain a little while from
purchasing those things which are not absolutely necessary, that so those who
have engrossed commodities may suffer (as they deservedly will) the loss of
their ill gotten hoards, by reason of the commerce with foreign nations, which
their fleets will protect. Above all, bring forward your armies into the field.
Trust not to appearances of peace or safety. Be assured that, unless you
persevere, you will be exposed to every species of barbarity. But if you exert
the means of defense which God and Nature have given you, the time will soon
arrive, when every man shall sit under his own vine, and under his own
fig tree, and there shall be none to make him afraid.

THE sweets of a free commerce with every part of the earth, will soon
reimburse you for all the losses you have sustained. The full tide of wealth
will flow in upon your shores, free from the arbitrary impositions of those,
whose interest, and whose declared policy it was, to check your growth. Your
interests will be fostered and nourished by government that derive their power
from your p^ant, and will therefore be obliged by the influence of cogent
necessity, to exert it in your favor.

It is to obtain these things that we call for your strenuous, unremitted
exertions. Yet do not believe that you have been or can be saved merely by your
own strength. No! It is by the assistance of Heaven, and this you must
assiduously cultivate, by acts which Heaven approves. Thus shall the power and
the happiness of these sovereign, free and independent States, founded on the
virtue of their citizens, increase, extend and endure, until the Almighty shall
blot out all the empires of the earth.

By order of Congress. HENRY LAURENS, President.

In CONGRESS, May 9, 1778. RESOLVED,
THAT it be recommended to Ministers of the Gospel, of all denominations, to
read, or cause to be read, immediately after divine service, the above address
to the inhabitants of the United States of America, in their respective
churches and chapels, and other places of religious worship.

Published by order of Congress. CHARLES THOMSON, Secretary.

STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS BAY.
COUNCIL CHAMGER, May 23, 1778.
ORDERED, That a printed copy of the foregoing Address, be transmitted to the
several Ministers of the Gospel of every denomination in this State, to be read
to their respective congregations, agreeable to the recommendation of Congress
aforesaid.

In the name, and by order of Council. JOHN AVERY, Dep. Sec'y.

BAY-STATE: BOSTON: Printed by POWARS and WILLIS, for the Honorable the COUNCIL
of said STATE.


