DR. DANA'S ELECTION-SERMON.
MAY 13th, 1779.

A SERMON, PREACHED BEFORE THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF CONNECTICUT, AT
HARTFORD, ON THE DAY OF THE ANNIVERSARY ELECTION, MAY 13, 1779.

BY JAMES DANA, D. D. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN WALLINGFORD.

At ROMAE ^^ere in servitium Consules, Patres, Eques; quanto quis illustrior,
tanto magis fal^i ac festinantes, vultuque composito. -- Insurgere paulatim
AUGUSTUS, munia senatus, magistratuum, legum in se trahere, paucis nobilium
adversantibus: cum caeteri, quanto quis servitio promptior, opibus et honoribus
extollerentur; ac novis ex rebus aucti tuta et praesentia quam vetera et
periculosa mallent. Manebant tamen etiam tum vestigia morientis libertatis.
TACIT. HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN.

M DCC LXXIX.

At a General Assembly of the Governor and Company of the State of Connecticut,
holden at Hartford, on the Second Thursday of May, A. D. 1779.
ORDERED, That the Hon. JABEZ HAMLIN, Esquire; and Col. STREET HALL, return the
Thanks of this Assembly to the Reverend Doctor JAMES DANA, for his Sermon
delivered before the General Assembly, on the anniversary Election, 13th May,
1779, and request a Copy thereof that it may be printed.

A true Copy of Record, Examined, by GEORGE WYLLYS, Sec'ry.

AN ELECTION SERMON.
JEREMIAH XVIII. 9, 10. And at what instant I shall speak concerning a nation,
and concerning a kingdom, to build and to plant it: If it do evil in my sight,
that it obey not my voice, then I will repent of the good wherewith I said I
would benefit them.
THIS passage of sacred writ is peculiarly adapted to infant states. From
hence, and the two verses next proceeding, we collect the general rule of the
divine allotments toward political combinations -- what will, on the one hand,
assuredly recover them from the brink of ruin -- what may, on the other ^and,
prevent their exaltation when favorable prospects open upon them.

THE present hour in the sanctuary will accordingly be devoted to a subject,
which may at no time hereafter be so seasonable. And the candor of this
venerable auditory is relied on, while I offer some sketches on the providence
of GOD in the rise and fall of empires -- the vestiges of it encouraging us
that the American confederacy may be built up -- the obligations of a people
for whom great things have been done, and upon whom such prospects are opening
-- the danger, in our circumstances, of presuming on the smiles of heaven, and
the quarters from which this danger is to be apprehended.

THE near relation these things have to the situation of our public affairs
will apologize for my not calling your attention so particularly to the origin
of government -- the ends of magistracy -- the character of a good ruler -- and
the duty of subjects.

FIRST, The governing providence of GOD is presupposed -- a doctrine clear from
the necessary dependence of creatures -- the uniform course of nature, and
special interpositions -- implied in the supposition of a revelation. GOD'S
government is alike manifest in the natural and moral world. To a Being of
infinite perfection all things are alike easy. It is, moreover, of great
moment, that the dominion of the SOVEREIGN of the universe be considered as
guided by unerring wisdom, and immutable holiness and goodness. In this view
our subject represents it. And hence it is equally the object of fear, pious
resignation, filial joy and confidence.

THIS doctrine, the foundation of natural religion, revealed illustrates. The
LORD has prepared his throne in the heavens; and his kingdom rules over all.
Promotion comes neither from the cast, nor from the west, nor from the south,
but GOD is judge: He pulls down one, and sets up another. His counsel
shall stand. It is in his family, the universe, as in a great house, wherein
are vessels not only of gold and silver; but also of wood and of earth; and
some to honor, and some to dishonor: -- Words which, however immediately
intended, may be accommodated to different orders in a civil community, and the
rank different kingdoms hold among their neighbors. Some are strong, and others
weak; some are above, and others beneath; some are the head, and others the
tail. 2. TIM. ii. 20. DRUT. xxviii. 13.


WHATEVER instruments are employed in building and planting kingdoms, the
divine hand is to be ultimately eyed. All power is of God. HE raises up, as
well as removes, the mighty man, and the man of war, the judge, and the
prudent, the counselor, the cunning artificer, and the eloquent orator, who,
in different ways, contribute to the exaltation of their people. To HIM are to
be ascribed their abilities, the time of their coming on the stage to assert
the rights of their country and mankind, their sphere of action, the acceptance
of their services, and term of their usefullness. And to whom but HIM, who
turns the hearts of an whole people as the hearts of one man, shall we
attribute the union of public bodies? the concurrence and strenuous exertions
of all ranks for the common safety?

THE same Being turns wise men backward, divides public councils, sends civil
discord into kingdoms, defeats military enterprises however well concerted, and
fills with terror those who seemed to be made without fear. At thy rebuke, O
GOD of Jacob, the stout-hearted are spoiled, and none of the men of might find
their hands. Thou cuttest off the spirit of princes, and art terrible to the
kings of the earth. The wrath of man shall praise thee; the remainder of wrath
shall thou restrain. Good rulers are his ministers for good. Cruel tyrants are
the rod of his anger. I have created the waster to destroy. The MOST HIGH
rules in the kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will, and SETS
UP OVER IT THE BASEST OF MEN.

THESE things imply no other divine influence than consists with the moral
perfections of the DEITY and human liberty. Far be it from GOD that he should
do wickedly.

IF it is asked, Why does not GOD govern the world without the instrumentality
of subordinate agents? As well might it be asked, Why did he not determine to
save the world without the intervention of a mediator? With respect to both it
should satisfy us, that so it seems good in his fight.

"AT what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom,
to build and to plant it." From what vestiges of providence may we infer, that
this language comes addressed to us? It were to be wished that this SECOND
enquiry could be answered by referring to the traces of a real reformation.
This would be the strongest assurance of the continuance and enlargement of our
liberties. But, O America! saved of the LORD, have thou not revolted more and
more?

DIVINE providence does not precipitate events: There is an harmony in its
distributions. Bodies politic, like the body natural, have their periods of
growing to maturity and decay. Some States go to decay sooner than others, as
some persons hasten on themselves a premature old age by various excesses. But
judging from analogy, is it to be supposed, ill-deserving as we are, that the
desolation of this country is near? a country rescued more than once in
circumstances seemingly desperate. From the justice of our cause, past
salvations, and present prospects, may we not hope, that for his own name's
sake the GOD of our fathers will make known his salvation in the sight of all
nations by humbling our oppressors?

WE cannot look into futurity. This is HIS prerogative who sees the end from
the beginning. But we call to mind his wonders of old. When our ancestors
sought a retreat from oppression, he made a path for them through the sea and
furnished them a table in the wilderness. When few in number, strangers in the
land, and encompassed by savage enemies -- when help was far off, he drove out
the heathen with his hand, increased our fathers, and caused the fear of them
to fall on the enemy. The hand which planted, has hitherto protected, this
vine -- at no time more remarkably, perhaps, than in our own. Events so
conspicuous, so much beyond all human foresight, as those we have been
witnesses to in this war, must impress such as disregard the common course of
providence. Permit me to mention in this view the debility of the country when
the war began -- the steps by which it has collected strength and firmness --
the flow progress of the enemy -- stores taken from them or brought us from
abroad -- altogether unexpected internal resources (fruits of inventive
necessity) -- the success of our military operations where we lest expected
success, when and where we were ready to despair -- the frustration of them
when a spirit of confidence possessed us -- the interference of foreign powers
-- the humiliating circumstances to which our potent enemies are reduced. Such
a number and variety of mavelous events seldom take place in an age. Whosoever is
wise, and will observe these things; even they shall understand the
loving kindness of the LORD.

WE are brought to an ERA as remote from our wishes, as it was from our
expectation, till the present struggle. We aimed at nothing more than a
constitutional connection with Britain. But he who is wonderful in counsel has
spoken, (and we cannot but obey his voice) that we need not go over the sea for
law. The MOST HIGH divides to the nations their inheritance, and separateth
the sons of Adam, determining the bounds of their habitation. His providence,
step by step, has called us to assume an independent rank among the nations.
May the new empire, the foundation of which, under the conduct of his
overruling hand, is already laid, be built up, so as to secure public liberty
to America as long as the sun and moon shall endure. May the example provoke to
emulation the numerous kingdoms, from which arbitrary sway has long since
deforced this inestimable blessing.

THE powers of the human mind are not exerted, or known, till necessity calls
them forth. Like treasures hid in the bowels of the earth, unless sought for,
unless we dig deep, they cannot be found. Thus it is with the abilities and
resources of a country.

A CONFEDERACY between free states, as the American, may have advantages
superior to any civil establishment. If a republic is small, it is destroyed by
a foreign force; if it be large, it is ruined by an internal imperfection. This
twofold inconvenience is remedied by a confederate republic -- a kind of
assemblage of societies that constitute a new one, capable of increasing by
means of new associations. It was these associations that contributed so long
to the prosperity of GREECE. By these the ROMANS attacked the universe; and by
these alone the universe withstood them. For when Rome was arrived to her
highest pitch of grandeur, it was the associations behind the Danube and the
Rhine, associations formed by the terror of her arms, that enabled the
barbarians to resist her. Spirit of Laws, Vol. I. p. 159, 160.


THE American confederacy, from the circumstances of it is formation -- the
necessity impelling to it -- the situation of the confederate States, with the
common interest European nations will have in protecting them -- and the
strength it will acquire by improvements in husbandry, manufactures and
commerce, new settlements in the wilderness, other states joining the union,
etc. bids fair to endure, when the power now armed against it shall be broken
in pieces -- When, perhaps, even the remembrance of it shall be blotted out
from under heaven -- Or this only written for a memorial, that it brought all
the horrors of a bloody war on a country which looked up to it as a parent --
that having first thrust out her children, these, taken under the patronage of
that Being who is the refuge of the oppressed, whose is the earth and the
fullness thereof, derived from him, and him only, a goodly heritage -- that
their unnatural parent wantonly claimed the fruit of their unparrelleled toil
and perils, and attempted by famine, fire and sword to compel them to
surrender it; but failing in the undertaking, precipitated her own ruin.

LIGHT has risen to us in obscurity, and shone more and more. Wherefore,

THIRDLY, What are the obligations of a people for whom such great things have
been done? upon whom such prospects are opening? To conciliate the favor of
the Almighty patron of our rights, we must, as our subject recommends, obey his
voice.

GOD speaks to men in his word and providence as clearly as when he uttered his
voice from the excellent glory. When we view him as the FATHER of the whole
family in heaven and earth -- making his sun to rise on the evil and good, and
sending rain on the just and unjust -- exercising loving kindness, judgment,
and righteousness in the earth -- reconciling the world to himself in JESUS
CHRIST -- leading sinners to repentance by the riches of his goodness and
forbearance; but whetting his sword, and taking hold on judgment, if the
degenerate turn not -- When we reflect further, that the love of GOD and our
neighbor is more than whole burnt offerings and sacrifices -- that faith
working by love is the sum of christianity -- that the kingdom of GOD is
righteousness, and peace, and joy in the HOLY GHOST -- We are hence
sufficiently informed what it is to hearken unto GOD, to obey his voice.

THE love of GOD is the first and great commandment; the love of our neighbor
the second, and like unto it. Such is the similarity and connection between
these two commandments, that he who loves not his brother, whom he has seen,
cannot love GOD, whom he has not seen. The exhortation, Look not every man on
his own things, but every man also on the things of others, could not have been
enforced by an argument of comparable weight with that the apostle subjoins;
Let this mind be in you, which was in CHRIST JESUS. The strength and extent of
this divine principle were displayed in him beyond all example. He went about
doing good; and, having humbled himself from the form of GOD to that of a
servant, in the likeness of men, gave himself a ransom for all. His religion is
better adapted to promote the welfare of society, by making it is members what
they ought to be, than all the maxims and institutions of the wisest
philosophers and legislators. Can the rejection of such a religion consist with
a public spirit? Men who affect to despise this heavenly institution, may boast
of an exalted benevolence and love of their country. But however qualified they
may be in other respects to serve their country, nothing could more fully prove
them enemies of it, than their vilifying a religion admirably adapted to
promote peace and mutual good will; inculcating those public affections which
build up a commonwealth, render it as a city compact together, and to it is
enemies terrible as an army with banners. May we never see the time in this
Christian State, when the contemners of a religion so beneficial to communities
shall be possessed of public trust. This would be to advance men who publicly
insult their country, and the cities of our GOD; who pour obloquy on the
brightest character that ever appeared in human form, the friend of all
mankind, GOD manifest in the flesh

FURTHER: Where the spirit of the LORD is, there is liberty. Arbitrary
principles destroy the social affections. They suppose the greater part made
for compliance and servitude. They transpose the order, and militate with the
designs of providence, which has equally in the state as in the church
appointed the GREATEST, servants of all. Principles which rob mankind of their
rights civil and religious, are not very compatible with the love of our people.

WHETHER civil or religious usurpation has been greatest, is difficult to say.
Tyrannical rulers have generally favored the views of tyrannical
ecclesiastics, in return for the services these have rendered them. Together
they have deluged the earth in blood. A better reason cannot, probably be given
for the late establishment of popery by a British parliament, while the
protestant religion, founded in principles of liberty, is barely tolerated.
Popery can prevail only under an arbitrary government, implying a general
ignorance of civil rights. Hence the preservation of our religion depends on
the continuance of a free government. Let our allies have their eyes opened on
the blessings of such a government, and they will at once renounce their
superstition. On the other hand, should we lose our freedom, this will prepare
the way to the introduction of popery.

PUBLIC happiness may be enjoyed either under a monarchy or aristocracy, on
supposition of public spirit in princes, or nobles. But faithful history scarce
permits us to make the supposition. "Ambition joined to idleness, and baseness
to pride, a desire of obtaining riches without labor, and an aversion to truth,
flattery* treason perfidy, violation of engagements, contempt of civil duties,
fear of the prince's virtue hope from his weakness* but above all a perpetual
ridicule cast upon virtue* are the characteristicks by which most courtiers in
all ages and countries have been consta^tly distinguished. If their should
chance to be some unlucky honest man among the people, Cardinal Richlieu hints*
that a prince should not employ him." SPIRIT of LAWS. Vol. 1. p. 29. 30.
Where the temptations to violate the rights of society are strong, the
opportunities of doing it frequent, and no immediate danger threatens, there is
not resolution, and seldom inclination, to withstand the allurements of wealth
and power. Justice yields to arbitrary might. The oppressed have none to
comfort them. Inured to slavery, they bear it patiently. Long usage brings men
to think those measures just, against which reason loudly remonstrates. He that
in a private station might exclaim, with HAZAEL, Is thy servant a dog that he
should do this thing? when placed in authority, disregards the voice of reason,
the claims of justice, the bonds of gratitude. The fascinating lust of dominion
never says, It is enough: That it is demands are so submissively yielded to is
surprising. Yea, some would have us believe, that resistance of the most
detestable tyranny is an unpardonable sin. They would have us sacrifice, at the
shrine of ROYALTY, the love of the brotherhood, the honor we owe to mankind,
and even the fear of GOD. If among their numerous prerogatives, kings had
claimed none of the divine, it would have been well. Taking the idea of
rebellion from the language of courts, it may be defined, an unsuccessful
resistance of tyranny. For success effaceth the crime.

THE only form of government expressly instituted by heaven was that of the
Hebrews. Their's was a confederate republic with JEHOVAH at the head. It
consisted of twelve distinct states; each sovereign in the administration of
justice within itself, while their councils and force were united in whatever
concerned them all. Their constitution was most friendly to public liberty. For
besides the independence of the respective states on each other, and their
confederacy as one kingdom for the better security of their common and
particular rights, in this divinely instituted polity public trusts were not
hereditary, nor had they any revenue to support the officers of government in
affluence. Equality of condition was provided for, and the means of corruption
prevented, by the agrarian law, prohibition of money on usury, release of
servants and debtors, and return of estates in the jubilee. That they might
preserve their liberties inviolate, they were instructed to remember their
bondage in Egypt, and wonderful deliverance -- the preservation of their
liberties in all times of danger by the manifest interposition of the Almighty
in humbling tyrants for their sakes.

WHEN they at length insisted on a change of their constitution, GOD gave them
a KING in his anger -- The first successor to the crown was of another family
-- And though the succession was continued in this, yet when the grandson came
to the throne, and refused to ease the burdens complained of, ten of the
states revolted. Heaven approved the revolt, and appointed them a king. And
when Rehoboam raised an army to recover his revolted subjects, a prophet of the
LORD was sent to him with the message, This thing is done of me. Ye shall not
go up to fight against your brethren.

THE constitution of England, reared by the wisdom of ages, has been called the
envy of Europe, and supposed to approach as near perfection as any human form
can. But what is the administration? The most important branch of the
legislature is entirely subservient to the views of the crown. Nor can it be
otherwise, while the public honors, treasure and force are at the disposal of
the prince. With these advantages what can hinder a British king from being an
absolute monarch?

WHEN either branch has lost it is independence, judge Blackstone well
observes, there must soon be an end of the constitution The legislature is
changed from that which was set up by the general consent and fundamental act
of the society. The same learned writer says, The stern commands of
prerogative have yielded to the milder voice of influence; the slavish and
exploded doctrine of non resistance has given way to military establishment by
law; and to the disuse of parliaments has succeeded a parliamentary trust of an
immense perpetual revenue. COMMENTARIES, Vol. I, p. 51, 52: 336.
The presumption is, that the constitution is materially defective.

FROM the natural parity of mankind it clearly follows, that all sovereignty is
ultimately in the people, or their representatives. They may, at any time,
regulate the succession, limit the sovereign, or abolish kingly government.
Different forms of government are adapted to different people and
circumstances. The only view in which one form is preferable to another, is,
the greater prospect of an impartial administration under it. For this reason
we give the preference to a representative democracy. We may be prejudiced by
education. Our present sufferings from an oppressive power may have strengthened
those prejudices. But all history assures us, that when the powers of
government have been lodged with a single person the care of the public has not
been the object of pursuit. He has been content with measures that will last
out his own time. Or if his views have extended further, it has been to
complete a system of tyranny. Nor has it been otherwise, when the decision of
all affairs has been engrossed by a few, and these not dependent on their
people. But in the form we speak of, a spirit of love and union is promoted by
mediocrity of circumstances -- a spirit of envy and jealousy is prevented.
Public employments are not lucrative -- they require application they are
transferrable. Here merit is more generally distinguished. Every individual
considers himself, and is regarded by the community, as a person of some
significance. The lowest have free access to the chief magistrate. Such a form
of government is an effectual cheek to that insupportable pride and boundless
ambition, which have slain millions. People are better satisfied with public
measures when their rulers have a common interest with them, and are led by
their connections, attachments, and a sense of dependence to care for the
state. Popular discontent will take place on some occasions. But if groundless,
it is soon appeased by the timely interposition of some wise and prudent
person. If well founded, the people know their rulers are ready to hear their
complaints -- will admit a conviction of any mistakes, and, upon conviction,
rectify them. Or if they persist in measures hurtful to the community, they can
be displaced. However a popular government has been reproached, it will be
found on enquiry less subject to threatening insurrections than the other forms.

ONE such government at least may be named, in which insurrections have rarely
taken place, and never proceeded to any desperate lengths. Were there any such
thing on earth, the government referred to might be proposed as a model of a
perfect commonwealth. It is indeed a singular example. The legislative body
have from the beginning done the highest honor to popular elections, and shown
the entire safety and wisdom of an annual choice. There can be no danger from
frequent elections, while those in authority are tender of the rights of the
community. When they are not so, ought elections to return but seldom to secure
them in place? In the commonwealth I speak of, a generous concern for the
public liberties in the legislature, and respect for authority in the people,
have happily united. It Is exertions on all public occasions, in the present war
especially, have placed in a convincing light the advantages of a
representative democracy. We trust there will never be occasion to say, that
it is order and happiness hitherto have not been owing to the spirit of liberty
and parity of circumstances, but to the check it has been under from Britain.
If it is own wisdom and virtue had not heretofore, as well as more lately,
guarded it is rights, that check, instead of defending, would have abridged
them. The checks of a monarchy or an aristocracy have not general happiness for
their object: For they both depend on great inequality in a community. They
pursue the interests of a few by the misery of many. Perhaps no amendment can
be proposed in the present civil polity of Connecticut but what would be
attended with greater ^isque than prospect of advantage. Alterations of the
constitution, or ancient usages are always hazardous; nor should ever be
attempted unless important in themselves -- unless also the prospect of success
will justify the hazard. Their tendency is to unsettle men's minds, and
dissolve government -- especially if they are frequent.


THERE may, we grant, be equality in the extreme. The spirit of liberty,
consisting in every man's doing what is right in his own eyes, is the
destruction of public happiness, and of society itself. Complaints may be
indulged without reason. It is true, notwithstanding, that the body of a people
much oftener acquiesce in wrong measures, and bear burdens which cannot
righteously be laid upon them, than complain without reason.

BUT the dignity of government should be maintained. True. They who watch for
the public weal are entitled to esteem and an honorable support. Despisers of
government are dangerous men in any state. There is, however, a difference
between good government and bad. Nor is the dignity of government to be
maintained by relinquishing, on demand, immunities conferred on us by the GOD
of nature and grace, recognized by the laws of society, and which we are
commanded by the highest authority to stand fast in. The dignity of government
depends not less on the wisdom and justice of it is administration, than on the
reverence and submission of the governed.

AMONG the various causes which have brought slavery on a free people, a lavish
distribution of the public treasure has not been the least. Hence rulers have
risen to independence, and subverted the liberties they were appointed to
defend. Instead of making the public burdens lighter, they have increased
them. The body of mankind rise up early, and sit up late, to toil for a scanty
subsistence; while the greater part of their earnings is consumed on the pride
and vanity, the sloth dissipation and luxury of a few. Behold the tears of the
oppressed in various parts of the earth. They cry out of violence and wrong
without redress -- Redress, did I say! Even a groan in their bondage is deemed
insolent, and not uttered but at the hazard of life. An opulent magistracy have
proved the bane of the state, as an opulent clergy have of the church.

WHILE justice constrains me to say this, it equally requires a caution against
a spirit of impatience and insolence under the administration of rulers who
seek the wealth of their people. Their vigilance, their unwearied attempts for
their country, especially at a time when it is liberties are in imminent danger,
demand the warmest acknowledgments and ready concurrence of the community.
Gratitude and interest oblige a people to say, We will be with you; be of good
courage, and do it. Government may lose the respect it claims by an ill judged
parsimony. Hence the first places in it may be filled by men of low talents, or
no fixed principles.

THE best security of any government is the love of it diffused through all
ranks. In order to this lenity must be it is characteristic. Wide is the
difference between an eastern DESPOT, like a roaring lion and ranging bear over
a poor people; and a ruler who is the FATHER of his subjects scattering the
wicked with his eyes, in whose days the righteous flourish. When the ear
hears him, it blesses him; and when the eye sees him, it gives witness to
him. In conducting a state, as in a family, severity may procure a forced
submission for a time; but, on the whole, renders authority weak and
precarious. Hence many and rigorous penal laws are to be avoided. They destroy
the distinction of crimes -- eradicate the principles of ingenuity and shame --
beget a slavish spirit -- and must end in anarchy or despotism. Multiplying
penal laws, like that of oaths, destroys the force of them. Lenity is
peculiarly the character of the divine government. The supreme ruler of the
world delights in mercy. Punishment is his strange work. Now the nearer any
human government is conformed to this pattern, the more perfect.

WE go on to say, simplicity of manners conduces to build a state. Such a
people are, for the most part, active, hardy and brave -- jealous of their
rights -- united in their councils -- fruitful in resources -- fixed in their
purpose, unawed by the threats or ravages of tyrants: Yea, these rouse them to
greater exploits.

THE principal riches of a state consist in the fruits of the field. Special
attention is therefore due to the condition of the husbandman.

ADD to this, the encouragement of manufactures -- for which there will be
further occasion as the country shall populate; and which may be much
facilitated by inviting industrious and virtuous foreigners to settle among us.

FINALLY: A government which gives due encouragement to schools and public
worship has every way the advantage of one that neglects them, in regard of
civil order and happiness. This is easily seen from comparing them together. An
early culture in human knowledge, and instruction in religion, are important
objects -- a like necessary to build up a people. The immediate civil
advantages of them, regard to posterity, and to the SOVEREIGN of the universe,
who dispenses to communities in this world according to their character,
enforce them upon us. The oath of GOD can no longer be the bond of society,
than the public acknowledgment of him is upheld. It is given as part of the
character of one of the best rulers, that he spoke comfortably to all the
Levites that taught the good knowledge of the LORD. If the ministers of
religion invade the province of the magistrate, or assume dominion over the
faith of christians, or are needlessly involved in secular affairs, or lead a
life of idleness, dissipation and sensuality, let them be despised. If the
gospel has an unfriendly aspect on civil society -- or if any individual can
be injured in his christian liberty by being required to uphold it in such
public form as he shall choose, then let the Lord's Day, and the institutions of
religion be neglected. But if the contrary is the obvious truth, a good
magistrate will then take care of religion, that the state may be in health and
prosper. Them that honor me, I will honor; but they who despise me, shall be
lightly esteemed.

STATES just emerging from oppression, are in danger of presuming on the smiles
of heaven. This danger is intimated in the text: An enquiry from what quarters
it arises, was the last thing proposed.

ABUSE of prosperity is incident to our lapsed nature. Special divine
interpositions often meet with no other returns than unthankfulness, security,
and self confidence. Should our deliverances be perverted to the purposes of
venality and worldly ambition, infidelity, dissipation, licentiousness and
internal dissentions, this would indeed be to do evil in GOD'S sight. It would,
more than the external violence we have hitherto repelled, endanger our
privileges. With good reason might we fear, that our gracious GOD would repent
of the good, which he has encouraged us to expect. DEUTERONOMY. viii. 10, 11. 19, 20.
There might be melancholy occasion to apply to our confederacy, RE^UNIUS
AETATIS.

WHEN the enemy threatened to overwhelm us, we besieged the throne of grace.
GOD'S right hand and holy arm has gotten the victory. We have sung his praise.
Shall we soon forget his works! He has delivered us, that we might serve him
in holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives. Oh that there were
such an heart in us!

LOVE of our country, love of liberty, are expressions much used by many who
are most passionate lovers of their own selves. They have not failed to improve
the opportunities of oppressing their neighbors and country, at a time when all
orders have been called, in a peculiar manner, to cultivate that charity which
seeks not her own. Nothing more than liberty has been used for a cloak of
maliciousness. This has prejudiced many against the cause of America. But for
this our union might have been greater, and many embarrassments and misfortunes
prevented. The spirit of liberty, under just regulation, is a most efficacious
mean of building and planting a state -- Liberty, used for a pretense, pulls it
down with both hands.

AN honest zeal for the public liberties, not directed by sound wisdom, merits
the opprobrium, which the enemies of the Jews maliciously cast on them: That
which they build, if a fox go up, he shall even break down their stone wall.

THE experience of all ages shows, that a Kingdom divided cannot stand. Of what
moment, then, is a spirit of love, and of a sound mind, that there be no schism
in the body politic, but that the members have the same care one of another?

FURTHER: Nothing has a darker aspect on rising states than effeminate
manners. They equally enervate the body and mind -- banish all public spirit --
soon make a sensible people ignorant of their common interest and danger, and
an active people indolent -- diminish their resources -- destroy the
consistency and energy of their councils -- and extinguish the ardor which the
invasion of their rights had kindled in them. Such manners invite an invasion
from abroad; or expose them to the intrigue and usurpation of ambitious spirits
among themselves; under whose shadow, instead of enjoying the sweets of
liberty, the fruit of their own vine, they are torn and devoured without a
possibility of relief. Should any have spirit to remonstrate, fire comes out of
the bramble and devours the cedars of Lebanon.

ON what rocks have other states split, when they appeared impregnable to
foreign arms? What were the attendants on prosperity in the four great empires
of the world? The prophetic character of the first. Thou that art given to
pleasures, that dwell carelessly, ISAI xlvii. 8.
was most strikingly exemplified on the day of her fall. To this event the
following words refer: How is the OPPRESSOR ceased? the GOLDEN city ceased? How
art thou cut down to the ground that did weaken the nations? CHAP. xiv. 4; 12.
Another prophet describes the second as flowing in riches, which cherished
pride and the lust of conquest -- pushing westward, and northward, and
southward. DAN. xi. 2. viii. 4.
The inscription on her is, Arise, devour much flesh CHAP. vii. 5.
-- words expressive of the savage spirit which worldly greatness begets. After
subjecting the first mentioned empire, and extricating the people of GOD from
slavery, growing vain and insolent by success, and sinking into effeminacy, she
was subdued by the third; or rather by her own vices. However, she avenged
herself on the conquerors, by introducing corruption, bribery and luxury, which
"sunk them from the passionate love of liberty, and made them run eagerly into
servitude. Conquest and security dissolved the bonds of union which common
danger hold them in. Fatal dissentions took place among men originally free,
brought up together and natives of the same country, companions in the same
dangers, and instruments in the accomplishment of the same exploits and
victories, tearing in pieces the empire they had all concurred to form at the
expense of their blood." The fourth is described by the prophet as exceeding
strong, and treading down all the former kingdoms, and devouring the whole
earth. DAN. ii. 40. and vii. 7. 23.
The Romans were a people "formed to subdue and to govern the world." Their
"system of jurisprudence is the noblest monument of their wisdom." But their
victories contributed to their decline and ruin. Ill boding wealth first
introduced foreign manners. No crime, no act of wanton lust is now unknown; for
Roman poverty is lost. Luxury, more merciless than arms, invaded Rome, and thus
avenged the conquered world. Prima peragrinos obscoena pecunia mores Intulit.
Nullum crimen abe^^ facinusque libidinis, ex quo Paupertas Romana perit.
Soevior armis Luxuria incubuit, victumque ulciscitur orbem.
JUVEN. l. 2. Satyr. 6.


AN elegant writer resembles such changes in rich and luxurious states to that
in the fine country round VESUVIUS on an eruption of that fiery mountain.
"While the inhabitants are sunk in voluptuousness, while all is smiling round
them, and they think that no evil, no danger is nigh, the seeds of destruction
are fermenting within; and breaking out on a sudden, lay waste all their
opulence, all their delights; till they are left a sad monument of divine
wrath, and of the fatal effects of internal corruption."

VOLUPTUOUSNESS, pride, and contempt of religion and providence are the natural
growth of opulence and military success. In these respects the sin of our
enemies is written with a pen of iron, and with the print of a diamond. For
these they are now threatened as in v. 7. of the context. MEAN, TEKEL, if not
written on the walls of the palace of GEORGE THE THIRD, at least seems legible
on his councils.

PUBLIC crimes not only prevent the good, which providence may intend a
community; but sooner or later meet signal vengeance. Because they regard not
the work of the LORD, nor the operation of his hands, he shall destroy them,
and not build them up. May we learn from the example of others, not from our
own experience, the consequences of unamending wickedness. We see our danger.
If our caution is awakened, it may be a lengthening of our tranquillity.

FOR the age of this country we are, perhaps, as degenerate as any people --
especially considering the errand of our ancestors hither, and our privileges
and deliverances. Profligate manners, during the present war, have run and been
glorified. Is it not to be feared, that as we multiply, and extend our
commerce, a vain magnificence, the lust of power, sensuality, and contempt of
all principles of religion and virtue will be imported in as large cargoes as
foreign commodities? Should this be the case, it would destroy the freedom for
which we have endured many years severe conflict.

WE may image to ourselves the future glory of these rising states from the
abundance of the sea flowing in to them -- a rapid population -- a vast
wilderness turned into a fruitful field -- a respectable navy -- a well
disciplined militia -- the progress of science -- and the establishment of an
empire on such liberal and stable principles, that, humanly speaking, it may
defy all foreign assaults.

BUT while one imagines this delightful scene ready to open, a melancholy gloom
comes over the mind. Methinks I see profusion and luxury coming in like a flood
-- corruption and bribery invading all ranks -- public measures carried by
influence -- houses of worship forsaken, or frequented only by few -- the
public support of religion withheld, and it is ministers despised -- the LORD'S
day devoted to amusements -- family devotion almost universally laid aside --
revealed religion generally disbelieved -- the present infamy wiped off from
the vices of intemperance and uncleanness -- our children early taught to set
their mouths against the heavens -- personal revenge demanded for an
inadvertant speech, or little indignity, and the demand gratified -- laws
against such crimes, but dormant, and therefore to all intents repealed.

WE may not on a sudden, but gradually, reach this pitch of degeneracy. Would
to GOD there were no grounds for such apprehensions. Pardon, respectable
hearers, the mention of them. These evils may be more easily prevented than
eradicated. Could we persuade the rising generation to remember our fears and
struggle -- Could we make posterity feel the distresses we endure to establish
freedom, virtue and religion -- Could we speak to future times, and make them
shun the vices which have ruined other states, after their escape from and
triumph over, most dangerous enemies, it would be well. But should we, and
those that come after us, learn the principles and manners which have destroyed
kingdoms, what can we expect but to share the same fate? Will not the governor
of the world visit for these things? How applicable is the following passage,
referring to the redemption of the Jews from Babylonish slavery? After all that
is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great trespasses, seeing that
thou our GOD have punished us less than our iniquities deserve, and have given
us such deliverance as this: Should we again break thy commandments? --
would thou not be angry with us till thou had consumed us, so that there
should be no remnant nor escaping? O LORD GOD of Israel, thou are righteous,
for we remain yet escaped, as it is this day. Behold, we are before thee in our
tresspasses. EZRA ix. 13,*15.


WE are yet involved in a destructive, though necessary war. Had gratitude,
justice, wisdom, or natural affection influenced our public enemy, the scene of
blood would not have opened: Had they improved by disappointments, it would
have been closed. There was a time, since the commencement of hostilities, when
a separation might have been prevented. A separation is now determined, and
cannot be revoked. Rage against temples and sacred things was thought an ill
omen among the heathen: They esteemed clemency in conquerors a virtue. We could
name an enemy, boasting of their humanity, and professing Christianity, whose
ravages, whose merciless treatment of those in their power, would blot the page
of pagan history. Tyrants make the world a wilderness. Are they abased? The
wilderness and solitary places are glad, and the desartrejoiceth, and
blossometh as the rose.

THE events of the war need not be rehearsed. Hitherto the LORD has helped us.
We praise his goodness, manifest in conducting our civil and military councils;
raising up so many patrons and guardians of our rights; and girding with
strength and courage our armies and militia. The gentleman at the head of our
forces is distinguished for "address in posting himself to advantage; presence
of mind in unexpected emergencies; and intrepidity in the heat of action." The
providence of GOD signally preserved and honored him at his first entrance on
the stage of action. At the call of his country he has sacrificed domestic
quiet and affluence. To his wisdom, unskaken fortitude, and universal respect,
it is greatly owing, under providence, that the enemy, after four years
exertions to pluck up, pull down, and destroy are themselves reduced to greater
straits than in any foreign war. May a life of such importance to America be
still preserved. Having broken the power of the oppressor, may he be further
prevented with the blessings of goodness, and at length share in the reward of
those who are more than conquerers.

THE time would fail me barely to mention other public characters entitled to
the acknowledgment of their country. There is one, however, which I may not
pass in silence -- One who, like a skillfull pilot, has taken the helm, and
conducted the ship safe in a tempestuous season -- whose unremitting
application to a variety of public business, without the least confusion,
bespeak a great mind -- whose vigor and dispatch, joined with the prudence and
stability of years, adorn an exalted station -- who is accepted of the
multitude of his brethren, and deservedly held in highest estimation in
neighboring states. We account it among the instances of the signal favor of
ALMIGHTY GOD to this state, that he has given us such a governor in this
trying day, and sustained him under the extraordinary cares of government, so
that he has labored, and has not fainted.

WE doubt not, may it please your EXCELLENCY, but you have other testimony than
the affections of your country. Your charity and service, and faith and
patience enable you to make the appeal of an eminent lover of his nation, at
the head of government in a day similar to the present, "Think upon me, my GOD,
for good, according to all that I have done for this people." The
Representatives of a grateful people will not forget your work and labor of
love. But your highest motives, as were those of another chief magistrate of
the Hebrews, are taken from the future recompense of fidelity in a public
station: Having respect to this, you have chosen to suffer affliction with the
people of GOD. We ardently wish your Excellency divine supports under the
weight of public affairs which come upon you daily, and the continuance of the
public esteem -- that you may yet be honored as a principal pillar of this
state, and an illustrious instrument in building up the United States. The
sovereign disposer of events, who destroys the hope of man, has sensibly
touched you in lately removing, in the midst of his days, a son deservedly dear
to you. Col. JOSEPH TRUMBULL; who died August 23, 1778, act. 42.
Under this grievous dispensation, and in life's decline, may the prospects of
the Christian faith be your support.

I BEG further indulgence, while your Excellency is included in an humble
address to the LEGISLATURE now convened in the house of GOD.

YOU are not insensible, FATHERS, (for as such, GOD be thanked, the rulers of
this state of Connecticut may fitly be addressed) - You are not insensible what
will assuredly build up a commonwealth, and what pull down and destroy it. Nor
need I say, that to advance the one and prevent the other depends much on
legislators. Suffer me to remind you, that the wisdom from above crowns all
other talents, and applies them to the public good. Possessed of the fear of
GOD, in all the afflictions of your people you will be afflicted -- will not
sacrifice their liberties through pusillanimity, or from any secular prospects.
The interests of virtue and religion, guarded and advanced by your example and
authority, will exalt this community -- But "the importance and salutary
influence of religion in civil rulers" were well described and enforced by my
reverend brother the last year. The Reverend Mr. WHITTELSEY.


As Christian magistrates, you will emulate that public spirit, that spirit of
liberty, which the example and maxims of the author of our religion inspire.

YOUR EXCELLENCY and HONORS will indulge me, at a juncture so interesting, in
the most explicit recommendation of several things belonging to our peace.

IN these times of convulsion authority has lost much of that respect which is
due to it. This may be accounted for without the supposition of weakness or
unfaithfulness in the rulers, or turbulence in the people. Experience must
inform the statesman what public measures are salutary. In America's present
contest measures heretofore untried were called for: Many which have been gone
into, have had happy effects: Some upon trial have been found unadapted; or
their novelty has prevented their being carried into execution. These reasons
have rendered a repeal of several acts of the legislature necessary. Frequent
instances of this kind tend to lessen a regard to authority. Men must be
gradually prepared to receive salutary laws. In politics, as in religion, many
things are beneficial, which they cannot bear at present. Some disorders may
gain so great an ascendant in a state, that to attempt a reformation of them at
such a time, would only discover the weakness of the magistrates and laws; as
there are diseases in which medicines would only hasten death. There was never
a sounder maxim than that lately advanced by a worthy prelate. The art of
government consists in not governing too much. Few laws, dictated by wisdom,
drawn up with simplicity, and faithfully executed, best support the dignity of
government. Your endeavors to restore authority from it is present relaxation
will meet the concurrence of all reasonable men -- all well wishers to their
country. The miseries of anarchy would exceed those we have withstood at an
amazing hazard. Our enemies flatter themselves, that internal divisions and
confusion will soon destroy our independence. We wish they may be disappointed
-- that as general distress has united states very different in their
constitution and manners, they may, when the common danger shall be removed,
guard against so fatal an evil as licentiousness. A good magistrate will not
"flatter people in their follies, nor comply with their passions against their
true interests and his own judgment. By a wise moderation he will raise their
spirits when they are too low, and show them their danger when they grow too
presumptuous. Not satisfied with governing wisely for his own time, he leaves
the government in such a state, that no others shall have the power of abusing
their trust, and hurting the republic."


IT is of much importance, that those who are in commission for the peace, with
whom it lies to support the laws and order through the state, be men of known
abilities, firmness and prudence; otherwise they will weaken government still
more. We trust that in these appointments our civil fathers will have regard to
the best gifts. And yet there is a more excellent way, the application of men's
talents being of more consequence than the luster of them.

IF any efficacious measures for the free course of commutative justice can be
devised, it will be happy. An unfixed medium insensibly corrupts the public
morals, and disseminates most threatening jealousies, alienations and
animosities. We doubt not but this matter will have its due weight with the
legislature.

THE public support of schools, houses of worship, and a learned ministry, has
hitherto, under providence, preserved tranquillity and order, respect for
rulers, obedience to their laws, and promoted virtuous manners. The same means
are still necessary to the same ends.

A DOOR is opening for the improvement and enlargement of education. Various
circumstances, arising from new connections and the state of population in the
country, particularly call your attention to this object -- an object which
grows in importance every day. Foreign manners will gain admission, if the most
prudent and faithful care is not taken: Should they be admitted, our glory and
defense would depart from us. One way of preventing them, is, to put the
education of youth upon the best plan. "Learning," says a great civilian,
MONTESQUIEU.
"proves dangerous in dspotic states; emulation fatal. But in a republican
government the whole force of education is required." Bad books, like bad
company, corrupt good morals. Publications replete with levity, irreligion and
obscenity have for many years had a general circulation in Europe. The authors
of them must be ranked among the worst enemies of society. A taste for such
publications begins to prevail among the American youth, foreboding the entire
loss of principles and manners unless seasonably checked.


THE British nation though supposed free, have really lost their independence,
the fountain of public liberty being corrupted. Hence a timely vigilance
against all corrupt influence in the choice of the legislative body from being
once introduced among us, will be of essential service to the state: It will
prevent the reins of government from ever falling into the hands of weak or
designing men. You cannot have too jealous an eye on tyranny under every form;
nor can your zeal be better employed than against the means of it, bribery and
corruption. It helps to secure public liberty, when no one man is allowed to
hold many public offices, and these offices are not lucrative.

MAY I not add, the security of a state, and regard to that Being who builds
and destroys kingdoms, require, that such as pay no acknowledgments to him,
perhaps question his existence, be neglected in the distribution of public
trusts? Shall the oath of GOD be offered them? Can it have any binding force?
And if their oath is no tie, do they not dissolve the bond of society?

SHOULD corruption, voluptuousness and tyranny get the ascendant among us,
notwithstanding all we have suffered, the most signal interpositions of heaven
for our deliverance, and our advantages to model a confederate republic on
stable principles of freedom and justice, how should we merit the wrath of the
Almighty! An European confederacy, after many years bloody struggle against
monarchical tyranny, were brought under an aristocratic of their own
establishing; by which they are at present governed. "This stomachful people,
who could not endure the least exercise of arbitrary power or impositions, or
the fight of any foreign troops under the Spanish government, have been since
inured to them all, in the highest degree, under their own popular magistrates;
bridled with hard laws; terrified with severe executions; environed w^^^
foreign forces: and oppressed with the most cruel hardships and variety of
taxes, that was ever known under any government." SIR WILLIAM TEMPLE'S history
of the united provinces, p. ^55, duodecimo.
Detested be the thought of supporting a few individuals in magnificence and
dissipation on the spoils of an industrious people. Is there no ground to
apprehend, that opulence and the lust of dominion may be introduced, and at
length destroy the happy equality we enjoy at present? Survey the past history
of human nature. Is it essentially changed? OBSTA PRINCIPIIS is an excellent
political maxim applied to the evil we speak of. We may date the loss of
liberty from the time we lose our equality. Bribery, corruption and tyranny
prevail wherever luxury does, and nearly in the same proportion. It may be
worthy your consideration, whether sumptuary laws may not be one mean of
preserving the virtue of the state. Whether such laws can or cannot effectually
prevent luxury the example of legislators themselves may go far to do it. Their
simplicity of manners will be followed. Frugality should be reputable in a
christian commonwealth. For our LORD has taught us to gather up the fragments,
that nothing be lost.

I WOULD not before such an auditory suggest any thing that might imply want of
respect, that would argue distrust* or might seem forward or assuming. I am
persuaded there is not a legislature on earth entitled to fuller confidence
than that I have the honor to address. I speak with the greater freedom,
revered fathers, assured that from inclination and principle you will not be
wanting in precaution against whatever might encourage avarice, dangerous
ambition, or a vain luxurious taste.

THE powers of government are lodged with you, GENTLEMEN, in a time of such
public embarrassment as calls for rulers of tried abilities, firm attachment to
the public liberties, and an uncommon degree of probity and magnanimity. This
people are not insensible of the solicitude that must attend your deliberations
-- the difficulties which will call forth all your talents and patience. The
measures of this assembly, of the present session, may be of the utmost
consequence to remote posterity. Out of the house of the LORD we wish you
understanding of the times, and the special presence of HIM who stands in the
congregation of the mighty. Allow me to accommodate, with some variation, the
words of a pious ruler: These states are young and tender, and the empire to be
builded exceeding magnifical, of fame and of glory throughout all countries.
May he who increases the nations, and destroys them, establish the work of
our hands.

THAT I be not further tedious, the address shall be closed with wishing you,
HONORED FATHERS, the affectionate and dutiful regards of this community -- a
sense of divine approbation -- the remembrance of posterity as the restorers of
the public liberty -- and the plaudit of the great day, Well done, good and
faithful servants.

CHRISTIAN pastors, with the concurrence of the legislature, may be greatly
instrumental in forming the principles and manners of their country. Would they
build it up, they will not desire affluence or secular power. Their ambition
will be to display that meekness, contentment, moderation and abstractedness
from the world; that concern for the highest interests of their fellow-men,
which so engagingly recommend the example of their LORD. They will serve their
country by inculcating a public spirit and principles of liberty -- protesting
equally against civil and spiritual tyranny -- recommending sobriety and
frugality, obedience to magistrates, and a peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty -- and by bearing testimony against profusion, dissipation and
licentiousness. They will doubtless have occasion to unite against the avowed
enemies of the christian religion. For the prevalence of dissolute manners
naturally leads to infidelity in principle. Men love darkness rather than
light, because their deeds are evil. It will, perhaps, be the best method with
such men, as they assert christianity to be a forgery, to call upon them to
show when the forgery was introduced -- by whom -- and by what means it gained
ground.

SAGACITY, activity, patience, with attachment to her interests, distinguish
the emissaries of ROME. Shall the children of this world be wiser than the
children of light? It must also be observed, that sloth, luxury and effeminacy
are connected with boundless ambition, pride, avarice and the intolerant spirit
of persecution in the Romish clergy. Their character and doom we collect from
our SAVIOR. If that servant say in his heart, my LORD delayeth his coming, and
shall begin to beat the menservants, and maidens, and to eat and drink, and be
drunken: The LORD of that servant will come in a day when he looks not for
him, and at an hour when he is not ware, and will cut him in sunder, and will
appoint him his portion with the unbelievers. To this profligate and detestable
character stands opposed that of a laborious, faithful and exemplary clergy --
a character estimable in the eye of the great LORD of the household, which will
inspire with confidence at his appearing. This also is described in the same
place. Who then is that faithful and wise steward, whom his LORD shall make
ruler over his household, to give them their portion of meat in due season?
Blessed is that servant, whom his LORD when he comes, shall find so doing.
LUKE xii. 42, -- 46.


A RECOMMENDATION to other orders of this community, to cooperate with their
rulers and teachers in building it up, will conclude a discourse, already too
long for the strength of the speaker -- he fears also for the patience of the
hearers.

MORE depends on the virtue of the state taken collectively, than on that of
any individuals, how important soever their station. The best public characters
cannot build up, or save from ruin, a people resolved to do evil in GOD's
sight. EZEKIEL. xiv. 13, -- 21.
They cannot make a secure people vigilant, a pusillanimous people brave, or a
vicious people happy. All ranks must do their part to prevent public ruin, and
build up the commonwealth, by hearkening unto GOD. Enforce then, in your
respective stations, the laws against impiety and immorality, and the counsels
from the pulpit on the same subjects. Reverence the truths and institutions of
religion. Be frugal, industrious and temperate, shunning "every species of
extravagance and dissipation, all expensive diversions and entertainments," as
was resolved and recommended by the illustrious patriots who laid the
foundation of our confederacy. Extracts from the votes and proceedings of
Congress, A.D.1774.
If persons of figure, fortune and influence would join in this laudable
resolution, they would merit much of their country. America's daughters would
honor themselves by encouraging simplicity, economy and industry, promoting
the manufactures of the country, and guarding against foreign fashions and
amusements.

WHAT is done and suffered, by persons in a private station, for those that
live near them, or even for their immediate dependents, is ultimately done and
suffered for the community, and may, through various connections, be followed
with lasting effects of the highest public utility. May such be just and
charitable, abide in their calling, and be faithful in Israel. Cheerfully
support good government. Keep a wakeful eye on your rights. Oppose tyranny in
church or state with equal zeal and firmness: Withstand it in it is beginnings.
Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. They shall prosper that seek her good.

IN whatever station we are any of us called to act for our country, let us
promote her welfare to the extent of our ability. While we feel her wrongs, let
us bewail her crimes, and every one repent him of his wickedness. On the whole,
may the prospects of futurity swallow up every other concern.

IT is a sublime description of the felicity of Israel, (referring to their
quiet settlement in Palestine) which Moses has given: May it in some good
measure be verified in our beloved country. DEUTERONOMY. xxxiii. 26, -- 29.
There is none like unto the GOD of Jesurun, who rides upon the heavens in thy
help, and in his excellency on the sky. The eternal GOD is thy refuge. And he
shall thrust out the enemy from before thee, and shall say, Destroy them.
Israel shall then dwell in safety alone: The fountain of Jacob shall be upon a
land of corn and wine; also his heavens shall drop down dew. Happy art thou, O
Israel! Who is like unto thee, O people saved by the LORD, the shield of thy
help, and who is the sword of thy excellency! and thine enemies shall be found
liars unto thee, and thou shall tread upon their high places.

AMEN.
CORRECTIONS.
PAGE 29, line I, (margin) read,

Prima peregrinos obscoena pecunia mores Intulit

Various lesser errors of the press are left to the correction of the candid
reader.


