A NARRATIVE OF COLONEL ETHAN ALLEN's CAPTIVITY, From the Time of his being
taken by the British, near Montreal, on the 25th Day of September, in the Year
1775, to the Time of his Exchange, on the 6th Day of May, 1778:

CONTAINING, (...) VOYAGES AND TRAVELS, (...) the most remarkable Occurrences
respecting (...) many (...) Continental Prisoners of different Ranks and
Characters, which fell under his Observation, in the Course of the same;
particularly the Destruction of the Prisoners at New York, by General Sir
William How, in the Years 1776 and 1777.

Interspersed with some POLITICAL OBSERVATIONS.

Written by himself, and now published for the Information of the Curious in
all Nations. -- Price Ten Paper Dollars.

When God from Chaos gave this World TO BE,
Man then he formed, and formed him TO BE FREE.
American Independence, a Poem, by FRENEAU. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY
ROBERT BELL, IN THIRD STREET. M. DCC. LXXIX.

INTRODUCTION.
INDUCED by a sense of duty to my country, and by the application of many of my
worthy friends, some of whom are of the first, characters, I have concluded to
publish the following narrative of the extraordinary scenes of my captivity,
and the discoveries which I made in the course of the same, of the cruel and
relentless disposition and behavior of the enemy, toward the prisoners in
their power; from which the state politician, and every gradation of character
among the people, to the worthy tiller of the soil, may deduce such inferences
as they shall think proper to carry into practice. Some men are appointed into
office, in these states, who read the history of the cruelties of this war with
the same careless indifferency, as they do the page^ (...) Roman history; nay,
some (...) preferred to places of trust and profit by the tory influence. The
instances are (I hope) but rare; and it stands all freemen in hand, to prevent
their further influence, which, of all other things, would be the most baneful
to the liberties and happiness of this country; and so far as such influence
takes place, robs us of the victory we have obtained, at the expense of so much
blood and treasure.

I should have exhibited to the public a history of the facts herein contained,
soon after my exchange, had not the urgency of my private affairs, together
with more urgent public business, demande^ my attention, 'till a few week
before the date hereof. The re^^er will readily discern, that a narative of
this sort could not have be^n wrote when I was a prisoner: (...) trunk and
writings were often se^^ched, under various pretenses; (...) that I never wrote
a syllable, or made even a rough minute, whereon I might predicate this
narration, but trusted solely to my memory for the whole. I have, however,
taken the greatest care and pains to recollect the facts, and arrange them; but
as they touch a variety of characters and opposite interests, I am sensible
that all will not be pleased with the relation of them: Be this as it will, I
have made truth (...) invariable guide, and stake (...) honor on the truth of
the (...) I have been very generous (...) British, in giving them (...) credit
for all their (...) usage of any considerable consequence, which I met with
among them, during my captivity; which was easily done, as I met with but
little, in comparison of the bad, which, by reason of the great plurality of
it, could not be contained in so concise a narrative; so that I am certain,
that I have more fully enumerated the favors which I received, than the abuses
I suffered. The critic will be pleased to excuse any inaccuracies in the
performance itself, as the author has unfortunately missed of a libera^
education.

Bennington, March 25 th, 1779. ETHAN ALLEN.

A NARRATIVE OF COL. ETHAN ALLEN'S OBSERVATIONS DURING HIS CAPTIVITY.
EVER since I arrived to a state o^ manhood, and acquainted myself with the
general history of mank^^d. I have felt a sincere passion for liberty. The
history of nations ^^med to perpetual slavery, in (...) sequence of holding up
to tyrant their natural-born liberties, I read with a sort of philosophical
ho^^ey so that the first systematical and b^oody attempt at Lexington, to
enslave America, thoroughly electrified my mind, and fully determined me to
take part with my country: And while I was wishing for as opportunity to
signalize myself in its behalf, directions were privately sent to me from the
then colony (now state) of Connecticut, to (...) the Green Mountain Boys; (and
if possible) with them to surprise and take the fortress Ticonderoga. This
enterprise I cheerfully undertook; and, after first guarding all the several
passes that led thither, to cut off all intelligence between the garrison and
the country, made a forced march from Bennington, and arrived at the lake
opposite to Ticonderoga, on the evening of the ninth day of May, 1775, with two
hundred and thirty w^liant Green Mountain Boys; (...) it was with the utmost
difficulty that I procured boats to cross the lake: However, I landed eighty
three men near the garrison, and ^^ent the boats back for the rear ^^uard
commanded by col. Seth Warner; but the day began to dawn, and I found myself
under a necessity to attack the fort, before (...) rear could cross the lake;
and, (...) it was viewed hazardous, I ha^^gued the officers and soldiers in the
manner following: Friends and fellow soldiers, you have, for a number of years
past been a scourge and terror to arbitrary power. Your valor has been famed
abroad, and acknowledged, as appears by the advice and orders to me (from the
General Assembly of Connecticut) to surprise and take the garrison now before
us. I now propose to advance before you, and in person conduct you through the
wicket-gate; for we must this morning either quit our pretensions to valor, or
possess ourselves of this fortress in a few minutes; and, in as much as it is a
desperate attempt, (which none but the bravest of men dare undertake) I do not
urge it on any contrary to his will. You that will undertake voluntarily, poise
your firelocks.

The men being (at this time) drawn up in three ranks, each poised his
firelock. I ordered them to face to the right; and, at the head of the
center-file, marched them immediately to the wicket-gate aforesaid, where I
found a centry posted, who instantly snapped his fusee at me: I run immediately
toward him, and he retreated through the covered way into the parade within the
garrison, gave a halloo, and ran under a bomb-proof. My party who followed me
into the fort, I formed on the parade, in such manner as to face the two
barracks which faced each other. The garrison being asleep, (except the
centries) we gave three huzzas which greatly surprised them. One of the
c^ntries made a pass at one of my officers with a charged bayonet, and slightly
wounded him: My first thought was to kill him with my sword; but, in an
instant, altered the design and fury of the blow to a slight cut on the side of
the head; upon which he dropped his gun, and asked quarter, which I readily
granted him, and demanded of him the place where the commanding officer kept;
he showed me a pair of stairs in the front of a barrack, on the west part of
the garrison, which led up to a second story in said barrack, to which I
immediately repaired, and ordered the commander (captain Delaplace) to come
forth instantly, or I would sacrifice the whole garrison; at which the captain
came immediately to the door with his breeches in his hand, when I ordered him
to deliver to me the fort instantly, who asked me by what authority I demanded
it: I answered him, In the name of the great Jehovah, and the Continental
Congress. (The authority of the Congress being very little known at that time)
he began to speak again; but I interrupted him, and with my drawn sword over
his head, again demanded an immediate surrender of the garrison; to which he
then complied, and ordered his men to be forthwith paraded without arms, as he
had given up the garrison: In the mean time some of my officers had given
orders, and in consequence thereof, sundry of the barrack doors were beat down,
and about one third of the garrison imprisoned, which consisted of the said
commander, a lieutenant Feltham, a conductor of artil^ery, a gunner, two
sergeants, and forty four rank and file; about one hundred pieces of cannon,
(...) 13 inch mortar, and a number (...) sw^vels. This surprise was carried
into execution in the gray of the morning of the 10th day of (...), 1775. The
sun seemed to rise that morning with a superior lu^^re; and Ticonderoga and its
dependencies smiled on its conquerors, who tossed about the flowing bowl, and
wished succe^^ to Congress and the liberty and freedom of America. Happy it was
for me, ((...) that time) that the then (...) pages of the Book of Fate, which
afterward unfolded a miserable scene of two years and eight months
imprisonment, was hid from my view: But to return to my narration; col. Warner,
with the rear guard, crossed the lake, and joined me early in the morning, whom
I sent off, without loss of time, with about one hundred men, to take
possession of Crown Point, which was garrisoned with a sergeant and twelve men;
which he took possession of the same day, as also upwards of one hundred pieces
of cannon. But one thing now remained to be done, to make ourselves complete
masters of lake Champlain: This was to possess ourselves of a sloop of war,
which was then laying at St. John's; to effect which, it was agreed in a
council of war, to arm and m^n out a certain schooner, which lay at south Bay,
and that captain (now general) Arnold should command her, and that I should
command the batteaux. The necessary preparations being made, we (...) sail from
Ticonderoga, in quest of the sloop, which was much larger and carried more guns
and heavy metal than the schooner. General Arnold, with the schooner sailing
faster than the batteaux, arrived (...) St. John's; and by surprise, possessed
himself of the sloop, before I could arrive with the batteaux: He also made
prisoners of a sergeant and twelve men, who were garrisoned at that place. It
is worthy remark, that as soon as general Arnold had secured the prisoners on
board, and had made preparation for sailing, the wind, which but a few hours
before was fresh in the south, and well served to carry us to St. John's, n^w
shifted, and came fresh from the north; and in about one hour's time, general
Arnold sailed with the prize and schooner for Ticonderoga: When I met him with
my party, within a few miles of St. John's, he saluted me with a discharge of
cannon, which I returned with a volley of small arms: This being repeated three
times, I went, on board the sloop with my party, where several loyal Congress
healths were drank. We were now masters of lake Champlain, and the garrisons
depending thereon. This success I viewed of consequence in the scale of
American politics; for if a settlement between the then colonies and Great
Britain, had soon taken place, it would have been easy to have restored these
acquisitions; but viewing the then future consequences of a cruel war, (as it
has really proved to be) and the command of that lake, garrisons, artillery,
etc. must be viewed to be of signal importance to the American cause, and it is
mavelous to me, that we ever lost the command of it. Nothing but the taking a
Burgoyne, with a whole British army, could (in my opinion) atone for it; and
notwithstanding such an extraordinary victory, we must be obliged to regain the
command of that lake again, be the (...) what it will: By doing this, Canada
will easily be brought into union and confederacy with the United States of
America. Such an event would put it out of the power of the western tribes of
Indians to carry on a war with us, and be a solid and durable bar against any
further in human barbarities committed on our frontier inhabitants, by cruel
and blood-thirsty savages; for it is impossible for them to carry on a war,
except they are supported by the trade and commerce of some civilized nation;
which to them would be impracticable, did Canada compose a part of the American
empire.

Early in the fall of the year, the little army, under the command of the
generals Schuyler and Montgomery, were ordered to advance into Canada. I was at
Ticonderoga, when this order arrived; and the general, with most of the field
officers, requested me to attend them in the expedition; and though at that time,
I had no commission from Congress, yet they engaged me, that I should be
considered as an officer the same as though I had a commission; and should, as
occasion might require, command certain detachments of the army. -- This I
considered as an honorable offer, and did not hesitate to comply with it, and
advanced with the army to the isle Auix Noix; from whence I was ordered (by the
general) to go in company with major Brown, and certain interpreters, through
the woods into Canada, with letters to the Canadians, and to let them know,
that the design of the army was only against the English garrisons, and not the
country, their liberties, or religion: And having, through much danger,
negotiated this business, I returned to the isle Auix Noix the fore part of
September, when general Schuyler returned to Albany; and in consequence the
command devolved upon general Montgomery, whom I assisted in laying a line of
circumvallation round the fortress St. John's: After which I was ordered by the
general, to make a second tour into Canada, upon nearly the same design as
before; and withal to observe the disposition, designs and movements of the
inhabitants of the country: This reconnoitre I undertook with reluctance,
choosing rather to assist at the siege of St. John's, which was then closely
invested; but my esteem for the general's person, and opinion of him as a
politician and brave officer, induced me to proceed.

I passed through all the parishes on the river Sorrel, to a parish at the
mouth of the same, which is called by the same name, preaching politics; and
went from thence across the Sorrel to the river St. Lawrence, and up the river
through the parishes to Longale, and so far met with good success as an
itinerant. In this round, my guard was Canadians, (my interpreter and some few
attendants excepted.) On the morning of the 24th day of September, I set out
with my guard of about eighty men, from Longale, to go to Lapraier; from whence
I determined to go to general Montgomery's camp; but had not advanced two miles
before I met with major Brown, (who has since been advanced to the rank of a
colonel) who desired me to halt, saying that he had something of importance to
communicate to me and my confidents; upon which I halted the party, and went
into an house, and took a private room with him and several of my associates,
where col. Brown proposed, that "Provided I would return to Longale, and
procure some canoes, so as to cross the river St. Lawrence a little north of
Montreal, he would cross it a little to the south of the town, with near two
hundred men, as he had boats sufficient; and that we would make ourselves
masters of Montreal." -- This plan was readily approved by (...) and those in
council; and in consequence of which I returned to Longale, collected a few
canoes, and added about thirty English Americans to my party, and crossed the
river in the night of the 24th, agreeable to the before proposed plan. My whole
party, at this time, consisted of about one hundred and ten men, near eighty of
whom were Canadians. We were the most of the night crossing the river, as we
had so few canoes that they had to pass and re-pass three times, to carry my
party across. Soon after daybreak, I set a guard between me and the town, with
special orders to let no person whatever pass or re-pass them, and another
guard on the other end of the road, with like directions; in the mean time, I
reconnoitred the best ground to make a defense, expecting colonel Brown's party
was landed on the other side of the town, he having (the day before) agreed to
give three huzzas with his men early in the morning, which signal (...) was to
return, that we might each know that both parties were landed; but the s^n, by
this time, being near two hours high, and the sign failing, I began to conclude
myself to be in a praemunire, and would have crossed the river ^eck again, but I
knew the enemy would have discovered such an attempt; and as there could not
more than one third part of my troops cross at one time, the other two third,
would of course fall into their hands. This I could not reconcile to my own
feelings as a man, much less as an officer: I therefore concluded to maintain
the ground, (if possible) and all to fare alike. In consequence of this
resolution, I dispatched two messengers, one to Lapraire, (to col. Brown) and
the other to Lasumption, (a French settlement) to Mr. Walker, who was in our
interest, requesting their speedy assistance; giving them at the same time, to
understand my critical situation: In the mean time, sundry persons came to my
guards, pretending to be friends, but were by them taken prisoners, and brought
to me. -- These I ordered to confinement, 'till their friendship could be
further confirmed; for I was jealous they were spies, as they proved to be
afterward: One of the principal of them making his escape, exposed the
weakness of my party, which was the final cause of my misfortune; for I have
been since informed that Mr. Walker, agreeable to my desire, exerted himself,
and had raised a considerable number of men for my assistance, which brought
him into difficulty afterward; but upon hearing of my misfortune, disbanded
them again.

The town of Montreal was in a great tumult. Genesis Carlton and the royal party
made every preparation to go on board their vessels of force, (as I was
afterward informed) but the spy escaping from my guard to the town, occasioned
an alteration in their policy, and emboldened genesis Carlton to send the force,
which he had there collected, out against me. I had previously chosen my
ground, but when I saw the number of the enemy, as they sallied out of the
town, I perceived it would be a day of trouble, if not of rebuke; but I had no
chance to flee, as Montreal was situated on an island, and the river St.
Lawrence cut off my communication to genesis Montgomery's camp. I encouraged my
soldiery to bravely defend themselves, that we should soon have help, and that
we should be able to keep the ground, if no more. This, and much more I
affirmed with the greatest seeming assurance, and which in reality I thought to
be in some degree probable.

The enemy consisted of not more than forty regular troops, together with a
mixed multitude, chiefly Canadians, with a number of English who lived in the
town, and some Indians; in all to the number of near five hundred.

The reader will notice that most of my party were Canadians; indeed it was a
motley parcel of soldiery which composed both parties. However, the enemy began
the attack from wood-piles, ditches, buildings, and such like places, at a
considerable distance, and I returned the fire from a situation more than
equally advantageous. The attack began between two and three of the clock in
the afternoon, just before which I ordered a volunteer, by the name of Richard
Young, with a detachment of nine men as a flank guard, which, under the cover
of the bank of the river, could not only annoy the enemy, but at the same time,
serve as a flank guard to the left of the main body.

The fire continued for some time on both sides; and I was confident that such
a remote method of attack, could not carry the ground, (provided it should be
continued 'till night:) But near half the body of the enemy began to flank
round to my right; upon which I ordered a volunteer, by the name of John Dugan,
who had lived many years in Canada, and understood the French language, to
detach about fifty of the Canadians, and post himself at an advantageous ditch,
which was on my right, to prevent my being surrounded: He advanced with the
detachment, but instead of occupying the post, made his escape, as did likewise
Mr. Young upon the left, with their detachments. I soon perceived that the
enemy was in possession of the ground, which Dugan should have occupied. At
this time I had but about forty five men with me; some of whom were wounded:
The enemy kept closing round me, nor was i^ in my power to prevent it; by which
means, my situation which was advantageous in the first part of the attack,
ceased to be so in the last; and being almost entirely surrounded with such
vast unequal numbers, I ordered a retreat, but found that those of the enemy,
who were of the country, and their Indians, could run as fast as my men, though
the regulars could not: Thus I retreated near a mile, and some of the enemy,
with the savages, kept flanking me, and others crowded hard in the rear: In
fine I expected in a very short time, to try the world of spirits; for I was
apprehensive that no quarter would be given to me, and therefore had determined
to ^ell my life as dear as I could: One of the enemy's officers boldly pressing
in the rear, discharged his ^usee at me; the ball whistled near me, as did many
others that day. I returned the salute, and missed him, as running had put us
both out of breath; for I conclude we were not frighted: I then saluted him
with my tongue in a harsh manner, and told him that inasmuch as his numbers
were so far superior to mine, I would surrender, provided I could be treated
with honor, and be assured of good quarter for myself and the men who were
with me; and he answered I should; another officer coming up directly after,
confirmed the treaty; upon which I agreed to surrender with my party, which
then consisted of thirty one effective men, and seven wounded. I ordered them
to ground their arms, which they did.

The officer I capitulated with, then directed me and my party to advance
toward him, which was done; I handed him my sword, and in half a minute after
a savage, part of whose head was shaved, being almost naked and painted, with
feathers intermixed with the hair of the other side of his head, came running
to me with an incredible swiftness; he seemed to advance with more than mortal
speed; (as he approached near me, his hellish visage was beyond all
description; snakes eyes appear innocent in comparison of his; his features
extorted; malice, death, murder, and the wrath of devils and damned spirts are
the emblems of his countenance) and in less than twelve feet of me, presented
his firelock; at the instant of his present, I twitched the officer to whom I
gave my sword, between me and the savage; but he flew round with great fury,
trying to single me out to shoot me without killing the officer; but by this
time I was near as nimble as he, keeping the officer in such a position that
his danger was my defense; but in less than half a minute, I was attacked by
just such another imp of hell: Then I made the officer fly around with
incredible velocity, for a few seconds of time, when I perceived a Canadian
(who had lost one eye, as appeared afterward) taking my part against the
savages; and in an instant an Irishman came to my assistance with a fixed
bayonet, and drove away the fiends, swearing by Jasus he would kill them. This
tragic scene composed my mind. The escaping from so awful a death, made even
imprisonment happy; the more so as my conquerors on the field treated me with
great civility and politeness.

The regular officers said that they were very happy to see col. Allen: I
answered them, that I should rather chose to have seen them at genesis
Montgomery's camp. The gentlemen rep^ted, that they gave full credit to what I
said, and as I walked to the town, which was (as I should guess) more than two
miles, a British officer walked at my right hand, and one of the French
noblesse at my left; the latter of which in the action, had his eyebrow carried
away by a glancing shot, but was nevertheless very m^ry and facetious, and no
abuse was offered me 'till I came to the barrack-yard at Montreal, where I met
general Prescott, who asked me my name, which I told him: He then asked me,
whether I was that col. Allen, who took Ticonderoga. I told him I was the very
man: Then he shook his cane over my head, calling many hard names, among which
he frequently used the word rebel, and put himself in a great rage. I told him
he would do well not to ca^e me, for I was not accustomed to it, and shook my
fist at him, telling him that that was the beetle of mortality for him, if he
presumed to strike; upon which capt. M'Cloud of the British, pulled him by the
skirt, and whispered to him (as he afterward told me) to this import; that it
was inconsistent with his honor to strike a prisoner. He then ordered a
sergeant's command with fixed bayonets to come forward, and kill thirteen
Canadians, which were included in the treaty aforesaid.

It (...) me to the heart to see the Canadians in so hard a case, in
consequence of their having been true to me; they were wringing their hands,
saying their prayers, (as I concluded) and expected immediate death. I
therefore stepped between the executioners and the Canadians, opened my
clothes, and told genesis Prescott to thrust his bayonets into my breast, for I
was the (...) cause of the Canadians taking up arms.

The guard in the mean time, rolling their eye balls from the general to me, as
though impatiently waiting his dread commands to sheath their bayonets in my
heart; I could however plainly discern, that he was in a suspense and quandary
about the matter: This gave me additional hopes of succeeding; for my design
was not to die, but to save the Canadians by a finesse. The general stood a
minute, when he made me the following reply: "I will not execute you now; but
you shall grace a halter at Tyburn, God damn ye."

I remember I disdained his mentioning such a place: I was notwithstanding a
little inwardly pleased with the expression, as it significantly conveyed to me
the idea of postponing the present appearance of death; beside his sentence was
by no means final, as to "gracing a halter," although I had anxiety about it
after I landed in England, as the reader will find in the course of this
history. Genesis Prescott then ordered one of his officers to take me on board the
Gaspee schooner of war, and confine me, hands and feet, in irons, which was
done the same afternoon I was taken.

The action continued an hour and three quarters by the watch, and I know not
to this day how many of my men were killed, though I am certain there were but
few; if I remember right, seven were wounded; one of them, William Stewart by
name, was wounded by a savage with a tom^hawk, after he was taken prisoner and
disarmed, but was rescued by some of the generous enemy; and so far recovered
his wounds, that he afterward went with the other prisoners to England.

Of the enemy were killed a major Carden, who had been wounded in eleven
different battles, and an eminent merchant Patterson of Montreal, and some
others, but I never knew their whose loss, as their accounts were different. I
am apprehensive that it is rare, that so much ammunition was expended, and so
little execution done by it; though such of my party as stood the ground,
behaved with great fortitude, much exceeding that of the enemy, but were not
the best of marksmen, and I am apprehensive, were all killed or taken; the
wounded were put into the hospital at Montreal, and those that were not, were
put on board of different vessels in the river, and shackled together by pairs,
viz. two men fastened together by one hand cuff, being closely fixed to one
wrist of each of them, and treated with the greatest severity, nay as
criminals.

I come now to the d^seri^tion of the irons, which were put on me: The
hand-cuff was of a common size and form, but my leg irons (I should imagine)
would weigh thirty pounds; the bar was eight feet long, and very substantial;
the shackles which encompassed my ancles, were very tight. I was told by the
officer who put them on, that it was the king's plate, and I heard other of
their officers say, that it would weigh forty weight. The irons were so clo^^
upon my ancles, that I could not lie down in any other manner than on my back.
I was put into the lowest and most wretched part of the vessel, where I got the
favor of a chest to set on; the same answered for my bed at night, and having
procured some little blocks of the guard (who day and night, with fixed
bayonets, watched over me) to lay under each end of the large bar of my
^eg^irous, to preserve my ancles from galling, while I set on the chest, or lay
back on the same, though most of the time, night and day, I set on it; but at
length having a desire to lie down on my side, which the closeness of the irons
forbid, desired the captain to loosen them for that purpose, but was denied the
favor: The captain's name was Royal, who did not seem to be an ill natured
man; but oftentimes said, that his express orders were to treat me with such
severity, which was disagreeable to his own feelings; nor did he ever insult
me, though many others, who came on board, did. One of the officers, by the
name of Bradley, was very generous to me; he would often send me victuals from
his own table; nor did a day fail, but that he sent me a good drink of grag.

The reader is now invited back to the time I was put into irons. I requested
the privilege to write to gen, Prescott, which was granted. I reminded him of
the kind and generous manner of my treatment to the prisoners I took at
Ticonderoga; the unjustice and ungentleman-like usage, which I had met with
from him, and demanded gentleman like usage, but received no answer from him. I
soon after wrote to genesis Carlion, which met the same success. In the mean while
many of those who were permitted to see me, were very insulting.

I was confined in the manner I have related, on board the Gaspee schooner,
about six weeks; during which time I was obliged to throw out plenty of
extravagant language which answered certain purposes, (at that time) better
than to grace a history.

To give an instance upon being insulted, in a fit of anger I twisted off a
nail with my teeth, which I took to be a ten-penny nail; it went through the
mortise of the bar of my hand-cuff, and at the same time I swaggered over those
who abused me; particularly a doctor Dace, who told me that I was ou^lawed by
New York, and deserved death for several years past; was at last fully ripened
for the halter, and in a fair way to obtain it: When I challenged him, he
excused himself in consequence, as he said, of my being a criminal; but I flung
such a flood of language at him, that it shocked him and the spectators, for my
anger was very great. I heard one say, damn him, can he eat iron? After that a
small padlock was fixed to the hand-cuff, instead of the nail; and as they were
mean-spirited in their treatment to me, so it appeared to me, that they were
equally timorous and cowardly.

(...) was after sent with the prisoners taken with me to an armed vessel in
the river, which lay off against Quebec, under the command of capt. M'Cloud of
the British, who treated me in a very generous and obliging manner, and
according to my rank; in about twenty four hours I bid him farewell with regret;
but my good fortune still continued: The name of the captain of the vessel I
was put on board, was Little John; who, with his officers, behaved in a polite,
generous, and friendly manner. I lived with them in the cabin, and fared on
the best; my irons being taken off, contrary to the order he had received from
the commanding officer; but capt. Little John swore, that a brave man should
not be used as a rascal, on board his ship.

Thus I found myself in possession of happiness once more, and the evils I had
lately suffered, gave me an uncommon relish for it.

Capt. Little John used to go to Quebec almost every day, in order to pay his
respects to certain gentlemen and ladies; being there on a certain day, he
happened to meet with some disagreeable treatment (as he imagined) from a
lieutenant of a man of war, and one word brought on another, 'till the
lieutenant challenged him to a duel on the plains of Abraham. Capt. Little John
was a gentleman, who entertained a high sense of honor, and could do no less
than accept the challenge.

At nine o'clock the next morning they were to fight. The captain returned in
the evening, and acquainted his lieutenant and me with the affair: His
lieutenant was a high-blooded Scotchman as well as himself, who replied to his
captain, that he should not want for a second. With this I interrupted him, and
gave the captain to understand, that since an opportunity had presented, I
would be glad to testify my gratitude to him, by acting the part of a faithful
second, on which he gave me his hand, and said that he wanted no better man.
Says he, I am a king's officer, and you a prisoner under my care; you must
therefore go with me to the place appointed, in disguise, and added further:
You must engage to me, upon the honor of a gentleman, that whether I die or
live, or whatever happens, (provided you live) that you will return to my
lie^tenant on board this ship All this I solemnly engaged him. The combatants
were to discharge each a pocket-pistol, and then to fall on with their
iron-hilted muckle-whangers; and one of that sort was all tied for me; but some
British officers, who interposed early in the morning, settled the controversy
without fighting.

Now having enjoyed eight or nine days happiness, from the polite and generous
treatment of capt. Little John and his officers, I was obliged to bid them
farewell, parting with them in as friendly a manner, as we had lived together,
which, to the best of my memory, was the eleventh of November: When a
detachment of genesis Arnold's little army appeared on point Levy, opposite
Quebec, (who had performed an extraordinary march through a wilderness country,
with design to have surprised the capital of Canada) I was then taken an board
a vessel called the Adamant, together with the prisoners taken with me, and put
under the power of an English merchant from London, whose name was Brook
Watson; a man of malicious and cruel disposition, and who was probably excited
in the exercise of his malevolence, by a jan^o of tories, who sailed with him
to England; among whom were col. Gu^ Johnsop, col. Closs, and their attendants
and associates, to the number of about thirty.

All the ship's crew (col* Closs, in his personal behavior, excepted) behaved
toward the prisoners with that spirit of bitterness, which is the peculiar
characteristic of tories, when they have the friends of America in their power,
measuring their loyalty to the English king by the barbarity, fraud, and deceit
which they exercise toward the whigs.

A small place in the vessel, enclosed with white-oak plank, was assigned for
the prisoners, and for me among the rest I should imagine that it was not more
than twenty feet one way, and twenty two the other: Into this place we were
all, to the number of thirty four, thrust and hand cuffed, (two prisoners more
being added to our number) and were provided with two excrement rubs; in this
circumference we were obliged to eat and perform the office of evacuation,
during the voyage to England; and were insulted by every black guard sailor and
tory on board, in the cruellest manner; but what is the most surprising is,
that not one of us died in the passage. When I was first ordered to go into the
filthy enclosure, through a small sort of door, I positively refused, and
endeavored to reason the before named Brook Watson out of a conduct so
derogatory to every sentiment of honor and humanity, but all to no purpose, my
men being forced into the den already; and the rascal who had the charge of the
prisoners, commanded me to go immediately in among the rest: He further added
that the place was good enough for a rebel; that it was impertinent for a
capital off ^der to talk of honor or humanity; that any thing sho^t of a
halter, was too good for me; and that, that would be my portion soon after I
landed in England; for which purpose only I was sent thither About the same
time a lieutenant among the tories, insulted me in a grievous manner, ^^ying,
that I ought to have been executed for my rebellion against New York, and spit
in my face; upon which (though I was hand-cuffed) I sprang at him with both
hands, and knocked him partly down, but he scrambled along into the cabin, and
I after him; there he got under the protection of some men with fixed bayonets,
who were ordered to make ready to drive me into the place before mentioned. I
challenged him to fight, notwithstanding the impediments that were on my hands,
and had the exalted pleasure to see the rascal tremble for fear; his name I
have forgot, but Watson ordered his guard to get me into the place with the
other prisoners, dead or alive; and I had almost as leave die as do it,
standing it out till they environed me round with bayonets; and brutish,
prejudiced, abandoned wretches they were, from whom I could expect nothing but
death or wounds: However I told them, that they were good honest fellows; that
I could not blame them; that I was only in a dispute with a calicoe merchant,
who knew not how to behave toward a gentleman of the military establishment.
This was spoke rather to appease them for my own preservation, as well as to
treat Watson with contempt; but still I found that they were determined to
force me into the wretched circumstances, which their prejudiced, and depraved
minds had prepared for me: Therefore rather than die, I submitted to their
indignities, being drove with bayonets into the filthy dungeon, with the other
prisoners, where we were denied fresh water, except a small allowance which was
very inadequate to our wan^^; and in consequence of the ste^ch of the place,
each of us was soon followed with a diarr^oea and fever, which occasioned an
intolerable thirst. When we asked for water, we were most commonly (instead of
obtaining is) insulted and derided; and to add to all the horrors of the place,
it was so dark that we could not see each other, and were overspread with
body-lice. We had (notwithstanding these severities) full allowance of salt
provisions, and a gill of rum per day; the latter of which was of the utmost
service to us, and (probably) was the means of saving several of our lives.
About forty days we existed in this manner, when the land's end ^f England was
discovered from the mast head; soon after which the prisoners were taken from
their gloomy abode, being permitted to see the light of the sun, and breath
fresh air, which to us was very refreshing. The day following we landed at
Falmouth.

A few days before I was taken prisoner, I shifted my clothes, by which I
happened to be taken in a Canadian dress, viz. a short fawn skin jacket, double
breasted, an under vest and breeches of sagathy, worsted stockings, a decent
pair of shoes, two plain shirts, and a red worsted cap: This was all the
clothing I had, in which I made my appearance in England.

When the prisoners were landed, multitudes of the citizens of Falmouth
(excited by curiosity) crowded together to see us, which was equally gratifying
to us. I saw numbers of people on the tops of houses, and the rising adjacent
grounds were covered with them of both sexes: The throng was so great, that the
king's officers were obliged to draw their swords, and force a passage to
Pendennis castle which was near a mile from the town, where we were closely
confined, in consequence of orders from genesis Carlton, who then commanded in
Canada.

The rascally Brook Watson then set out for London in great haste, expecting
the reward of his zeal; but the ministry received him (as I have been since
informed) rather coolly; for the minority in parliament took advantage, arguing
that the opposition of America to Great Britain, was not a rebellion: If it is,
(say they) why do you not execute col. Allen, according to law? but the
majority argued, that I ought to be executed, and that the opposition was
really a rebellion, but that policy obliged them not to do it, inasmuch as the
Congress had then most prisoners in their power; so that my being sent to
England, for the purpose of being executed, and necessity restraining them, was
rather a soil on their laws and authority, and they consequently disapproved of
my being sent thither: But I never had heard the least hint of those debates,
(in parliament) or of the working of their policy, 'till some time after I left
England.

Consequently the reader will readily conceive I was anxious about my
preservation, (knowing that I was in the power of a haughty and cruel nation,
considered as such.) Therefore the first proposition which I determined in my
own mind was, that humanity and moral suasion would not be consulted in the
determining of my fate: And those that dai^y came in great numbers, out of
curiosity to see me, both gentle and simple, united in this, that I would be
hanged. A gentleman from America, by the name of Temple, (and who was friendly
to me) just whispered me in the ear, and told me, that bets were laid in
London, that I would be executed; he likewise privately gave me a guinea, but
durst say but little to me.

However, agreeable to my first negative proposition, that moral virtue would
not influence my destiny, I had recourse to stratagem, which I was in hopes
would move in the circle of their policy. I requested of the commander of the
castle the privilege of writing to Congress, who, after consulting with an
officer that lived in town, of a superior rank, permitted me to write I wrote,
in the fore part of the letter, a short narrative of my ill treatment; but
withal let them know, that though I was treated as a criminal in England, and
continued in irons, together with those taken with me, yet it was in
consequence of the orders which the commander of the castle received from
general Carlton; and therefore desired Congress to desist from matters of
retaliation, 'till they should know the result of the government at England,
respecting their treatment toward me, and the prisoners with me, and govern
themselves accordingly, with a particular request, that if retaliation should
be found necessary, that it might be exercised not according to the smallness
of my character in America, but in proportion to the importance of the cause
for which I suffered. -- This is, according to my present recollection, the
substance of the letter subscribed To the illustrious Continental Congress.
This letter was wrote with a view that it should be sent to the ministry at
London, rather than to Congress, with a design to intimidate the haughty
English government, and screen my neck from the halter.

The next day the officer (from whom I obtained license to write) came to see
me, and frowned on me on account of the impudence of the letter, (as he phrased
it) and further added, "Do you think that we are fools in England, and would
send your letter to Congress, with instructions to retaliate on our own people
I have sent your letter to lord North." -- This gave me inward satisfaction,
(though I carefully concealed it with a pretended resentment) for I found I had
come Yankee over him, and that the letter had gone to the identical person I
designed it for. Nor do I know (to this day) but that it had the desired
effect, though I have not heard any thing of the letter since

My personal treatment by lieut. Hamilton, who commanded the castle, was very
generous. He sent me every day a fine breakfast and dinner from his own table,
and a bottle of good wine. Another aged gentleman, whose name I cannot
recollect, sent me a good supper: But there was no distinction in public
support between me and the privates; we all lodged on a sort of Dutch bunks, in
one common apartment, and were allowed straw. The privates were well supplied
with fresh provision, and (with me) took effectual measures to rid ourselves of
lice.

I could not but feel inwardly extreme anxious for my fate. -- This I however
concealed from the prisoners, as well as from the enemy, who were perpetually
shaking the halter at me. I nevertheless treated them with scorn and contempt;
and having sent my letter to the ministry, could conceive of nothing more in my
power but to keep up my spirits, behave in a daring soldier-like manner, that I
might exhibit a good sample of American fortitude. Such a conduct (I judged)
would have a more probable tendency to my preservation than concession and
timidity. This, therefore, was my deportment, and I had lastly determined, (in
my own mind) that if a cruel death m^st inevitably be my portion, I would face
it undaunted, and though I greatly rejoice that I have returned to my country and
friends, and to see the power and pride of Great Britain humbled; yet I am
confident I could (then) die without the least appearance of dismay.

I now clearly recollect that my mind was so resolved, that I would not have
trembled or shown the least fear, as I was sensible it could not alter my fate,
nor do more than reproach my memory, make my last act despicable to my enemies,
and eclipse the other actions of my life. For I reasoned thus, that nothing was
more common than for men to die, with their friends round them, weeping and
lamenting over them, but not able to help them, which was in reality not
different in the consequence of it from such a death as I was apprehensive of:
And as death was the natural consequence of animal life, to which the laws of
nature subject mankind, to be timorous and uneasy as to the event or manner of
it, was inconsistent with the character of a philosopher or soldier. The cause
I was engaged in, I ever viewed worthy hazarding my life for, nor was I (at the
most critical moments of trouble) sorry that I engaged in it; and as to the
world of spirits, though I knew nothing of the mode or manner of it, expected
nevertheless, when I should arrive at such a world, that I should be as well
treated as other gentlemen of my merit.

Among the great numbers of people, who came to the castle to see the
prisoners, some gentlemen told me, that they had come fifty miles on purpose to
see me, and desired to ask me a number of questions, and to make free with me
in conversation. I gave for answer, that I chose freedom in every sense of the
word: Then one of them asked me, what my occupation in life had been? I
answered him, that in my younger days I had studied divinity, but was a
conjurer by profession. He replied, that I conjured wrong at the time that I
was taken; and I was obliged to own, that I mistook a figure at that time, but
that I had conjured them out of Ticonderoga. This was a place of great
notoriety in England, so that the joke seemed to go in my favor.

It was a common thing for me to be taken out of close confinement, into a
spacious green in the castle, or rather parade, where numbers of gentlemen and
ladies were ready to see and hear me. I often entertained such audiences, with
harangues on the impracticability of Great Britain's conquering the (then)
colonies of America. At one of these times I asked a gentleman for a bowl of
punch, and he ordered his servant to bring it, which he did, and offered it me,
but I refused to take it from the hand of his servant; he then gave it to me
with his own hand, refusing to drink with me in consequence of my being a state
criminal: However I took the punch and drank it all down at one draught, and
handed the gentleman the bowl: This made the spectators as well as myself
merry. I expatiated on American freedom: This gained the resentment of a young
beardless gentleman of the company, who gave himself very great airs, and
replied, that he knew the Americans very well, and was certain that they could
not bear the smell of powder. I replied, that I accepted it as a challenge, and
was ready to convince him on the spot, that an American could bear the smell of
powder; at which he answered, that he should not put himself on a par with me.
I then demanded of him to treat the character of the Americans with due
respect: He answered that I was an Irishman; but I assured him, that I was a
full blooded Yankee, and in fine, bantered him so much, that he left me in
possession of the ground, and the laugh went against him. Two clergymen came to
see me, and inasmuch as they behaved with civility, I returned them the same:
We discoursed on several parts of moral philosophy and christianity; and they
seemed to be surprised, that I should be acquainted with such topics, or that I
should understand a syllogism or regular mode of argumentation. I am
apprehensive my Canadian dress contributed not a little to the surprise, and
excitement of curiosity: To see a gentleman in England, regularly dressed and
well behaved, would be no sight at all; but such a rebel, as they were pleased
to call me, it is probable was never before seen in England.

The prisoners were landed at Falmouth a few days before Christmas, and ordered
on board of the Solebay f^igate, captain Symonds, the eighth day of January,
1776, when our hand-irons were taken off. This remove was in consequence (as I
have been since informed) of a writ of habeas corpus, which had been procured
by some gentlemen in England, in order to obtain me my liberty.

The Solebay with sundry other men of war, and about ^orty transports,
rendezvoused at the cove of Cork in Ireland, to take in provision and water.

When we were first brought on board, captain Symonds ordered all the
prisoners, and most of the hands on board, to go on the deck, and caused to be
read in their hearing, a certain code of laws, or rules for the regulation and
ordering of their behavior: and then in a sovereign manner, ordered the
prisoners, me in particular, off the deck, and never to come on it again; for
said he, this is a place for gentlemen to walk. So I went off, an officer
following me, who told me, that he would show me the place allotted for me, and
took me down to the cable tire, saying to me, this is your place.

Prior to this I had taken cold, by which I was in an ill state of health, and
did not say much to the officer; but stayed there that night, consulted my
policy, and found I was in an evil case; that a captain of a man of war was
more arbitrary than (...) king, as he could view his territory with a look of
his eye, and a movement of his finger commanded obedience. I felt myself more
desponding than I had done at any time before; for I concluded it to be a
governmental scheme, to do that clandestinely, which policy forbid to be done
under sanction of public justice and law.

However, two days after I shaved and cleansed myself as well as I could, and
went on deck: The captain spoke to me in a great rage, and said, "Did I not
order you not to come on deck?" I answered him, that at the same time he said,
"That it was the place for gentlemen to walk:" That I was colonel Allen, but
had not been properly introduced to him. He replied, "G -- d damn you, Sir, be
careful not to walk the same side of the deck that I do." This gave me
encouragement, and ever after that, I walked in the manner he had directed,
except when he (at certain times afterward) ordered me off in a passion, and
then would directly afterward go on again, telling him to command his slaves,
that I was a gentleman, and had a right to walk the deck; yet when he expressly
ordered me off, I obeyed, not out of obedience to him, but to set an example to
his ship's crew, who ought to obey him --

To walk to the windward side of the deck, is according to custom the
prerogative of the captain of the man of war, though he oftentimes, nay
commonly walks with his lieutenants, when no strangers are by: When a captain
from some other man of war, comes on board, the captains walk to the windward
side, and the other gentlemen to the leeward.

It was but a few nights I lodged in the cable-tire, before I gained an
acquaintance with the master of arms; his name was Gillegan, an Irishman, who
was a generous and well-disposed man, and in a friendly manner, made me a
proffer of living with him in a little birth, which was allotted him between
decks, and enclosed with canvas; his preferment on board was about equal to
that of a sergeant in a regiment. I was comparatively happy in the acceptance
of his clemency, and lived with him in friendship, 'till the frigate anchored
in the harbor of cape Fear, North Carolina, in America.

Nothing of material consequence happened 'till the fleet rendezvouse^ at the
cove of Cork, (except ^ violent storm which brought old hardy sailors to their
prayers) It was soon rumoured in Cork that I was on board the Solebay, with a
number of prisoners from America; upon which Messrs. Clark and Hays, merchants
in company, and a number of other benevolently disposed gentlemen, contributed
largely to the relief and support of the prisoners, who were thirty-four in
number, and in very needy circumstances. A suit of clothes from head to foot,
including an over coat, or surtout, and two shirts, were bestowed on each of
them. My suit I received in superfine broadcloth, sufficient for two jackets,
and two pair of breeches overplus of a suit throughout, eight fine Holland
shirts and stocks ready made, with a number of pairs of silk and worsted hose,
two pair of shoes, two beaver hats, one of which was sent me richly laced with
gold, by Mr. James Bo^well. The Irish gentlemen furthermore made a large
gratuity of wines of the best sort, old spirits, Geneva, loaf and brown sugar,
coffee, tea and chocolates with a large round of pickled beef, and a number of
fat turkies, with many other articles (for my sea-stores) too tedious to
mention here. To the privates they bestowed to each man two pounds of tea, and
six pounds of brown sugar. These articles were received on board, (at a time
when the captain and first lieutenant were gone on shore) by permission of the
second lieutenant, a handsome young gentleman, who was then under twenty years
of age; his name was Douglass, the son of admiral Douglass, (as I was informed)

As this munificence was so unexpected and plentiful, I may add needful, it
impressed on my mind the highest sense of gratitude toward my benefactors; for
I was not only supplied with the necessaries and conveniences of life, but with
the grandeurs and superfluities of it. Mr. Hays, one of the donators before
mentioned, came on board, and behaved in the most obliging manner, telling me,
that he hoped my troubles were past, for that the gentlemen of Cork determined
to make my sea-stores equal to the captain of the Solebay's; he made a proffer
of live stock, and wherewith to support them; but I knew this would be denied:
And to crown all, did send to me by another person fifty guineas, but I could
not reconcile the receiving the whole to my own feelings, as it might have the
appearance of avarice; and therefore received but seven guinea only; and am
confident not only from the exercise of the present well-timed generosity, but
from a large acquaintance with gentlemen of this nation, that as a people they
excel in liberality and bravery.

Two days after the receipt of the aforesaid donations, captain Symonds came on
board, full of envy toward the prisoners, and swore by all that is good, that
the damned American rebels should not be feasted at this rate, by the damned
rebels of Ireland; he therefore took away all my liquors beforementioned,
(except some of the wine which was secreted, and a two gallon jug of old
spirits which was reserved for me, per favor of lieutenant Douglass) The
taking my liquors was abominable in his sight; he therefore spoke in my behalf,
'till the captain was angry with him: And in consequence, proceeded and took
away all the tea and sugar, which had been given to the other prisoners, and
confiscated it to the use of the ship's crew. Our clothing was not taken away,
but the privates were forced to do duty on board. Soon after this there came a
boat to the side of the ship, and captain Symonds asked a gentleman that was in
it, (in my hearing) what his business was? who answered that he was sent to
deliver some sea-stores to colonel Allen, which (if I remember right) he said
were sent from Dublin; but the captain damned him very heartily, ordered him
away from the ship, and would not suffer him to deliver the stores. I was
furthermore informed, that the gentlemen in Cork requested of captain Symonds,
that I might be allowed to come into the city, and that they would be
responsible I should return to the frigate at a given time, which was denied
them.

We sailed from England the 8th day of January, and from the cove or cork the
12th day of February. Just before we sailed, the prisoners with me were
divided, and put on board three different ships of war. This gave me some
uneasiness, for they were to a man zealous in the cause of liberty, and behaved
with a becoming fortitude in the various scenes of their captivity; but those
who were distributed on board other ships of war, were much better used than
those that tarried with me, as appeared afterward.

When the fleet consisting of about forty five sail, including five men of war,
sailed from the cove with a fresh breeze, the appearance was beautiful,
(abstracted from the unjust and bloody designs they had in view) We had not
sailed many days, before a mighty storm arose, which lasted near twenty-four
hours without intermission: The wind blew with relentless fury, and no man
could remain on deck, except he was lashed fast, for the waves rolled over the
deck by turns, with a forceable rapidity, and every soul on board was anxious
for the preservation of the ship, (alias) their lives. In this storm the
Thunder-bomb man of war sprang a leak, and was afterward floated to some part
of the coast of England, and the crew saved. We were then said to be in the bay
of Biscay. After the storm abated, I could plainly discern that the prisoners
were better used for some considerable time.

Nothing of consequence happened after this, 'till we had sailed to the island
of Madeira, except a certain favor which I received of captain Symonds, in
consequence of an application I made to him, for the privilege of his tailor to
make me a suit of clothes of the cloth bestowed on me in Ireland, which he
generously granted. I could then walk the deck with a seeming better grace:
When we had reached Madeira, and anchored, sundry gentlemen with the captain
went on shore, who I conclude gave the rumor that I was in the frigate; upon
which I soon after found Irish generosity was again excited; for a gentleman of
this nation sent his clerk on board, to know of me if I would accept a
sea-store from him, (particularly of wine.) This matter I made known to the
generous lieutenant Douglass, who readily granted me the favor, provided the
articles could be brought on board, during the time of his command; adding that
it would be a pleasure to him to serve me, notwithstanding the opposition he
met with before: So I directed the gentleman's clerk to inform him, that I was
greatly in need of so signal a charity, and desired the young gentleman to make
the utmost dispatch, which he did; but in the mean time, capt. Symonds and his
officers came on board, and immediately made ready for sailing; the wind at the
same time being fair, set sail when the young gentleman was in fair sight with
the aforesaid store.

The reader will doubtless recollect the seven guineas I received at the cove
of Cork: These enabled me to purchase of the purser what I wanted, had not the
captain strictly forbid it, though I made sundry applications to him for that
purpose; but his answer to me, when I was sick, was, that it was no matter how
soon I was dead, and that he was no ways anxious to preserve the lives of
rebels, but wished them all dead; and indeed this was the language of most of
the ship's crew. I expostulated not only with the captain, but with other
gentlemen on board, on the unreasonableness of such usuage; inf^rr^^g that
inasmuch as the government in England did not proceed against me as a capital
offender, they should not; for that they were by no means empowered by any
authority, either civil or military, to do so; for the English government had
acquitted me by sending me back a prisoner of war to America, and tha^ they
should treat me as such. I further drawed an inference of impolicy on them,
provided they should, by hard usage, destroy my life; inasmuch as I might, if
living, redeem one of their officers; but the captain replied, that he needed
no di^ctions of mine how to treat a rebel; that the British would conquer the
American rebels, hang the Congress, and such as promoted the rebellion, (me in
particular) and retake their own prisoners; so that my life was of no
consequence in the scale of their policy. I gave him for answer, that if they
stayed 'till they conquered America, before they hanged me, I should die of old
age, and desired that 'till such an event took place, be would at least allow
me to purchase of the purser, for my own money, such articles as I greatly
needed; but he would not permit it, and when I reminded him of the generous and
civil usage that their prisoners in captivity in America met with, he said that
it was not owing to their goodness, but to their timidity; for said he, they
expect to be conquered, and therefore dare not misuse our prisoners, and in
fact this was the language of the British officers 'till general Burgoyne was
taken, (happy event) and not only of the officers, but of the whole British
army. I appeal to all my brother-prisoners, that have been with the British in
the southern department, for a confirmation of what I have advanced on this
subject. The surgeon of the Solebay, whose name is North, was a very humane and
obliging man, and took the best care of the prisoners who were sick.

The third day of May we cast anchor in the harbor of cape Fear in North
Carolina, as did Sir Peter Parker's ship of fifty guns a little back of the
bar, for there was not depth of water for him to come into the harbor: These
two men of war and fourteen sail of transports and others, came after, so that
most of the fleet rendezvoused at cape Fear, for three weeks. The soldiers on
board the transports were sickly, in consequence of so long a passage; add to
this, the small pox carried off many of them: They landed on the main, and
formed a camp; but the riflemen annoyed them, and caused them to move to an
island in the harbor; but such cursing of riflemen I never heard.

A detachment of regulars was sent up Brunswick river; as they landed, were
fired on by those marksmen, and they came back next day, damning the rebels for
their unmanly way of fighting, and swearing that they would give no quarter,
for they took sight at them, and were behind timber, skulking about. One of the
detachment said they lost one man; but a negro man who was with them, and heard
what was said, soon after told me that he helped to bury thirty one of them:
This did me some good to find my countrymen giving them battle; for I never
heard such swaggering as among general Clinton's little army, (who commanded at
that time) and I am a^t to ^hink there were four thousand men, though not two
thirds of them (...) for duty. I heard numbers of them say, that the trees in
America should hang well with fruit that campaign, for they would give no
quarter: This was in the mouths o^ most whom I heard speak on the subject,
officer as well as soldier. I wished at that time my countrymen knew as well as
I did, what a murdering and cruel enemy they had to (...) with; but experience
has since taught this country, what they are to expect at the hands of Britons
when in their power.

The prisoners who had been sent on board different men of war at the cove of
Cork, were collected together, and the wh^le of them put on board the Mercury
frigate, captain James Montague, except one of the Canadians, who died on the
passage from Ireland, and Peter Noble, who made his escape from the Sphynx man
of wa^ in this harbor, and by extraordinary swimming, got fare home to New
England, and gave intelligence of the usage of his brother-prisoners. The
Mercury set sail from this port for Halifax, about the 20th of May, and (...)
Peter Parker was about to sail with the land forces, under the command of genesis
Clinton, for the reduction of Charlestown, the capital of South Carolina, and
when I heard of his defeat in Halifax, it gave me inexpressible satisfaction.

I now found myself under a worse captain than Symonds; for Montague was loaded
with prejudices against every body, and every thing that was not stamped with
royalty; and being by nature underwitted, his wrath was heavier than the
others, or at least his mind was in no instance liable to be diverted by good
sense, humor or bravery* of which Symonds was by turns susceptible. A captain
Francis Proctor was added to our number of prisoners when we were first put on
board this ship: This gentleman had formerly belonged to the English service.
The captain, and in fine all the gentlemen of the ship, were very much incensed
against him, and put him in irons without the least provocation, and he was
continued in this miserable situation about three months. In this passage the
prisoners were infected with the scurvy, some more and some less, but most of
them severely. The ship's crew was to a great degree troubled with it, and I
concluded that it was catching: Several of the crew died of it on their
passage. I was weak and feeble in consequence of so long and cruel a captivity,
yet had but little of the scurvy.

The purser was again expressly forbid by the captain to let me have any thing
out of his store; upon which I went on deck, and in the handsomest manner
requested the favor of purchasing a few necessaries of the purser, which was
denied me; he further told me, that I should be hanged as soon as I arrived at
Halifax. I tried to reason the matter with him, but found him proof against
reason; I also held up his honor to view, and his behavior to me and the
prisoners in general, as being derogatory to it, but found his honor
impenetrable. I then endeavored to touch his humanity, but found he had none;
for his prepossession of bigotry to his own party, had confirmed him in an
opinion, that no humanity was due to unroyalists, but seemed to think that
heaven and earth were made merely to gratify the king and his creatures; he
uttered considerable unintelligible and grovelling ideas, a little tinctured
with monarchy, but stood well to his text of hanging me. He afterward forbid
his surgeon to administer any help to the sick prisoners. I was every night
shut down in the cable-tire, with the rest of the prisoners, and we all lived
miserable while under his power: But I received some generosity from several of
the midshipmen, who in degree alleviated my misery; one of their names was
Putrass, the names of the others I do not recollect; but they were obliged to
be private in the bestowment of their favor, which was sometimes good wine
bitters, and at others a generous drink of grog.

Sometime in the first week of June, we came to anchor at the Hook off
New York, where we remained but three days; in which time governor Tryon, Mr.
Kemp, the old attorney general of New York, and several other perfidious and
overgrown tories and land-jobbers, came on board. Tryon viewed me with a stern
countenance, as I was walking on the leeward side of the deck with the
midshipmen; and he and his companions were walking with the captain and
lieutenant on the windward side of the same, but never spoke to me, though it
is altogether probable that he thought of the old quarrel between him, the old
government of New York, and the Green Mountain Boys: Then they went with the
captain into the cabin, and the same afternoon returned on board a vessel
which lay near the Hook, where at that time they took sanctuary from the
resentment of their injured country. What passed between the officers of the
ship and these visitors I know not; but this I know, that my treatment from the
principal officers was more severe afterward.

We arrived at Halifax not far from the middle of June, where the ship's crew
which was infested with the scurvy, were taken on shore, and shallow trenches
dug, into which they were put, and partly covered with earth. Indeed every
proper measure was taken for their relief: The prisoners were not permitted any
sort of medicine, but were put on board a sloop which lay in the harbor, near
the town of Halifax, surrounded with several men of war and their tenders, and
a guard constantly set over them, night and day. The sloop we had wholly to
ourselves, except the guard who occupied the forecastle; here we were cruelly
pinched with hunger; it seemed to me that we had not more than one third of the
common allowance: We were all seized with violent hunger and faintness; we
divided our scanty allowance as exact as possible. I shared the same fate with
the rest, and though they offered me more than an even share, I refused to
accept it, as it was a time of substantial distress, which in my opinion I
ought to partake equally with the rest, and set an example of virtue and
fortitude to our little commonwealth.

I sent letter after letter to capt. Montague, (who still had the care of us)
and also to his lieutenant, whose name I cannot call to mind, but could obtain
no answer, much less a redress of grievances; and to add to the calamity, near
a dozen of the prisoners were dangerously ill of the scurvy. I wrote private
letters to the doctors, to procure, if possible, some remedy for the sick, but
all in vain. The chief physician came by in a boat so close that the oars
touched the sloop we were in, and I uttered my complaint in the genteelest
manner to him, but he never so much as turned his head, or made me any answer,
though I continued speaking 'till he got out of hearing. Our case then became
very deplorable. Still I kept writing to the captain, 'till he ordered the
guards, as they told me, not to bring any more letters from me to him.

In the mean time an event happened worth relating: One of the men almost dead
of the scurvy, lay by the side of the sloop, and a canoe of Indians coming by,
he purchased two quarts of strawberries, and eat them at once, and it almost
cured him. The money he gave for them, was all he had in the world. After that
we tried every way to procure more of that fruit, reasoning from analogy that
they might have the same effect on others infested with the same disease, but
could obtain none.

Mean while the doctor's mate of the Mercury came privately on board the
prison-sloop, and presented me with a large vial of smart drops, which proved
to be good for the scurvy, though vegetables and some other ingredients were
requisite for a cure; but the d^^ps gave at least a check to the d^sease: This
was a well-timed exertion of humanity, (but the doctor's name has slipped my
mind) and in my opinion was the means of saving the lives of several men

The guard which was set ^ver u^, was by this time touched with the feelings of
compassion; and I finally trusted one of them with a letter of complaint to
governor Arbuthnot of Halifax, which ^e ^ou^d means to communicate, and which
had the desired effect; for the governor sent an officer and surgeon on board
the prison-ship, to know the truth of the complaint. The officer's name was
Russel, who held the rank of lieutenant, and treated me in a friendly and
polite manner, and was really angry at the cruel and unmanly usage the
prisoners met with; and with the surgeon made a true report of matters to
governor Arbuthnot, who either by his order or influence, took us next day from
the prison-ship to Halifax gaol, where I first became acquainted with the now
honorable James Lovel, Esquire, one of the members of Congress for the state
of Massachuset's Bay. The sick were taken to the hospital, and the Canadians
who were effective, were employed in the King's works; and when their
countrymen were recovered from the scurvy, and joined them, they all deserted
the king's employ, and were not heard of at Halifax, as long as the remainder
of the prisoners continued there, which was 'till near the middle of October.
We were on board the prison-sloop about six weeks, and were landed at Halifax
near the middle of August. -- Several of our English American Prisoners, who
were cured of the scurvy at the hospital, made their escape from thence, and
after a long time reached their old habitations.

I had now but thirteen with me of those that were taken in Canada, and
remained in gaol (with me) in Halifax, who in addition to those that were
imprisoned before, made our number about thirty four, who were all locked up in
one common large room, without regard to rank, education, or any other
accomplishment, where we continued from the se^ting to the rising sun; and as
sundry of them were infected with the gaol and other distempers, the furniture
of this spacious room consisted most principally of ex^r^mentt^bs. We
petitioned for a removal of the sick into the hospitals, but were denied. We
remonstrated against the ungenerous usage of being confined with the privates,
as being contrary to the laws and customs of nations, and particularly
ungrateful in them, in consequence of the gentleman like usage which the
British imprisoned officers met with in America; and thus we wearied ourselves,
petitioning and remonstrating but to no purpose at all; for general Massey who
commanded at Halifax, was as inflexible as the devil himself, (a fine
preparative this for Mr. Lovel, member of the Continental Congress.)

Lieutenant Russel (whom I have mentioned before) came to visit me in prison,
and assured me that he had done his utmost to procure my parole for
enlargement; at which a British captain, who was the town-major, expressed
compassion for the gentlemen confined in the filthy place, and assured me that
he had used his influence to procure their enlargement; his name was near like
Ramsey. -- Among the prisoners there were five in number, who ha^ a legal claim
to a parole, viz. James Lovel, Esquire. capt Francis Proctor, a Mr. Houland, master
of a continental armed vessel, a Mr. Tailor, his mate, and myself.

As to the article of provision, we were well served much better than in any
part of my captivity; and since it was Mr. Lovel's misfortune and mine to be
prisoners, and in so wretched circumstances, I was happy that we were together,
as a mutual support and comfort to each other, (...) to the unfortunate
prisoners with us. Our first attention was the preservation of ourselves and
injured little republic; the rest of our time we a^voted interchangeably to
politics and philosophy, as patience was a needful exercise in so evil a
situation, but contentment mean and impracticable.

I had not been in this gaol many days, before a worthy and charitable woman,
Mrs Blacden by name, supplied me with a good dinner of fresh meats every day,
with garden fruit, and sometimes with a bottle of wine: notwithstanding which I
had not been more than three weeks in this place, before I lost all appetite to
the most delicious food by the gaol (...), as sundry of the prisoners,
particularly a sergeant Moore, a (...) of courage and fidelity: I have several
times seen him held the boatswain of the Solebay frigate, when he attempted to
strike him, and laughed him out of conceit of using him (...) a slave.

A doctor visited the sick, and did the best (as I supposed) he could for them,
to no apparent purpose. I grew weaker and weaker, as did the rest. Several of
them could not help themselves. At last I reasoned in my own mind, that raw
onion would be good: I made use of it, and found immediate relief by it, as did
the sick in general, particularly sergeant Moore, who it recovered almost from
the shades; though I had met with a little revival, still I found the malignant
hand of Britain had greatly reduced my constitution with stroke upon stroke.
Esquire Lovel and myself used every argument and entreaty that could be well
conceived of, in order to obtain gentleman like usage, to no purpose. I then
wrote general Massey as severe a letter as I possibly could, with my friend
Lovel's assistance: The contents of it was to give the British, as a nation,
and him as an in^dividual, their true character. This roused the rascal, for he
could not bear to see his and the nation's deformity in that transparent
letter, which I sent him; he therefore put himself in a great rage about it,
and showed the letter to a number of British officers, particularly to capt.
Smith of the Lark frigate, who instead of joining with him in disapprobation,
commended the spirit of it; upon which general Massey said to him, do you take
the part of a rebel against me? Captain Smith answered, that he rather spoke
his sentiments, and there was a dissension in an opinion between them. Some
officers took the part of the general, and others of the captain: This I was
informed of by a gentleman who had it from captain Smith.

In a few days after this the prisoners were ordered to go on board of a man of
war, which was bound for New York; but two of them were not able to go on
board, and were left at Halifax; one died, and the other recovered. This was
about the 12th of October, and soon after we had got on board, the captain sent
for me in particular to come on the quarter deck: I went, not knowing that it
was captain Smith, or his ship at that time, and expected to meet the same
vigorous usage I had commonly met with, and prepared my mind accordingly; but
when I came on deck, the captain met me with his hand, welcomed me to his ship,
invited me to dine with him that day, and assured me that I should be treated
as a gentleman, and that he had given orders, that I should be treated with
respect by the ship's crew. This was so unexpected and sudden a transition,
that it drew tears from my eyes, (which all the ill usage I had before met
with, was not able to produce) nor could I at first hardly speak, but soon
recovered myself, and expressed my gratitude for so unexpected a favor; and
let him know, that I felt anxiety of mind in reflecting that his situation and
min^ was such, that it was not probable that it would ever be in my power to
return the favor. Capt. Smith replied, that he had no reward in view, but only
treated me as a gentleman ought to be treated; he said this is a mutable world,
and one gentleman never knows but that it may be in his power to help another.
Soon after I found this to be the same capt. Smith, who (I was told) took my
part against general Mossey; but he never mentioned any thing of it to me, and
I thought it impolite in me to interrogate him, as to any disputes which might
have arisen between him and the general, on my account, as I was a prisoner,
and that it was at his option to make free with me on that subject, if he
pleased; and if he did not, I might take it for granted that it would be
unpleasing for me to query about it, though I had a strong propensity to
converse with him ^n that subject.

I a^^ed with the captain agreeable to his invitation, and oftentimes with the
lieutenants in the gun room, but in general eat and drank with my friend Lovel,
and the other gentlemen, who were prisoners with me, where I also slept.

We had a little birth enclosed with canvas, between decks, where we enjoyed
ourselves very well, in hopes of an exchange; besides our friends at Halifax
had a little notice of our departure, and supplied us with spirituous liquor,
and many articles of provision for the coast Captain Burk having been taken
prisoner, was added to our company (he had commanded an American armed vessel)
and was generously treated by the captain, and all the officers of the ship, as
well as myself. We now had in all near thirty prisoners on board, and ^s we
were sailing along the coast, (if I recollect right) off Rhode Island, captain
Burk with an under officer of the ship, (whose name I do not recollect) came to
our little birth, proposed to kill captain Smith and the principal officers of
the frigate, and take it; (...) that there was thirty five thousand pounds
sterling in the same. Capt. Burk likewise averred, that a strong party out of
the ship's crew, was in the conspiracy, and urged me and the gentleman that was
with me, (...) our influence with the private prisoners, to execute the design,
and take the ship with the cash into one of our own ports.

Upon which I replied, that we had been too well used on board to murder the
officers; that I could by no means reconcile it to my conscience, and that in
fact it should not be done; and while I was yet speaking, my friend Lovel
confirmed what I had said further pointed out the ungratefulness of such an
act; that it (...) not full short of murder, and in fine all the gentlemen in
the birth, opposed capt Burk and his colleague: But they strenuously urged that
the conspiracy would be found out, and that it would cost them their lives,
provided they did not execute their design. I then interposed (...), and put an
end to further arguments on the subject, and told them that they might depend
upon it upon my honor, that I would faithfully guard captain Smith's life: If
they attempted the assault. I would assist him. (for they desired me to remain
n^uter) and that the same honor, that guarded captain Smith's life, would also
guard theirs, and it was agreed by those present not to reveal the conspiracy,
to the intent that no man should be put to death, in consequence of what had
been projected; and captain Burk and his colleague went to stifle the matter
among their associates. I could not help calling to mind what captain Smith
said to me, when I first came on board: This is a mutable world, and one
gentleman never knows but that it may be in his power to help another. --
Captain Smith and his officers still behaved with their usual courtesy, and I
never heard any more of the conspiracy.

We arrived before New York, and east anchor the latter part of October, where
we remained several days, and where capt. Smith informed me, that he had
recommended me to admiral How and general Sir William How, as a gentleman of
honor and veracity, and desired that I might be treated as such. Captain Burk
was then ordered on board a prison-ship in the harbor. I took my leave of
capt. Smith, and with the other prisoners was sent on board a transport-ship,
which lay in the harbor, commanded by capt. Craig, who took me into the cabin
with him and his lieutenant: I fared as they did, and was in every respect well
treated in consequence of directions from captain Smith.

In a few weeks after this I had the happiness to part with my friend Lovel,
(for his ^ake, who the enemy affected to treat as a private; he was a gentleman
of merit, and liberally educated, but had no commission; they maligned him on
account of his unshaken attachment to the cause of his country) He was
exchanged for a governor Philip Skene of the British. I was continued on board
this ship. 'till the latter part of November, where I contracted an
acquaintance with a captain of the British, (his name has slipped my memory.)
He was what we may call a genteel, hearty fellow. I remember an expression of
his over a bottle of wine, to this import: That there is greatness of soul for
personal friendship to subsist between you and me, as we are upon opposite
sides, and may at another day be obliged to face each other in the field. (I am
confident that he was as faithful as any officer in the British army.) At
another sitting he offered to be^ a dozen of wine, that fort Washington would
be in the hands of the British in three days. I stood the (...), (and would had
I known that that would have been the case) and the third day afterward we
heard a prodigious heavy cannonade, and that day the fort was taken sure
enough. Some months after, (when I was on parole) he called upon me with his
usual humor, and mentioned the bet. I acknowledged I had lost it, but he said
he did not mean to take it then, as I was a prisoner; that he would another day
call on me, when their army came to Bennington. I replied that he was quite too
generous, as I had fairly lost it; besides the Green Mountain Boys would not
suffer them to come to Bennington. This was all in good humor. I should have
been glad to have seen him after the defeat at Bennington, but did not.

It was customary for a guard to attend the prisoners, which was often changed.
One was composed of tories from Connecticut, in the vicinity of Fairfield and
Green Farms. The sergeant's name was Hoit. They were very full of their
invectives against the country, swaggered of their loyalty to their king, and
exclaimed bitterly against the "cowardly Yankies," (as they were pleased to
call them) but finally contented themselves with saying, that when the country
was overcome, they should be well rewarded for their loyalty, out of the
estates of the whigs, which would be confiscated. This I found to be the
general language of tories, after I arrived from England on the American coast.
I heard sundry of them relate, that the British generals had engaged them an
ample reward for all their losses, disappointments and expenditures, out of the
forfeited rebels estates.

This language early taught me what to do with tories estates, as far as my
influence can go. For it is really a game of hazard between whig and tory: The
whigs must inevitably have lost all, in consequence of the abilities of the
tories, and their good friends the British; and it is no more than right the
tories should run the same risque, in consequence of the abilities of the
whigs: But of this more will be observed in the sequel of this narrative.

Some of the last days of November, the prisoners were landed at New York, and
I was admitted to parole with the other officers, viz. Proctor, Howland, and
Tailor. The privates were put into the filthy churches in New York, with the
distressed prisoners that were taken at fort Washington; and the second night
sergeant Roger Moore (who was bold and enterprizing) found means to make his
escape with every of the remaining prisoners that were taken with me, except
three who were soon after exchanged: So that out of thirty-one prisoners, who
went with me the round exhibited in these sheets, two only died with the enemy,
and three only exchanged; one of whom died after he came within our lines; all
the rest at different times, made their escape from the enemy.

I now found myself on parole, and restricted to the limits of the city of
New York, where I soon projected means to live in some measure agreeable to my
rank, though I was destitute of cash -- My constitution was almost worn out by
such (...) and barbarous captivity. The enemy gave out that I was crazy, and
wholly unmanned, but my vitals held found, (nor was I delirious any more than I
have been from my youth up; but my extreme circumstances at certain times,
rendered it political to act in some measure the madman) and in consequence of
a regular diet and exercise, my blood recruited, and my nerves in great measure
recovered their former tone, strength and usefulness, in the course of six
months.

I nextly invite the reader to a retrospective sight and consideration of the
doleful scene of inhumanity exercised by general Sir William How, and the army
under his command, toward the prisoners taken on Long Island, on the twenty
seventh day of August, 1776; sundry of whom were in an inhuman and barbarous
manner, murdered after they had surrendered their arms; particularly a genesis
Odel, (or Woodhul) of the militia, who was hacked to pieces with cutlasses
(when alive) by the light horsemen, and a captain Fellows, of the continental
army, who was thrust through with a bayonet, of which wound he died instantly.

Sundry others were hanged up by the neck 'till they were dead; five on the
limb of a white oak tree, and without any reason assigned, (except that they
were fighting in defense of the only blessing worth preserving:) And indeed
those who had the misfortune to fall into their hands at fort Washington, in
the month of November foll^wing, met with but very little better usage, except
that they were reserved from immediate death to famish and die with hunger: in
fine the word rebel applied to any vanquished persons, without regard to (...),
who were in the continental service, on the 27th of August aforesaid, was
thought (by the enemy) sufficient to sanctify whatever cruelties they were
pleased to infl^ct, death itself not excepted; but to pass over particulars
which would swell my narrative far beyond my design.

The private soldiers who were brought to New York, were crowded into churches,
and environed with slavish Hessian guards, a people of a strange language, who
were sent to America for no other design but cruelty and desolation: and at
others, by merciless Britons, whose mode of communicating ideas being
intelligible in this country, served only to tantalize and insult the helpless
and perishing; but above all the hellish delight and triumph of the tories over
them, as they were dying by hundreds: This was too much for me to bear as a
spectator; for I saw the tories exulting over the dead bodies of their murdered
countrymen. I have gone into the churches, and seen sundry of the prisoners in
the agonies of death, in consequence of very hunger, and others speechless and
near death, bi^^g pieces of chips; others pleading for God's sake, for
something to eat, and at the same shivering with the cold. Hollow groans
saluted my ears, and despair seemed to be imprinted on every of their
countenances. The filth in these churches (in consequence of the flux) was
almost beyond description. The floors were covered with excrement. I have
carefully sought to direct my steps so as to avoid it, but could not. They
would beg for God's sake for one copper, or morsel of bread. I have seen in one
of these churches seven dead at the same time, lying among the excrements of
their bodies.

It was a common practice with the enemy, to convey the dead from these filthy
places, in carts, to be slightly buried, and I have seen whole gangs of tories
making derision, and exulting over the dead, saying there goes another load of
damned rebels. I have observed the British soldiers to be full of their
blackguard (...), and vaunting on these occasions, but they appeared to me less
malignant than tories.

The provision dealt out to the prisoners was by no means sufficient for the
support of life: It was deficient in quantity, and much more so in quality. The
prisoners often presented me with a sample of their bread, which I certify was
damaged to that degree, that it was loathsome and unfit to be eaten, and I am
bold to aver it, (as my opinion) that it had been condemned, and was of the
very worst sort. I have seen and been fed upon damaged bread, (in the course of
my captivity) and observed the quality of such bread as has been condemned by
the enemy, among which was very little so effectually spoiled as what was dealt
out to these prisoners -- Their allowance of meat (as they told me) was quite
trifling, and of the basest sort. I never saw any of it, but was informed (^ad
as it was) it was swallowed almost as quick as they got hold of it. I saw some
of them sucking bones after they were speechless; others who could yet speak,
and had the use of their reason, urged me in the strongest and most pathetic
manner, to use my interest in their behalf, for you plainly see (say they) that
we are devoted to death and destruction; and after I had examined more
particularly into their truly deplorable condition, and had become more fully
apprised of the essential facts, I was persuaded that it was a premeditated and
systematical plan of the British council, to destroy the youths of our land,
with a view thereby to deter the country, and make it submit to their
despotism; but that I could not do them any material service, and that by any
public attempt for that purpose, I might endanger myself by frequenting places
the most nauseous and co^tagi us that could be conceived of. I refrained going
into the churches, but frequently converted with such of the prisoners as were
admitted to come out into the yard, and found that the systematical usage still
continued. The guard would often drive me away with their fixed bayonets. A
Hessian (one day) followed me five or six rods, but by making use of my legs,
got rid of the lubber. Sometimes I could obtain a little conversation,
notwithstanding their severities.

I was in one of the church yards, and it was rumoured among those in the
church, and sundry of the prisoners came with their usual complaints to me, and
among the rest a large bo^^d tall young man, (as (...) told me from
Pennsylvania) who was reduced to a mere skeleton; said he was glad to see me,
before he died, which he had expected to have done last night, but was a little
revived; he furthermore informed me, that he and his brother had been urged to
enlist into the British, but had both resolved to die first; that his brother
had died last night, in consequence of that resolution, and that he expected
shortly to follow him; but I made the other prisoners stand a little off, and
told him with a low voice to list; he then asked, whether it was right in the
sight of God? I assured him that it was, and that duty to himself obliged him
to deceive the British by enlisting, and deserting the first opportunity; upon
which he answered with transport, that he would list. I charged him not to
mention my name as his adviser, lest it should get air, and I should be closely
confined, in consequence of it.

The integrity of these suffering prisoners is hardly credible. Many hundreds,
I am confident, submitted to death, rather than enlist into the British
service, which (I am informed) they most generally were pressed to do I was
astonished at the resolution of the two brothers particularly; it seems that
they could not be stimul^ted to such exertions of heroism from ambition, as
they were but obscure soldiers; strong indeed must the internal principle of
virtue be, which supported them to brave death, and one of them went through the
operation, as did many hundred others. I readily grant tha^ instances, of
public virtue are no excitement to the sordid and vicious, nor on the other
hand, will all the barbarity of Britain and Heshland awaken them to a sense of
their duty to the public; but these things will have their proper effect on the
generous and brave.

The officers on parole were most of them zealous, if possible, to afford the
miserable soldiery relief, and often consulted with one another on the subject,
but to no effect, being destitute of the means of subsistence, which they
needed; nor could the officers project any measures, which they thought would
alter their fate, or so much as be a means of getting them out of those filthy
places to the privilege of fresh air. Some projected that all the officers
should go in procession to general How, and plead the cause of the perishing
soldiers; but this proposal was negatived for the following reasons, viz
because that general How must needs be well acquainted and have a thorough
knowledge of the state and condition of the prisoners in every of their
wretched apartments, and that much more particular and exact than any officer
on parole could be supposed to have, as the general had a return of the
circumstances of the prisoners, by his own officers every morning, of the
number which were alive, as also the number which died every twenty four hours,
and consequently the bill of mortality, as collecte^ from the daily returns,
lay before him with all the material situations and circumstances of the
prisoners; and provided the officers should go in procession to general How,
according to the projection, it would give him the greatest affront, and that
he would either retort upon them; that it was no part of their parole to
instruct him in his conduct to prisoners; that they were mutinying against his
authority, and by affronting him, had forfeited their parole; or that more
probably, instead of saying one word to them, would order them all into as
wretched a confinement as the soldiers whom they sought to relieve; for at that
time, they British, from the general to the private sentinel, were in full
confidence, nor did they so much as hesitate but that they should conquer the
country. Thus the consultation of the officers was confounded and broken to
pieces, in consequence of the dread, which at that time lay on their minds, of
offending general How; for they conceived so murderous a tyrant would not be
too good to destroy even the officers, on the least pretense of an affront, as
they were equally in his power with the soldiers; and as general How perfectly
understood the condition of the private soldiers, it was argued that it was
exactly such as he and his council had devised, and as he meant to destroy
them, it would be to no purpose for them to try to dissuade him from it, as
they were helpless and liable to the same fate, on giving the least affront;
indeed anxious apprehensions disturbed them in their then circumstances.

Mean time mortality raged to such an intolerable degree among the prisoners,
that the very school boys in the streets knew the mental design of it in some
measure; at least they knew that they were starved to death. Some poor women
contributed to their necessity, 'till their children were almost starved, and
all persons of common understanding knew that they were devoted to the
cruellest and worst of deaths. It was also proposed by some to make a written
representation of the condition of the soldiery, and the officers to sign it;
and that it should be couched in such terms, as though they were apprehensive
that the general was imposed upon by his officers, in their daily returns to
him of the state and condition of the prisoners; and that therefore the
officers moved with compassion, were constrained to communicate to him the
fact^ relative to them, nothing doubting but that they would meet with a speedy
redress; but this proposal was most generally negatived also, and for much the
same reason offered in the other case; for it was conjectured that general
Howe's indignation would he moved against such officers as should attempt to
whip him over his officers backs; that he would discern that himself was really
struck at, and not the officers who made the daily returns; and therefore
selfpreservation deterred the officers from either petitioning or remonstrating
to general How, either verbally or in writing; as also the consideration that
no valuable purpose to the distressed would be obtained.

I made several rough drafts on the subject, one of which I exhibited to the
colonels Magaw, Miles and Atlee, and they said that they would consider the
matter; soon after I called on them, and some of the gentlemen informed me,
that they had wrote to the general on the subject, and I concluded, that the
gentlemen thought it best that they should write without me, as there was such
spirited aversion subsisting between the British and me.

In the mean time a col. Hussecker, of the continental army, (as he then
reported) was taken prisoner, and brought to New York, who gave out that the
country was most universally submitting to the English king's authority, and
that there would be little or no more opposition to Great Britain: This at
first gave the officers a little shock, but in a few days they recovered
themselves; for this colonel Hussecker being a German, was feasting with
general De Heister, his countryman, and from his conduct they were
apprehensive, that he was a knave; at least he was esteemed so by most of the
officers; it was nevertheless a day of trouble. The enemy blasphemed. Our
little army was retreating in New Jersey, and our young men murdered by
hundreds in New York: The army of Britain and Heshland prevailed for a little
season, as though it was ordered by Heaven to show to the latest posterity,
what the British would have done, if they could, and what the general calamity
must have been, in consequence of their conquering the country, and to excite
every honest man to stand forth in the defense of liberty, and to establish the
independency of the United States of America for ever: But this scene of
adverse fortune did not discourage a Washington: The illustrious American hero
remained immovable. In liberty's cause he took up his sword: This reflection
was his support and consolation in the day of his humiliation, when he
retreated before the enemy, through New Jersey into Pennsylvania. Their triumph
only roused his indignation, and the important cause of his country, which lay
near his heart, moved him to cross the Delaware again, and take ample
satisfaction on his pursuers. No sooner had he circumvallated his haughty foes
and appeared in terrible array, but the host of Heshland fell. This taught
America the intrinsic worth of perseverance, and the generous sons of freedom
flew to the standard of their common safeguard and defense; from which time the
arm of American liberty has prevailed.

This surprise and capture of the Hessians enraged the enemy, who were still
vastly more numerous than the continental troops: They therefore collected, and
marched from Princeton, to attack general Washington, who was then at Trenton,
having previously left a detachment from their main body at Princeton, for the
support of that place. This was a trying time, for our worthy general (though in
possession of a late most astonishing victory) was by no means able to
withstand the collective force of the enemy; but his sagacity soon suggested a
stratagem to effect that which by force to him was at that time impracticable:
He therefore amused the enemy with a number of fires, and in the night made a
forced march, undiscovered by them, and next morning fell in with their rear
guard at Princeton, and killed and took most of them prisoners. The main body
too late perceiving their rear was attacked, hurried back with all speed, but
to their mortification found they were out generalled, and baffled by general
Washington, who was retired with his little army toward Morristown, and was
out of their power. These repeated successes, one on the back of the other,
chagrined the enemy prodigiously, and had an amazing operation in the scale of
American politics, and undoubtedly was one of the corner-stones, on which the
fair structure of independency has been fabricated; for the country at no one
time has ever been so much dispirited as just before the morning of this
glorious success, which (...) part dispelled the gloomy clouds of oppression
and slavery, which lay pending over America, big with the ruin of this and
future generations, and enlightened and spirited her sons to redouble their
blows on a merciless and haughty, and (I may add) perfidious enemy.

Furthermore this success had a mighty effect on general How and his council,
and roused them to a sense of their own weakness, and convinced them that they
were neither omniscient or omnipotent. Their obduracy had death-designing
malevolence in some measure, abated or was suspended. The prisoners who were
condemned to the most wretched and cruellest of deaths, and who survived to
this period, (though most of them died before) were immediately ordered to be
sent within general Washington's lines for an exchange, and in consequence of
it, were taken out of their filthy and poisonous places of confinement, and
sent out of New York to their friends in haste; several of them fell dead in
the streets of New York, as they attempted to walk to the vessels in the
harbor, for their intended embarkation. -- What numbers lived to reach the
lines I cannot ascertain, but from concurrent representations which I have
since received from numbers of people who lived in and adjacent to such parts
of the country, where they were received from the enemy, I apprehend that most
of them died in consequence of the vile usage of the enemy. Some who were
eyewitnesses of that scene of mortality, (more especially in that part which
continued after the exchange took place) are of opinion, that it was partly in
consequence of a slow poison; but this I refer to the doctors that attended
them, who are certainly the best judges.

Upon the best calculation I have been able to make from personal knowledge,
and the many evidences I have collected in support of the facts, I learn that
of the prisoners taken on Long Island, fort Washington, and some few others, at
different times and places, about two thousand perished with hunger, cold and
sickness, (occasioned by the filth of their prisons) at New York, and a number
more on their passage to the continental lines; most of the residue who reached
their friends, having received their death wound, could not be restored by the
assistance of physicians and friends; but like their brother-prisoners, ^ell a
sacrifice to the relentless and scientific barbarity of Britain. I took as much
pains as my circumstances would admit of, to inform myself not only of matters
of fact, but likewise of the very design and aims of general How and his
council: The latter of which I predicated on the former, and submit it to the
candid public.

And lastly the aforesaid success of the American arms, had a happy effect on
the continental officers, who were on parole at New York: A number of us
assembled, (but not in a public manner) and with full bowls and glasses, drank
general Washington's health, and were not unmindful of Congress and our worthy
friends on the continent, and almost forgot that we were prisoners.

A few days after his recreation, a British officer of rank and importance in
their army, (whose name I shall not mention in this narrative, for certain
reasons, though I have mentioned it to some of my close friends and confidents)
sent for me to his lodgings, and told me, 'That faithfulness (though in a wrong
cause) had nevertheless recommended me to general Sir William How, who was
minded to make me a colonel of a regiment of new levies, (alias tories) in the
British service, and proposed that I should go with him, and some other
officers, to England, who would embark for that purpose in a few days, and
there be introduced to lord G. Germain, and probably to the king; and that
previously I should be clothed equal to such an introduction, and instead of
paper rags, be paid in hard guineas; after this should embark with general
Burgoyne, and assist in the reduction of the country, which infallibly would be
conquered, and when that should be done, I should have a large tract of land,
whether on the New Hampshire Grants, or in Connecticut; it would make no odds,
as the country would be forfeited to the crown." I then replied, "That if by
faithfulness I had recommended myself to genesis How, I should be loath, by
unfaithfulness, to lose the general's good opinion; besides, that I viewed the
offer of land to be similar to that which the devil offered Jesus Christ, "To
give him all the kingdoms of the world, if he would fall down and worship him;"
when at the same time that the damned soul had not one foot of land upon
earth." This closed the conversation, and the gentleman turned from me with an
air of dislike, saying, that I was a bigot; upon which I retired to my lodgings.

Near the last of November I was admitted to parole in New York, with many
other American officers, and on the 22d day of January, 1777, was with them
directed by the British commissary of prisoners to be quartered on the westerly
part of Long Island, and our parole continued. During my imprisonment there, no
occurrences worth observation happened. I obtained the means of living as well
as I desired, which in great measure repaired my constitution, which had been
greatly injured by the severities of an inhuman captivity. I now began to feel
myself composed, expecting either an exchange or continuance in good and
honorable treatment; but alas! my visionary expectations soon vanished. The
news of the conquest of Ticonderoga by genesis Burgoyne, and the advance of his
army into the country, made the haughty Britons again to feel their importance,
and with that their insatiable thirst for cruelty.

The private prisoners at New York, and some of the officers on parole, felt
the severity of it. -- Burgoyne was their toast and demigod: To him they paid
adoration: In him the tories placed their confidence, "and forgot the Lord
their God," and served How, Burgoyne, and Knyphausen, Knyphausen, a H^ssian
gene^^^^.
and became vile in their own imaginations, and their foolish hearts were
darkened, professing to be great politicians, and relying on foreign and
merciless invaders, and with them seeking the ruin, bloodshed and destruction
of their country, "became fools," expecting with them to share a dividend in
the confiscated estates of their neighbors and countrymen, who sought for the
whole country, and the religion and liberties thereof: -- Therefore God gave
them over to strong delusions, to believe a lie, that they all might be damned.

The twenty-fifth day of August I was apprehended, and under pretext of artful,
mean and pitiful pretenses, (that I had infringed on my parole) taken from a
tavern, where there were more than a dozen officers present, and in the very
place where those officers and myself were directed to be quartered, put under
a strong guard, and taken to New York, where I expected to make my defense
before the commanding officer; but contrary to my expectations, and without the
least solid pretense of justice or a trial, was again encircled with a strong
guard with fixed bayonets, and conducted to the provost-gaol in a lonely
apartment, next above the dungeon, and was denied all manner of subsistence
either by purchase or allowance. The second day I offered a guinea for a meal
of victuals, but was denied it, and the third day I offered eight Spanish
milled dollars for a like favor, but was again denied, and all that I could
get out of the sergeant's mouth, was, that by God he would obey his orders. I
now perceived myself to be again in substantial trouble. In this condition I
formed an oblique acquaintance with a captain Edward Travis, of Virginia, (who
was in the dungeon below me) through a little hole which was cut with a
penknife, through the floor of my apartment which communicated with the
dungeon; it was a small crevice, through which I could discern but a very small
part of his face at once, when he plied it to the hole; but from the discovery
of him in the situation which we were both then in, I could not have known him,
(which I found to be true by an after acquaintance.) I could nevertheless hold
a conversation with him, and soon perceived him to be a gentleman of high
spirits, who had a high sense of honor, and felt as big as though he had been
in a palace, and had treasures of wrath in store against the British. In fine I
was charmed with the spirit of the man; he had been near or quite four months
in that dungeon, with murderers, thieves, and every species of criminals, and
all for the sole crime of unshaken fidelity to his country; but his spirits
were above dejection, and his mind unconquerable. I engaged to do him every
service in my power, and in a few weeks afterward, with the united petitions
of the officers in the provost, procured his dismission from the dark mansion
of fiends to the apartments of his petitioners.

And it came to pass on the third day, at the going down of the sun, that I was
presented with a piece of boiled pork, and some biscuit, which the sergeant
gave me to understand, was my allowance, and I ^ed sweetly on the same; but I
indulged my appetite by degrees, and in a few days more, was taken from that
apartment, and conducted to the next loft or story, where there were above
twenty continental and some militia officers, who had been taken and imprisoned
there, besides some private gentlemen who had been dragged from their own homes
to that filthy place, by tories. Several of every of the denominations
mentioned died there, some before, and others after I was put there.

The history of the proceedings relative to the provost only, was I particular,
would swell a volume larger than this whole narrative: Shall therefore only
notice such of the occurrences which are most extraordinary.

Capt. Vandyke bore with uncommon fortitude near twenty months confinement in
this place, and in the mean time was very serviceable to others who were
confined with him. The allegation against him, as the cause of his confinement,
was very extraordinary: He was accused of setting fire to the city of New York,
(at the time the west part of it was consumed) when it was a known fact, that
he had been in the provost a week before the fire broke out; and in like
manner, frivolous were the ostensible accusations against most of those who
were there confined; the case of two militia officers excepted, who were taken
in their attempting to escape from their parole; and probably there may be some
other instances which might justify such a confinement.

Mr. William Miller, a committee-man, from West Chester county, and state of
New York, was taken from his bed in the dead of night, by his tory neighbors,
and was starved for three days and nights in a department of the same gaol; add
to this the denial of fire, and that in a cold season of the year, in which
time he walked day and night, to defend himself against the frost, and when he
complained of such a reprehensible conduct, the word rebel or committee-man was
deemed by the enemy a sufficient atonement for any inhumanity that they could
invent or in^lict. He was a man of good natural understanding, a close and
sincere friend to the liberties of America, and endured fourteen months cruel
imprisonment with that magnanimity of soul, which reflects honor on himself
and country.

Major Levi Wells and captain Ozias Bissel were apprehended and taken under
guard from their parole on Long Island, to the provost, on as fallacious
pretenses as the former, and were there continued 'till their exchange took
place, which was near five months. Their fidelity and zealous attachment to
their country's cause, which was more than commonly conspicuous, was
undoubtedly the real cause of their confinement.

Major Brinton Pain, captain Flahaven, and captain Randolph, who had at
different times distinguished themselves by their bravery, especially at the
several actions in which they were taken, was all the provocation they gave,
for which they suffered about a years confinement each in the same filthy gaol.

A few weeks after my confinement, on the like fallacious and wicked pretenses,
was brought to the same place, from his parole on Long Island, major Otho
Holland Williams, (now a full colonel in the continental army.) In his
character are united the gentleman, officer, soldier and friend; he walked
through the prison with an air of great disdain; said he,

"Is this the treatment which gentlemen of the continental army are to expect
from the rascally British, when in their power? Heavens forbid it!" He was
continued there about five months, and then exchanged for a British major.

John Fell, Esquire (now a member of Congress for the state of New Jersey) was
taken from his own house by a gang of infamous tories, and by order of a
British general, was sent to the provost, where he was continued near one year.
The stench of the gaol, which was very loathsome and unhealthy, occasioned a
hoarseness of the lungs, which proved fatal to many who were there confined,
and reduced this gentleman near to the point of death; he was indeed given over
by his friends who were about him, and himself concluded that he must die. I
could not endure the thought that so worthy a friend to America should have his
life stole from him in such a mean, base, and scandalous a manner, and that his
family and friends should be bereaved of so great and desirable a blessing, as
his further care, usefulness and examples, might prove to them. I therefore
wrote a letter to genesis Robertson, (who commanded in town) and being touched
with the most sensible feelings of humanity which dictated my pen to paint
dying distress in such lively colors that it wrought conviction even on the
obduracy of a British general, and produced his order to remove the now
honorable John Fell, Esquire out of gaol, to private lodgings in town; in
consequence of which he slowly recovered his health. There is so extraordinary
a circumstance which intervened, concerning this letter, that it is worth
noticing.

Previous to the sending it, I exhibited the same to the gentleman on whose
behalf it was wrote, for his approbation, and he forbid me to send it in the
most positive and explicit terms; his reason was, That the enemy knew by every
morning's report, the condition of all the prisoners, mine in particular, as I
have been gradually coming to my end for a considerable time, and they very
well knew it, and likewise determined it should be accomplished, as they had
served many others; that to ask a favor, would give the merciless enemy
occasion to triumph over me in my last moments, and therefore I will ask no
favors from them, but resign myself to my supposed fate. But the letter I sent
without his knowledge, and I confess I had but little expectations from it, yet
could not be easy 'till I had sent it. It may be worth a remark, that this
gentleman was an Englishman born, and from the beginning of the revolution, has
invariably asserted, and maintained the cause of liberty.

The British have made so extensive an improvement of the provost during the
present revolution 'till of late, that a very short definition will be
sufficient for the dullest apprehensions. It may be with propriety called the
British inquisition, and calculated to support their oppressive measures and
designs, by suppressing the spirit of liberty; as also a place to confine the
criminals, and most infamous wretches of their own army, where many gentlemen
of the American army, and citizens thereof, were promise^ously confined, with
every species of criminals; but they divided into different apartments, and
kept at as great a remove as circumstances permitted, but it was nevertheless
at the option of a villainous sergeant who had the charge of the provost, to
take any gentlemen from their room, and put them into the dungeon, which was
often the case: At two different times I was taken down stairs for that
purpose, by a file of soldiers with fixed bayonets, and the sergeant
brandishing his sword at the same time, and having been brought to the door of
the dungeon, I there flattered the vanity of the sergeant, whose name was Keef,
by which means I procured the surprizng favor to return to my companions; but
some of the high mettled young gentlemen could not bear his insolence, and
determined to keep at a distance, and neither please or displease the villain,
but none could keep clear of his abuse; however, mild measures were the best;
he did not hesitate to call us damned Rebels, and use us with the coarsest
language. The captains Flahaven, Randolph and Mercer, were the objects of his
most stagran^ and repeated abuses, who were many times taken to the dungeon,
and there continued at his pleasure. Captain Flahaven took cold in the dungeon,
and was in a declining state of health, but an exchange delivered him, and in
all probability saved his life.

It was very mortifying to bear with the insolence of such a vicious and
ill-bred imperious rascal. Remonstrances against him were preferred to the
commander of the town, but no relief could be obtained, for his superiors were
undoubtedly well pleased with his abusive conduct to the gentlemen, under the
severities of his power, and remonstrating against his infernal conduct, only
served to confirm him in authority, and for this reason I never made any
remonstrances on the subject, but only stroaked him, for I knew that I he was
but a cat's paw in the hands of the British officers, and that if he should use
us well, he would immediately be put out of that trust, and a worse man
appointed to succeed him; but there was no need of making any new appointment,
for Cunningham, their provost marshal, and Keef, his deputy, were as great
rascals as their army could boast of, except one Joshua Loring, an infamous
tory, who was their commissary, of prisoners, nor can any of these be supposed
to be equally criminal with general Sir William How and his associates, who
prescribed and directed the murders and cruelties, which were by them
perpetrated.

This Loring is a monster! -- There is not his like in human shape. He exhibits
a smiling countenance, and on a superficial acquaintance, seems to wear a phiz
of humanity, but has been instrumentally capable of the most consummate acts of
wickedness, (which were firstly projected by an abandoned British council,
clothed with the authority of a How) murdering premeditately (in cool blood)
near or quite two thousand helpless prisoners, and that in the most
clandestine, mean and shameful manner, (at New York.) He is the most
mean-spirited, cowardly, deceitful, and destructive animal in God's creation
below, and legions of infernal devils, with all their tremendous horrors, are
impatiently ready to receive How and him, with all their detestable
accomplices, into the most exquisite agonies of the hottest region of hellfire.

The sixth day of July, 1777, general St. Clair, and the army under his
command, evacuated Ticonderoga, and retreated with the main body through
Hubberdton into Castleton, which was but six miles distance, when his rearguard
commanded by colonel Seth Warner, was attacked at Hubberdton by a body of the
enemy of about two thousand commanded by genesis Fraser. Warner's command
consisted of his own and two other regiments, viz. Francis's, and Hale's, and
some scattering and enfeebled soldiers. His whole number, according to
information, was near or quite one thousand; part of which were Green Mountain
Boys; about seven hundred out of the whole he brought into action. The enemy
advanced boldly, and the two bodies formed within about sixty yards of each
other. Col. Warner having formed his own regiment, and that of col. Francis's,
did not wait for the enemy, but gave them a heavy fire from his whole line, and
they returned it with great bravery. It was by this time dangerous for those of
both parties, who were not prepared for the world to come; but col. Hale being
apprised of the danger, never brought his regiment to the charge, but left
Warner and Francis to stand the blowing of it, and fled, but luckily fell in
with an inconsiderable number of the enemy, and to his eternal shame,
surrendered himself a prisoner.

The conflict was very bloody. -- Colonel Francis fell in the same, but colonel
Warner, and the officers under his command as also the soldiery, behaved with
great resolution. The enemy broke, and gave way on the right and left, but
formed again, and renewed the attack; in the mean time the British grenadiers,
in the center of the enemy's line, maintained the ground, and finally carried
it with the point of the bayonet, and Warner retreated with great reluctance.
Our loss was about thirty men killed, and that of the enemy amounted to three
hundred men killed, including a major Grand. The enemy's loss I learnt from the
confession of their own officers, when a prisoner with them. I heard them
likewise complain, that the Green Mountain Boys took sight.

The next movement of the enemy, of any material consequence, was their
investing Bennington, (with a design to demolish it, and subject its
Mountaineers, to whom they had a great aversion) with fifteen hundred chosen
men, including tories, with the highest expectation of success, and having
chosen an eminence of strong ground, fortified it with slight breast works, and
two pieces of cannon; but the government of the young state of Vermont, being
previously jealous of such an attempt of the enemy, and in due time had
procured a number of brave militia from the government of the state of New
Hampshire, who together with the militia of the north part of Berkshire county,
and state of Massachuset's, and the Green Mountain Boys, constituted a body of
desperadoes, under the command of the intrepid general Stark, who in number
were about equal to the enemy.

Colonel Herrick, who commanded the Green Mountain Rangers, and who was second
in command, being thoroughly acquainted with the ground where the enemy had
fortified, proposed to attack them in their works upon all parts, at the same
time. This plan being adopted by the general and his council of war, the little
militia brigade of undisciplined heroes, with their long brown firelocks, (the
best security of a free people) without either cannon or bayonets, was, on the
16 th day of August, led on to the attack by their bold commanders, in the face
of the enemy's dreadful fire, (and to the astonishment of the world, and
burlesque of discipline) carried every part of their lines in less than one
quarter of an hour after the attack became general, took their cannon, killed
and captivated more than two thirds of their number, which immortalized general
Stark, and made Bennington famous to posterity.

Among the enemy's slain was found col. Baum, their commander, a col. Pfester,
who headed an infamous gang of tories, and a large part of his command; and
among the prisoners was major Meibome, their second in command, a number of
British and Hessian officers, surgeons, etc. and more than one hundred of the
before mentioned Pfester's command. The prisoners being collected together, were
^ent to the meeting house in the town, by a strong guard, and general Stark not
imagining any present danger, the militia scattered from him to rest and
refresh themselves; in this situation he was on a sudden attacked by a
reinforcement of eleven hundred of the enemy, commanded by a governor Skene,
with two field pieces: They advanced in regular order, and kept up an incessant
fire, especially from their field pieces, and the remaining militia retreating
slowly before them, disputed the ground inch by inch. The enemy were heard to
halloo to them, saying stop Yankees.

In the mean time col. Warner, with about one hundred and thirty men of his
regiment, (who were not in the first action) arrived and attacked the enemy
with great fury, (being determined to have ample revenge on account of the
quarrel at Hubberdton) which brought them to a stand, and soon after genesis Stark
and col. Herrick brought on more of the scattered militia, and the action
became general; in a few minutes the enemy were forced from their cannon, gave
way on all parts and fled, and the shouts of victory were a second time
proclaimed in favor of the militia. The enemy's loss in killed and prisoners,
in these two actions, amounted to more than twelve hundred men, and our loss
did not exceed fifty men.

This was a bitter stroke to the enemy, but their pride would not permit them
to hesitate but that they could vanquish the country, and as a specimen of
their arrogance, I shall insert genesis Burgoyne's

PROCLAMATION.
By John Burgoyne, Esquire lieutenant general of his majesty's armies in America,
colonel of the queen's regiment of light drago^ns, governor of fort William in
North Britain, one of the representatives of the commons of Great Britain in
parliament, and commanding an army and fleet employed on an expedition from
Canada, etc etc. etc.
THE forces entrusted to my command are designed to act in concert, and upon a
common principle, with the numerous armies and fleets which already display in
every quarter of America, the power, the justice, and when properly sought, the
mercy of the king.

The cause in which the British arms are thus exerted, applies to the most
affecting interests of the human heart; and the military servants of the crown,
at first called forth for the sole purpose of restoring the rights of the
constitution, now combine with love of their country, and duty to their
sovereign, the other extensive incitements which spring from a due sense of the
general privileges of mankind. To the eyes and ears of the temperate part of
the public, and to the breasts of suffering thousands in the provinces, be the
melancholy appeal, whether the present unnatural rebellion has not been made a
foundation for the compleatest system of tyranny that ever God in his
displeasure, suffered for a time to be exercised over a froward and stubborn
generation.

Arbitrary imprisonment, confiscation of property, persecution and torture,
unprecedented in the inquisitions of the Romish church, are among the palpable
enormities that verify the affirmative. These are inflicted by assemblies and
committees, who dare to profess themselves friends to liberty, upon the most
quiet subjects, without distinction of age or sex, for the sole crime, often
for the sole suspicion, of having adhered in principle to the government under
which they were born, and to which by every tie, divine and human, they owe
allegiance. To consummate these shocking proceedings, the profanation of
religion is added to the most profligate prostitution of common reason; the
consciences of men are set at naught; and multitudes are compelled not only to
bear arms, but also to swear subjection to an usurpation they abhor.

Animated by these considerations; at the head of troops in the full powers of
health, discipline, and valor; determined to strike where necessary, and
anxious to spare where possible, I by these presents invite and exhort all
persons, in all places where the progress of this army may point, -- and by the
blessing of God I will extend it far, -- to maintain such a conduct as may
justify me in protecting their lands, habitations, and families. The intention
of this address is to hold forth security, not depredation to the country.

To those whom spirit and principle may induce to partake the glorious task of
redeeming their countrymen from dungeons, and re-establishing the blessings of
legal government, I offer encouragement and employment; and upon the first
intelligence of their associations, I will find means to assist their
undertakings. The domestic, the industrious, the infirm, and even the timid
inhabitants, I am desirous to protect, provided they remain quietly at their
houses; that they do not suffer their cattle to be removed, nor their corn or
forage to be secreted or destroyed; that they do not break up their bridges or
roads; nor by any other act, directly or indirectly, endeavor to obstruct the
operations of the king's troops, or supply or assist those of the enemy.

Every species of provision brought to my camp, will be paid for at an
equitable rate, and in solid coin.

In consciousness of christianity, my royal master's clemency, and the honor
of soldiership, I have dwelt upon this invitation, and wished for more
persuasive terms to give it impression: And let not people be led to disregard
it, by considering their distance from the immediate situation of my camp -- I
have but to give stretch to the Indian forces under my direction, and they
amount to thousands, to overtake the hardened enemies of Great Britain and
America: I consider them the same wherever they may lurk.

If notwithstanding these endeavors, and sincere inclinations to effect them,
the phrensy of hostility should remain, I trust I shall stand acquitted in the
eyes of God and men, in denouncing and executing the vengeance of the state
against the wilful outcasts. -- The messengers of justice and of wrath await
them in the field; and devastation, famine, and every concomitant horror that a
reluctant but indispensable prosecution of military duty must occasion, will
bar the way to their return.

Camp near Ticonderoga, 4th July, 1777. J. Burgoyne.
By order of his excellency the lieutenant general, Robt. Kingston, secretary.

General Burgoyne was still the toast, and the severities toward the prisoners
were in great measure increased or diminished, in proportion to the expectation
of conquest. His very oftentatious proclamation was in the hand and mouth of
most of the soldiery, especially the tories, and from it, their faith was
raised to assurance.

I wish my countrymen in general could but have an idea of the assuming
tyranny, and haughty, malevolent, and insolent behavior of the enemy at that
time; and from thence discern the intolerable calamities which this country
have extricated themselves from by their public spiritedness and bravery.

The downfall of general Burgoyne, and surrender of his army, dashed the
aspiring hopes and expectations of the enemy, and brought low the imperious
spirit of an opulent, puissant and haughty nation, and made the tories bite the
ground with anguish, exalted the valor of the freeborn sons of America, and
raised their fame and that of their brave commanders to the clouds, and
immortalized general Gates with laurels of eternal duration.

No sooner had the knowledge of this interesting and mighty event reached his
Most Christian Majesty, who in Europe shines with a superior luster in
goodness, policy and arms, but the illustrious potentate, auspiciously
influenced by Heaven to promote the reciprocal interest and happiness of the
ancient kingdom of France, and the new and rising states of America, passed
great and decisive decree, that the United States of America, should be free
and independent.

Vaunt no more Old England! consider you are but an island! and that your power
has been continued humanity. Order your broken and vanquished battalions to
retire from America, the scene of your cruelties. Go home and repent in dust
and sackcloth for your aggravated crimes. The cries of bereaved parents,
widows, and orphans, reach the Heavens, and you are abominated by every friend
to America. Take your friends the tories with you, and be gone, and drink deep
of the cup of humiliation. Make peace with the princes of the house of Bourbon,
for you are in no condition to wage war with them (...) Your veteran soldiers
are fallen in America, and your glory is departed. Be quiet and pay your debts,
especially for the hire of the Hessians. There is no other way for you to get
into credit again but by reformation and plain honesty, which you have
despised; for your power is by no means sufficient to support your vanity. I
have had opportunity to see a great deal of it, and felt its severe effects,
and learned lessons of wisdom and policy, when I wore your heavy irons, and
bore your bitter rev^lings and reproaches. I have something of a smattering of
philosophy, and understand human nature in all its stages tolerably well; am
thoroughly acquainted with your national crimes and assure you that they not
only cry aloud for Heaven's vengeance, but excite mankind to rise up against
you. Virtue, wisdom and policy, are in a national sense always connected with
power, or in other words, power is their offspring, and such power as is not
directed by virtue, wisdom, and policy, never fails finally to destroy itself
as yours has done. -- It is so in the nature of things, and unfit that it
should be otherwise; for if it was not so, vanity, injustice, and oporession,
might reign triumphant for ever. I know you have individuals, who still retain
their virtue, and consequently their honor and humanity. Those I really pity,
as they must more or less suffer in the calamity, in which the nation is
plunged headlong; but as a nation I hate and despise you.

My affections are frenc^i^ied -- I glory in Louis the sixteenth, the generous
and powerful ally of these (...) am fond of a connection with so enterp^^zng,
learned, polite courteous, and commercial a (...) and am sure that I express
the sentiments and feelings of all the friends to the present revolution. I
begin to learn the French tongue, and recommend it to my countrymen before
Hebrew, Greek or Latin, (provided but one of them only are to be attended to)
for the trade and commerce of these states in future must inevitably shift its
channel from England to France, Spain, and Portugal; and therefore the
statesman, politician and merchant, need be acquainted with their several
languages, particularly the French, which is much in vogue in most parts of
Europe. Nothing could have served so effectually to illuminate, polish, and
enrich these states as the present revolution, as well as preserve their
liberty -- Mankind are naturally too national, even to the degree of bigotry;
and commercial intercourse with foreign nations has a great and necessary
tendency, to improve mankind, and erase the superstition of the mind by
acquainting them that human, nature, policy and interest, are the same in all
nations, and at the same time they are bartering commodities for the
conveniences and happiness of each nation, they may reciprocally exchange such
part of their customs and ^anners as may be beneficial, and learn to extend
charity and good will to the whole world of mankind.

I was confined in the provest-gaol at New York the twenty sixth day of August,
and continued there to the third day of May, 1778, when I was taken out under
guard, and conducted to a sloop in the harbor at New York, in which I was
guarded to Staten-Island, to general Campbell's quarters, where I was admi^^ed
to eat and drink with the g^reral, and several other of the British field
officers, and treated for two days in a polite manner. As I was drinking wine
with them one evening, I made an observation on my transition from the
provest-criminals to the company of gentlemen, adding that I was the same man
still, and should give the British credit by him, (speaking to the general) for
two days good usage.

The next day colonel Archibald Campbell (who was exchanged for me.) came to
this place, (conducted by Mr. Boudinot, the then American commissary of
prisoners) and saluted me in a handsome manner, saying that he never was more
glad to see any gentleman in his life, and I gave him to understand that I was
equally glad to see him, and was apprehensive (...) it was from the same
motive. The gentlemen present laughed at the fancy, and conjectured that sweet
liberty was the foundation of our gladness; so we took a glass of wine
together, and then I was accompanied by general Campbell, colonel Campbell Mr.
Boudinot, and a number of British officers, to the b^a^, which was ready to
sail to Elizabethtown point. Mean while I entertained them with a rehearsal of
the cruelties exercised toward our prisoners; and assured them that I should
use my influence, that their prisoners should be treated in future in the same
manner, as they should in future treat ours; that I thought it was right in
such extreme cases, that their example should be applied to their own
prisoners; then exchanged the decent ceremonies of compliment, and parted: I
sailed to the point aforesaid, and in a transport of joy, landed on liberty
ground, and as I advanced into the country, received the acclamations of
grateful people.

I soon fell into company with col* Shelden, (of the light horse) who in a
polite and obliging manner, accompanied me to headquarters. Valley Forge, where
I was courteously received by genesis Washington, with peculiar marks of his
approbation and esteem, and was introduced to most of the generals and many of
the principal officers of the army, who treated me with respect, and after
having offered general Washington my further service, in behalf of my country,
as soon as my health (which was very much imparted) would admit, and obtained
his license to return home, I took my leave of his excellency, and set out from
Valley Forge wi^^ genesis Gates and his suite for Fish Kill, where we arrived the
latter end of May. In this tour the general was pleased to treat me with the
familiarity of a companion, and generosity of a lord, and to him I made known
some striking circumstances which occurred in the course of my captivity.

I then bid farewell to my noble general and the gentlemen of his re^inue, and
set out for Bennington the capital of the Green Mountain Boys, where I arrived
the evening of the last day (...) to their great surprise; so I was to them as
(...) from the dead, and now both their joy and (...) was complete. Three
cannon were fired that evening, and next morning colonel Herrick gave orders,
and fourteen more were discharged, welcoming me to Bennington, my usual place
of abode; thirteen for the United States, and one for young Vermont.

After this ceremony was ended we moved the flowing bowl, and rural felicity,
sweetened with friendship, glowed in each countenance, and with loyal healths
to the rising States of America, concluded that evening, and with the same
loyal spirit, I now conclude my narrative.

FINIS.
DILWORTH'S SPELLING BOOKS by the Dozen, Gross, five Hundred, or one Thousand,
are now selling by Robert Bell, next Door to St. Paul's Church in Third-street,
Philadelphia.

Said Bell, also sells,

LITERATURE, in all Arts, sciences and Languages, to those Sentimentalists, who
are so truly scientific, as to be persuaded in their own Minds, that the
Enjoyment of Books is superior to any Pleasure arising from the Contemplation
of Gold, Silver, or Paper Dollars.


