A VINDICATION OF THE CONDUCT OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF VERMONT,
Held at Windsor in October 1778, against Allegations and Remarks of the
Protesting Members; with Observations on their Proceedings at a Convention held
at Cornish, on the 9th Day of December 1778.

By IRA ALLEN.

Arlington, 9th Jan. 1779.

DRESDEN: PRINTED BY ALDEN SPOONER.

A Vindication etc.
THE imaginary Union of the State of Vermont with sixteen Towns east of
Connecticut-River has been attended with many disagreeable consequences, but I
apprehend they are already chiefly removed by the wise conduct of the Honorable
General Assembly at their Session in October last: Yet it appears that the
protesting members are still useing their influence to divide the freemen of
this State, in order to bring about their interested views, which will be
explained in the course of these Observations.

In the very preamble of the union bill (so called) are these words, viz. "On
the representation of a Committee from the New Hampshire Grants (so called)
east of Connecticut-River, that the said Grants are not connected with any
State with respect to their internal police:" this appears to be the grand
hypothesis or foundation on which the union was formed; that all the Grants
east of Connecticut-River to the Mason line was not connected with any State
with respect to their internal police, and was at free liberty to connect with
any body politic to form government that would receive them, or to form a State
by themselves: if this state of the matter be the truth, the union ought to be
supported in spite of all opposition; if not, it will be like unto the foolish
man's house built on the sand. But the following Letter from the President of
the Council of New Hampshire, to his Excellency Governor Chittenden, together
with Col. Allen's representation from Congress will reflect light on this
subject.

Extract of President Wear's letter to his Excellency Governor Chittenden,
dated Exeter, August 22d, 1778.

"A paper has been laid before the General Assembly attested by Thomas Chandler
jun'. as Secretary of the State of Vermont, dated June 11th 1778, purporting a
Resolution of the General Assembly of the State of Vermont, to receive into
union with said State sixteen Towns on the east side of Connecticut River, and
leave or rather an invitation to any towns contiguous to those sixteen to enter
into the same union."

"On which I am directed to represent to you, and to desire it may be laid
before the Representatives of your people, the intimation in said Resolve, that
the said sixteen towns "are not connected with any State with respect to their
internal police," is an idle phantom, a mere chimera without the least shadow
of reason for its support."

"The town of Boston in the Massachusetts, or Hartford in Connecticut (if
disposed) might as rationally evince their being unconnected with their
respective States, as those sixteen towns their not being connected with
New Hampshire."

"Were not those towns settled and cultivated under the grant of the Governor
of New Hampshire? Are they not within the lines thereof as settled by the King
of Great Britain prior to the present Era? Is their any ascertaining the
boundaries between any of the United States of America, but by the lines
formerly established by the authority of Great Britain? I am sure there is not.
Did not the most of those towns send Delegates to the Convention of this State
in the year 1775? Have they not from the commencement of the present war
applied to the State of New Hampshire for assistance and protection? It is well
known they did -- and that New Hampshire at their own expense has supplied
them with arms, ammunition etc. to a very great amount, as well as paid
soldiers for their particular defense, and all at their request as members of
this State -- Whence then could this new doctrine, that they were not connected
with us, originate? I earnestly desire that this matter may be seriously
attended to, and I am persuaded the tendency thereof will be to anarchy and
confusion."

"When I consider the circumstances of the people west of Connecticut River,
the difficulties they encountered in their first settlement, their late
endeavors to organize government among themselves, and the uncertainty of
their being admitted as a separate State into the confederacy of the United
States, I am astonished that they should supply their enemies with arguments
against them by their connecting themselves with people whose circumstances are
wholly different from their own, and who are actually members of the State of
New Hampshire -- A considerable number of Inhabitants of those sixteen towns (I
am well informed) are entirely averse to a disunion with the State of
New Hampshire, and are about to apply to this State for protection; indeed some
have already applied. And are not the people in this State under every
obligation civil and sacred to grant their brethren the needed defense?"

"I beseech you, sir, for the sake of the people you preside over; and the said
people for the sake of their future peace and tranquillity, to relinquish every
connection as a political body with the towns on the east side of Connecticut
River, who are members of the State of New Hampshire, entitled to the same
privileges as the other people of said State, from which there has never been
any attempt to restrict them."

The representation of Col. Ethan Allen, viz.

To his Excellency the Governor, the honorable the Council, and to the
Representatives of the freemen of the State of Vermont in General Assembly met.

Gentlemen,

The Subscriber hereto begs leave to make the following report, viz.

By the desire of his Excellency, and at the request of several of the Members
of the honorable the Council to me made in Sept. last, I have taken a journey
to Philadelphia, in order to gain knoledge how the political situation of the
State of Vermont stood in the view of Congress, which I here exhibit.

On the 16th Day of September last, I am informed by Members of Congress, that
the Delegates from the State of New Hampshire exhibited to Congress a
remonstrance (which they had previously received from the Council and Assembly
of said State) against the proceedings of the State of Vermont, with respect to
their taking into union a number of towns on the east side of
Connecticut-River, and in their inviting other towns to revolt from
New Hampshire, a copy of which I herewith exhibit, a matter which (they
allege) was incompatible with the right of New Hampshire, and an infringment
on the confederacy of the United States of America, and therefore desired the
Congress to take the matter under consideration, and grant some order thereon
to prevent the effusion of blood, and the confusion and disorders which would
otherwise inevitably ensue.

The delegates from New York at the same time exhibited to Congress sundry
papers containing allegations against the State of Vermont, which after some
altercations were admitted, and it was agreed that the same together with the
remonstrance from the State of New Hampshire, should be taken under
consideration on the afternoon of the 18th, by a Committee of the whole house,
at which time it was moved to be brought forward, but urgent business
occasioned 'its being deferred to the 19th, at which time I arrived at
Philadelphia, and being immediately informed of the business by some of the
members of Congress, I used my influence against the matter its being hastily
determined ex-par^^, and particularly objected to the complaints from the
States of New Hampshire and New York, their being both considered at the same
time, alleging that they were of a very different nature. And in consequence
of this, together with my earnest request and application, I obtained assurance
that the matter should not be brought to a decision before I could have an
opportunity to lay the matter before this people; as I had previously let the
members of Congress know, that the Assembly of this State was to sit at this
time; and I engaged to transmit the proceedings of this Assembly to Congress as
soon as they transpired, at their request.

The allegations thrown in by New York received a most severe shock on the
perusal of my late pamphlet in answer to his Excellency Governor Clinton's
proclamation dated in February last, containing certain overtures to the
inhabitants of this State; as well as from my large treatise on the nature and
merit of the New York claim, and their treatment to the inhabitants of this now
State of Vermont. In fine, the New York complaints will never prove of
sufficient force in Congress to prevent the establishment of this State. But
from what I have heard and seen of the disapprobation at Congress of the union
with sundry towns east of Connecticut River, I am sufficiently authorized to
offer it as my opinion, that except this State recede from such union
immediately, the whole power of the Confederacy of the United States of America
will join to annihilate the State of Vermont, and to vindicate the right of
New Hampshire, and to maintain inviolate the Articles of Confederation, which
guarantee to each State their privileges and immunities.

Thus, Gentlemen, I have given you a short representation of the political
situation of this State as it now stands in the General Congress of the United
States of America; upon which I stake my honor.

Given under my hand at Windsor, this 10th Day of October, A. D. 1778. ETHAN
ALLEN.


Several other accounts was received from Congress by the Members of the
council and Assembly of this State similar to the report of Col. Ethan Allen.

By the foregoing it appears that the State of New Hampshire are spiritedly
determined to support their claim to Connecticut-River.

The grand Council of America are opposed to said Union, and view the State of
New Hampshire to extend to Connecticut-River; therefore it became the
legislature of this State to act with the greatest precaution at their last
session, in a matter that so deeply concerned the well-being of the State.

The protesting members in the course of their printed papers have much to say
relative to the report of the grand Committee made on the 19th, which was
confirmed by the Assembly on the 20th; by quoting one part of a sentence they
carry the sense of that report materially different from what the true sense
and meaning was; the sentence is in these words, viz. "They are unanimously
determined, in every prudent and lawful way, to maintain and support entire the
State as it now stands."

This sentence cannot be justly construed that the grand Committee or Assembly
meant at all events to support the union with said sixteen towns: if they had,
they would have put the sentence thus, "They are unanimously determined to
maintain and support entire the State as it now stands." There could not have
been the least propriety in adding these words, "in every prudent and lawful
way." In the last clause of the report of said Committee, it is said, "That the
General Assembly proceed to erect courts and enact laws and regulations for the
support of government, as far as the circumstances of the State will admit."

The grand Committee and Assembly have here a reserve: they did not think the
circumstances of the State would admit of any new exertion of jurisdiction east
of the river. But if the grand Committee and Assembly, in that report, had
meant to have solemnly covenanted with said sixteen towns, as the protesting
members pretend, there would not have been the least reserve, which there now
appears to be.

Previous to this, it was proposed that Col. Pain, or some other gentleman
from the east side of the river, should go to Congress, on the expense of this
State, to see if by any arguments they had against New Hampshire, they could
evince to Congress their right to unite with this State: but they then refused,
except they could be authorized to bring on a determination in Congress,
whether this State should be a State or not, and the decision to be made with
the encumbrance of the union.

The truth of the matter was this, the grand Committee and Assembly were
willing to support the union with said sixteen towns, provided it could be done
without endangering the whole State, and without a contention or war with
New Hampshire: but they were not willing to contend or fight with New Hampshire
for a territory east of Connecticut-river.

It is to be observed, that by the very preamble of the Union Bill, it was
represented by that Committee, that those towns were not connected with any
State, with respect to their internal police. Several of that Committee also
represented, that the inhabitants of said towns were almost unanimous for
joining this State, and that New Hampshire as a State would not object against
said towns connecting with this State. By reason of these representations the
union took place.

The first and third of the foregoing representations appear not to be true by
President Weare's letter (reference thereto being had,) as to the second
representation some of said towns refused to send a representative to the
Assembly, by reason there were so many in opposition to the union: other towns
for reasons to me unknown, neglected to send a representative to the Assembly;
in all six of the sixteen towns refused or neglected to send a representative
to the Assembly, by which it appears that six of the sixteen towns have in some
degree broke the union themselves, by not sending a representative as aforesaid.

In this situation can any man in his right mind flatter himself that it would
have been the least degree of prudence for the Assembly to have made any new
exertions of jurisdiction east of the River, when a large minority of the
inhabitants of said sixteen towns were in opposition to the union -- the State
of New Hampshire strenuously opposed to it -- the members of the Grand Council
of America in opposition thereto, as they view New Hampshire to extend to
Connecticut river? Who is young Vermont, that they should on a false and
ex-parte representation, go on headlong to break in upon the Articles of
Confederation of the United States, that have humbled the haughty pride of
Great Britain? Surely these are and must be viewed by every reasonable person
very weighty reasons in favor of the conduct of the Assembly.

Is it not well known, and ought it not to be greatfully acknowledged by every
subject of this State, that New Hampshire by their timely assistance in sending
their Hero general Stark with orders to act in conjunction with our people, and
at his own option to put himself and men under the command of general Schuyler
(who is a known enemy to this State) or not; and by wise co-opperations with
the militia of this State, saved it from impending ruin at the time when
general Burgoyne made such hasty strides into the country? Would it not be the
highest ingratitude to thus requite New Hampshire for their signal services, by
taking from them (against their consent) so valuable a territoty, provided it
was even in the power of this State?

The counties in this State were established by the general Assembly at their
session in March last. The union with the sixteen towns east of
Connecticut-River and this State took place at the session of Assembly in June
last, soon after which civil magistrates were chosen, inhabitants of some of
said sixteen towns, and sworn into such office, which did severally discharge
their respective functions as magistrates of this State. The High Sheriff of
the county of Cumberland officiated in his office in said sixteen towns.

The three votes complained of are in these words, viz. " Question 1 st.
Whether the counties in this State shall remain as they were established by
this Assembly at their session in March last."

" Question 2 d. Whether the towns east of Connecticut-River included in the
union with this State, shall be included in the county of Cumberland."

" Question 3 d. Whether the towns on the east side of Connecticut-River, who
are included by union with this State, shall be erected into a distinct county
by themselves."

These votes did not add any thing to the union, neither did they take any
thing from the people that they had before enjoyed. It was the same to pass a
resolve that the county lines should remain as they were established last
March, as to have resolved they should remain as they were the day said votes
were passed: county lines being established by the Assembly will remain the
same until altered by the same authority. As said votes had reference to county
lines only, the union was the same after said votes were passed as before; the
sense of those votes was only this, that the Assembly did not think it was
prudent to make any new exertion of jurisdiction east of the River, for the
time being.

The protesting members in the course of their printed papers, often have
reference to the sixth article in the Bill of Rights, which in it is true sense
is entirely in favor of the proceedings of the Assembly. But in their remarks
they have falsely quoted it, as they have promiscuously taken some words,
others they have added that are not to be found in any part of said article,
and connected them together in such manner as would best suit their turns,
which is in these words, viz. "That government is, and ought to be, instituted
for the benefit of the whole, and not a part only." The first part of the said
article is in these words, viz.

"That government is, or ought to be, instituted for the common benefit,
protection and security of the people, nation or community, and not for the
particular emolument or advantage of any single man, family, or set of men, who
are a part only of that community." The whole being greater than it is parts,
therefore the whole is to be regarded; or in the words of the constitution;
"for the common benefit, protection and security of the people, nation, or
community;" which fairly implies the major part: Therefore the next sentence
is this, "and not for the particular emolument or advantage of any single man,
family, or set of men, who are a part only of that community:" which clearly
shows the last sentence has reference to the minority; and that government was
not instituted for the particular advantage of any single man, family, or set
of men, but for the people, nation, or community; or in other words, the major
part, or body of the people. These people on the east side of the river, are
just such a set of men as the constitution has reference to; and it was the
opinion of the Assembly, that to make any new exertion of jurisdiction east of
the river, would be more damage to the body of the people in the State, than it
would be advantage to the set of men on the east side of the river. Indeed, if
it was a damage to the State, they, as a part, would be equally sufferers; and
if it was a benefit to the State, they, as a part of the State, would be
equally benefited. And as government was instituted for the good of the people,
nation, or community, the Assembly acted in conformity to the sixth article in
the Bill of Rights.

The protesting members, either through mistake or design, have printed the vote
relative to the division of counties (next before the three votes so much
complained of) which was reconsidered, and ought not to have been published.

The order or rule of the House is, that no member shall be absent more than
fifteen minutes at a time, without the leave of the House. The dissenting
members, by absenting themselves from the House without leave, broke the rules
of the House which they themselves had assented to.

The thirteenth section in the constitution is as follows, viz. "The votes and
proceedings of the General Assembly shall be printed weekly during their
sitting, with the yeas and nays on any question, vote, or resolution, where one
third of the members require it, (except when the votes are taken by ballot)
and when the yeas and nays are so taken, every member shall have a right to
insert the reasons of his votes upon the minutes, if he desire it."

In the course of this section there is leave given to one third of the
members, if they request it, to have the proceedings of the Assembly printed
weekly during their sitting, with the yeas and nays on any question, vote, or
resolution, except when the votes are taken by ballot; and when the yeas and
nays are so taken, there is a much greater liberty given; for every member has
then a right to insert the reasons of his votes upon the minutes, if he desires
it.

It is to be observed, that these things are spoken of in the plural, viz.
weekly. -- The right of a member to insert his reasons, is sufficient to show
it to be the sense of the constitution, that every member should keep his seat,
and the minor to submit to the major. -- Indeed, common sense is sufficient to
teach us that in all political bodies, or assemblies, the minor must submit to
the major. Men differ almost as much in sentiments as they do in looks, and are
no more to blame for not thinking alike than for not looking alike. If in the
most united body of men that ever associated together under heaven, it should
become a custom that whenever any one or more could not agree with the majority
in sentiment, they should absent themselves from that body, it would soon
dwindle away. The constitution of this State makes ample provision for the
minority in some cases, if there was but one that differed in sentiment from
the rest, for the vindication of his conduct, and better information of his
constituents, has liberty of inserting his reasons on the minutes.

In the thirteenth and fourteenth sections in the frame of government, there is
a way provided for all questions, votes, resolutions, bills, acts, or laws,
that pass in General Assembly, to be printed and laid before the people for
their perusal.

In the eighteenth article in the Bill of Rights, it is declared, "That the
people have a right to assemble together, to consult for their common good, to
instruct their representatives."

The people being informed of the proceedings of the Assembly, pursuant to the
directions in the thirteenth and fourteenth sections in the frame of
government, have a right by the eighteenth article in the Bill of Rights, "to
instruct their representatives," previous to the next session of Assembly; and
this is a plain path marked out in the constitution, for those members to walk
in who cannot join in sentiment with the majority.

Therefore for the minority to absent from the house contrary to the
constitution, and take a path that is not known by the Constitution, is a
violation of the constitution.

The protesting members in their remarks, find great fault with the Assembly
for not "carrying into execution the plan proposed in the report and resolve of
the Assembly on the 20th instant." To give eternal truth it is due limits, the
fault was in them; their withdrawing took one half of the Committee away that
was appointed, and left no person that was acquainted with the circumstances of
the people on the east side of the river; therefore it was not in the power of
the Assembly to make out a state of matters pursuant to said report and resolve.

The protesting members in the course of their printed papers, further find
fault with the Assembly for proceeding to business after they withdrew;
alleging that there was but thirty-nine members (at most) that remained to act
as an Assembly after they had withdrawn, which is a gross mistake, there was
forty, and their names are as follows, viz. Capt. Eli Noble, Capt. John,
Fasset, Col. Ebenezer Walbridge, Mr. John Millington, Capt. John Fasset, jun.
Mr. Reuben Thomas, Mr. Joseph Bradley, Capt. Gideon Ormsbee, Mr. Martin Powell,
Capt. Abraham Underhill, Mr. Moses Robinson, Mr. Gideon Adams, Mr. Thomas
Rowley, Mr. William Ward, Mr. Abner Lewis, Mr. Abraham Iackson, Mr. Roswell
Post, Mr. Iesse Belnap, Capt. Jonathan Fasset, Capt. Josiah Powers, Mr. Nathan
Foot, Capt. Comfort Starr, Mr. Edward Harris, Mr. Hubbel Wells, Mr. Silas
Hamilton, Capt. Jonathan Knight, Col. Samuel Fletcher, Mr. Nathaniel Robinson,
Mr. Abner Miles, Mr. Joshua Webb, Mr. Edward Akin, Mr. Samuel Scott, Maj.
Thomas Chandler, Capt. Ebenezer Curtiss, Mr. Thomas Cooper, Mr. William Gallup,
Capt. Phinehas Williams, Capt. John Throop, Capt, Edmund Hodges, and Mr.
Timothy Bartholomew.

The Protesting, members in their remarks also assert, that the Assembly
proceeded to business when there was not two thirds of the members elected on
the west side of the river. It is to be observed that by their printed jouanals
there was sixty-one members elected on the west side of the river, Col. Ethan
Allen included. The town of Arlington, on freemen's meeting day, made choice of
Col. Ethan Allen and Capt. John Fasset to represent the town; Col. Allen, when
informed of his appointment, declined serving. Another meeting was called, and
Capt. Matthew Lion was chosen in his stead, but by some irregularities in his
credentials, was refused a seat. Col. Allen was then urged to serve, but
declining the religious test, did not take a seat. -- It is well known that the
dissenting members found great fault with the Assembly, for permitting Col.
Allen to speak in the House, alleging, that he was not a member, and had no
business there; yet, to make out that there was not a quorum on the west side
of the river, they have enrolled his name on the printed journals. According to
the intent and meaning of the constitution, there was only Capt. Fasset that
could be justly counted for a representative for said town; therefore there was
a quorum on the west side of the river.

It is a known and just maxim in law, that no man shall take the advantage of
his own wrong. -- There was a very full House, until the dissenting members
withdrew; they, by withdrawing, violated the constitution, and broke the rules
of the House, as has been before observed -- the fault is in them, that there
was not a full House: that being the case, they cannot in justice have any
pretensions to that plea. -- By their arguments and practice, if there was just
a quorum of the Assembly, and some vote or resolve should be passed that was
disagreeable to only: one member, he would enter his protest against such
procedure, and withdraw, which would effectually break up the Assembly. Thus
they would put it in the power of one man to rule the whole, as arbitrary as
ever George the third did, when he prorogued the British parliament at some
times when they did not conduct to his mind.

But suppose the Assembly had dissolved on the dissenting member's withdrawing,
and designing men had made overtures to the neighboring States, to have shared
this State amongst them; would it not have tended to anarchy and confusion?

Have not the good people of this State solemnly covenanted to stand by and
support each other by all the ties that are held sacred amongst men? Are not
the freemen of this State, the members of the Council and Assembly, under the
most solemn oaths to be true to the State, and to support the constitution
thereof? And are not these solemn ties binding on men? Is not this State a
frontier to three neighboring States? And how soon we shall have a call for
men in the field is uncertain; if we had such a call, how should we raise men
and pay them? Are not our adversaries the Yorkers impatiently waiting such a
revolution? Should it take place, how long before our inheritance would be
divided amongst them?

What an infinity of hardships the inhabitants of this State have endured for a
series of years, to defend their just rights against the arbitrary power of
New York, and in our turn, with the rest of our brethren of this continent,
against Great Britain? How many internal broils, and great expenses have we
suffered, until we have almost completed a fair fabric of freedom? And now,
because a few young workmen on this glorious building, cannot have their will,
in opposition to a major part of the old and experienced workmen, they would
(if I may be allowed the comparison) like lightning descending on a
powder-house, burst the whole building asunder, and reduce the whole fabric to
a huge heap of shattered rubbish.

Surely it was of the greatest necessity and highest importance for the
Assembly to steadily pursue the business of the State, at that most critical
juncture.

The protesting members, in their remarks, quote the fifth article in the Bill
of Rights, viz. "That all power being originally inherent in, and consequently
derived from the people; therefore all officers of government, whether
legislative or executive, are their trustees and servants, and at all times
accountable to them."

By their appeal to the people, one would be induced to believe that the old
Romish valerian law was in force in this State; which, after the expulsion of
their kings in ancient Rome, gave liberty to any citizen that was fined, or
condemned by the sentence of any magistrate, to appeal to the judgment of the
people.

I readily grant that all governmental power was in the people before they
formed any mutual compacts; but by reason of vile and vicious men, it became
necessary to have some known rules or form of government, to protect the
virtuous, and punish the vicious. In order to form such rules or laws, as
people were numerous and scattered, it became necessary to choose and send
representatives, in order to which, individuals must give up to their
representatives their natural right of legislation, for such term of time as
should be mutually agreed, on such representatives proceeding to form any laws
or mode of government, they would act by the authority of the people; and
should the people, after the publication of such mode of government or law, by
their own voluntary consent, accept of the same, there cannot be the least
doubt but that they would be bound by such constitution or law; and in erecting
an executive branch of government, the people would give up to such magistrates
as they should elect, their natural right of executive power, for the more easy
and convenient exercise of the same, and for their common good, for such term
of time, and in such manner as should be specified in such constitution or law
as they should mutually assent to.

It is to be observed that "all officers of government, whether legislative or
executive, are their trustees and servants, and at all times accountable to
them;" yet it is to be understood, in a constitutional way. It has been before
observed, that in the thirteenth and fourteenth sections in the Frame of
Government, there is a way pointed out for all matters that pass in the
Assembly, to be laid before the people for their perusal. -- In the eighteenth
article in the Bill of Rights, it is said, "That the people have a right to
assemble together to consult for their common good, to instruct their
representatives." It is reasonable to suppose this instruction is to be given
previous to the next session of the Assembly; and that after such instruction,
each member should, at the next session, take his seat.

This is the proper line of an appeal to the people; and this power the people
reserved in their own breasts, in the establishment of the constitution.

In the forty-fourth and last section in the constitution, after describing how
a Council of Censors shall be chosen, it is said, "and whose duty it shall be
to enquire whether the constitution has been preserved inviolate in every part;
and whether the legislative and executive branches of governments have
performed their duty as guardians of the people, or assumed to themselves, or
exercised other or greater powers than they are entitled to by the
constitution." "For these purposes they shall have power to send for persons,
papers and records; they shall have authority to pass public censures."

It appears to be a way pointed out in the constitution, to call either of the
branches of government to account, to see if the constitution has been
preserved inviolate in every part, or whether the Council or Assembly have
assumed to themselves, or exercised other or greater powers than they are
entitled to by the constitution: and in case of any such fault, this Council of
Censors are authorized to pass public censures. -- This appears to be the last
resort, or bar, to preserve the liberties of the people; which, together with
the annual elections, at which times the freemen are under solemn oaths to vote
for those persons that are most noted for wisdom and virtue -- the powers of
the Assembly are to judge of the elections and qualifications of their own
members; and that no person but those that have acquired and maintained a good
moral character, shall be capable of holding any civil office in this State, is
abundantly sufficient to preserve the liberties of the people. -- And now for
the protesting members to make an appeal to the people, to pass public censures
on the majority of the Assembly, (in a way that is not known in the
constitution) and by several false assertions and misrepresentations, to extort
a determination from the people ex-parte (before an answer could be made to
their remarks) to answer their design in forming a Convention, (for purposes to
be hereafter more at large discussed) is a most daring insult on government, at
the same time they pretend to be great sticklers for good order and government,
when they themselves are the cause of all the confusion.

As I providentially happened at Cornish on the 9th of December last, I there
attended a Convention that was called at the request of those Gentlemen that
withdrew from the Council and Assembly of the State of Vermont, at their
session in October last; and for part of the foundation of some remarks I
propose to make on the conduct of said Gentlemen, shall recite an extract of
the proceedings of said Convention, which here follows: But as I took this
extract from the loose minutes, and as I understood the clerk had directions to
transcribe it, and correct the grammar, do not publish it as an attested
extract.

Extracts from the Minutes of a Convention held at Cornish, December 9th, 1778.

"Voted first, That the members of this Convention will unite together, for the
purpose of pursuing such legal and regular measures, as may have a tendency to
secure to ourselves the benefits of government, without any regard to the
distinction made by the arbitrary line drawn on the western bank of
Connecticut-river, by the King in Council, in the year 1764.

"2 dly. A major part of the Committee appointed to draw at large, a
declaration proposed in the report of a Committee of Assembly of Vermont, on
the 19th of October last, laid before this Convention a pamphlet, drawn by
them, in pursuance of said appointment; which was repeatedly read, and
unanimously approved -- Whereupon voted, that 1500 of the above mentioned
pamphlets be printed, and transmitted to Congress, and other States; and to all
the towns on the New Hampshire Grants, agreeable to report.

"3 dly. Whereas notwithstanding the above mentioned request for this
Convention, but few of those towns whose members continued to act with said
Assembly after the protesting members had withdrawn, have sent members to this
Convention. And the conduct of the Assembly in passing the votes and resolves,
contained in their printed journals, the protest, remarks, etc. have rendered
it impracticable to carry said resolves into execution by said Assembly, as
therein proposed; which difficulty will continue so long as said votes stand in
force: and the people in those towns, by justifying the conduct of the Assembly
in violating the constitution, will thereby dissolve the solemn compact which
they entered into by the confederation, and the people consequently become
discharged from their oaths of allegiance:

Therefore voted, That the following proposals be made to New Hampshire, in
pursuance of said resolves.

1 st. To agree upon and settle a dividing line between New Hampshire and the
Grants, by committees from each party, or otherwise as they may mutually agree.

2 d. If that is not complied with, that the whole dispute with New Hampshire
be submitted to the decision of Congress, in such way and manner as Congress
and the parties may agree; always providing, the Grants be allowed equal
privileges in espousing and conducting their cause in the trial with the other
party. Or,

3 d. That we will agree with them mutually to appoint and constitute a court
of disinterested, judicious men, of the three New England States, for the
purpose of hearing and determining the dispute. -- If neither of the foregoing
ways can effect the settling of the controversy, in case New Hampshire and we
can agree upon a plan of government, we will consent that the whole of the
Grants connect with New Hampshire, and become with them one entire State, as it
was limited and bounded before the settling of said line in 1764 -- and until
one or other of the foregoing proposals be complied with, we shall endeavor to
defend ourselves in every lawful way, and trust our cause with the all-wise
governing Providence to succeed us.

And that the inhabitants of those towns on the Grants, in the State of
Vermont, who have not sent a representative to this Convention, and whose
members joined with a majority of said Assembly in passing said votes, be
requested to direct their members to rescind the same, and join in said
proposals.

4 th. That all the other towns on said Grants be requested to join us in
making the foregoing proposals to New Hampshire; and that those towns that
agree to join us therein, be requested to transmit copies of their votes to
Governor Marsh, Mr. Woodward, Col. Olcott, Col. Morey, Maj. Child's, Col. Pain,
and Genesis Baley, committee by this Convention for receiving them, and carrying
the foregoing votes and proceedings into execution, so soon as the towns on the
Grants can have opportunity to join us therein.

5 th. In case those towns whose members continued to act with the Assembly of
Vermont, still remain firm and steadfast in supporting and continuing the votes
of the Assembly, which are complained of as unconstitutional, and neglect to
join in carrying into execution said report of their committee, we shall make
overtures to join with New Hampshire, on the last article in said proposals.

6 th. That said Committee be empowered to call a Convention from the towns on
the Grants, whenever any thing shall arise which shall, in their opinion,
render one necessary."

There were only eight towns sent representatives to said Convention from the
west side of Connecticut-river. The number of towns represented from the east
side of said river, I cannot particularize; but there was not so many as
expected.

Their first procedure appears to be to dissolve the line drawn on the bank of
Connecticut-river, by the King in Council, in the year 1764, and to bring all
the Grants to the Mason line on one footing, in order to lay a plan for further
procedures.

Ever since some towns east of Connecticut-river made proposals for a union
with this State, there has been much said relative to the Mason line, and that
New Hampshire had no just claim to jurisdiction west of said line.

The government of New Hampshire, from it is beginning, so far as respects
jurisdiction, was a royal government. Capt. John Mason, by different grants
from the Council of Plymouth, had all the land conveyed to him between
Salem-river and Piscataqua-river, and sixty miles up into the country; which he
afterward called by the name of New Hampshire. That Council could give him
right of soil, but was not authorized to give him jurisdiction over one foot --
this was a prerogative of the Crown. The way to find the extent of
New Hampshire, was by the limits prescribed in the Governor's commission. When
the government was first formed, there was but few people, and John Cutts, Esquire
was appointed President of a Council. The limits of the government, in that
early day, was not so particularly expressed, as we afterward find them. The
next magistrate they had appointed, was his Excellency Benning Wentworth, Esquire
-- In his commission, speaking of the boundaries, particularly mentions,
extending west until it meets with his Majesty's other governments. This
commission was the very thing that gave life and energy to jurisdictional
authority, and extended it to all parts of the government, which, by all
ancient maps and proceedings, was viewed to extend as far west as Connecticut
and the Massachusetts Bay. There was no mention made of a Mason line, on
account of jurisdiction; but as to the right of soil, the Crown disposed of it
to the Council of Plymouth, and they to Capt. John Mason: so that on account of
private property, there is propriety in mentioning the Mason line; but on
account of jurisdiction, it is the most idle whim that ever entered the head of
an enthusiast in politics.

By what has been said, and by the extract of President Weare's letter,
(reference thereto being had) is sufficient to show that New Hampshire have as
good a right to exercise jurisdiction west of the Mason line, as east: and the
reason why New Hampshire have not as good a right now to exercise jurisdiction
west of Connecticut-river, as east, is that a royal edict was passed in the
year 1764, extending the jurisdiction of New York to the west bank of said
river: Which edict was, and ever has been, disagreeable to most of the
inhabitants; for which reason application has been made at several times to
New Hampshire, to assert their claim to the Grants west of said river, and has
been as often refused; therefore the inhabitants of this State have experienced
all the evils that a Colden, Dunmore, and Try^^, together with a clan of
New York land-jobbers, could invent and inflict; and had it not been for that
glorious spirit of freedom, that stimulated the good people of this State to
stand for their natural rights, and assume to themselves amongst the powers of
the earth that equal station that the God of Nature had blessed them with, they
would before this time have been effectually bound to New York, in connecting
with them in forming a constitution, etc.

Therefore New Hampshire have lost their right of jurisdiction west of
Connecticut-river, and can have no more just right now to extend jurisdiction
west of said river, than the Massachusetts Bay have now to extend jurisdiction
to their ancient northern limits, which would take a very considerable part of
New Hampshire and this State. -- It was a royal edict passed in the year 1739,
that curtailed the Massachusetts Bay to Patuxet-falls in the river Merrimac.

But to return to our subject. This is the infant State of Vermont, which in
some degree must be viewed similar to a young, but perfect child; which in the
nature of things, must depend on those more aged for it is support. Thus I view
the United States and this, and New Hampshire as our greatest benefactor.

Yet this State, from misrepresentation as aforesaid, and by discovering
internal broils in New Hampshire, did presume to extend jurisdiction over part
of their original territory. How this mighty authority became vested in the
State of Vermont, has ever been beyond my conception: Though I readily conceive
that it furnished New York with argumentative harangues to play off against
Vermont, ar Congress.

The Conventioners, in the foregoing extract, appear to have invented a very
extraordinary way to absolve the freemen from their oaths of allegiance. By
what has been before observed, it appears to be the sense of the constitution
of this State, that the majority should rule the minority. Indeed men differ so
much in sentiments, that no political body of men could long subsist any other
way. Yet it seems the Conventioners presume to declare, that if the majority do
not submit to the minority, and reconsider those votes complained of, that the
minority will thereby become discharged from their oaths of allegiance to this
State: which is very extraordinary. The natural inference to be drawn from such
procedures is, that if a certain junto of men cannot rule this State, as they
please, (if they have not already) they mean to violate their oaths of
allegiance and office to this State, and induce as many more as they can to
follow their example.

The protesting members in the course of their remarks, give an invitation to
all the towns on the Grants, on both sides of Connecticut-river, whether
connected with the State of Vermont or not, to send members to said Convention:
In consequence of which, some towns east of said river, sent members to said
Convention, which was represented in the General Assembly of the State of
New Hampshire. And said Convention have also given an invitation to all the
towns on the Grants to join with them.

It is to be observed, that a very large part of the towns on the Grants east
of Connecticut-river, are represented in the General Assembly of New Hampshire;
and that these towns did severally give their assent to the Articles of
Confederation of the United States; which articles binds the whole
confederation to defend the privileges and immunities of either of said States.
Therefore said towns cannot withdraw from New Hampshire and connect with any
other body politic.

In the close of the fifth article or paragraph in said extract, it is
declared, that "we shall make overtures to join with New Hampshire on the last
articles in said proposals." Thus it appears, after making several proposals to
blind the unwary, they are determined, if the majority of the people do not
submit to their plans, they will make overtures to New Hampshire to extend
jurisdiction over the whole State of Vermont: and this determination is made in
a Convention, where there was but eight towns represented on the west side of
the river; and some of their members declined acting in this respect. Is not
this driving points beyond all due bounds? But I am not daunted at this, as I
am sensible New Hampshire with this State well, and will not extend
jurisdiction west of the river. When we consider this, and the representation
of their first Committee, that New Hampshire had no right of jurisdiction west
of the Mason line. And now to take a retrospect view of all the procedures of
the union party, does it appear that the union was meant for the best good of
this State? I am conscious to myself it was not. But as interest and honor are
the principal guidance to human actions, I shall make that the basis of my next
observations.

As I had the honor to be appointed by the Honorable the General Assembly of
this State at their session in October last, to wait on the honorable the
Council of the State of New Hampshire, with letters relative to said union,
etc. I was also desired to return by the way of Cohos, which tour I have
accomplished; and by what I have seen and heard, am sufficiently authorized to
give it as my candid opinion, that the first seed of discord between
New Hampshire and it is disaffected towns, sprang from Dartmouth-College. There
was large sums of money due to that College in Great Britain, by donations, or
otherwise. At the commencement of this war, therefore* for gentlemen deeply
concerned with said College, to be too zealous in opposition to Britain, in
that early day, might be detrimental to said College. -- But this difficulty
did not long continue. -- Then certain men did not meet with such treatment,
nor posts of profit and honor, in that State, as they thought their high
mightinesses deserved: from hence began divisions and strife. By this time the
wheels of this State began to roll on -- then the disappointed politicians
began to rear up a Mason line, and arguments against New Hampshire, in order
for a union with this State; with this imaginary idea, that they would either
connect a considerable part of the Grants east of Connecticut-river with this
State, and thereby bring the seat of government on said river, or get in such
connections with this State, as to break it up, and connect the whole to
New Hampshire, which would also bring the seat of government on said river.
This they did, knowing that the inhabitants of this State, should they by any
means get broke to bits as a State, they would by all means connect with
New Hampshire before New York. -- There were several men on the west side of
the river had not too much honor or virtue to join in this plan.

Of late there has been such opposition to the union by Congress,
New Hampshire, etc. they have not now (if ever they had) the least expectation
of continuing to this State, but are using every possible art to disaffect the
good people of the upper part of Cumberland county against those of the county
of Bennington, in order to connect the whole, or as much as they can, to
New Hampshire. Those men in the county of Grafton, are very sensible that they
will be viewed like speckled birds, if they go back alone to New Hampshire; but
if they can return at the head of a powerful confederacy, they will yet govern
New Hampshire as they please.

I have also to observe, that several of the members of said Convention did
freely own to me, when at Cornish, that their design was to break up this
State, and connect the whole of the Grants to New Hampshire; alleging, that it
was for their interest so to do.

And now, let us trace the conduct of those zealous friends to the union, and
we shall find the line of their conduct in conformity to this plan.

And lastly, I have only to recommend to the good people of this State, to meet
in their several towns, and to see that they have representatives that will
attend at the next session of Assembly; and pursuant to the eighteenth article
in the Bill of Rights, give such instructions to their representatives relative
to said union, as shall, in their opinion, most conduce to the well-being of
this State. And for the better information of the freemen thereof, I herewith
subjoin the following resolves, which will undoubtedly have their due influence.

"In General Assembly, Windsor, October 23d, 1778.

Resolved, That the members of this Assembly lay before their constituents the
situation of the union subsisting between this State and sixteen towns east of
Connecticut-river; and be instructed how to proceed relative to said union, at
the next session of this Assembly.

Whereas there are several inhabited towns in this State, that have not been
represented in this Assembly according to constitution; and others whose
representatives have withdrawn themselves, and refuse to take a seat in this
House:

Therefore Resolved, That the Constable or Constables of each respective town
in this State, that is not fully represented according to constitution (and of
each respective town whose representatives still refuse to take their seats) be
and are hereby directed to warn all the freemen of their respective towns to
meet together at some convenient time and place by them appointed, within such
towns, before the next adjourned session of Assembly, and make choice of a
representative or representatives to attend the Assembly, at their adjourned
session to be holden at Bennington, on the second Thursday of February next."

TO THE INHABITANTS OF THE STATE OF VERMONT.
FRIENDS AND FELLOW COUNTRYMEN,
I Subjoin this Letter to Esquire ALLEN'S pamphlet, as I judged it to be the most
effectual method of circulating it generally among the people

When I consider the infant settlement of this country, the oppressive hand of
New York, which has ever been stretched out against it, it is frontier situation
in the present revolution, and barbarous war with Great Britain, and the
magnanimity, fortitude and perseverance with which the militia (alias) Green
Mountain Boys* have withstood the several conflicts maintained their ground
vindicated their liberty, triumphed over their enemies* foreign and domestic,
and baffled all their machinations, shining with superior (...) both in arms,
freedom of constitution and government; and above all, in the righteousness of
their cause.

I cannot reflect on the mighty scene without amazement, and acknowledging the
propitions agency of Deity.

But when I reflect on the contracted, mean, and servile disposition and
conduct of those among us, who are secretly and others who openly espouse the
cause of New York, or Great Britain, and are opposers of our happy constitution
and government, my indignation is moved against such pests of society. But when
I consider myself as an individual of the community with whom I have delegated
my natural right of punishing offenders, to the legislature, and legal officers
of justice; I rest satisfied, knowing that the laws are now about to be printed
and judges already appointed, and that a legal distribution of justice will
shortly take place.

These reflections have, undoubtedly, more or less exercised the minds of every
friend to our present government; and I hope may have a proper influence on the
virtuously disposed.

I shall conclude this letter with a short narrative of my last journey to
Congress. The first morning after my arrival. I delivered the public writings
(which were entrusted me by the legislature of this State, and signed by the
Governor) to the President* they were read, and ordered to be put with the
minutes of the House, to be re-examined, and the subject matter therein
contained, to be determined upon as soon as the policy of the United States
would admit. The delegates from New Hampshire had received instructions from
their government, just before I left Philadelphia, not to assert their claim to
the westward of Connecticut river, and it is wholly repugnant to their policy
ever to do it. And well it is for Vermont, that the Assembly at their last
setting, refused to exercise jurisdiction to the eastward of the said river;
for New Hampshire have it more in their power either to help or hurt Vermont,
than any State on the continent, but are friendly disposed as we can desire,
provided we do not injure ourselves, by endeavoring in the most ungrateful
manner to abuse them. And as to New York their flagrant injustice toward this
people, hangs as a dead weight on their character and cause, at Congress; and
will forever put it out of their power to ruin this State; you only need the
exercise of public virtue and perseverance, and you will certainly be confirmed
an independent State. I am, friends and countrymen, your most obedient, humble
and faithful servant,

ETHAN ALLEN.
Arlington, 9th Jan. 1779.

