A BRIEF REPLY TO THE GRAND ENQUIRY, What must I do to be saved?

To which are added, Some peculiar DOCTRINES, AND OBSERVATIONS upon them, In
which they are represented as unscriptural. ALSO, The PROCEEDINGS OF THE
ECCLESIASTICAL COUNCIL At the ORDINATION of the Rev. DANIEL FOSTER, In
NEW-BRAINTREE.

O foolish Teachers who has bewitched you, that you should pervert the Truth!
May the Cockatrice Egg never hatch. MASSACHUSETTS BAY: WORCESTER, Printed by
ISAIAH THOMAS.

THE following thoughts, were at first designed for private use; but after
perusal, for the honor of truth, the good of my fellow sinners, the shame of
erroneous teachers, and the destruction of error, I have obtained liberty to
publish them to the world; which may the blessing of God attend to the latest
ages.

I am, Reader, a sincere well-wisher to your best interest,

An Inhabitant of New-Braintree.
January 1779.
SIR,
I HAVE of late been entertained with strange things from the pulpit, which
have caused no small uneasiness in my mind, with regard to the essentials of
the Gospel, lest they should be brought down, and rendered palatable to the
pride of the carnal heart.

For, in my apprehension, those scriptural doctrines, which serve to exalt the
savior and abase the creature, such as the depravity of the human nature, and
the rich, free, sovereign grace of God, in the recovery of lost sinners to
himself, by faith in the imputed righteousness of Christ, are evidently struck
at.

I therefore seriously ask an answer to that all-important question -- "What
must I do to be saved." Acts xvi. 30.

I the rather make this enquiry, as I have lately been taught the following
doctrines, viz.

1. That men in a natural unregenerate state, can do those things which are
well-pleasing and acceptable in the sight of God.

2. That the special, effacacious influences of the Holy Spirit in conversion
are unnecessary.

3. Which asserts an unregenerate man has as much power or ability to take
possession of the heavenly Canaan, as Israel had to take possession of the
earthly Canaan.

4. Some, says the preacher, hold to an absolute, personal, unconditional
election, which (adds he) is absurd and ridiculous, and blessed be God, it is
false doctrine: For Christ did as much for Judas as for St. Paul.

5. I am told that the power of the will, though an Arminian tenet, is a good
one; that every man's has power within himself, from means and motives held up,
savingly to choose or refuse.

6. That if I repent and believe the Gospel, God has engaged that he will give
me a new heart and would cause me to walk in his statutes; and if I do not God
will break his covenant. As in Deuteronomy.

From the apostle's mentioning the breaking off of the Jews, and grafting in of
the Gentiles, I am told, that the former dispensation was a faith of
profession, and the present dispensation means no more, else the apostle's
reasoning is foolishness. Consequently tells me that saving grace is
unnecessary for complying with any ordinance.

8. I am taught that creeds, catechisms, confessions of says, church
covenants, etc. are a long rope of which the devil has the knot-end. That the
devil could not have done so much mischief without them, and that there could
not be a reformation till these were thrown aside. But then he added, that
children might be taught the catechize, provided the most dangerous parts were
left out.

9. I am told on account of the righteousness of Christ the divine attributes
harmonise, justice could demand no more: Christ partaking human nature his
elevated and restored it to favor; and the whole human race are upon better
standing than Adam in innocence.

10. The gospel is a remedial law, brought down to our capacities, and that we
are able to obey its precepts.

11. The depravity of human nature is denied, and original sin is asserted not
to be damning.

12. I have been taught that original sin and imputed guilt is as unscriptural
as the Indian's philosophy was unphilosophical, when he said, the world was
held up by a great Indian, the Indian stood upon a tortoise and the tortoise
stood upon nothing.

13. That an unregenerate man could act a divine faith, or put forth a saving
act, as well as the regenerate.

14. I am taught that a saying says is an assent of the will, founded on the
understanding, but the consent of the will was no part of it, illustrated by
this similitude, ' I believe there is such a place as London, because I have
seen the history of it.' And the life of faith is works: And that God is not
the immediate author of faith, but the scriptures mediately or by means. And
the faith of devils differs not from the faith of believers, but in this, one
has works, the other has none.

These, Sir, are the doctrines I have been taught to believe; pray be so kind
as to give me, in brief, your sentiments upon them, and you will greatly oblige
one, who is searching after Truth.

The REPLY.
Dear Sir,
BY your address you discover a desire to be freed turn error, and to be led
into the knowledge of divine truth.

It will afford me peculiar pleasure, if I may be happily instrumental, in the
hand of God, of affording you some little assistance in this most weighty
concern.

Your first enquiry is, ' What must I do to be saved?' I would direct you to
the apostle's answer, Believe on the Lord Jesus Christ and thou shall be saved.
Not that any person if left to the inclinations of his own depraved heart, will
ever feel a disposition savingly to close with Christ. Because the carnal mind
is enmity against God. Romans viii. 7. For by grace are ye saved through faith,
and that not of yourselves, it is the gift of God. Ephesians. ii. 8.

Man is not born a believer, faith springs not up of itself, from some hidden
seeds in our degenerate nature; but is altogether of a foreign extract, it is
of a supernatural birth.

None that give credit to the Bible, of even consult their own experience and
observation, but must confess, that this grace of faith is a holy principle,
which no man brings into the world with him, for we are born with an evil heart
within us; are all included in the number of the many, who by one man's
disobedience were made sinners. There is an inbred principle of infidelity, an
hidden root of bitterness, in the corrupt nature, which we have all derived
from apostate Adam. Foolishness, says the wiseest man, is bound up in the heart
of a child, and nothing can effectually root it out, but the rod of his
strength, who makes his people willing in the day of his power.

Unrenewed men are as much at enmity in their minds, against the grace of God,
and the merits of Christ, in the scripture. account of them, as they are to his
holiness and moral government.

This appears evident in convicted persons, when enlightened by the holy
spirit, they see themselves under a broken law, and in extreme danger of
perishing forever, without an interest in Christ, a new heart, and a change
from nature to grace: Yet how great is their attachment to the law as a
covenant of works, how does the spirit of the pharisee operate and prevail
within them! That however much they may express their desire toward a savior,
and a willingness to be justified by Christ; it is plain they are for
compounding matters, mingling law and gospel, or else pass on in a middle way
between them: At best they are for washing their sins by the tears of
repentance, joined with faith in the blood of Christ, or else hope to make a
righteousness of their prayers and duties, thinking by these to recommend
themselves to the grace of God, to obtain Christ, and get entitled to his
benefits: At most the pride of their stubborn hearts will not suffer them to
come to Christ as naked forlorn sinners, wretched and miserable, trembling
under fearful apprehensions of their guilt and danger, as worthless, helpless
and hopeless in themselves considered, depending alone on the perfect
righteousness of Christ for justification and acceptance with God.

Hence it is manifest, that holy and unfeigned faith, is so far from being a
connatural principle in us, that by nature we are utter strangers to it, nay
enemies against it.

Nor is this says an acquired habit or the natural effect of human endeavors,
which we procure to ourselves, by virtue of our own more improvements on
natural reason and conscience: For the truly regenerate are born not of blood,
nor of the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man but of God. John i, 13.

And when it shall please God to bring you savingly to believe in Christ, he
will give you to see that salvation is all of grace, of pure, unmingled grace,
that all boasting may be excluded from man, and all the glory redound to his
great name. That the law is spiritual, but that you are carnal, sold under sin
He will show you that all works produced by human endeavors and even faith
itself, as it is the act of the creature, are entirely set aside in the grand
business of our justification before God; and that you stand in the most
absolute need of a better righteousness than your own even the perfect
righteousness of Christ to denominate you righteous before his enlightened
tribunal. That nothing short of an almighty power can take away the stony
heart, and effectually renew the will. He will then hold up a savior to view,
such a savior as is exactly calculated to relieve you under your perishing
circumstances; and will enable you to hunger and thirst after Christ: He will
give you to see that in Jesus the Redeemer all fullness dwells; all fullness of
merit and righteousness, of grace, sanctification and salvation; and this for
the unworthy, for the most guilty among men, for whosoever will, even for the
chief of sinners.

If you know these things by happy experience, may you still go on rejoicing in
Christ Jesus, putting no confidence in the Flesh. But if not, may the Lord give
you a will, a heart, cordially to accept of Christ; may he make bear his arm,
and by the powerful operations of the blessed spirit, effectually draw off your
affections from the love of sin, from the love of the world, and the things of
it; may he draw you to himself, and savingly unite you to Jesus Christ by a
faith of divine operation; that you may live to God, honor his great name, and
bring forth much fruit to the praise of his glorious grace, that hereafter you
may join with saints and angels in sublime ascriptions of praise to him that
sits upon the throne, and to the lamb forever and ever.

As to the doctrines you have been taught, viz.

1. "That men in a natural, unregenerate state, can do those things which are
well-pleasing and acceptable in the sight of God."

This appears to me both dangerous and unscriptural. 1. Dangerous for it leads
the sinner to build his hopes for heaven on a false foundation, even upon his
own works: But what say the scriptures, Other foundation can no man lay, than
that is laid, which is Jesus Christ. 1 Cor. iii. 11. By grace are ye saved; not
of works, lest any man should boast. Ephesians. ii. 8, 9. Now if Jesus Christ be the
only foundation for men to build the salvation of their precious souls upon,
then to build upon works as a foundation must be infinitely dangerous. 2. It is
unscriptural; for, says Christ, John iii. 6. that which is born of Flesh, is
Flesh. And says the apostle, Romans viii. 8. They that are in the Flesh cannot
please God. By being in the flesh, must mean man in his natural unregenerate
state, for being born of the flesh is directly opposed by our Savior himself
to being born of the spirit: He therefore adds, Marvel not that I said unto
thee, ye must be born again. We read expressly, Heb. xi. 6. That without faith
it is impossible to please God. But man in his natural state has not faith,
therefore it is impossible for man in his natural state to do those things
which are well pleasing in the sight of God.

2. "That regeneration, and the special effacacious influences of the holy
spirit in conversion are unnecessary."

The former part of this article is diametrically opposite our savior's
conference with Nicodemus, and to the import of the whole New Testament and is
therefore false. And as to the special, effacacious influences of the holy
spirit in conversion as unnecessary, these texts may prove the assertion
unscriptural, Ephesians. i. 19, 20. And what is the exceeding greatness of his power
to us ward who believe, according to the working of his mighty power, which he
wrought in Christ, when he raised him from the dead. 2 Cor. v. 17. Therefore if
any man be in Christ he is a new creature. With Ephesians. ii. 1.10.

3. "Which asserts, an unregenerate man has as much power, or ability to take
possession of the heavenly Canaan, as Israel had to take possession of the
earthly Canaan."

If by power, or ability, he means a natural power, I shall not contend with
him; but if he means a moral power, that men have a heart, a will, while
unregenerate, to love God, to choose his service, to believe in Christ, and
accept of salvation, as offered in the gospel through him, I must deny the
assertion, and hold it unscriptural: Else why does our savior complain, Ye
will not come unto me that ye might have life, John v. 40. It is represented in
scripture as being given unto men to believe, Philip. i. 2, 9: And says Christ,
John vi. 44, No man can come to me except the Father which has sent me draw
him.

4. "Some, says the preacher, (I had almost said imposter) hold to an absolute,
personal, unconditional election; which, adds he, is absurd and ridiculous, and
blessed be God it is false doctrine: For Christ died as much for Judas as for
St. Paul."

That there is a certain remnant that shall be saved, and this by virtue of
election is plain from the following passages. V^ssels of mercy before prepared
unto glory, Romans ix 23. The election has obtained, Romans xi. 7. As many as were
ordained to eternal life believed, Acts xiii. 48. And 2 Thessalonians. ii. 13. God
has from the beginning chosen you to salvation, etc. It was requisite that
election should be absolute, because of the absoluteness of God's decree
touching the death of his Son, unto which he was foreordained unrepealably. 1.
Pet. i. 20. He was the lamb slain from the foundation of the world, Rev. xiii.
8. And it was not possible that cup should pass from him, Matt xxvi. 39, 42.
Now if it be a thing below the prudence of men to lay down the price, without
securing the purchase; then surely the wisdom of God could not determine the
death of his son, for men's salvation, and yet leave the salvation of these
very men at an uncertainty; which it must have been, if their election had not
been absolute. And that election is personal, is plain from this; the design of
God in the death of Christ could not otherwise be secured. Had the design been
to purchase salvation for believers, without ascertaining the persons that
should believe, it had been uncertain whether any would be saved, because
uncertain whether any would believe. If certain that some would believe, this
certainty must be decreed. For nothing future could be certain otherwise; and
if it was decreed that some should believe, the individuals of that some must
be decreed also; for faith is the gift of God, and could not be foreseen in
any, but whom he had decreed to give it unto. Which laid together are a good
demonstration that those Christ died for, were as well pre-ordained, as that he
should die for them, and that definitely and by name.

It is also unconditional.

To derive election from any root, beside the good pleasure of God, is to
frustrate the principal end of man's salvation, viz, the glory of God's grace,
Ephesians. i. 6, 2, 7. This attribute of all the rest, he will not have eclipsed, nor
infringed upon; it is so divinely sacred, as not to admit the least human
touch; for which very cause, the Lord has so contrived that blessed design of
his glory, that all boasting is excluded, and no Flesh shall glory in his
presence, 1. Cor. i. 29. But if any thing in the creature, any good works
foreseen, be entitled to the causality of election, flesh will glory; and
instead of excluding man's boasting, grace itself will be excluded. See Romans
xi. 6.

It is said "Christ died as much for Judas as for St. Paul:" This I deny. Judas
is acknowledged by all, to be the son of perdition, and to be eternally lost:
But those for whom Christ died are appointed to obtain salvation through him, 1 Thessalonians. v. 9. Christ is said expressly to die for his people, Matt. i. 21. His
sheep, John x. 11, 12. His church, Acts xx. 28. Ephesians. v. 25. As distinguished
from the world, Romans v. 8. Whence, says one, "We may surely conclude, that
Christ died not for all and every one. Not for those he never knew, whom he
hates, whom he hardens, on whom he will not show mercy, who were before of old
ordained to condemnation: In a word for a reprobate, for the world for which he
would not pray."

Here perhaps you will object, "How can the offers of salvation ba said to be
made with sincerity to those for whom Christ never died?" To this I answer in
the words of a learned divine. "Those to whom the gospel is preached, are
obliged to believe that Christ is God, the son of God, the true Messiah, etc.
according to the tenor of the revelation made to them; and may justly be
condemned for not believing in him as such, even though he died not for them;
for that he died for them, is not what they are obliged to believe, that being
no part of the revelation made to them; nor will they be condemned for not
believing that he died for them, but for their neglect, contempt and unbelief
of him and his gospel."

5. "I am told that the power of the will, though an Arminian tenet, is a good
one; that every man has power within himself from means and motives held up,
savingly to choose or refuse."

To this it may be replied, as to unregenerate persons they have no will, or
moral power, to choose and prefer spiritual and divine things; they desire not
the knowledge of God's ways; their carnal minds are enmity against God, and are
not subject to his law, nor can they be subject to it, without the special
grace of God. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, Psa. 110.3.
Who are born not of blood, nor of the will of the Flesh, etc. John i. 13.

6. "That if I repent and believe the Gospel, God has engaged that he will give
me a new heart, and would cause me to walk in his statutes, and if I do not,
God will break his covenant, as in Deuteronomy."

Here it may be observed, that no person does truly repent and believe in
Christ, but he that has, a new heart. I hope no one will be so absurd as to
assert, than an unregenerate person, while such, can act saving faith and
evangelical repentence: No, they must be created in Christ Jesus, and have the
spirit of Christ put in them first. Hence faith and repentance are not
conditions of the new heart, but the fruits and gracious exercises of it. These
by the influences of his spirit, God will enable to walk in his statutes, and
to persevere through faith and holiness unto salvation. For having loved his
own which were in the world, he loved them to the end. John xiii. 1. Jer. xxxi.
31.

7. "From the apostle's mentioning, the breaking off of the Jews, and grafting
in of the Gentiles, I am told, that the former dispensation was a faith of
profession, and the present dispensation means no more, else the apostle's
reasoning is foolishness. Consequently tells me that saving grace is
unnecessary for complying with any ordinance."

We may here observe, that no dispensation, ever given from God to men admits
of hypocrisy; he always requires the heart, and even under the Mosaic
dispensation, those that were ceremonially polluted, were forbidden to partake
of the passover, notwithstanding their profession, And under the holy
dispensation of the gospel, the church of Christ is called a spiritual house,
and believers are said to be lively stones of which it is built, an holy priest
had to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God by Jesus Christ, 1 Peter
ii. 5. But what unfit materials, are hypocritical professors, who are dead in
trespasses and sins, to make up a part of this spiritual building? The gospel
therefore requires holiness of heart and life in all those that make profession
of their faith in Christ. And let every one, that names the name of Christ
depart from iniquity, 2 Timothy ii. 19. God is a spirit and they who worship him,
must worship him in spirit and in truth, John iv. 24.

8. "I am taught that creeds, catechisms, confessions of faith, church
covenants, etc. are a long rope of which the devil his the knot-end; that the
devil could not have done so much mischief without them as with them, and that
there would not be a reformation till these were thrown aside, etc." These
though not infallible, are to be looked upon, so far as they agree with the
word of God, to be good directories for our searching out the mind and will of
God; and ought to be made use of as such, by us: Which to deny, is to deny the
practice of the reformed churches in all periods. As to their being a long
rope, etc. I think it a very indecent and unjustifiable expression. And as to
there being no reformation till these are thrown aside; this we know, there
have been glorious out-pourings of the spirit in the churches where these have
been carefully attended to, and we hope for still greater. Hold fast therefore
the form of sound words. 2 Timothy i. 12.

9. "I am told on account of the righteousness of Christ, the divine attributes
harmonise, justice could demand no more. Christ partaking human nature has
elevated and restored it to favor; and the whole human race are upon better
standing than Adam in innocence."

That the divine attributes do harmonise in the justification and salvation of
them that believe in Christ, I hope none will deny. But to say, that Christ by
partaking human nature has restored it to divine favor, etc. is contradictory
to scripture and common sense: For if all men are restored to the favor of
God, then all men will be saved, but say the scriptures, Many be called, but
few chosen, Mat. xx. 16. vii. 14. And is it not imposing upon common sense to
say, that persons dead in sin, under the wrath of God, and a moral inability to
please God, which is the scripture account of the whole human race by nature,
are upon better standing than Adam in innocence, who was holy, in the image,
favor and enjoyment of God?

10. "The gospel is a remedial law, brought down to our capacities, and that we
are able to obey its precepts."

I find nothing in scripture for this: Besides, as one observes, it is a great
mistake, to suppose that the conditions of this imaginary new law are easier,
than the conditions of the old covenant of works. The case is much otherwise;
he with whom the first covenant was made, had sufficient power and ability to
fulfill all its conditions, and fully to come up to all its demands. But fallen
creatures are morally incapable of performing sincere though imperfect
obedience; they have naturally no sincerity, no truth in the inward parts, no
principle of new obedience, nor does this pretended covenant supply them with
any.

11. "The depravity of human nature is denied, and original sin asserted not to
be damning."

To prove the depravity of human nature see Psalm li. 5. Behold I was shapen in
iniquity, and in sin did my mother conceive me. With Psa. lviii, 3. Isa.
xlviii, 8. "What is here said of David, says a learned divine, is true of all
men; since every imagination of the thoughts of men's hearts, both in the old
and in the new world, is evil, Genesis vi, 5, and 8, 21." And that not only the
wicked are estranged from the womb, but the elect of God, are by nature
children of wrath even as others, Ephesians. ii, 3. Which suppose them to be guilty
and polluted as others; and indeed how should it be otherwise for that which is
born of the Flesh is Flesh. That original sin is not damning appears false from
this, All sin in its own nature is damning, for sin, every sin is a
transgression of the law of God, and is therefore exposed to its penalty, even
to eternal death, Romans vi. 23. Therefore original sin must be damning.

12. "I have been taught that original sin and imputed guilt, is as
unscriptural as the Indian's philosophy was unphilosophical, when he said that
the world was held up by a great Indian, the Indian stood upon a tortoise, and
the tortoise stood upon nothing. This was delivered in our pulpit by a
transient person, which discovers to me, that he was as ignorant of the
mysteries of the Gospel, as his Indian was of philosophy.
"

To prove original sin, or that we are born sinners, and imputed guilt, see
Romans v. 12. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin; and so
death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. Imputed guilt, I think is
plain from the 19th verse, For as by one man's disobedience, many were made
sinners, so, or in like manner, as it might he rendered by the obedience of one
shall many be made righteous. Now how do men become righteous? Is it not by the
righteousness of Christ, being imputed or made over to the soul, upon its
receiving him by faith? If so, then by parity of reasoning we are made sinners
by Adam's sin being imputed to us.

13. "That an unregenerate man could a divine faith, or put forth a saving act
as well as the regenerate."

This is to say, there may be the act where the habit is not; or that there may
be an effect without a cause; which are equally absurd: In order to act faith
there must be the principle: for what says our savior, First make the tree
good, then the fruit will be good; for a corrupt tree cannot bring forth good
fruit.

14. "I am taught that a saving faith is an assent of the will founded on the
understanding, but the consent of the will was no part of it; illustrated by
this similitude, I believe there is such a place as London because I have seen
the history of it. And the life of faith is works: And that God is not the
immediate author of faith, but the scriptures mediately, or by means* And the
faith of devils differs not from the faith of believers, but in this, one has
works, the other has none."

According to this, an historical faith, or the faith of assent, is saving.
Hence the greatest profligate that barely assents to this, that Jesus is the
Christ, has saving faith -- O monstrous! If you set under such a ministry, I
pity you, and the poor people there. The consent of the will is essential to a
saving faith; how can I be said truly to believe in Christ, except I receive
him with my whole heart, and most cheerfully consent that Christ with all his
benefits shall be mine, and I with all the powers of my soul, will be his, and
for him? This faith will work by love and purify the heart; and any thing short
of this is but a dead faith: To them that believe Christ is precious, but to
thousands that give their assent to the Bible as true, he is not precious:
'They see neither form nor comeliness in him, why they should desire him:' But
to as many as receive him, to them he gives power to become the sons of God,
even to as many as believe on his name, John i. 12. And have not these the
faith of consent think you? He adds, "the life of faith is works." I answer,
no; good works, or holiness, are the necessary effects of a saving faith; but
Christ is the life of faith, hence he is called the believer's life. He is the
grand object of faith; hence, says he, Ye believe in God, believe also in me.

God is the immediate author of faith; Faith is the gift of God, says the
apostle, and though faith comes by hearing, yet barely hearing or attending on
the means, does not produce faith, this is the special and immediate work of
the spirit of God upon the soul, hence we read of Lydia, "whose heart the
Lord," not men nor means, "opened." Notwithstanding it is the duty of all to
attend upon the means, for in this way God ordinarily communicates this special
grace: In the disposals of saving faith he acts as sovereign, he gives it to
whom he will and is under no obligations, but his more good pleasure to bestow
it upon any. The faith of believers is essentially different from that of
devils in this -- "They have an apprehension, or sense, of the supreme holy
beauty and comeliness of divine things, as they are in themselves, or in their
own nature. This the devils and damned in hell are and forever will be entirely
destitute of.

Your servant, etc."

At an ECCESIASTICAL COUNCIL, holden at NEW-BRAINTREE, October 27, 1778, at the
house of the Rev. Mr. BENJAMIN RUGGLES.
PRESENT.
Rev. Messrs. David White, dissent. Isaac Jones, John Willard, Nathan Fisk,
Isaac Foster, Ephraim Ward, Josiah Dana, Dan Foster, Joseph Appleton, dissent.
Emerson Foster, MESSENGERS. Deacon William Page, dissent. Deacon Solomon Rich,
Daniel Alden, Esquire Deacon Jabez Crosby, Deacon Nathan Johnson, Mr. John Phipps,
dissent. Deacon Jonas Rice. Deacon Hezekiah Griswold, Mr. Samuel Haskell,
dissent. Deacon Joseph Torrey. Rev. Isaac Jones was chosen Moderator, and John
Willard, Scribe.
THE Council was opened by the Moderator with prayer. A Committee from the
church in New-Braintree waited upon the Council, informing them, that some
person had matters of grievance, which they were desirous of laying before the
council. It was resolved to give them an hearing forthwith. The aggrieved
accordingly appeared, and exhibited a paper, in which they, in general,
represented Mr. Daniel Foster, Pastor elect of New-Braintree, as holding some
principles in his public discourses, and private conversation, which are not
agreeable to truth, and of a dangerous tendency. The complainants having no
particular articles of charge, committed to writing, were directed by the
Council to withdraw, and commit to writing, what were particular matters of
grievance; which having done, they laid the paper before the council, and
served Mr. Foster with a copy. The Council then adjourned to Wednesday morning
7 o'clock.

Wednesday, October 28. The council met according to adjournment. The aggrieved
and Mr. Foster then appeared before the Council. The articles of grievance were
then read, and Mr. Foster's answer to them; and both parties were fully heard.

The Articles of Grievance, were as follows, viz.

1. None will ever be excluded happiness, but those that exclude themselves as
moral agents, infants included, the reason he gave, because where sin abounded,
grace did much more abound; and it was not rational to think, that God would
make a world, and then let the Devil run away with it.

2. In denying election, and in saying that Christ died as much for Judas as
for St. Paul.

3. There is no enmity in man naturally against God.

4. Original sin is not damning.

5. That an unrenerate man could act a divine faith, or put forth a saving act
as well as the regenerate.

6. In a funeral discourse, Mr. Foster said, it would not be asked in the great
day how men believed, but how they obeyed.

The following is Mr. FOSTER'S REPLY to the allegations brought against him.

To the venerable Council convened, and now sitting in New-Braintree.
VENERABLE SIRS,
Last evening, 10 o'clock, I was waited upon with a copy of what a number of
persons are pleased to call masters of grievance, signed Daniel Matthews.

I am very sorry those aggrieved had not bethought themselves in time, and
favored me with a copy of their allegations before the punctum temporis, of my
being called upon to appear before this venerable body to answer for myself,
touching those things whereof they accuse me. A proper time to prepare for his
own defense, being ever granted the vilest malefactors: But though treated with
such neglect and contempt, yet for the interest of truth, and being willing to
grant my opponents a hearing, though in point of honor and even good manners,
they are not entitled to such a favor, I will proceed to observe something
upon the matters exhibited against me.

1. It is alleged that I said in a discourse from Genesis 3, and 9. as asserted
in the first article of charge.

In answer to all which, I appeal to my notes.

2. They allege that I deny election, and said that Christ died as much for
Judas as for St. Paul. In a restrained sense.

3. They allege that I said from the gospel feast, there is no enmity in man
against God. This I fully deny as asserted.

4. They say that in private I said, original sin was not damning. This I own
as my sentiment, though I do not recollect I ever said so.

Moreover, they charge me with saying as in the 5th article. In answer to
which, I suppose he may act faith with divine assistance, equally with the
greatest saint; neither can act without it. -- If these brief replies are not
satisfactory I crave the liberty of enlargement, before the venerable Council,
as I have here no proper time to reply in a formal manner.

Worthy Gentlemen, your humble servant, DANIEL FOSTER.
A true copy. Examined by Rev. BENJAMIN RUGGLES, Oct. 28 1778.




The Council being by themselves, then received from Mr. FOSTER a CONFESSION of
his FAITH, which was read, and accepted as orthodox. Which was as follows, viz.

1. I believe there is one God, and one mediator between God and man, the man
Christ Jesus.

2. I believe that when God made man, he gave him a law, holy, just and good,
and that man had full power to keep that law; that man by sin broke the divine
law, fell under the wrath of God, etc.

3. That God did not leave man to perish in this state of sin, but was
self-moved to provide a savior, his own eternal son.

4. That Christ, by doing and suffering, satisfied divine justice, brought in
everlasting righteousness, for all that shall comply with the gospel in time.

5. That God has appointed a day in which he will judge the world by Jesus
Christ according to the Gospel.

6. That all who in time comply with the gospel, shall in the judgment be
acquitted and rewarded with eternal life.

7. That the scriptures of the old and new Testament are the word of God, a
perfect rule of faith and life.

8. I believe a Trinity in the Godhead as the scriptures teach.

9. I believe that God does foreknow all things that do in time come to pass.

10. (That man by the fall, has lost his ability to do good, is averse to good)
and dead in sin, and unable to convert himself by his own strength, and needs
the special influences of the Spirit. It seems Mr. Foster has received farther
light since his ordination, for he has written thus, viz The former part of the
10th article appears to me at present not to be true, D. Foster. I would advise
him to take heed, lest the light within him should prove to be darkness.


11. I believe that God did from eternity elect to life eternal, a certain
number of fallen men, even all those who should in time believe in Christ,
which I acknowledge infers a reprobation of the rest, i. e. all the finally
impenitent.

The above I subscribe as my confession of faith, according to present light,
waiting on God to give farther light, and ready to receive it when offered.

DANIEL FOSTER.
A true copy from the minutes.




The Council then proceeded to consider by themselves, the articles of charge,
article by article.

As to the first article of charge, it was voted, that it ought not to be any
bar in the way of the Council's proceeding to ordination.

As to the second article Mr. Foster said, that he never did in the most remote
sense, deny election; and in the confession of faith, exhibited before the
Council, he owns expressly the doctrine of election. Mr. Foster explained
himself, and mentioned what he meant, by "Christ dying as much for Judas as for
St. Paul." He said Christ by his death, put all men into a salvable state, so
that the offers of salvation were with sincerity made to Judas, as well as to
Paul and others, and that the reason why Judas was not saved as well as others,
was, that he wilfully rejected Christ, and would not come to him that he might
have life. I rather conceive Judas believed not, because he was not one of
Christ's sheep. See John. x. 26,
Voted, that this article as explained, is no just bar in the way of the
Council going on to ordain Mr. Foster.

As to the third article, viz. That "there is no enmity in man naturally
against God." Mr. Foster fully denied this as asserted; and then proceeded to
say, "That the natural man had framed in his mind an unjust representation of
the moral character of God, and being conscious he had broke God's law, and
that justice was armed against him, and was bound to punish him, he therefore
hated God; but that his enmity against God was not pointed against his true or
whole character, but against his character as lawgiver and judge; and that the
holy spirit of God, in regeneration, removes from the mind these false
apprehensions of God's character, by which means the sinner is brought to love
God." I cannot but look upon this as a sh^^king piece (...) divinity, and if no
bar to ordination, really I don't know what might be termed one.
Voted, That this is no bar in the way of proceeding to ordination.

As to the fourth article, in which Mr. Foster is charged with saying in
private, that "original sin is not damning." Mr. Foster allowed that all sin,
in its own nature is damning, and that the reason why original sin is not
damning, is because of the mediation of Christ and an interest therein, and
that men are not delivered from the condemnation of sin, whether original or
actual, till they are savingly interested in Christ. Voted, that this article
of charge as explained by Mr. Foster, is not only no bar against his
ordination, but sound divinity.

As to the fifth article, in which the pastor elect is charged with saying in
some performance, that an unregenerate man can act a divine faith, or put forth
a saving act, as well as the regenerate: He answers, "I suppose he may act
faith, equally with the greatest saint; and that neither can act it without."
He adds, "That no one ever acted faith, previous to some real, spiritual
change: That his design in the performance referred to, is no more than this,
that we have an entire dependence upon God, and that we are not sufficient of
ourselves to do any thing spiritually good, without divine assistance." Voted,
that this fifth article is no bar against proceeding to ordination.

As to the last article, in which the pastor elect is charged with saying, in
the funeral sermon of Madam Ruggles deceased, "That it would not be asked in
the great day, how we believed, but how we obeyed." Mr. Foster objected against
the legality of the charge, as he had not been served with a copy of it:
However, upon its being moved that on the whole, it might be best, he consented
to say something to it. He granted readily, "That the righteousness and merits
of Christ, was the sole ground of a sinner's justification: And that where good
men are said to be justified in the great day by their works, such works had
faith in Christ as their principle." Voted, That the explanation above is
satisfactory to the Council.

The council then proceeded, to examine the pastor elect, as to his sentiments
upon the most important points of religion, and the motives that influenced him
to undertake the ministry; and they voted their satisfaction upon these heads.

It was then voted by the council, that the way is clear to proceed to the
ordination of the pastor elect. The following ministers were appointed to the
ensuing services, viz. Rev. Dan Fos^^^ to make the first prayer: Rev. Mr. Ward
to make the prayer before the charge; Rev. Mr. Jones to give the charge; Rev.
Mr. Dana to make the prayer after the charge; and Rev. Mr. Fisk to give the
right hand of fellowship.

A true copy taken from the original.


