SERMON ON BROTHERLY LOVE PREACHED At the Old Brick Meeting House in BOSTON,
December 28, 1778. BEFORE THE MOST ANCIENT AND HONORABLE SOCIETY OF FREE AND
ACCEPTED MASONS. And published at their unanimous Request.

By SIMEON HOWARD, A. M. Pastor of the West Church in BOSTON.

BOSTON, Printed by Brother THOMAS FLEET.

AT the Most Ancient Grand Lodge of FREE and ACCEPTED MASONS.
Boston, December 28, 1778.
THE Most Worshipful JOSEPH WEBB, Esquire G.M. in the Chair, with all the Grand
Officers, together with the Master and Wardens of Massachusetts and St.
Andrew's Lodge, with about 120 Masons present. Voted unanimously, That the
Thanks of this Grand Lodge be given to the Rev. Mr. SIMEON HOWARD for his
Sermon delivered this Day, and that the following Brethren be a Committee to
wait upon him and return him Thanks accordingly, and request a Copy of the same
for the Press, viz.

Capt. Samuel Barrett, S. G. W. Lieut. Col. Paul Revere, J. G. W. Col. Thomas
Crafts, S. G. D. Lieut. Col. Edward Procter, J. G. D. Mr. John Lowell, G. T.
Attest. WM. HOSKINS. G.S.

GENTLEMEN,
YOUR approving of my Sermon, so far as to desire a copy of it for the press,
does me an honor, for which I thank you. -- My aim in composing, it was to
promote the benevolent ends of your institution; with the same view I now
consent to its publication; hoping the readers will exercise the same candor
toward this hasty composition, which I experienced from the hearers.

I am, Gentlemen, Your most obedient, humble Servant, SIMEON HOWARD.
Jan. 5, 1779.
Brotherly Love inculcated.
1 JOHN iii. 18. -- Let us not love in word, neither in tongue, but in deed and
in truth.


BROTHERLY LOVE is so agreeable to the uncorrupted principles of our nature,
and so plainly necessary and conducive to the well-being and happiness of human
society, that persons of all persuasions will, in general, acknowledge it to be
a virtue of peculiar excellency, which none ought to neglect. And while they
thus allow its importance, there are but few but what pretend to be possessed
of it. But notwithstanding men so generally agree in commending and laying
claim to this virtue, there are, it is probable, many who have but a very
imperfect idea of it. Some there are who seem to think that it consists only in
good words and good wishes, or in desiring the welfare of others; although they
do nothing to promote it any further than mere words will go. They are full of
kind expressions; and there their charity begins and ends.

This is the error which the Apostle cautions us against in the text; "Let us
not love in word, neither in tongue." He does not mean that it is improper to
use kind words, or to make professions of love and good will; but that we
should not content ourselves with these only, or imagine that benevolence
requires nothing more of us. Such language is agreeable and pleasant, and using
it is one way of showing kindness, though it by no means proves a real principle
of love in the heart, and in many cases can be of no substantial service to the
person to whom it is addressed. For, in the language of the Apostle James, "If
a brother or sister be naked and destitute of daily food; and one of you say
unto him, depart in peace, be ye warmed and filled: notwithstanding ye give
them not those things which are needful for the body; what does it profit?" Is
this true charity? Does this amount to loving our neighours as ourselves? By no
means. People do but deceive themselves, if they imagine they have either
christian faith, or christian charity, unless they show it by good works: But
more especially, if they scruple not to defraud, to defame and otherwise to
injure their neighbors, with such good words as brotherly-love and charity in
their mouths. Instead of contenting ourselves with this merely verbal charity,
the Apostle exhorts us to love in deed and in truth; i. e. to cultivate a
principle of love and benevolence in our hearts, that we may with truth and
sincerity make professions of it; and be ever ready to manifest it by deeds of
charity.

This duty of brotherly-love is a very extensive one: It virtually comprises
all the duties of the second table, all moral and social virtues, as they are
distinguished from the duties that immediately relate to God as their object:
Accordingly, the Apostle Paul says, "he that loves another has fulfilled the
law." Nor is it improbable that many who make pretensions to this virtue are
under other mistakes about it, besides that cautioned against in the text. It
may therefore be useful to us all, and conducive to one professed design of
that ancient institution which gave occasion to this solemnity, to spend a
little time in explaining that charity or brotherly-love recommended in the
text.

It is to be considered both in its principle, and in its effects or operations
as it is called forth into exercise on various occasions, and in different
circumstances.

It primarily intends sincere good will or unfeigned benevolence; heartily
wishing well to others, and desiring both their temporal and eternal good.
Seeing, says the Apostle Peter, in his first epistle, 1 chap. "Seeing ye have
purisied your souls in obeying the truth unto unfeigned love of the brethren;
see that ye love one another with a pure heart fervently." -- This is the
general idea of christian charity, or brotherly-love.

But it will be proper to be more particular in explaining the nature of this
virtue, by pointing out some of the principal properties of it and showing what
is contrary thereto. Love is an active principle in the soul: Wherever it is,
it has a mighty influence upon the mind and behavior; producing effects
correspondent to its nature* and restraining the subjects of it from every
thing contrary thereto: And it is to be made manifest both to ourselves and
others by its fruits, and not by an empty profession. And,

1. It is a property of brotherly-love to rejoice in the goodness of God to
others; and to delight in their happiness. We are enjoined to "rejoice with
them that do rejoice," in testimony of the good will which we bear to them. And
if we sincerely love others we are of course pleased when we see them happy and
prosperous; especially when we see them wise, good and virtuous; and so in a
fair way to obtain eternal salvation. "Charity rejoiceth not in iniquity, but
rejoiceth in the truth." And the apostle John, declares that he "had no greater
joy than to see others walking in the truth."

From hence it is easy to see, how contrary an envious temper and repining at
the welfare of others is to brotherly-love. Accordingly one part of the
Apostle's description of this virtue is this, "charity envieth not." If then we
would be possessed of this amiable virtue we must avoid all envy at those who
are wiser, richer, more virtuous, more esteemed, more prosperous, than
ourselves. Living in malice, and living in envy are akin to each other, and
joined together in scripture, as being both opposite in their nature to
brotherly-love or christian charity.

2. Another property of brotherly-love is to sympathise with others in their
troubles and afflictions; bearing a part in their sorrows, and being sincerely
grieved for them when they are in adversity. Accordingly we are exhorted in
scripture to "weep with them that weep," as well as to rejoice with them that
do rejoice. Every one knows by experience that whenever he sincerely loves
another, as for example, a child, a brother, or a friend nearer than a brother;
he is of course grieved and afflicted for them when they are in trouble. So the
truly charitable man cannot see any others in sorrow and distress with an eye
of indifference; but will as it were feel for them, and share in their sorrows;
according to the exhortation of the Apostle -- "Bear ye one another's burdens,
and so fulfill the law of Christ;" that is, the law of love, which is
emphatically the law of Christ, who said, "Hereby shall all men know that ye
are my disciples, if ye have love one for another." If we can see our brethren
or neighbors in sorrow and difficulty, without any pity or compassion, without
a tender sympathy with them, we do not certainly love them in sincerity and
truth; especially if we are rather pleased than grieved when we see them
laboring under adversity.

3. It is the property of this virtue to mourn for the errors and vices of
others, by which their future happiness is endangered, as well as for their
worldly sorrows and afflictions.

Whoever is possessed of true benevolence, desires the eternal happiness of all
men; and therefore cannot but be grieved when he sees any walking in the ways
of sin and folly which lead to misery and destruction.

From this property of brotherly-love we see that it is inconsistent therewith
to be designedly or willingly instrumental in leading others into wickedness;
to tempt and entice them to intemperance, uncleanness, profaneness, unlawful
gaming, or any kind of vicious extravagance; or even to set them an example of
such wickedness: Whoever does thus is so far from imitating the father of
mercies in benevolence, as we are exhorted to do, that he rather resembles the
grand adversary of God and man, "who, as a roaring lion, walks about seeking
whom he may devour."

4. Brotherly-love, or true benevolence, implies doing good to all as we have
opportunity; relieving their wants, comforting them in trouble, and doing what
in us lies to promote their welfare. Love is a generous bountiful principle; it
exerts itself in substantial acts of kindness, as occasion and opportunity are
presented. He that loves in deed and in truth "does good to all men, as he has
opportunity;" according the Apostle's exhortation; who says also, "to do good
and to communicate forget not; for with such sacrifices God is well pleased."
We are indeed directed by the Apostle to do good, "especially unto them who are
of the household of faith." The reason of this direction is, that we, as
christians, are more nearly connected with them; they belong, as it were, to
the same family and are our brethren in a more appropriate sense, than mankind
in general; and because they are also supposed to be more worthy characters,
better and more useful members of society than others. And though christianity
has on this account been charged with recommending a contracted spirit: Yet, if
I mistake not, the other institution above referred to, in like manner
recommends to its professors the members of their own society as the first
objects of their liberality and beneficence. Nor do I apprehend that any
reasonable objection can be brought against this direction. One end of all
social connections is to promote mutual affection among those who form them:
They have plainly a tendency to do this. Members of the same society must be
supposed to be better acquainted with the wants and necessities of one another,
than with those of other men; and to be more concerned for their good. By
entering into a particular connection with others we take upon ourselves a new
obligation to love and do good to them, in addition to that which we are
naturally under to men in general, considered only as human creatures. We ought
not indeed to confine our good will and good offices to our brethren by
profession; nor does christianity or the other institution above mentioned
require us to do so; but only to give them the preference. Both these
institutions leave the natural obligations to universal charity in their full
force; and induce some new ones with respect to those of our own particular
fraternity. Our nearest connections are naturally the first objects of our
benevolence; from them it extends to others more remote.

"Friend, parent, neighbor first it will embrace,
"Our country next, and next all human race."
According to our ability we are to do good to all men, so far as we can
consistently with our obligations to those to whom we are under particular
engagements; not only to entertain strangers and afford relief and assistance
to the poor and those who are in sorrow and distress; but to do all we can to
promote both the temporal and eternal happiness of mankind. And therefore this
excellent virtue will naturally lead a man to lend his assistance for the
support of religion and virtue, of good order and government; for opposing the
encroachments of tyranny and arbitrary power, for the encouragement of arts and
sciences, of useful manufactures, of commerce, of agriculture, and of every
thing which tends to the real good of mankind. And he who has it in his power
to be useful in this way and neglects it, must be deficient in that brotherly
love and charity which the gospel recommends.

5. Loving in deed and in truth implies forbearance and candor toward those
who may differ from us in opinion in some respects, instead of rashly judging,
condemning, persecuting or reviling them. "Judge not, that ye be not judged,"
says our Savior, "condemn not, and ye shall not be condemned." It is indeed
allowable for us to speak of known errors in opinion or practice, as such, as
contrary to the truth and gospel of Christ; yea, Christians are commanded to
contend earnestly for the faith once delivered to the saints. But then it is in
love that we ought to speak the truth, to oppose error and to contend for the
faith; not with wrath and bitterness, as is too commonly done by different
sects and parties. We ought to remember that we ourselves are fallible and
liable to err, as well as those that differ from us; that we have no more right
to lord it over their faith and consciences, than they have over ours; nor,
consequently, have we any right to harm them, merely for their religious
opinions, though they are erroneous.

The gospel is a plan of liberty, allowing, and even requiring all men to
exercise their own judgment and consciences; and forbidding them to usurp
authority over one another, or uncharitably to censure each other. The holy
scriptures abound with precepts to this purpose; and an habitual regard to them
is required in the exhortation in the text.

6. This virtue implies a pacific disposition; and endeavoring, as much as in
us lies, to live peaceably with all men; more especially with our christian
brethen; and therefore requires humility and mutual condescension, without
which there can be no peace, no dwelling together in unity; but uncharitable
contentions and fatal divisions must needs take place. "I therefore the
prisoner of the Lord," says the Apostle, Ephesians. iv, "beseech you, that ye walk
worthy of the vocation wherewith ye are called; with all lowliness and
meekness; with longsuffering; forbearing one another in love, endeavoring to
keep the unity of the spirit in the bond of peace."

Whoever loves his brethren in deed and in truth, will be desirous to maintain
peace and unity; even though in some cases he should be obliged for that end to
give up his own just right. This must however be confined to things indifferent
in their own nature; for we are not in any case to do evil, or sin against God
for the sake of peace: Nor are we obliged, for this cause, to give up our
temporal rights when they are considerable, or willingly to become slaves to
encroaching and ambitious men. But whatever can be done consistently with a
good conscience, and the preservation of our own valuable rights,
brotherly-love obliges us to do, rather than contend.

7. This virtue implies a forgiving temper of mind, and a disposition to
overlook injuries. Forgiving others their trespasses is a material branch of
that charity which the gospel requires. "Put on therefore," says the Apostle,
"as the elect of God, holy and beloved, bowels of mercies, kindness, meekness,
longsuffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, if any man
have a quarrel against any; even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye." (Col.
iii. 12.) And it ought to be remembered what great stress our blessed Lord
himself puts upon this, saying, -- "If ye forgive men their trespasses, your
heavenly Father will also forgive your trespasses: But if ye forgive not men
their trespasses, neither will your Father forgive you."

And if this be the case, we see that it is plainly inconsistent with brotherly
love, to indulge an implacable spirit and a desire of revenge; -- it is so let
the injury be ever so great; but it is more inexcusable when the injury is too
trifling to deserve the resentment of a wise man; being only an idle word, or
unguarded expression, utterred perhaps in a passion. A man who for such
trifling offenses insists upon being revenged, even though it should be by
taking the life of the offender, has a spirit as contrary to that of love, as
light is to darkness; even though he should in contempt of common sense and good
breeding, and in defiance of the feelings of humanity and the laws of God, be
absurd enough to call this genteel satisfaction.

8. And lastly; it is to be observed, that he who loves in deed and in truth,
will be careful to abstain from every kind of injury toward his neighbor, and
to practice all those social and relative duties which are necessary for the
good order, peace and happiness of society, All these duties have their
foundation in love as their principle; and they naturally flow from it, as
streams from their fountain. Nor can a person break any of God's commandments,
relative to social life, without violating the great law of christian charity
at the same time. The Apostle Paul himself explains the christian law of love
in this latitude; representing it as inconsistent with every kind and degree of
fraud and injustice, and including in it every social virtue -- our whole duty
toward our neighbor. For thus he speaks Romans xiii. "Owe no man any thing but
to love one another; for he that loves another, has fulfilled the law. For
this, thou shall not commit adultery; thou shall not kill; thou shall not
steal; thou shall not bear false witness; thou shall not covet: And if there be
any other commandment, it is briefly comprehended in this saying, namely, thou
shall love thy neighbor as thyself. Love works no ill to his neighbor:
Therefore love is the fulfilling of the Law."

Having thus explained the great and important duty recommended in the text, I
shall ask your patience no longer, than while I briefly apply the subject. And,

1. Let us ever bare upon our minds the great extent, the comprehensive nature
of the law of love; -- that it requires not merely good words and kind wishes,
or even giving alms; but the practice of all moral and social virtues, and the
abstaining from all vice; and that if we allow ourselves to lead dissolute
immoral lives, we in vain pretend to be possessed of brotherly-love.

2. Let us consider the many obligations we are all under to the duty we have
been considering; -- from the relation we bare to all men, as our brethren,
they in common with us, being all the offspring of the same great Father of our
spirits; from the example of universal love and beneficence which this great
Parent has set us; -- from our weakness and insufficiency to our own happiness,
and the (...) they stand in of help and assistance from one another; -- from
the social nature of man, his love of society, and disposition to be pleased
with the exercises of benevolence, whether he feels them in himself or sees the
effects of them in others: And as christians, we are obliged to this duty, by
the repeated and express commands of the gospel, and the example of Jesus
Christ, our Lord and Master, who gave the most convincing evidences of sincere
affection to us, and has commanded us to love one another as he has loved us;
and by our desires and hopes of eternal happiness in heaven, which cannot be
obtained or enjoyed without a benevolent temper. -- And let me add, that the
brethren of the ancient Society of Free and Accepted Masons, are under an
additional obligation to this duty. They have voluntarily bound themselves to
observe the laws and orders of an institution, one design of which is to
promote brotherly-love, and which allows of nothing contrary thereto; of no
immoral, no injurious practice. For, this, I am fully satisfied, may be truly
said of their institution; that it was in part designed to make men benevolent
kind and virtuous; and that the more closely a brother conforms to the rules of
his profession, the more happy he will be in himself, and the more useful to
others. It may however and no doubt often does, fail of effecting its design;
as is the case of christianity, though planed by the wisdom of God himself. But
it would be highly unreasonable to make either of these institutions answerable
for the ill conduct of their professors. Shame be to all unworthy, to all
immoral brethren. But let not a blameless, a benevolent and a wise institution
be repreached for their sakes.

A vicious and uncharitable Mason is pecularly inexcusable. He is bound to be
otherwise by the laws of nature, of revelation and of masonry: And yet so great
is his corruption, so strong his propensity to wickedness, that he breaks
asunder this three fold cord to the disgrace of his profession, and even of his
humanity. Let then, the gentlemen of this fraternity be pleased to consider,
how strongly they are obliged to the practice of charity and all virtue. Your
institution, you know, has been faulted by some, unacquainted with its
principles, as having a bad tendency, and by others as trifling and useless.
But it is not all the reproaches of its enemies that can so much dishonor it,
as the vicious lives of its professors. Take care then to confute all such
insinuations by showing that it has a good influence upon your tempers and
lives. Demean yourselves according to the good rules and orders of your
society. Let there be found among you no instance of impiety, of profaneness,
of intemperance, of impurity, of dishonesty, of covetousness, of contention, or
of any other vice: But strive to excel in all the virtues of a good life. This
will render the badges of your profession honorable; will gain respect to your
institution from those who do not profess it; will make you happy in
yourselves, and increase the happiness and diminish the sorrows of your family
and domestic connections, and cause those who are not entrusted with your
secrets to bless your institution; it will make you good husbands, good
fathers, good friends, and good members of society; you will be workers
together with God in promoting the happiness of mankind; and in that day, when
all secrets shall be disclosed, you will be approved by your Judge, and
admitted free of the city that is above, whose builder and maker is God.

But I must not forget the collection for the poor, which was proposed to be
part of the business of this assembly. This benevolent proposal coming from a
society of free Masons, shows that though their charity regards in the first
place their own members, yet it is not confined to them, but extends to all who
need relief. In this good work they invite all who are able to join them. --
Give me leave to second the invitation. -- Though giving alms is not the whole,
it is yet an essential part of charity, where there is occasion and ability for
it. That there is at present great occasion for it among us must be known to
most of you. Besides such poor as we always have with us, there are many
persons now in this town reduced, by the consequences that have resulted from
the war, from comfortable circumstances, to such poverty as to be unable to
procure the real necessaries of life: This is said to be the case with the
families of some of those who are now in the public service, or have died
fighting in defense of their country, for a very inadequate reward. And at the
same time that the war has been thus unfavorable to some, it has given
opportunity to others to acquire great wealth. Suppose then that you were thus
reduced, so as not to have wherewithal to purchase bread and fuel to keep
yourself and your family from suffering. Would not you think that those around
you who had enough and to spare ought to assist you: And if instead of doing
it, they should spend in sumptuous living, in expensive equipage, furniture,
servants, needless diversions, and idle amusements, enough to support many such
families as yours, would you think that they did right? Or that they had any
regard for the laws of christianity, of masonry, or even of humanity? Or
suppose instead of being thus poor and neglected, you were one of those who
have, in this day of general calamity, found means greatly to increase your
riches, and should thus neglect a poor brother or neighbor, though you every
day spent in needless show and luxury enough to support a poor family with
frugality; would not your conscience accuse you of a very criminal neglect of
duty, if you should reflect but a moment upon the matter? Would not your own
heart condemn you? Could you think that you acted as became a christian, a free
Mason, or even a man? And would it not chil your spirits in your gayest
amusements to think, that there were many among us suffering for want of
necessaries, which they could procure with what you needlessly spend? Suppose
farther; that instead of thus shuting up your bowels of compassion, you should
retrench some of your unnecessary expenses, and give what you thus saved to
some poor worthy family, to dispel the melancholy of an affectionate father, to
revive the spirits of an anxious distressed mother, to spread a smile over the
meagre, dejected countenances of half-famished children, or to cause some
widow's heart to sing for joy, whose husband has died in the service of his
country; should you, I say, thus bestow what you saved by denying yourself a
needless gratification, would it not afford you more true satisfaction and joy
of heart, than you ever received from an assembly or a concert, or any other
diversion or amusement? -- It certainly would, unless you are quite divested of
humanity. And would not the blessing of persons ready to perish coming on you,
be worth more than to be applauded by the unthinking votaries of pleasure, as a
jovial companion, a man of taste, who knew how to spend money and make a figure?

As to the families of soldiers, it is no more than justice to assist them, if
they need assistance. For you cannot but be sensible that it is principally
owing to our army that you have had an opportunity of acquiring your affluence,
and are now in the peaceable enjoyment of it; nor can you be ignorant that
their wages have been insufficient for their support. And can you pretend to be
possessed of brotherly-love, while you neglect to assist them -- neglect to do
justice?

You cannot but know that the sacred scriptures represent this duty as of the
utmost importance. The passages to this purpose, both in the old and new
testament, are almost innumerable: And they all deserve the consideration of
every one who desires to be approved of God: But I would particularly ask your
attention to the words of our blessed Savior, recorded in the 25th chapter of
Matthew. There he has given us a representation of the final judgment; in which
we are taught, that the main thing, upon which the doom of every one will turn,
will be the having practiced, or neglected this duty: -- That when the Son of
man shall sit upon the throne of his glory, and all nations be gathered before
him. -- "He shall say unto them on his right hand, come, ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world:
For I was an hungered and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink:
I was a stranger, and ye took me in: Naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and
ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me. -- Inasmuch as ye have
done it unto one of the least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me.
Then shall he say also unto them on his left hand, depart from me, ye cursed,
into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels: For I was an
hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no drink: I was
a stranger, and ye took me not in: Naked and ye clothed me not: Sick, and in
prison, and ye visited me not. -- Inasmuch as ye did it not to one of the least
of these, ye did it not to me." Can any argument more forceable be devised to
recommend the practice of charity? What! shall the great Judge of the world,
seated upon his tribunal declare before angels and men, that our having
relieved a brother in distress, was doing a kindness to him; and accordingly
reward us with eternal happiness; -- And that our having neglected to show
kindness to the necessituous, was neglecting him; and accordingly punish us
with everlasting destruction! And do we after this, need to be urged to this
duty? Shall we not rather be searching for objects of charity, and be desirous
of employing as much of the wealth which God has given us, in this way, as we
can? Thus disposed of, upon right principles, it will draw more than sterling
interest: -- It will, in this world, gain us the "favor of God, which is life,
and his loving kindness, which is better than life;" and, in due time, be
repaid with glory, honor, and immortal felicity. One would think that this
consideration would induce the hard-hearted Miser, the griping Extortioner, and
even the thoughtless Voluptuary, with all the unpitying herd of Worldings, to
abound in acts of charity, even from a principle of selfishness. However, if
this argument has no effect, I can think of no other that will be likely to
prevail; and will, therefore, conclude with the words of king Solomon, to the
same purpose with those of our Savior just recited; "Whose stops his ears at
the cry of the poor, he also shall cry himself, but shall not be heard. -- He
that has pity upon the poor, lends unto the Lord; and that which he has
given, will he pay him again."


