A VINDICATION OF THE OPPOSITION OF THE INHABITANTS OF VERMONT TO THE
GOVERNMENT OF NEW YORK, AND OF THEIR RIGHT TO FORM INTO AN INDEPENDENT STATE.
Humbly submitted to the Consideration of the impartial WORLD.

By ETHAN ALLEN.

PRINTED BY ALDEN SPOONER, 1779, Printer to the State of Vermont.

THIS Vindication is humbly inscribed to his Excellency the Governor and the
Hon. the Council of the State of Vermont, by their most obedient humble Servant
the Writer. If it meets with their Approbation and Patronage, he will esteem it
a Compliment of Honor and Respect, and be still further satisfied if it may but
contribute toward the Happiness and Establishment of the People on whose
Behalf (...) was Wrote.

State of VERMONT. In Council, Arlington, 23d of August, 1779.
RESOLVED, That the following Vindication be forthwith published, and that a
Number of the ^^^^phlets be sent to the Congress of the United States, (...) to
the General Assembly of every of these States; (...) that a Number be likewise
sent to the Generals and (...) principal Officers of the Continental Army, for
(...) Consideration.

Per Order of the Governor and Council. JOSEPH FAY, Sec'ry.

A Vindication etc.
THE very extraordinary demand which the government of the State of New York
make on the grand Congress of the United States, to forthwith to decide in
their favor, (and as they would have it ex-part^ that long and spirited
controversy which has subs^^^ between them and the inhabitants of the territory
no^ known by the name of Vermont, together with their ^^^representations of
facts, has induced the government o^ Vermont, to publish to the impartial
world, a further vindication of the conduct of those inhabitants than has been
already done, and exhibit to all wise and understanding Beings whom it may
concern, the intrinsic causes, motives and reasons, of their assuming
government.

IT is well known that this contest was not occasioned by the late revolution,
but existed many years before that the contending parties were greatly
exasperated toward each other; and that those inhabitants had appealed from
the decision of the courts, as by law established in the then province of
New York, to arms, and had anounced to the public their reason for so doing.

A SHORT state of the proceedings of both parties (being necessary to
communicate to the public, in order to their rightly determining the merits of
such an important dispute) is herewith given. And 1st. The government of
New York obtained the jurisdiction of the contested territory in 1764, ex-parte
and contrary to the minds of the original Grantees and Settlers under
New Hampshire, and therefore ought to be considered as null and void from the
beginning. And secondly, The undue use and oppressive exercise which they have
ever since made of the power of jurisdiction toward those inhabitants, although
their legal claim of jurisdiction was ever so well grounded, would fully
justify those inhabitants in their opposition to that government, and in their
assuming independence.

NO SOONER had the government of New York obtained the jurisdiction of these
lands, but they presumed to re-grant sundry large patents, interfering with
prior grants from the government of New Hampshire, at a time when the Grantees
under New Hampshire were in full possession of the very lands re-granted.

THIS reprehensible procedure of the government of New York, said those
inhabitants under the necessity of remonstrating against that government. They
therefore empowered Samuel Robinson, Esquire (then of Bennington) their Agent, to
lay the same before the King and privy Council, together with a humble Petition
from those inhabitants, that the jurisdiction of those lands might be restored
to New Hampshire again. The consequences of these measures were favorable to
the Grantees under New Hampshire, and were the means of obtaining the King's
express prohibition to the government of New York, to make no grants of lands
in the disputed premises, on pain of his highest displeasure.

THE government of New York did, nevertheless presume in direct violation of
the said prohibition, to grant most of the prohibitted premises: and further
proceeded to oppose the authority of the king, by erecting and establishing the
counties of Cumberland and Gloucester, which are contained in the territory in
dispute, though the king had signified to the said government, his utter
disapprobation of the establishment thereof. And all this when the now
Independent States were subject to the royal authority.

IN the year 1769, the claimants under the subsequent grants from New York, and
not residing on the controverted premises, brought action of Ejectment in their
supreme Court held at Albany, against sundry actual settlers who claimed the
soil by virtue of prior grants from New Hampshire. But most if not all the
judges and attorn^es (particularly Messrs. Duane and Kemp) which attended the
court, were patentees under New York; and some of them entrusted in the very
patents, then on trial.

The plantiffs appearing in great state and magnificence, which together with
their junto of land thieves, made a brilliant appearance; but the defendants
appearing in but ordinary fashion, having been greatly fatigued by hard labor
wrought on the disputed premises, and their cash much exhausted, made a very
disproportionable figure at court. In fine, interest, connection and grandeur,
being all on one side, easily turned the scale against the honest defendants,
and judgment without mercy in favor of the claimants under New York was given
against them. In the course of the trial, a grant of the township from
New Hampshire under which the defendants claimed being produced in court, and
also a certificate from the Governor of New Hampshire, and his Secretary, that
the said grant was legally executed to the grantees whose names were mentioned
on the back of the charter, it was nevertheless ruled that the same should not
be read in court.

SOON after, writs of possession were issued in form of law against the
vanquished defendants, and new actions of ejectment were commenced against
other of the inhabitants; but their spirit was too great to bear such insults
any longer; they therefore resisted and defeated the officers in their attempts
to gain possession.

DIRECTLY after these tu^ul^s, the legislature of New York passed a law
annexing a penalty of thirty pounds fine and six Months imprisonment, on any of
their subjects who should refute to assist ^h^ sheriff when legally requested,
to carry into execution those writs of possession.

THIS law had no sooner been promulgated, but Governor Tryon who then p^^si^ed
over the government, gave orders to the militia of Albany county, to assist the
sheriff in executing the writs aforesaid.

THE inhabitants being thus drove to the extremity of either quitting their
posissions or resisting the sheriff and his posse. In this state of desparacy
they put on fortitude and chose the latter expedient, and managed with that
bravery that they defended their possessions; and the sheriff with his posse
returned to their own land without any bloodshed on the occasion. But it should
be confessed that this event was not altogether owing to the valor of the
green mountain boys, for the militia were most generally persuaded that the
cause of those inhabitants was just; and that the New York patentees were
oppressive and unjust, and therefore they would not hazard their lives to
assist them in such usurpation of the rights of their fellow men, and in the
event were sure to be no gainers turn which way it would.

AFTER this ineffectual muster of the militia, the land schemers adopted
different measures to accomplish their designs, perceiving that the militia
would not fight for their subsequent and exorbitant claims; and as to
themselves, they were a jesuitical and cowardly junto of schemers, not inured
to danger, hardships, or the horrors of war, durst not fight for their own
claim; their accustomed way to carry points being to deceive, cheat, and over
reach the commonality of their species under pretext of law, justice, and good
government. These are their horns of iron, and with them they do push. They
were therefore obliged to follow their old and beaten road of politics; and by
their influence caused a number of the leading men among those inhabitants, to
be indicted as rioters, designing to have made such an example of them, as to
fright the inhabitants in general to a tame compliance with the decisions of
their courts of law, or which is the same thing, to yield up their property to
them, and become their tenants and slaves.

THE inhabitants in general were apprised that this was their design, and
guarded against it; were very active and vig^^ent in defending their friends
and neighbors indicted as aforesaid; being fully persuaded that the said junto
of patentees had in those very indictments for their object, the very lands
which they the aforesaid inhabitants possessed.

SUNDRY proclamations under the signature of governor Tryon were issued, for
the express purpose of apprehending those inhabitants which he was pleased to
denominate riotous, licentious, disorderly, etc. and large rewards therein were
offered for that purpose; but the governor and whole catalogue of patentees,
had the mortification to be baffled in their attempts to take rioters (as they
phrased it) during the course of three years; and the green mountain boys
prevailed against them, seized their magistrates and emisaries; and in fine,
all those their abettors which dared to venture upon the contested lands, and
chastised them with the whips of the wilderness, the growth of the land which
they coveted.

AND on the 9th day of March 1774, the legislative authority of the province of
New York, did pass twelve acts of outlawry, against those inhabitants, and they
on their part published a declaration of a defensive war, against the
government of New York, on the 26th day of April following; and extended their
settlements and emigrants from New England, increased their power, and they
built fortifications in their frontier settlements, against the government of
New York, and garrisoned them, and prospered until the late glorious revolution.

A PARTICULAR history of this controversy from the commencement of it down to
this era, having been written by the writer of this vindication, and published
in 1774. Entitled A brief Narrative of the proceedings of the government of
New York etc. it will be therefore needless, as also too prolix, to give the
contents a place in this; and for this reason some memorable parts of it only
are subjoined: and to the whole is added as an appendix, nine sections of the
same; holding forth a clear confutation of a New-Yorkish doctrine, recently
propagated, of an ancient right or theirs to the jurisdiction of the territory
in dispute, with a chain of arguments calculated on an extensive scale, and
predicated on undeniable facts; evincing that the right of soil to the lands
contained in the limits of the New Hampshire Grants was conveyed to the
grantees, by virtue of the respective grants; that their right to the lands
therein contained is indefeasible; and that the royal adjudication of the
boundary line between the governments of New Hampshire and New York, should
have operated as a line of jurisdiction only, and not in any measure to effect
the property of the subject. Without the consideration of these arguments on
the right of title of those lands, a just conclusion on the controversy cannot
be drawn; for if those settlements were an intrusion on the right of the
government of New York, it would in a great measure extenuate their conduct
toward them; but if on the grounds of justice and solid argument the
New Hampshire Grants are good and valid, it must of necessity invalidate the
New York interfering grants, and leave that government no excuse for their
abuse to those inhabitants. This we refer to the public and proceed to the
later stages of the controversy.

THE approaching rupture between Great Britain and the Colonies was matter of
serious reflection to the inhabitants of this frontier; their controversy with
New York, having (at a great expense) been previously submitted to the king and
privy council, by the negotiation of special agents at two different times, and
was in a high probability of being determined in their favor; which influenced
some of the inhabitants to take a part with Great Britain; the more so, as this
part of the country was a frontier, and of consequence would be greatly under
the enemy's power, who was then in possession of Ticonderoga, Crown-Point and
St. John's, and commanded the lake with a vessel of force besides. At the same
time their settlements were extended on the east side of the lake almost to the
province of Quebec. This was their situation when on the very eve of a war with
Great Britain.

THE battle of Lexington almost distracted them, for interest inclined them to
favor the royal side of the dispute, but the stronger impulses of affection to
their country, excited them to resent its wrongs, and obtain satisfaction for
the blood of their massacre'd countrymen. Their condition was truly perplexed
and critical: their hopes were placed on the royal authority for their
deliverance from the encroachments and oppressions of the government of
New York; but the ties of consanguinity, personal acquaintance and friendship,
similarity of religion and manners to the New England governments from whom
these inhabitants had most generally emigrated, weighed very heavy in their
deliberations; besides, the cause of the country was generally believed to be
just; and that resistance to Great Britain had become the indispensible duty of
a free people. But there was one very knotty query, which exercised the minds
of their best politicians, viz. Provided they should take an active part with
their country. And furthermore. Provided an accommodation should take place,
and the colonies return to their former allegiance, what would then become of
them or their remonstrances against the government of New York, lodged at the
court of Great Britain? but this danger seems to have been luckily passed over.

SOON after the news of the Lexington battle, the principal officers of the
green montain boys, and other principal inhabitants were convened at
Bennington, and attempted to explore futurity, but it was found to be
unfathomable; and the scences which have since taken place, then appeared to be
precarious and uncertain. However, it was imagined that provided those
inhabitants were loyal to their country, and the event of the war should prove
favorable to America, and their struggles for liberty should bring about a
revolution in stead of a rebellion; that in this case they should rid
themselves of the grievous usurpation of the government of New York, and be
entitled and readily admitted to any privileges which could reasonably be
expected on revolution principles, which undoubtedly will be the consequence;
(for it can hardly be doubted, that provided the said inhabitants had exercised
the same degree of loyalty to the king that they have to the country, they
might have shared as great privileges from the royal favor, as they now request
of Congress, viz. Provided the event of the war had proved as successful to
Britain as it has to America.) And as every of the colonies and plantations
were then taking arms for the mutual security of their liberty; and it was
equally just and incumbant on the inhabitants of the New Hampshire Grants, to
do the same. It was therefore reserved to take an active part with the country,
and thereby annihilate the old quarrel with the government of New York, by
swallowing it up in the general conflict for liberty; at that time not
apprehending the least danger (on the proviso of a revolution's taking place)
that congress would resolve them to belong to the government of New York; or in
any manner countenance their being deprived of their liberty by subjecting them
under the power of a government which they detest more than that of the
British, which they have manfully assisted the United States to suppress.

BUT the enemy having the command of lake Champlain and the garrisons
contiguous to it, was ground of great uneasiness to those inhabitants who had
extended their settlements on the rivers Ottercreek, and Onion-river, and along
the east side of the lake aforesaid, who, in consequence of a war, would be
under the power of the enemy. It was therefore projected to surprise the
garrisons of Ticonderoga and Crown-Point, with the armed vessel in the lake,
and gain the command of that important pass; in as much as such an event would
in a great measure secure those inhabitants from the enemy, obliging them to
take post in Canada: but whether such a measure would be agreeable to congress
or not they could not for certain determine. But it was apprehended that if
those posts were not soon taken they would be strongly reinforced, and become
impregnable to any attack short of a regular siege, for which, at that time,
the country were very deficient in the articles of artillery, etc.

WHILE these matters were deliberating, a committee from the council of
Connecticut arrived at Bennington, with advice and directions to carry into
execution the surprise of those garrisons; and, if possible, to gain the
command of the lake. Which was done without loss of time.

DURING near two years in the first of the war with Britain, the inhabitants of
these contested lands governed themselves, and managed their internal police
under the direction of committees and conventions, as they had done from the
commencement of their controversy with the government of New York, a small
number of the inhabitants excepted, who are situate in the southeast corner of
Cumberland county, who adhere to the government last mentioned, and are part of
them tories.

ON the 15th day of January 1777, the inhabitants of the New Hampshire Grants
to the westward of Connecticut-river, at a general convention, abrogated their
former modes of government, viz. by committees and conventions, and declared
themselves A FREE AND INDEPENDENT STATE, and have formed their constitution and
mode of government, elected their officers both civil and military; and made
and established a code of laws for the future government of the State.

AND in consequence of their frontier situation have been invaded by Britons,
Hessians, Savages, and more savage tories; and have (as they humbly conceive)
in their various struggles for liberty, fairly merited the inestimable
enjoyment of it. This they consider as the ultimate reward of their many
expensive toils, battles, and hazards; and for the attainment of which, they
have endured such an uncommon series of concomitant evils.

On the 23d day of February 1778, his excellency governor CLINTON, in pursuance
of the request of the Senate and Assembly of the State of New York, issued his
proclamation, which is here transcribed, with the answer to the same, which was
published in August following.

By his Excellency GEORGE CLINTON, Esquire Governor of the State of New York,
General of all the Militia, and Admiral of the Navy of the same. A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS the Senate and Assembly of this state, L. S.
did, by their several resolutions passed the twenty-first day of this instant
month of February, declare and resolve, That the disaffection of many persons,
inhabiting the north eastern parts of the county of Albany, and certain parts
of the counties of Charlotte, Cumberland and Gloucester, clearly included
within the ancient, original, true and lately established bounds of this state,
arose from a contest, about the property of the soil of many tracts of land,
within those parts of the said counties respectively.

THAT the said contest was occasioned partly by the issuing of diverse
interfering patents or grants, by the respective governments of New York, on
the one part, and those of Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire, on the other,
antecedent to the late establishment of the eastern boundary of this state;
partly by an higher quit-rent reserved on the said lands, when re-granted under
New York, than were reserved in the original grants under New Hampshire or
Massachusetts Bay, and the exorbitant fees of office accruing thereon; and
partly by a number of grants made by the late government of New York after the
establishment of the said eastern boundary, for lands which had been before
granted by the governments of New Hampshire and Massachusetts Bay,
respectively, or one of them; in which last mentioned grants by the late
government of New York, the interest of the servants of the crown, and of new
adventurers, was, in many instances, contrary to justice and policy, preferred
to the equitable claims for confirmation of those who had patented the lands
under New Hampshire or Massachusetts Bay.

THAT the aforesaid disaffection has been greatly increased, by an act passed
by the legislature of the late colony of New York, on the ninth day of March,
in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and seventy four, entitled,
"An Act for preventing tumultuous and riotous assemblies in the places therein
mentioned, and for the more speedy and effectual punishing the rioters." That
many of the aforesaid disaffected persons, though unjustifiable in their
opposition to the authority of this state labor under grievances arising from
the causes above mentioned, which in some measure extenuate their offense, and
which ought to be redressed.

THAT therefore the legislature of this state, while on the one hand, they will
vigorously maintain their rightful supremacy over the persons and property of
those disaffected subjects, will on the other hand, make overtures to induce
the voluntary submission of the delinquents.

THAT an absolute and unconditional discharge, and remission of all
prosecutions, penalties and forfeitures, under the abovementioned act, shall
be an established preliminary to such overtures; which overtures are as
follows, viz.

1st. THAT all persons actually possessing and improving lands, by title under
grants from New Hampshire or Massachusetts Bay, and not granted under New York,
shall be confirmed in their respective possessions.

2d. THAT all persons actually possessing and improving lands, not granted by
either of the three governments, shall be confirmed in their respective
possessions, together with such additional quantity of vacant land, lying
contiguous to each respective possession, as may be necessary to form the same
into a convenient farm; so as the quantity to be confirmed to each respective
person, including his possession, shall not exceed three hundred acres.

3d. THAT where lands have heretofore been granted by New Hampshire and
Massachusetts Bay, or either of them, and actually possessed in consequence
thereof, and being so possessed, were afterward granted by New York, such
possessions shall be confirmed, the posterior grant under New York,
notwithstanding.

Provided always, That nothing in the above regulations contained, shall be
construed to determine any question of title or possession, that may arise
between different persons claiming under New Hampshire or Massachusetts Bay, or
between persons claiming under New Hampshire on the one, and under
Massachusetts Bay on the other part, independent of any right or claim under
New York.

4^T. THAT with respect to all such cases, concerning the aforesaid
controverted lands, as can not be decided by the rules exhibited in the
aforegoing articles, or some or one of them, the legislature of the state of
New York, will provide for the determination of the same, according to the
rules of justice and equity arising out of such cases respectively, without
adhering to the strict rules of law.

5th. THAT in all cases where grants or confirmations shall become necessary,
on acceptance of the above overtures, such grants or confirmations, shall issue
to the grantees, at and after the rate of five pounds for a grant or
confirmation of three hundred acres or under, and for every additional hundred
acres, the additional sum of sixteen shillings, except in cases, where lands
shall be granted or confirmed to diverse persons in one entire tract, in which
case the grants shall issue, respectively, for fifteen pounds each, which
allowances shall be in lieu of all other fees or perquisites whatsoever.

6th. THAT whenever, agreeable to the above regulations, new grants or
confirmations shall become necessary under this state, for lands heretofore
granted by New Hampshire or Massachusetts Bay. he same quit-rent only shall be
reserved, which was reserved in the original grants under New Hampshire or
Massachusetts Bay.

7th. THAT w^^^e lands heretofore granted by New Hampshire or
Massachusetts Bay, have been since confirmed to such grantees by ^^w grants
under New York, the quit-rents on such lands, shall be reduced to what they
were in the original grants, under New Hampshire or Massachusetts Bay.

8th. THAT in order to encourage the settlement of the aforesaid disputed
lands, in a peaceable subjection to the authority and jurisdiction of this
(...) and also of all other lands held within and under this state, the
following commutation for the quit-rents, shall be allowed, viz. That on
payment, (...) the rate of two shillings and sixpence lawful mon^^ of this
state, into the treasury of this state, for every penny sterling of quit-rent
reserved, or on delivery into the same, of seventeen times the quantity of
grain, or other commodity reserved for such quit-rent, the same shall thence
forward be utterly discharged, and for ever cease and be extinguished.

THAT these overtures should be offered with a view, not only to induce the
aforesaid discontented inhabitants of the counties of Albany, Charlotte,
Cumberland and Gloucester, to return to a lawful and rightful obedience to the
authority and jurisdiction of this state; but also in favor of all others whom
the same may concern; and to be of no avail to any person or persons
whatsoever, who shall after the first day of May next, yield or acknowledge,
any allegiance or subjection to the pretended state of Vermont, the pretended
government thereof, or to any power or authority, pretended to be held or
exercised thereunder.

THAT the aforegoing overtures, on the condition obove expressed, be tendered
for acceptance to all persons, to whose case the same, or any or either of
them, do, or shall apply, upon the public faith and assurance of the
legislature and government of this state of New York, pledged to such person
and persons for the purpose.

THAT the several branches of the legislature of the state of New York, will
concur in the necessary measures for pro^^cting the loyal inhabitants of this
state, resi^^ing in the counties of Albany, Charlotte, Cumberland and
Gloucester, in their persons and estates, and for comp^^^ng all periods,
residing within this state, and refusing obedience to the government and
legislature thereof, to yield that obedience and allegiance, which, by law and
of right, they owe to this state:

And whereas, The said Senate and Assembly of this (...) of New York, have
also, by their resolution requested me to (...) my Proclamation, under the p^^y
seal of this state, reciting their aforesaid declinations and resolutions, and
strictly charging and commanding all manner of persons, in the name of the
people of the state of New York, to take due notice thereof, at their peril,
and govern themselves accordingly.

I DO THEREFORE hereby, in the name of the people of the state of New York,
publish and proclaim the aforesaid declarations and resolutions; and I do
hereby, strictly charge and command all manner of persons within this state, at
their peril, to take due notice of this proclamation, and of every article,
clause, matter and thing therein recited and -- contained, and to govern
themselves accordingly.

Given under my Hand, and the Privy Seal of the State of New York. at
Poughkeepsie, in the County of Duchess, the Twenty Third Day of February, in
the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and Seventy Eight. GEO. CLINTON.

GOD save the PEOPLE.
THIS proclamation, after mentioning a disaffection of many persons inhabiting
the northeast parts of the county of Albany, and certain parts of the counties
of Charlotte, Cumberland and Gloucester, proceeds to affirm that these tracts
of country were clearly included within the ancient, original, true and lately
established bounds of the state of New York.

THAT many, nay, almost the whole of the inhabitants in those counties, alias,
the state of Vermont, are disaffected to the government of New York, will not
be disputed. This is a fact: But it is not a fact, that the ancient, original
and true bounds of New York included those lands. The first intimation that
ever saluted the ears of the public, asserting this doctrine, was, from a
proclamation of governor Tryon's, dated the 11th day of December, 1771, which
begins thus: Whereas, it is the ancient and incontestible right of this colony,
to extend to Connecticut-river as its eastern boundary. This assertion has
been answered at large in my Treatise on the Conduct of this Government toward
the New Hampshire Settlers, to which I refer the reader, and at present
observe, that as the quoted assertions in these proclamations, are wholly
without foundation, they need only to be as positively denied as they are
asserted. The fact is, that the tract of land which now comprehends the state
of Vermont, was universally known to be in the government of New Hampshire.
Thus it was placed by all Geographers in their maps, 'till the year 1764, when
the now English King, for certain polical reasons, which I shall mention,
extended the jurisdiction of New York over the pre^nises, by his special royal
authority. At the time of the alteration of this jurisdiction, jealousies had
fired the minds of king and parliament against the growth and rising power of
America, and at this time they began to advance men and governments into power,
with a political design to crush the (...) of America. New York had ever been
their favorite government: They could almost vie with Great Britain in the art
of vassalaging common people, and in ^^^sing every idea of liberty from the
human mind, by making and keeping them poor and servile. This Great Britain
well knew, and therefore sheed a large territory from New Hampshire, and asided
it to New York, to depress the power of the one, and enlarge and extend the
other. A well concerted plan: But the green mountain boys disconcerted it, by
throwing their weight in to the scale of congress, which, thank GOD, has fairly
ponderated. Thus may be seen the design, as well as date, of the original,
ancient and true bounds of the state of New-York's being extended over the
state of Vermont; and for the same reason it was thus extended by
Great Britain, it will undoubtedly be curtailed by congress.

As to the acts of outlawry, mentioned in the proclamation, they died a natural
death the first day of January 1776, as may be seen from the act itself, here
quoted: And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that this act
shall remain and continue in full force and effect, from the passing thereof,
until the first day of January, which will be in the year of our Lord, one
thousand seven hundred and seventy-six.

THE subjects of the state of Vermont, were under no apprehensions from these
old lifeless acts: Nor do I conceive, that the present legislature of the state
of New York have laid them under any obligation, in granting their a pardon. It
was a matter which (...) leg (...) New York. (...); and the party last (...)
old quarrel with M. Tr^on, and (...), that the legislature of the state of
New York (...) late in the day, undertook to give an (...) discharge and
remission of all (...) and forfeitures incurred, under an act which had been
long dead; and which, when alive, served only to discover to the world, the
wickedness and depravity of that legislative body which enacted them. In the
lifetime of this act, I was called by the Yorkers an outlaw, and afterward by
the British was called a rebel; and I humbly conceive, that there was as much
propriety in the one name as the other, and I verily believe, that the king's
commissione^s would now be as willing to pardon me for the sin of rebellion,
provided I would afterward be subject to Britain, as the legislature
abovementioned, provided I would be subject to New York; and, I must confess, I
had as leave be a subject to the one as the other, and, it is well known, I
have had great experience with them both.

NEXT, I propose to consider that part of the proclamation called Overtures,
which are contained in the three first articles. Article 1st. That all persons
actually possessing and improving lands, by title under grants from
New Hampshire o^ Massachusetts Bay, and not granted under New York, shall be
confirmed in their respective possessions.

THIS first article cannot be considered of any material consequence, inasmuch,
as among almost the whole possessions referred to in the article, there are but
very few if any, but what are covered with New York grants.

THE second article is as follows: That all persons possessing and improving
lands, not granted by either of the three governments, shall be confirmed in
their respective possessions, together with such additional quantity of vacant
land, lying contiguous to each respective possessions, as may be necessary to
form the same into a convenient farm, so as the quantity of land to be
confirmed to each respective possession, shall not exceed three hundred acres.

NEITHER of these two first articles, called Overtures, affect the controversy,
except in some very few instances, inasmuch as all, or in a manner all the
possessions spoken of, were first granted by New Hampshire, except some few
which were granted by Massachusetts Bay; and then, lastly, ^^^post the whole of
(...) possessions regranted by New York. This being the case, what has been
hitherto proposed, does not reach the essence of the controversy, as the New
York (...) very well know; besides, it is not in the power of the government to
confirm any of those possessions which have been already granted, and therefore
become the property of the grantees, as will be more fully discussed in its
proper place. I proceed to the third article of the much boasted Overtures.

THAT where lands have been heretofore granted by New Hampshire and
Massachusetts Bay, or either of them, and actually possessed in consequence
thereof, and being so possessed, were afterward granted by New York, such
possession shall be confirmed, the posterior grant under New York
notwithstanding.

THOUGH it is absolutely out of the power of the said legislative authority, to
confirm the possessions mentioned; yet, to discover their want of generosity in
their proposal, I shall, in the first place, consider what a trifling
proportion of those possessions could be confirmed upon their own stating,
inasmuch, as the confirming clause in the article, only confirms the possessor,
who being so possessed at the time that the New York grant was said, and has no
respect to any additional possession carried on after the grant took place: The
identical words are, And being so possessed, were afterward granted by
New York; viz. After such possession was actually made, and the possessor being
so in possession at the time the grant took place, such possession shall be
confirmed, but any later possession cannot be included in the condition of
being so possessed; for, a later possession was no possession at all at the
time the condition of possession took place; and consequently, every possession
which has been begun in the state of Vermont, since the lands were granted by
New York, must be lost to the possessor, and fall into the hands of the
New York grantees, with all other uncultivated lands in the state; and all our
purchases of those lands from New Hampshire and Massachusetts Bay, fall to the
ground, together with our possessions, which have been increased an hundred
fold.

THESE Overtures have hitherto been considered only in a grammatical and
logical sense, allowing them their own construction; I now proceed to consider
them in a law sense. A legislative authority, within its own jurisdiction, may
confirm a possession on vacant land, by making a grant of the same to the
possessor: But, for the legislative authority of the state of New York, to
pretend as they do in their proclamation, to vacate any grants, made by their
own authority, in favor of any possession, and to confirm such possessions, by
nullifying and defearing their own grants, is the height of folly and
stupidity: For, the lands being once granted, the property passes to the
grantee, who is become the sole proprietor of the same; and he is as
independent of that legislative authority which granted (...), as any person
may be supposed to be, who purchases a farm of land of me by deed of
conveyance; and it is as much out of the power of that legislature to vacate a
grant made by them, or the same authority, in favor of any possessor, as it is
out of my power to vacate my deed of conveyance in favor of some second person.
It is contrary to common sense to suppose, that the property of the subject is
at the arbitrary disposal of the legislature: If it was, they might give a
grant to day, and vacate it to morrow, and so on, ad infinitum. This would
destroy the very nature and existance of personal property, as the whole would
depend on the sovereign will and last act of the legislature: But the train of
the matter is, the first conveyance will, and ought to hold good; and this
defeats all subsequent conveyances.

FROM what has been said on this subject, it appears, that the overtures in the
proclamation (...) forth, are either romantic, or calculated to deceive woods
people, who, in general, may not be supposed to understand law, or the power of
a legislative authority.

I HAVE further to evince my arguments on this subject, by the concurring
opinion of the Lords of the Board of Trade, on complaint made to them from
those very persons, possessing the land we are speaking of. That clause of
their report which is similar to what I have argued, is in these words: Such
subsequent grants made by the government of New York, however unwarrantable,
cannot be set aside by any authority from his majesty, in case the grantees
shall insist on their title.

THUS it appears, in a trial (of the same case we are treating of) before the
board of trade, that the king, under whose authority the government of New York
had, in an oppressive manner granted those very lands, could not, by his royal
authority, vacate or set aside the grants; yet the present legislative
authority of the state of New York, proclaim to the world, and pledge the faith
of government, that they will do it. But enough has been said on the
impossibility of it, as well as on the ungenerousness of the proposal: And as
to the quit-rents, the General Assembly of the state of Vermont will determine
their expediency, and probably release them all.

WHAT has been observed, answers every part of the proclamation worth notice,
as the five last articles had an entire reference to the three first; though it
may be worth observing, that the time of compliance with those overtures are
run out, and it is my opinion, that but few of the subjects of the state of
Vermont have closed with them. The main inducement I had in answering them was,
to draw a full and convincing proof from the same, that the shortest, best, and
most eligible, I had almost said, the only possible way of vacating those
New York interfering grants, is, to maintain inviolable the supremacy of the
legislative authority of the independent state of Vermont. This, at one stroke,
overturns every New York scheme which may be calculated for our ruin, makes us
free men, confirms our property, "and puts it fairly in our power to help
ourselves" to the enjoyment of the great blessings of a free, uncorrupted and
virtuous civil government.

BENNINGTON, August 9, 1778.

ON the 31st day of October 1778, the Senate and Assembly of the state of
New York, prevailed on his Excellency Governor CLINTON to issue his last
Proclamation and dying Speech, to the citizens of the rising state of Vermont,
which is here transcribed verbatim.

By his Excellency GEORGE CLINTON, Esquire Governor of the State of New York,
General and Commander in Chief of all the Militia, and Admiral of the Navy of
the same. A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS the Senate and Assembly of this state, L. S.
did by concurrent resolutions, passed the 21st day of February last, propose
certain overtures with respect to the controverted lands, in the north eastern
parts of the county of Albany, and certain parts of the counties of Cumberland,
Charlotte and Gloucester, in order to quiet the disorders prevailing in that
part of the state.

AND WHEREAS the said resolutions have been misrepresented by some, and
misunderstood by others, and are deemed not to apply to the cases of many
persons entitled to relief; by reason whereof apprehensions still remain on the
minds of many of the inhabitants in that part of the state, and they have not
in consequence thereof, returned to their allegiance to this state, within the
time, for that purpose in said resolution, limited.

AND WHEREAS the Senate and Assembly, in order more effectually to remove such
apprehensions, and more fully to explain the said resolutions, and manifest the
equitable intensions of the legislature, have by concurrent resolutions passed
this present session.

RESOLVED, That with respect to all such lands, which have heretofore been
granted by the governments of New Hampshire or Massachusetts Bay, and have not
been since granted by the government of New York; that all such grants, under
New Hampshire or Massachusetts Bay, shall be confirmed and declared good, valid
and effectual, to all intents and purposes, as if the same had been made by the
government of New York; and shall not be deemed null or void, by reason of the
nonperformance of any condition contained in the same.

AND WHEREAS it is impossible to establish any general principle for the
determination of all disputes, that may arise between persons claiming under
New Hampshire or Massachusetts Bay, one the one, and New York on the other
part, but each case must be determined according to its particular merits.

RESOLVED THEREFORE, That in all cases' of dispute, ^^sing between persons
claiming under New Hampshire or Massachusetts Bay on the one, and New York on
the other part, for the same lands (besides confirming such possessions as were
made under New Hampshire or Massachusetts Bay, prior to any grants for the same
under New York, the ligislature will submit the determination thereof, to such
persons as the Congress of the United States, shall elect or appoint for that
purpose, to be determined according to equity and justice, without adhering to
the strict rules of law.

PROVIDED ALWAYS, That nothing in these overtures contained, shall deprive any
persons actually possessing lands under New York, of the lands so by them
severally actually possessed; but such persons shall be confirmed in their
respective possessions.

RESOLVED, That nothing contained, either in the above mentioned or these
resolutions, shall be construed to affect any disputes that may arise between
any person independent of a claim under New Hampshire or Massachusetts Bay, on
the one, and New York on the other part.

RESOLVED, That all persons shall be entitled to the benefit of the
abovementioned, and those resolutions, notwithstanding they may have withheld
their allegiance from, and been in opposition to the government of this state
since the first day of May last.

PROVIDED, That no person shall be entitled to such benefit, who shall have
committed treason against the state, by adhering to the king of Great Britain.

AND WHEREAS the said Senate and Assembly of this state, by their concu^en
resolution, (...) also in this present session on the legislature, (...)
requested me to (...) my proclamation, contianing the substance of their
concurrent (...) aforesaid; and have thereby also authorized me in such
proclamation, to pledge the faith of the legislature of this state, for the
saithful performent of the several matters contained to their said concurrent
resolutions.

NOW THEREFORE, I do by these present, publish and proclaim the concurrent
resolutions of the Senate and Assembly aforesaid, above particularly recited,
hereby pledging the faith of the legislature of this state, for the faithful
performance of the several matters therein contained; and I do hereby require
all persons concerned, to take notice thereof and govern themselves accordingly.

Given under my Hand and the Privy Seal of the said State, at Poughkeepsie, on
the Thirty-First Day of October, in the Third Year of the Independence of the
said State, and in the Year of our Lord One Thousand Seven Hundred and
Seventy-Eight. GEO. CLINTON.
By his Excellency's Command, STEPHEN LUSH, P. Sec'ry.

GOD SAVE THE PEOPLE.
IT is apprehended that what has been already animadverted on the first of
these proclamations, amounts to a clear refutation of the essential parts of
both; especially to those who are acquainted with the circumstances of the
granting and settling those lands, but to the public in general, who are not.
The answer is not sufficiently explanatory: we have therefore thought it
expedient, to make ^^me additional observations on the first of them, with a
full answer to the latter. Inasmuch as the leading gentlemen of the government
of New York, in both public and private company, when discussing on the
controversy, do not hesitate, in the most positive manner, to affirm, and stake
their honor, that their government have really offered (those deluded people)
the inhabitants of Vermont, a full and authentic confirmation of their lands
granted by New Hampshire and Massachusetts Bay; but that they are,
nevertheless, "refractory and licentiously disposed." The truth of this matter
must be learnt from such part of the aforesaid proclamations called overtures,
which is all that ever have been pretended to be made from that government to
those inhabitants.

Governor Clinton's first proclamation begins with an air of penitence,
pointing out a number of grievances, which he admits those inhabitants "have
labored under, which, in some measure, extenuate their offense, and which
ought to be redressed." This then is the point at issue, whether those
overtures are calculated for that purpose, or are adiquate to it, or not: or
whether they were not rather calculated to deceive and ensnare the people to
whom they were made.

"THAT the said contest was occasioned, partly by the issuing of diverse
interfering patents or grants, by the respective government of New York, on the
one part, and those of Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire, on the other,
antecedent to the late establishment of the eastern boundary of this state."

PREVIOUS to this establishment, which was in 1764, the government of New York
had granted but two small parcels of land in the new territory of Vermont,
namely, the patent of Hoosick, in 1765, which is supposed to extend into the
township of Pownal, and to include five or six thousand acres of land in said
town, which is situate in the southwest corner of the state of Vermont: and
also the patent of Wallumscock, in 1739, is said to interfere with the
townships of Shaftsbury and Bennington; including about five thousand acres of
land: these are all the New York patents which interfered with the limits of
Vermont, at the time of the settlement of their eastern boundary,; "and partly
by a number of grants made under the late government of New York, after the
establishment of the said eastern boundary, which had been granted by the
governments of New Hampshire and Massachusetts Bay respectively, or one of
them; in which the last mentioned grants by the late government of New York,
the interest of the servants of the crown, and of new adventures, was, in many
instances, contrary to justice and policy, preferred to the equitable claims
for confirmation of those who had patented the lands under New Hampshire or
Massachusetts Bay."

THIS confession comes very near the truth, though in the sentence was, in many
instances, contrary to justice and policy: It should have been said, in every
instance contrary to justice and policy. However, it in a great measure
comprehends the main object of injustice on which the controversy arose, and
consequently the main source of grievancies may be deduced from it.

THE government of New Hampshire, previous to the settlement of the said
boundary line, (and when those lands were universally supposed to be in that
government) had granted one hundred and thirty-six townships, six miles square,
in the territory of the now state of Vermont. Previous to these grants under
New Hampshire, the government of the Massachusetts Bay had granted sundry
tracts of land in the territory aforesaid, which in the settlement of the
boundary line between them and New Hampshire in 1739, fell within the
jurisdiction of the latter, and was by them mostly confirmed to the original
grantees under Massachusetts Bay. No sooner had the government of New York
obtained jurisdiction of the said territory, but they proceeded to re-grant the
lands aforesaid to new adventurers, in prejudice to the grantees and actual
settlers under New Hampshire and Massachusetts Bay: But remonstrances from them
against the oppressions of the government of New York, as mentioned aforesaid,
procured the king's prohibition, which is as follows.

At a Court at St. James's the 24th Day of July, 1767.
Present the KING's most Eccellent Majesty, Arch Bishop of Canterbury, Lord
Chancellor, Duke of Queensbury, Duke of Ancestor, Lord Chamberlain, Earl of
Luchsield, Earl of Bristol, Earl of ^^elburn, Viscount Falmouth, Viscount
Barrington, Viscount Clarke, Bishop of London, Mr. Secretary Conway, Hans
Stanley Esquire.
His Majesty having taken the said report, viz. A report of the Lords of the
Board of Trade into consideration, was pleased with the advice of his privy
council, to approve thereof, and does hereby strictly charge, require and
command, that the Governor or Commander in Chief of his Majesty's Province of
New York, for the time being, do not, on pain of his Majesty's highest
displeasure, presume to make any grant whatsoever, of any part of the lands
described in the said report, until his Majesty's further pleasure should be
known concerning the same.

William Sharp.
A true Copy, Attest. GEO. BANYAR, Dep Sec'ry.

The government of New York, in the face of this prohibition, presumed still to
regrant the said lands included in the aforesaid one hundred and thirty-six
townships till nearly the whole was circumscribed in the limits of their
subsequent patents, except an inconsiderable number of townships near
Connecticut-river; which, on condition of surrendering to them the original
charters under New Hampshire, were at the exorbitant fees of two thousand and
three hundred Spanish milled dollars for each township granted to the original
grantees under New Hampshire again, with a reservation of a much higher
quit-rent than what was reserved in the original grants under New Hampshire,
and at a very great expense obtained: And it is worthy of a remark, that the
said interfering patents from New York were mostly made after the said
prohibition was certified to them. "That an absolute and unconditional
discharge and remission of all prosecutions, penalties, and forfeitures, under
the abovementioned act, shall be and established preliminary to such
overtures."

As the laws alluded to in the said act were temporary, and the term for their
continuing in force expired more than two years; consequently they were as though
they had not been, in every sense, except that they intailed an eternal
disgrace on the government of New York for enacting them, which infamy has
been renewed by the aforesaid proposal of a mock pardon; ushered in as an
established preliminary to certain overtures, which the present government of
New York were making to the citizens of Vermont. It seems they expected that
this would be considered as an eminent display of their goodness, and pave the
way for their overtures which were equally empty and impertinent. The
preliminary containing no pardon, and the overtures confirmed no lands; as the
arguments previously published, and in this defense again exhibitted, will
clearly evince, to which the reader is referred.

"THAT with respect to all such cases concerning the aforesaid controverted
lands, as cannot be decided by the rules exhibitted in the aforegoing articles,
or some or one of them; the legislature or the state of New York will provide
for the determination of the same, according to the rules of justice and equity
arising out of such cases respectively, without adhering to the strict rules of
law."

FROM fifteen years acquaintance with the government of New York, Vermont is by
no mean, willing to trust this important controversy to their decision of
justice and equity, as it has hitherto deviated from every idea of those rules
of moral rectitude which are practiced by virtuous governments; their notions
of justice and equity seem to be unnatural and unjust; at least, every sample
of it which they have as yet exhibitted to those inhabitants appears to be so;
probably a habit of inslaving their subjects has beat it into their heads, that
it is just; and thus people commonly conceive it to be just to inslave negroes.

IT IS strange that the said legislature had not considered this difficulty
which the said inhabitants labor under before they made the offer; for though
the legislature may, for all that can be objected to their former conduct, be
really honestly disposed; yet such a belief could hardly rationally be supposed
to gain credit among a people who have suffered such flagrant and high handed
oppressions from both the legislative and executive authority; and where it is
the interest and very genius of the government, to enrich individuals on the
tenantage, poverty and slavery of the great mass of their subjects, a little
seriour reflection might have determined them not to make such a proposal; and
consequently, not have put us to the blush in answering the same. It is hoped
that this freedom of writing will be excused, as we are obliged in this
defense, to give our reasons for rejecting these overtures.

ACCORDING to the proposal of the aforesaid legislature, every inhabitant in
the contested territory would be liable to a trial at law for his land, in some
way which the legislature shall provide, for the determination of his tide.
Those inhabitants have scent too much money already in land trials at the New
York courts, but could never have the charters under which they held their
land, so much as read in court.

But it may be argued, that agreeable to the articles of Confederation of the
United States, that persons holding under grants from different governments,
may have a right of petitioning for a decision, agreeable to the method therein
prescribed. But this would give birth to new troubles. The farmers of Vermont
are unskilled in law, and by no means a match for the overgrown wealthy New
York patentees; but insufficient as they may be supposed for the task, they
have, upon this plan, to go through a course of law in the state of New York; and
then, for certain, have to petition agreeable to the mode of trial pointed out
by the articles of confederation; and it will be readily conceived, that not
many of them are able to defray such an expense, or capable of managing such an
important lawsuit. -- Besides, the articles of confederation are not yet
subscribed to by the several United States; and it is uncertain whether they
ever will; especially as they now stand. And consequently the grantees holding
under different grants have, as yet, no right to a decision by petitioning in
the manner beforementioned.

WE come now to the consideration of governor Clinton's last proclamation of
the 31st of October 1778.

"WHEREAS the Senate and Assembly of this state, did by their concurrent
resolutions, passed the 21st day of February last, propose certain overtures
with respect to the controverted lands in the northeastern parts of the county
of Albany and certain parts of the counties or Cumberland, Charlottes and
Gloucester, in order to quiet the disorders prevailing in that part of the
state.

"AND WHEREAS the said resolutions have been misrepresented by some, and
misunderstood by others and are deemed not to apply to the cases of many
persons entitled to relief, etc.

"AND WHEREAS the Senate and Assembly, in order more effectually to remove such
apprehensions and more fully to explain the said resolutions, and manifest the
equitable intentions of the legislature, have by their concurrent resolutions
passed this present session."

THE public would naturally by this spacious introduction to the resolve
hereafter to be mentioned, imagine that the aforesaid equitable intention of
the legislature, would shine in robes of justice and generosity; and explain
the first proclamation alluded to, in some spiritual sense, very different from
its literal meaning: but in stead of that, we find the subsequent patents under
the government New York virtually confirmed, and the grantees and actual
settlers under New Hampshire and Massachusetts Bay, exposed to the same or
similer intriegues which they ever have been by that government since they laid
their interfering patents on those lands, as will appear from the resolve
itself. " Resolved, That with respect to all such lands which have heretofore
been granted by the governments of New Hampshire or Massachusetts Bay, and have
not been since granted by the government of New York; that all such grants
under New Hampshire or Massachusetts Bay, shall be confirmed and declared good,
valid and effectual, to all intents and purposes, as if the same had been made
by the government of New York."

THIS resolve which the said legislature are pleased to call an overture to the
inhabitants of Vermont, is a palpable insult and affront to the common reason
of mankind; inasmuch as not only the same legislature as well as every of those
inhabitants of common sense, very well know that all the lands of any
considerable consequence which have been granted by the governments of
New Hampshire and Massachusetts Bay, have been long since actually granted by
the government of New York, as has been before particularly represented; so
that this last product on from the senate and assembly of the state of
New York, as exhibitted in the said proclamation, is big with mischief and
manifest design against the claimants and actual settlers under New Hampshire
and Massachusetts Bay.

THE senate and assembly of the state of New York, have in the same
proclamation, proposed a very extraordinary arbitration between them the said
legislature, and the inhabitants of Vermont, and submit it to congress to
appoint the arbitrators.

THEIR proposal is as follows. " Resolved therefore, That in all cases of
disputes arising between persons claiming under New Hampshire and
Massachusetts Bay on the one, and New York on the other part, for the same
lands; besides confirming possessions as were made under New Hampshire or
Massachusetts Bay, prior to any grants for the same under New York, the
legislature will submit the determination thereof to such persons as the
congress of the united states shall elect for that purpose."

THIS proposal is really whimsical, or calculated to rid themselves of the
fulfillment of confirming certain possessions in the disputed territory, for the
faithful performance whereof they pledged the faith of government, as may be
seen in governor Clinton's first proclamation, and the absurdity and utter
impracticability of such a confirmation being pointed out in the answer to the
same of the 9th of August last. It seems that the said legislature have
indeavored to rid themselves of this difficulty by laying it on congress: but
it should be considered, that neither the said legislature or congress, are
parties concerned in the case; the dispute, as it respects the interfering
grants, lies between the grantees of the three governments respectively: they,
and only they, have a right of trial at common law, or to refer it to
arbitration, provided they agree; but it is no part of the business of the said
legislature or of congress, or both together, to bring forward such an
arbitration as the said resolve proposes: as on supposition, (for congress are
too wise to do it) should congress adopt the said proposal, and elect certain
men to determine a dispute between the legislature of the state of New York,
and the inhabitants of Vermont, and suppose furthermore, that such decision
should be in favor of the inhabitants; yet this would be no bar against a
process at law against those inhabitants, by the New York patentees, who would,
after a hundred such chimerical arbitrations, have the same right of trial at
common law, as they now have; for the legislature of the state of New York
cannot be supposed to be a party in these cares or to have any right to an
arbitration, any more than the legislature of the state of South Carolina, or
any indifferent person whatsoever; nor is it possible for the legislature of
the state of New York or Congress, to settle those disputes any other ways but
upon the principles of common law; so that the proposal of the said legislature
appears to be weak and impertinent.

THESE overtures bear a near resemblence to those of the British parliament to
the united states; in which cases it is not to be supposed, that there was any
sincerity. No favor is either asked or expected by the inhabitants of Vermont
from the legislature of the state of New York; they do not blame them for not
confirming their grants under New Hampshire and Massachusetts Bay; for they
know that inasmuch as the same lands have been since granted by the late
government of New York, it is out of their power to confirm their possessions;
but they blame them for pretening to do it when they know they cannot do it:
and also that they do not design to do it, as appears from the curious reserve
of confirming "all such lands which have heretofore been (...) by the
governments of New Hampshire or Massachusetts Bay," nex^ly follows the bite,
"and (...) been hnce granted by the government or New York."

FROM the foregoing animadversions on these proclamations it manifestly
appears; that the new government of the state of New York, are pursuing the
measures adopted by the old; which is the plan that they are determined to
affect, or nothing at all. From first to last they have put all at stake upon
it; and it is no ways probable that they so much as desire to comprehend
Vermont in their jurisdiction abstractly considered from it, for the haired
subsisting between them and those inhabitans, is similar to the British and
American aversion.

NOTHING can be more repugnant to the polity and genius of that government,
than to extend their jurisdiction as aforesaid, on any other terms, but to
engross the lands, and vassalage its inhabitants. To illustrate this
proposition, we will suppose this territory to be included in the jurisdiction
of New York; and likewise, that it was populated, and the inhabitants held
their property in that equal manner which they do at present; or as is common
in the New England states, which will be the case, provided the right of soil
be held under the New Hampshire grants; this would make a discord in the
government, and be a standing reproach to the inslaved part of the state; from
whence animceities and strife would constantly arise, as one party would be for
slavery, while the other would be for liberty, which would imbroil the
government, and end in a civil war; for their genius, polity, (...), spirit and
manners, would be as diametrically opposed to each other as they now are, or as
liberty is to slavery. A people so opposite to each other in civil, political,
and we may add, religious sentiments, can never subsist long under the same
government, for the demonstration whereof we appeal to the current history of
mankind.

AND this the government of New York have been very sensible of; and therefore
have from first to last, exerted themselves to divide the disputed terriritory
into large patents among themselves and favorites, so as not to endanger their
slavish mode of government, and avoid the difficulties beforementioned, by
(...) to reduce those brave inhabitants to sub^^^t to be their tenants; which,
if they could once effect, their spirit would dwindle away and expire with
liberty: but is it not altogether probable, that those inhabitants who have
suffered so much from Yorkish and British tyranny, will yet take the field
against the government of New York, (it need be) and at the muzzle of their
firelocks convince them of the independency of the state of Vermont; and that
their said patents are no more than an intrusion on the right of the green
Mountain bays.

THIS the government of New York are also apprized of, and are therefore
indefatigable in their applications to congress to procure a resolution
prohibiting the government of Vermont from any further proceedings as such, and
to decree, that the free citizens thereof, shall submit to the government of
New York: imagining, that in consequence of some such like resolve, that they
may procure a sufficient force from the united states, to carry into execution
the reduction of Vermont; an enterprise which their own militia see a (...)
inclined to undertake. Such sanguine expectations as these, from a government
which have been very sparing in pro^^^ting ^he independency of the united
states; and which have been wire-drawn into congress county by county; and
which have afforded such great numbers of disaffected inhabitants to the common
(...); whole malignant influence has probably done as much mischief and damage
to the public weal, as the brave and virtuous exertions of their well affected
inhabitants could do to forward and promote it. Nothing could be more romantic
than for such a government to expect that the power of the united states should
be exerted against their meritorious friends the citizens of Vermont, to effect
that which they had attempted with their militia, and were not able to
accomplish on a trial of many years, while under the king of Great Britain; and
which at this time those citizens apprehended to be out of their power.

AT present the people of Vermont have no apprehensions that their brethren in
the united states will so evilly requite them for their many important services
to the common cause, as to assist the government of New York to subjugate them
to their despotism.

THE government of New York never had a just right of jurisdiction over the
territory of Vermont. It was obtained by their solicitation ex-parte, and
without either the knowledge or approbation of the inhabitants, who as soon as
opportunity permitted, remonstrated against it before the king and council; and
furthermore complained of the oppressions of that government in appropriating
their lands and possessions for the emolument of their favorite adventurers.

HAD the government of New York sanctified the base and illegal manner of
acquiring a pretended legal claim of jurisdiction, by a virtuous and benevolent
administration; and in stead of monopolizing the soil, had confirmed the prior
grants under the governments of New Hampshire and Massachusetts Bay, clear of
fees and expense; the inhabitants would probably, by degrees, have excused
them, and reluctantly submitted to their government; but inasmuch as the
reverse of this has taken place, and a premeditated design of usurpation has
uniformly manifested itself in acquiring the claim of jurisdiction, and
exercising the same; it ought therefore in justice to be considered as null and
void from the beginning, on account of the illegal measures, false
representations, and undue influence, under which it was obtained and
excerised. Furthermore, though the government of New York had ever so good and
legal a claim to the jurisdiction, the mercenary, oppressive, and inhumane use
which they have made of it considered abstractly, should in justice, and
agreeable to the rules of sound policy, be a final bar against any further
exercise thereof.

THE inhabitants on the west side of the range of green mountains, never
pretended to associate or connect with the government of New York in any sense
whatsoever, but have managed their internal and external police wholly
independent of them as has been before related: though that government have
made use of every artifice and low cunning to entice and persuade them to it;
viz. by proposing a confirmation of lands to certain persons which they thought
to be fit instruments to inslave the rest; commissions civil and military were
likewise proposed to some with like views, but the main body of the people were
virtuous; and not only so, they had not the offer of either a confirmation of
their lands or a commission to every of them; and it is most probable, that
these offers which were actually made were fallacious; and that if the said
government had been confirmed, the proposed favorites would have shared much
the same fate as is propable the tories would have done in consequence of the
subjugation of the country at large by the government of Britain. However,
there were a number of depraved and mean spirited rascals which bit at the
bait, and would probably have assisted that designing government of land
clenchers, to divide the people, and finally inslaved them, had not the
integrity and heroism of the green mountain boys prevented it, making it
dangerous for any to except such commission, or secure his farm on the ruin of
his neighbors. Nevertheless the same sort of intrigues more or less took place
on the east side of the said range of mountains: the counties of Cumberland and
Gloucester were erected, and for a time partly established under the
jurisdiction of New York, and in violation of the then king's authority, but
injustice and oppression reigned to such an intolerable degree, that strife and
opposition to the government was the consequence which finally terminated in
the Westminster massacre on the 4th day of March 1774, which put a final period
to the grand usurpation of the government of New York on the east side of the
range of green mountains, and the main body of the people from that time till
now, have reprobated the government of New York, and have not suffered a court
to be convened and held in either of those counties, under the jurisdiction of
New York ever since, though that government have to this day been carrying on
some of their fomer cunning at Brattleborough, and a few other towns situate in
the south east corner of this state.

AT the time the government of New York confederated with the other states, the
inhabitants of Vermont had formed their constitution, elected their chief, and
other magistrates, and were in full possession of government; and as they were
free and unconnected with any state or body politic, had a just right so to do.
This right they received from nature, nor were they beholden to the government
of New York or any other power short of the omnipotent. New Hampshire had
forsaken and wholly neglected them, and New York tyrannized over them as much
as they possibly could, (or dare) and they were a people between the heavens
and the earth, as free as is possible to conceive any people to be; and in this
condition they formed government upon the true principles of liberty and
natural right; nor can the government of NewYork acquire any right of
jurisdiction over them in consequence of confederating with the other free
states of America; inasmuch as the state of Vermont was at that time not only
independent of the state of New York, but of any and every of the nuited states.

THE royal adjudication of the boundary line aforementioned, was temporary in
its nature, and arbitrary in its extention and conveyed nothing of the nature
of a charter, grant, or permanent jurisdiction to the government of New York,
but received its life and spirit by a mistical communication which it may be
supposed to have every moment from the sovereign will of the royal adjudicator;
from that source only this line crew all its support, as the branch does from
the vine from whence it springs; and the declaration of independence cuting the
vital union, occasioned this line like a lamp to go out which exhausted of oil
and leave no traces of its existence; from which moment the imaginary claim of
the New-Yorkish jurisdiction over the territory of Vermont expired, and the
inhabitants thereof reverted to a state of nature. Thus it appears, that the
government New York 1stly forfeited their claim of jurisdiction by the illegal
measures made use of in acquiring it. And 2dly, by the illegal and oppressive
exercise of it. And 3dly and lastly, they have lost it by the annihilation of
the English king's authority in consequence of the late revolution, by which
means the said adjudicated oppressive jurisdictional line became null and void
to all parties, and is as though it had not been.

FURTHERMORE, this frontier country was under the greatest necessity of forming
government; the inhabitants were obliged to exercise not only an internal
policy among themselves, but an external policy against foreign invasions; this
they dare not ^rust to the management of the government of New York; who, we
have but very little reason to doubt, would rejoice to have had the inhabitants
cut off, that their lands might fall into their hands; an object which they
have been unsuccessfully pursuing for many years.

THE government of the infant state was, as it were, in embryo, when the
haughty general Eurgoyne was penetrating the country; his spacious proclamation
filled the air with a tyrants awe; intimidated the weak, the servile and base,
but enraged the strong, the generous and the brave. Mean while the council of
the new state was very indefatigable in forming designs against him; not only
by forming their own militia into regular battalions under brave officers in
order to oppose him, but by exciting the government of New Hampshire to assist
them: while these matters were transecting, general Schuyler ordered the
militia of this state to march to Saratoga, but government would not permit it,
inasmuch as they apprehended that Bennington and its vicinity was an object of
destruction by the enemy. However the brave general STARK with his detachment
arrived at a lucky moment, and being cheerfully joined by the green mountain
boys, fell on the enemy with relentless fu^^, which terminated in the two
memorable and glorious battles of Bennington, and was the first check to the
progress of a formidable enemy; which proved the salvation of the new state,
and had its salutary influence on the pending cause of the independent states
of America at large, and is a striking proof of the good policy of assuming
government.

ANY one who is acquainted with mankind, and things, must know that it would be
impracticable to manage the political matters of this country without the
assistance of civil government. A large body of people destitute of it, is like
a ship in the sea without a helm or mariner, tossed with impetuous waves. They
could not enjoy domestic peace and security, considered abstractly, from a
British war and Yorkish usurpation, without civil regulations; the two last
considerations do in the most urgent manner excite them to strengthen and
confirm the government set up by the consent, approbation and authority of the
people, which is the fountain of all temporal power, and from which the
citizens of Vermont have already experienced such signal advantages. This puts
them on an equal footing with their NewYork adversaries, and will finally
enable them to baffle all their machinations and devices which nothing else can
possibly do.

USURPATION and injustice was the primary cause of the separation and revolt of
the English American colonies from Great Britain; and this was also their grand
reason and justification for so doing; and consequently the ground of their
right to independency. These reasons are abundently conclusive and
satisfactory, as exhibitted by congress at large; and there appears to be a
great degree of similarity in this controversy with the British government with
that of Vermont against the government of New York, except in this respect,
that the territory of Vermont was never under the jurisdiction of New York;
although by fraud, injustice, and the conniving of the British court, they
procured a royal order, purporting such a claim; which, in reality, originated
from a complication of interested and tyrannical views, between them and the
British court; the latter promoted and extended the power and influence of the
former in America, to promote and aid in the subjugation of it; (for at that
time the projection was forming) and it is well known that New York was their
favorite government; and it hardly admits a dispute but that the intrinsic
cause of the royal extension of the jurisdiction was to corroborate the designs
which have since been attempted against America; this and the Quebec bill was
of a piece, and the motive of their extention the same, to more effectually
bribe them governments to their interest, as subsequent and reciprocal
transactions may more fully evince.

BUT to proceed with the parallel. The British government claimed an exclusive
right of taxing the colonies in all cases whatsoever; such a prerogative would
unavoidably have terminated finally in abject slavery, as has been fully
illustrated by many ingenious writers, and verified by the universal experience
of mankind; but the government of New York took a more direct and immediate
method, for at one blow they struck at the landed property of every of the
inhabitants of Vermont, by stretching their subsequent interfering patents over
them; this was more like a combination of land thieves, than a government who
covering the lands and lobors of the inhabitans, which, but a little before by
iniquitous concerted measures at the British court (in stead of slaves) they
proved to be denominated their subjects. The mutilating the charter of the
Massachusetts Bay by the British parliament, was a high handed stride of
arbitrary power, and struck the very nerves of liberty, but not so fatal as
though they had appropriated the sod of the colony to new adventurers, as in
the instance of the interfering patents before mentioned; for nothing which can
be done to any people is capable of so effectually inslaving them, as the
monopoly of their lands; when this is the case with a people, it is idle for
them to dispute any more about liberty; for a sovereign nod of their landlord,
cannot fail to over awe them, and by degrees erase the natural images of
liberty from the mind, and make them grovel out a conteptable and miserable
life.

THE detestable acts of outlawry passed the 9th day of March 1774, by the
legislative authority of the colony of New York, particularly against the
inhabitants of Vermont was, in substance, a positive declaration of war against
them: by these acts they declared those inhabitants out of their protection;
and abdicated the government, provided they may be supposed at that time to be
possessed of any right thereto. The fact is, they appealed to arms; in this
case they must effect the conquest of Vermont, or give up their pretentions to
the government thereof. The inhabitants of Vermont, on the 26th day of April
following, published a declaration of a defensive war against the government of
New York, as aforesaid, and warlike preparations were making on both sides; but
the British invasion has procrastinated the determination of the matter till
this time; and when this great and astonishing revolution shall be fully
settled, ratified, and confirmed, it will be early enough for New York and
Vermont to proceed to the settlement of their controversy.

BUT to continue the parallel. Those acts of outlawry according to the express
tenor thereof, empowered their courts of judicature, to award sentence of death
against any of those inhabitants as should be capitally indicted, although they
were not personally before such court; and in like manner, any other sentence
of punishment short of death, against any of the said inhabitants which should
be criminally indicted without any hearing, mearly on indictment itself; and
also gave a full indemnification to any and every of their subjects, for
killing, maiming or wounding, those inhabitants which opposed such execution of
law: in fine, the real designs of these laws were to obtain possession of the
farms of those inhabitants, or to make those who had the magnanimity to oppose
them outlaws, and kill them where ever they could be found, that they might
possess and enjoy the country; for such as they could not kill on the spot they
only had to indict capitally, and procure a sentence of death against them,
from their court of judicature, (which was easily done) and then every of their
subjects or ruffians, became legal executioners; and from motives of public or
private rewards, were at liberty, nay, under obligations to kill and exterpate
them from the lands coveted, in any manner, and by any stratagem which might
best serve such inhumane purposses; for all which savage cruelties, the
parpetrators had governmental indemnification; and thus the inhabitants (which
they would fain have to be their subjects) were obliged either to give up their
inheritance, or, in the Yorkish sense of the word become outlaws, fellons,
rioters, etc. and be subjected to the dangers and hazards of the shocking evils
before mentioned, which nothing but the daring spirit and unconquerable
fortitude of the green mountain boys prevented taking place.

MUCH more might be said as to the injustice, tyranny, oppression, and
malevolence of these laws, but it is needless to animadvert any further on
them, inasmuch as they carry their own refutation along with them; they are
therefore subjoined verbatim to this vindication; with the original answer to
the same, published soon after they made their public appearance, and submitted
to the public consideration; with this observation, that among the arbitrary
edicts of the British government toward the colonies, none were equally
oppressive to this, except their declaration of war. Their act for transporting
the subjects of the colonies across the sea for trial for crimes committed or
said to be committed in this country, was a daring stroke against the liberties
of a free people; for though they were permitted a personal hearing, yet it was
attended with great embarrassments, and insurmountable evils and disadvantages,
to be forced to a trial in a strange country, destitute of acquaintance,
friends, or evidence, to make a defense; and probably without money or credit;
this would be a shocking condition to be reduced to, especially by law, the
original design of which, was to protect and promote the liberty and happiness
of mankind. This bears a near resemblance to those acts of outlawry, though it is
hardly so replete with malicious turpitude; and therefore a more certain
destruction would have been the fate of the inhabitants of Vermont, had those
laws taken place; who, on a landjobbers indictment, and a landjobbing courts
judgment, without hearing, to suffer death, or other punishment, by virtue of
the laws of an infamous landjobbing legislature.

THE local distance of Vermont from the seat of government in the state of
New York, is near four hundred and fifty miles from its extreme parts, which
would make government chargable and inconvenient; and abstracted from all other
considerations, would constitute a sufficient reason for the independence of
Vermont; nevertheless, provided those inhabitants were obliged to submit to the
government of New York, they would wish to have the distance ten times greater.

THE people of Vermont consider themselves as being virtually in union with the
united states, from the time that they took possession of lake Champlain, and
the garrisons depending thereon, in behalf of the united states, in May 1775;
from which early period of the revolution, they have taken an active part with
them, and have pursued invariable, the same object, viz. liberty; have
participated in all their troubles; and with them have hazarded all that is
worth living or dying for: such a combination of interests, and mutual
cooperation, in securing and defending the same, constitutes the very nature
and essence of union and confederation, nor can there be more than a mere
formal declaration requisite to fully establish a confederation between them.

AND lastly. A confederation of the state of Vermont with the other free and
independent states, cannot fail of being attended with salutary consequences to
the confederacy at large, for ages yet to come. What a nursery of hardy
soldiers may in future be nourished and supported in this fertile country,
(which is one hundred and fifty miles in length, and near sixty in breadth,)
stimulated with the spirit of liberty, having a perfect detestation and
abhorrence of arbitrary power, from the exertions whereof they have suffered so
much evil; will instill the principles of liberty and social virtue in their
children, which will be perpetuated to future generations: their climate and
interior remove from the sea coast, will naturally be productive of a laborious
life, by which means they will be in great measure exempted from luxury and
effeminacy, and be a valuable support to the rising empire of the new world.

THE following Votes and Proceedings of the Legislature of the Colony of
New York are subjoined to this Vindication; and also the Votes and Proceedings
of the General Committee for the Inhabitants of the New Hampshire Grants in
Answer thereto: And likewise, the Acts passed by the Legislative Body
aforesaid, the 9th of March Ultimo, and Remarks on the same, which here follow
in their order, as they were published in sundry public NewsPapers in America.

FROM the New Hampshire Gazette, No. 914.
At a general meeting of the committee for the several townships on the west
side of the range of green mountains granted under the great seal of the
province of New Hampshire, held at the house of Mr. Eliakim Wellers in
Manchester, on the 1st day of March A. D. 1775; and after wards, by
adjournment, at the house of Capt. Jehiel Hawlew, in Arlington, on the third
Wednesday of the same month; at which several times, and places, the New York
Mercury No. 1163, was produced; which contains an extract from the votes and
proceedings of the General Assembly of the colony of New York, which is as
follows, viz.

DIE SABATI, 10 Ho. A. D. 5th February, 1774.
MR. Brush, (in behalf of Mr. Clinton, chairman) from the grand committee,
reporter, that he was directed by the said committee, to make the following
report to the house, viz. That the said committee having taken into
consideration, the petition of Benjamin Hough, in behalf of himself, and many
of his majesty's subjects, inhabiting the county of Charlottes, and the
north-eastern district of the county of Albany; complaining of many acts of
outrage, cruelty, and oppression, committed against their persons and
properties, by the Bennington MOP, and the dangers and injuries to which they
are daily exposed, and imploring that this house will take them under their
protection, and secure them against future violence; and the said committee,
having also duly considered the several proofs and depositions presented in
support of the truth of the said petition, do therefore resolve.

1, THAT it appears to this committee, that there at present prevails in part
of the county of Charlottee, and in the north-eastern district of the county of
albany, a dangerous and destructive spirit of riot and licentiousness,
subversive of all order and good government; and that it is become an
intolerable grievance, which requires immediate redress.

2, RESOLVED, That it appears to this committee, that many acts of outrage,
cruelty, and oppression have been there perpetrated by a number of lawless
persons, calling themselves the Bennington MOP, who have seized, insulted, and
terrified several magistrates and other civil officers, so that they dare not
exercise their respective functions; risqued prisoners for debt, assumed to
themselves military commands, and judicial power; burned and demolished the
houses and property, and beat and abused the persons of many of his majesty's
subjects, expelled them from their possessions, and put a period to the
administration of justice, and spread terror and destruction through that part
of the country which is exposed to their oppression.

3, RESOLVED, That it is the opinion of this committee, that the complainants
before this house and others, who inhabit part of that colony, and from respect
to government, will not countenance or be concerned in the said riotous
proceedings, are exposed from the violence of the rioters to eminent danger
both in persons and properties; and that they stand in need of immediate
protection and succor.

4, RESOLVED, That it appears to this committee, that Ethan Allen, Seth Warner,
Remember Baker, Robert Cochran, Peleg Sunderland, Silvanus Brown, James
Breakenridge, and John Smith, are principal ring-lead (...) of, and actors in
the riots and disturbances aforesaid; and that it is therefore the opinion of
this committee, that an humble address be presented to his excellency, desiring
that he would be pleased to issue a proclamation, offering a reward of fifty
pounds for apprehending and securing any or either of the persons above named,
in his majesty's goal in Albany; and commanding the magistrates, and other
civil officers of the counties of Albany and Charlottee, to be active and
vigilent in suppressing the said riots, and preserving the public peace and
good order, as well as for bringing to justice the pe^^et ators and authors of
said riots.

5, RESOLVED, That it is the opinion of this committee, that a bill be brought
in, more effectually to suppress the said riotous and disorderly proceedings,
maintain the free course of justice, and for bringing the offenders to condign
punishment; which report he read in his place, and afterward delivered it in
at the table, where the said resolutions were severally read a second time,
resolved that this house does agree with the committee in their said
resolutions.

ORDERED, That a bill be brought in, pursuant to the last resolution, and that
Mr. Brush, and Col. Ten Broeck, prepare and bring in the same. Ordered, That
Capt. Delancey and Mr. Walton, wait on his excellency the governor with the
foregoing address and resolutions of the house.

MR. Nathan Clark, chairman of the committee of the New Hampshire settlers
aforesaid, ordered the clerk to read the resolves and votes aforesaid, to the
general committee, which was accordingly read sundry times, and the following
draught being presented in answer thereto, to the public meeting; seven
persons were selected and chosen out of the said general committee to examine
the same, and report their opinion thereon, which here follows.

WHEN we consider the numberless troubles, and almost insurmountable
difficulties which our infant settlements have been forced to struggle with
since its first beginning, which have been occasioned by an unequal and biassed
administration of law, ever since our unhappy misfortune of being annexed to a
government in which the interest of the greater part of the leading gentlemen
thereof are in direct opposition to our's. The tyrannical measures they take to
enslave us, (we hope) will not fad to justify us in the following arguments and
resolves thereon; for we think it an intolerable hardship, and piece of inhuman
cruelty, that we cannot be said to give sufficient proof of our loyalty and
obedience to government but at the resignation of our whole fortunes, in the
purchase and improvement of which, we have suffered an infinity of hardship.
While we view the spirit of the general assembly in their resolves, we cannot
but reflect with some regret, on what may of consequence prove the result
(without an alteration) of their present opinion; but there are scarce any
circumstances that entirely exclude hope; therefore we are not yet in total
despair; for this moment we happily call to mind, that the general assembly of
the same province, about two years ago, did annex all that part of the Bay
province west of Connecticut-river, to that UNLIMITED county of Albany; but
their avaricious grappling not being of a sufficient strength for such an
unreasonable burden, it failed, by which they lost their ideal booty.

THE reader will doubtless observe, that in the resolves of the assembly
aforesaid, there is not a single word mentioned in regard to the title of the
land contested for, but that they level all their spleen, and point all their
malice at notorious rioters, as they call them, and make a pretended show and
figure, as though they were great sticklers for good order and government;
although at the same time every person of common sense, who has had any
acquaintance and knowledge of the controversy, absolutely knows, that out
goodly and, with the labor thereon, is the only subject matter and grand
object of the whole controversy; and give the New-Yorkers but that, and the
matter would be accomplished to their eternal satisfaction; and it is presumed
the words riotous disorderly, licentious, etc. would not be printed again on
account of the New Hampshire grantees and present occupants, for the whole
course of the succeeding century.

FOR the truth of the case is, the executors of the law, are most (if not all)
of them the pretended claimants to the lands whereon the New Hampshire grantees
and occupants dwell; and their judgments on writs of ejectment, brought by the
New York patentees, have not hitherto failed to correspond with their imaginary
interests; but were they honest men they would not undertake to be judges in
their own case, or in any other wherein the resolution thereof would make a
president for their own, especially in title of land wherein judge and
plaintiff are connected in one common interest: such a distribution of law is
contrary to the law of reason and nations.

THEREFORE our case stands thus, if we submit to their execution of law, and
become obedient and submissive subjects of their designing government, we must
soon yield to be their tenants and slaves; and we cannot see reason to conform
to any law which will apparently bring us and our posterity into bondage, or
manifestly deprive us of our property; but inasmuch as we boldly adhere to the
maintenance of our property, which to us is very precious as it would be to the
New-Yorkers, was it in their hands. We find it is immediately recommended to
the governor of the province, by the general assembly, to issue his
proclamation, offering therein image (...) of money to apprehend those
notorious rioters ^as they are pleased to style them; (...) must indeed be
shocking to common sense when the reader comes to observe what notorious
complaints, and most horrid accusations are set forth in the resolves of the
general assembly of New York, mentioned in the fore part of this paper, against
thousands of hard laboring, industrious, honest peasants, who are in truth
loyal subjects of the crown of Great Britain, for their violations of law and
government; when at the same time the following express orders from his most
sacred majesty to that litigious government of New York, will plainly show,
that they do not make the least hesitation to rebel and act in direct
opposition to the authority of the crown; when (as in the present case) they
show a disposition to take advantage of the minor part of those under their
government, and throw them into contention and disorder, and thereby build
their fortunes on the ruin of the pretended aggressors; and all under the
specious pretense of good order and government, which is in fact what they
eventually aim at, as will appear by the following order.

At a court at St. James's, the 24th day of July 1767.
PRESENT, The KING's Most Excellent Majesty, Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord
Chancellor, Duke of Queensbury, Duke of Ancester, Lord Chamberlain, Earl of
Litchfield, Earl of Bristol, Earl of Shelburne, Viscount Falmouth, Viscount
Barrington, Viscount Clarke, Bishop of London, Mr. Secretary Conway, Hans
Stanley, Esquire


THE petition and report thereon by the lords of trade and plantation affairs,
is too prolix to be inserted in this paper; the royal order is therefore only
transcribed which is as follows.

His majesty taking the said report into consideration, was pleased with the
advice of his privy council, to approve thereof, and does hereby strictly
charge, require and command, that the governor of commander in chief of his
majesty's province of New York, for the time being, do not upon pain of his
majesty's highest displeasure, presume to make any grant whatsoever, of any
part of the lands described in the said report, until his majesty's further
pleasure shall be known concerning the same.

A true Copy, WILLIAM SHARP,
Attest GEO. BANYAR, Dep. Sec'ry.

NOTWITHSTANDING this prohibition, and one or two more of the same general
import, and from the same authority, the government of New York have lapped
their patents on the New Hampshire charters, and in consequence thereof demand
at common law, the land on which the New Hampshire grantees and occupants
dwell; and from hence has arisen the numerous troubles and disturbances between
the government of New York and its discontented subjects, the settlers under
New Hampshire. This has alto been the source of all licentiousness and
confusion, riotousness, etc. complained of by that government against the
settlers aforesaid.

AND whereas the true state of our grants has been already laid before the
worthy lords of the board of trade and plantation, and they having considered
and wisely deliberated upon its several circumstance, did on the third day of
December, A. D. 1772, make their report in favor of the New Hampshire grantees,
to his most gracious majesty, whose royal confirmation we daily expect; and on
the credit and good faith of this report, many hundreds of industrious (and
many of them wealthy) families have purchased and moved upon the New Hampshire
grants, nothing doubting of that title.

WE therefore humbly report to the said general committee of the New Hampshire
grants, as our opinion, 1. That as we over have, so for the future we will
remain loyal and dutiful subjects to our most rightful sovereign GEORGE the
third, and demean ourselves agreeable to the good and wholesome laws of the
realm, and fight for the dignity of his majesty's crown and government at all
times when there may be a call for it, viewing him as our political father, and
relying on him to be protected in our property.

2. THAT as we purchased our lands of one of his majesty's governors, and on
the good faith of the crown of Great Britain, we are determined to maintain
those grants, against all opposition, until his majesty's royal pleasure shall
be known in the premises.

AND whereas we have never made any further resistance to government, than the
law of self-preservation, which the law of GOD and nature enjoins on every
intelligent, wise and understanding being; we therefore are fully of the
opinion to resolve,

3. THAT such of the magistrates and governmental authority of the province of
New York, as have pursued, and have been accessory in the scheme of indicting
our friends and neighbors as rioters; and have by intrigue and stratagem of
various sorts, endeavored to take them, and punish them as criminals; thereby
to dishearten and terrify the New Hampshire settlers to that degree, that they
may tamely be disinherited; have acted contrary to the spirit and design of the
good and righteous laws of Great Britain, which, under a just administration,
never fail to secure the liberty and property of the subject; are thereby
guilty of great inhumanity to its respective subjects. We therefore resolve,
That as a country, we will stand by, and defend our friends and neighbors so
indicted, at the expense of our lives and fortunes. And we would recommend it
to the general assembly of the province of New York, to wait the determination
of his majesty, relative to the title of those lands, and desist from taking us
as rioters, to prevent the unhappy consequences that may result from such an
attempt.

AND fourthly, and lastly, resolved, That for the future, every necessary
preparation be made, and that our inhabitants hold themselves in readiness, at
a minute's warning, to aid and defend such friends of our's, who, for the merit
to the great and general cause, are falsely denominated rioters; but that we
will not act any thing more or less, but on the'defensive, and always encourage
due execution of law in civil cases, and also in criminal prosecutions, that
are so indeed; and that we will assist, to the utmost of our power, the
officers appointed for that purpose.

THE foregoing arguments, narrations and resolves, being laid before the
general committee of the New Hampshire grants, and was read sundry times, and
carefully examined; and after mature deliberation, Mr. Clark, chairman, put the
votes to trial, whether the foregoing was approved of as an answer to the
resolves of the general assembly of the province of New York? and it was passed
in the affirmative. And it was furthermore the advice of this committee, that
the foregoing be forthwith exhibited in the public papers, to the intent that
all officers, magistrates, and persons whatsoever, may know, that if they
presume to take the rioters aforesaid, they do it on their peril.

Certified per NATHAN CLARK, Chairman.
JONAS FAY, Clerk.
Bennington, April 14, 1774.
The following Law of the Colony of New York, was passed the 9th Day of March,
1774.

An Act for preventing tumultuous and riotous Assemblies in the Places therein
mentioned, and for the more speedy and effectual punishing the Rioters.
WHEREAS a spirit of riot and licentiousness has of late prevailed in some
parts of the counties of Charlotte and Albany, and many acts of outrage and
cruelty have been perpetrated by a number of turbulent men, who assembling from
time to time in arms, have seized, insulted and menaced several magistrates,
and other civil officers, so that they dare not execute their functions --
rescued prisoners for debt -- assumed to themselves military commands, and
judicial powers -- burned and demolished houses and property, and beat and
abused the persons of many of his majesty's subjects -- expelled others from
their possessions -- and finally, have put a period to the administration of
justice within, and spread terror and destruction throughout that part of the
country which is exposea to their oppression: Therefore, for the preventing and
suppressing such riots and tumults, and for the more speedy and effectual
punishing the offenders therein.

Be it enacted, by his excellency the Governor, the Council, and the General
Assembly, and it is hereby enacted, by the Authority of the same, That if any
persons to the number of three, or more, being unlawfully, riotously, and
tumultuously assembled, within either of the said counties, to the disturbance
of the public peace, at any time after the passing of this act, and being
required or commanded, by any one or more justice or justices of the peace, or
by the high sheriff, or his under sheriff, or by any one of the coroners of the
county where such assembly shall be, by proclamation to be made in the king's
name, in the form herein after directed, to disperse themselves, and peaceably
to depart to their habitations, or to their lawful business, shall, to the
number of three, or more, notwithstanding such proclamation made, unlawfully,
riotously, and tumultuously remain or continue together to the number of three,
or more, after such command or request made by proclamation, shall, for every
such offense, upon conviction thereof, in due form of law, either in the
supreme court of judicature of this colony, or at the courts of oyer and
terminer, and general goal delivery, or at the general sessions of the peace,
to be held respectively in and for the said counties of Albany and Charlotte,
or either of them, suffer twelve months imprisonment without bail or mainprize,
and such further corporal punishment as the respective courts before which he,
she, or they, shall be convicted, shall judge fit, no^ extending to life or
limb; and before his or her discharge, shall enter into recognizance with two
sufficient sureties, in such soon as the said court shall respectively direct,
to be of good behavior, and keep the peace toward his majesty and all his
subjects, for the term of three years from such his, her, or their discharge
out of prison.

And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That the order and form
of the proclamation which shall be made by the authority of this act, shall be
as hereafter follows, that is to say, The justice or other person authorized by
this act to make the said proclamation, shall, among the said rioters or as
near to them as he can safely come, with a loud voice command, or cause to be
commanded, silence to be kept while proclamation is making; and shall then
openly with a loud voice make, or cause to be made, proclamation in these
words, or to the like effect: Our sovereign lord the king, charge and
commands all persons being assembled, immediately to disperse themselves, and
peaceably to depart to their habitations, or to their lawful business, upon the
pain contained in the act made in the fourteenth year of the reign of king
GEORGE the third, to prevent tumultuous and riotous assemblies. And every such
justice or justices of the peace, sheriff, under sheriff or coronor, within the
limits of the reipective counties where they reside, are hereby authorized,
empowered, and required, on notice or knowledge of any such unlawful, riotous
and tumultuous assembly, forthwith to repair to the place where such unlawful,
riotous and tumultuous assembly shall be, to the number of three or more, and
there to make or cause to be made, proclamation in manner aforesaid.

3. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons do, or shall, with force and arms, wilfully and knowingly oppose,
obstruct, or in any manner wilfully and knowingly let, hinder or hurt any
person or persons, who shall begin to proclaim, or go to proclaim, according to
the proclamation hereby directed to be made, whereby such proclamation shall
not be made; that then every such opposing, letting, hindering, or hurting,
such person or persons so being or going to make such proclamation as
aforesaid, shall be adjudged felony without benefit of clergy; and that the
offenders therein, shall be adjudged felons, and shall suffer death, as in
cases of felony without benefit of clergy: And that also every such person or
persons, so being unlawfully, riotously and tumultuously assembled to the
number of three, as aforesaid, or more, to whom proclamation should or ought to
have been made, if the same had not been hindered as aforesaid, shall, in case
they, or any of them, to the number of three or more, shall continue together,
and not forthwith disperse themselves, after such let or hindrance, having
knowledge of such let or hindrance, shall likewise for every such offense, upon
conviction thereof in manner aforesaid, suffer the same pains and penalties as
are hereby inflicted on those who shall continue together to the number of
three or more, after they shall be commanded to depart to their habitations, or
lawful business, by proclamation as aforesaid.

4. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if such persons
so unlawfully, riotously and tumultuously assembled, or any three or more of
them, after proclamation made in manner aforesaid, shall continue together, and
not forthwith disperse themselves, it shall and may be lawful to and for every
such justice of the peace, sheriff, under sheriff, coroner, or constable, of
any county or township where such assembly shall be; and to and for such person
or persons as shall be commanded to be assisting unto such justice of the
peace, sheriff, under sheriff, coroner, or constable, who are hereby authorized
and empowered to command all his majesty's subjects of age and ability, to be
aiding and assisting to them therein; to seize and apprehend, and they are
hereby required to seize and apprehend such persons so unlawfully, riotously,
and tumultuously assembled together, after proclamation made as aforesaid, and
forthwith to carry the persons so apprehended, before any one or more of his
majesty's justices of the peace of the said counties of Charlotte or Albany, in
order to their being proceeded against for such their offenses according to law.

AND that if the persons so unlawfully, riotously and tumultusly assembled, or
any of them, shall happen to be killed, maimed, or hurt, in the dispersing,
seizing or apprehending them, by reason of their resisting the persons so
dispersing, seizing, or apprehending, or endeavoring to disperse, seize, or
apprehend them; that then every such justice of the peace, sheriff, under
sheriff, coroner or constable, and all and singular persons aiding and
assisting to them, or any of them, shall be freed, discharged, and indemnified,
as well against the king's majesty, his heirs and successors, as against all
and every other person and persons, of, for, or concerning the killing,
maiming, or hurting of any such person or persons so unlawfully, riotously, and
tumultously assembled, that shall happen to be so killed, maimed, or hurt as
aforesaid.

5. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That if any person or
persons within the said counties, or either of them, not being lawfully
authorized a judge, justice, or magistrate, shall assume judicial power, or
shall try, fine, sentence or condemn any person who shall either be absent, or
shall unlawfully or forcibly be seized, taken, or brought before him or them
for trial or punisnment; or if any person or persons shall aid or assist in
such illegal proceedings, or shall enforce, execute or carry the same into
effect; or if any person or persons shall unlawfully seize, detain, or confine,
or assault and beat any magistrate or civil officer, for, or in the respect of
any act or proceeding in the due exercise of his function, or in order to
compel him to resign, renounce, or surcease his commission or authority, or to
terrify, hinder, or prevent him from performing and discharging the duties
thereof; or if any person or persons, either secretly or openly, shall
unlawfully, wilfully and malliciously, burn or destroy the grain, corn or hay,
of any other person, being in any enclosure, or if any persons unlawfully,
riotously, and tumultuously assembled together, to the disturbance of the
public peace, shall unlawfully, and with force demolish or pull down, or begin
to demolish or pull down any dwelling house, barn, stable, grist-mill,
saw-mill, or out-house, within either of the said counties, that then each of
the said offenses respectively, shall be adjudged felony, without benefit of
clergy; and the offenders therein shall be adjudged felons, and shall suffer
death, as in cases of felony without benefit of clergy.

6. AND WHEREAS complaint and proofs have been made, as well before his
excellency the governor in council, as before the general assembly, That Ethan
Allen, some time of Salisbury, in the colony of Connecticut, but late of
Bennington, in the county of Albany, yeoman; Seth Warner, late of Bennington,
in the said county, yeoman; Remember Baker, late of Arlington, in the said
county, yeoman; Robert Cochran, late of Ruporte, in the county of Charlotte,
yeoman; Peleg Sunderland and Silvanus Brown, late of Socialborough, in the same
county, yeoman; James Brackenridge, late of Wallumschack, in the county of
Albany, yeoman; and John Smith, late of Socialborough, yeoman; have been
principal ringleaders of and actors in the riots and disturbances aforesaid;
and the general assembly, have thereupon addressed his excellency the governor,
to issue a proclamation offering certain rewards for apprehending and securing
the said offenders, and for bringing them and the other perpetrators and
authors of the riots to justice: And forasmuch as such disorderly practices are
highly criminal and destructive to the peace and settlement of the country, and
it is indispensably necessary for want of process to outlawry (which is not
used in this colony) that special provision be made for bringing such offenders
in future to trial and punishment, without exposing the colony to the expense
of extraordinary rewards and bounties for apprehending such offenders.

Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That it shall and may be
lawful to and for his excellency the governor, or the governor and commander in
chief for the time being, by and with the advice of the council, as often as
either of the above named persons, or any other person, shall be indicted in
either of the counties aforesaid, for any offense perpetrated after the passing
of this act, made capital by this or any other law, or where any person may
stand indicted for any of the offenses above mentioned, not made felony by this
act, to make his order in council, thereby requiring and commanding such
offender or offenders to surrender themselves respectively, within the space of
seventy days next after the first publication thereof, in the New York G^z^^te,
and weekly Mercury; to one of his majesty's justices of the peace, for either
of the said counties respectively, who are hereby required thereupon to commit
him or them, without h^^l or mainprize, to the goal of the city of New York, or
of the city and county of Albany, to the end that he or they may be
forthcoming to answer the offense or offenses, wherewith he or they shall
stand charged according to the ordinary course of the law; wh^^^ order the
clerk of his majesty's council, or his deputy, shall cause forthwith to be
printed and published, in eight successive papers, of the New York Gazette and
weekly mercury; the two first of which to be forthwith transmitted to the
sheriffs of the counties of Albany and Charlotte; and the said sheriffs
respectively, shall, within six days after the receipt thereof, cause the same
printed orders to be affixed upon the door of the courthouse of the county of
Albany, and upon the door of the dwell-house of Patrick Smith, Esquire where the
courts are now usually held for the said county of Charlotte, and upon the
doors of two other public-houses in each of their respective counties. And in
case the said offenders shall not respectively surrender themselves, pursuant
to such orders of his excellency the governor, or of the governor and commander
in chief for the time being, to be made in council as aforesaid; he or they so
neglecting or refusing to surrender himself or themselves as aforesaid, shall,
from the day to be appointed for his or their surrendry as aforesaid, be
adjudged, deemed, and (if indicted for a capital offense hereafter to be
perpetrated) to be convicted and attainted of felony, and shall suffer death,
as in cases of persons convicted and attainted of felony by verdict and
judgment, without benefit of clergy; and that it shall and may be lawful to and
for the supreme court of judicature of this colony, or the courts of oyer and
terminer, or general goal delivery, for the respective counties aforesaid, to
award execution against such offender or offenders so indicted for a capital
offense perpetrated after the passing of this act, in such manner as if he or
they had been convicted or attainted in the said supreme courts of judicature,
or before such courts of oyer and terminer, or general goal delivery
respectively: And if any offender, being indicted for a lesser offense, under
the degree of felony, shall not surrender himself within the time fixed by such
order, and after such notice aforesaid, he shall thence forth be deemed guilty
of the offense for which he may be charged by such indictment; and it shall be
lawful for the court wherein such indictment is found, to proceed to pronounce
such judgment against the offender as might lawfully be done if he was present
in court, and convicted in the ordinary course of the law, of the come
wherewith he shall so stand changed as aforesaid. Provided always,

7. And be it further enacted by the same authority aforesaid, That if any
person so neglecting to surrender himself as aforesaid within the said sevency
days, shall, at any time after, surrender himself to the sheriff of the cities
of New York or Albany, or of the counties of Duchess or West-Chester, (who are
to receive, and safely keep such offenders) and being actually in custody,
exhibited reasonable proof to the satisfaction of the judges of the supreme
court of this colony, or either of them, that he was not within either of the
said counties of Albany or Charlotte, or within either of the counties of
Cumberland or Gloucester, at any time after the publication and notices above
directed, and before such surrender of himself as aforesaid; then such judge
before whom such proof is made, shall forthwith notify the same in writing, to
the sheriff to whom any warrant of execution for the executing such offender,
or any other process for any lesser punishment has been, or may be issued; and
thenceforth such prisoner or offender shall not be liable to suffer death or
any other punishment for not surrendering himself -- Provided also, that
nothing in this act contained shall be construed to exempt any offender so
surrendering himself after the seventy days as aforesaid, from any punishment
to which he may be liable for any other crime than for not surrendering himself
within the seventy days as aforesaid, nor to deprive any person who shall so
surrender himself within the seventy days, from being bailed, in cases where he
shall be bailable by law; any thing herein contained to the contrary thereof in
any wise notwithstanding.

8. And be it further enacted by the same authority aforesaid, That all and
every person and persons who shall, after the expiration of the time to be
appointed as aforesaid, for the surrender of the respective offenders herein
before named, harbor, receive; conceal, abet, or succor such offender, or
offenders, knowing him or them to have been required to surrender him or
themselves by such order or orders as aforesaid, and not to have surrendered
pursuant thereto, shall upon conviction thereof in due form of law, suffer the
same pains and penalties as are by this act inflicted on those who shall
continue together to the number of three or more, after they shall be commanded
to depart to their habitation or lawful business by proclamation as aforesaid.

9. AND WHEREAS the said county of Charlotte, has but lately been set off from
the said county of Albany, and there is yet no goal or courthouse erected
within the same; and a great part of the said county being involved in a state
of anarchy and confusion, by reason of the violent proceedings of the aforesaid
riotous and and disorderly people, from whence it must at present be extremely
difficult, if not impracticable, to bring offenders to justice within the said
county:

Be it therefore further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That all treasons,
felonies, crimes, misdemeanors and offenses whatsoever, at any time heretofore
committed or perpetrated, or hereafter to be committed or pepetrated within the
said county of Charlotte, shall and may be proceeded against and presented by
any grand jury for the county of Albany, from time to time, to be impanelled
and sworn at any court or criminal jurisdiction to be held in and for the said
county of Albany, who shall and may charge any of the said offenses to have
been committed in any part of the said county of Charlotte, and all indictments
so found by them shall be adjudged to be good and valid, notwithstanding that
the place of perpetrating any of the said offenses be in the said indictments
alleged to be out of the said county of Albany? and all such offenses and
offenders which shall be presented or indicted as aforesaid, shall and may be
tried within the county of Albany, and by a jury thereof, and there heard,
determined and punished in the same manner and form as if such treason, felony,
crime, misdemeanor or offense, had arisen and been perpetrated within the said
county of Albany.

10. Provided always, And be it further enacted, That if any time hereafter the
justices to be appointed for holding courts of oyer and terminer, and general
goal delivery, for the said county of Charlotte, in cases cognizable before
them, or the justices of the general session of the peace for the said county
of Charlotte, in cases cognizable before them, shall conceive that any prisoner
or offender may be safely brought to justice within, and by a jury of the said
county of Charlotte, that then it shall and may be lawful to and for each of
the said courts respectively, to proceed against and try such prisoner or
offender, having lawful cognizance of his cause within and by a jury of the
said county of Charlotte, and him there to acquit or to sentence, condemn, and
punish as the law directs; any thing in this act to the contrary thereof
notwithstanding.

11. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That this act shall
be publicly read in every court of general sessions of the peace, to be held
in each of the said counties of Albany and Charlotte respectively.

12. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, That this act shall
remain and continue in full force and effect from the passing thereof, until
the first day of January, which will be in the year of our Lord, one thousand,
seven hundred, and seventy-six,

From the New Hampshire Gazette, No. 915. REMARKS, etc. on some late Laws
passed in New York.
HIS excellency governor Tryon in conformity to the addresses of the general
assembly of the colony of New York, having on the 9th day of March 1774, with
the advice of his council, issued his proclamation, offering therein large sums
of money for the purpose of apprehending and imprisoning the following persons,
viz. Ethan Allen, Seth Warner, Remember Baker, Robert Cochrain, Peleg
Sunderland, Silvanus Brown, James Breakenridge, and James Smith.

ANA whereas his excellency the governor, by the same proclamation, has
strictly enjoined and commanded all magistrates, justices of the peace,
sheriffs, and other civil officers of the counties of Albany and Charlotte, to
be active and vigilent in apprehending and imprisoning the persons abovenamed;
and we the aforesaid persons, who have hereunto subscribed, being conscious
that our cause is good and equitable in the sight of GOD, and all unprejudiced
and honest men, are determined at all events, to maintain and defend the same
'till his majest's pleasure shall be known concerning the validity of the
New Hampshire grants. -- And we now proclaim to the public, not only for
ourselves but for the New Hampshire grantees, and occupants in general; that
the spring and moving cause of our opposition to the government of New York was
self-preservation, viz. Firstly, the preservation and maintaining of our
property: And secondly, since that government is so incensed against us,
therefore it stands us in hand to defend our lives; for it appears by a late
set of laws passed by the legislature thereof that the lives and property of
the New Hampshire settlers are manifestly struck at; but, that the public may
rightly understand the essence of the controversy, we now proclaim to those
lawgivers, and to the world, that if the New York patentees will remove their
patents that have been subsequently lapped and laid on the New Hampshire
charters, and quiet us in our possessions, agreeable to his majesty's
directions, and suspend those criminal prosecutions against us for being
rioters (as we are unjustly denomination) then will our settlers be orderly and
submissive subjects to government; but be it known to that despotic fraternity
of lawmakers and lawbreakers, that we will not be fooled or frighted out of
our property; they have broke over his majesty's express prohibitions, in
patenting those lands, and when they act in conformity to the regal authority
of Great Britain, it will be soon enough for us to obey them. It is well known
by all wise and sensible persons in the neighboring governments, (that have
animadverted on the controversy) that their pretended zeal for good order and
government, is fallacious, and that they aim at the lands and labors of the
grantees and settlers aforesaid; and that they subvert the good and wholesome
laws of the realm, to corroborate with, and bring about their vile and
mercenary purposes.

AND, inasmuch as the malignity of their disposition toward us, has flamed to
an immeasurable and murtherous degree, they have in their newfangled laws,
calculated for the meridian of the New Hampshire grants, passed the 9th of
March, 1774; so calculated them, as to correspond with the depravedness of
their minds and morals; in them laws, they have exhibited their genuine
pictures. The emblems of their insatiable, avaricious, overbearing, inhuman,
barbarous, and blood-guiltiness of disposition and intention is therein
portraited in that transparent image of themselves, which cannot fail to be a
blot and an infamous reproach to them, to posterity. -- We cannot suppose that
every of his majesty's council, or that all the members of the general assembly
were active in passing so bloody and unconstitutional a set of laws;
undoubtedly, some of them disapproved thereof; and it is altogether possible,
that many that were active in making the law, were imposed upon by false
representations, and acted under mistaken views of doing honor to government;
but be this as it will, it appears that there was a majority. and it has been
too much the case with the government, for a number of designing schemers, and
land-jockeys, to rule the same. Let us take a view of their former narrow and
circumbscribed boundaries, and how, that by legerdemain, bribery and deceptions
of one sort or other, they have extended their domain far and wide; they have
wrangled with and encroached on their neighboring governments, and have used
all manner of deceit and fraud to accomplish their designs: their tenants groan
under their usury and oppression; and they have gained, as well as merited
disapprobation and abhorrence of their neighbors, and the innocent blood they
have already shed, calls for heaven's vengeance on their guilty heads; and if
they should come forth in arms against us thousands of their injured and
dissatisfied neighbors in the several governments, will join with us, to cut
off, and extirpated such an execrable race from the face of the earth!

THIS piece is not supposed to contain a full answer to the new constructed
laws aforesaid; for such a large two year old, has never before been seen in
America, it being of an enormous and monstrous birth; nor is it supposed to
give the legislators their full characters: but so much may suffice for the
present. To quote the laws, and make remarks thereon, would be matter
sufficient for a volume: However, we will yet make some short abservations,

1st, NEGATIVELY, it is not a law for the province of New York in general, but,

2d, POSITIVELY, it is a law but for part of the counties of Charlotte and
Albany; viz. Such parts thereof as are covered with the New Hampshire charters;
and it is well known those grants compose but a minor part of the inhabitants
of the said province; and we have not presentative in that assembly. The first
knowledge we had of said laws, was the completion of them; which informed us,
that if we assembled, three or more of us together, to oppose (that which they
all legal) authority, we shall be adjudged felons, and suffer the pains of
death; and that same fraternity of plotters knew, as well as we, and the
generally of the people in the adjacent colonies, that they have for a number
of years last past, endeavored to exercise such a course of what they call law,
that had they not been opposed by the people of these grants (called the MOB)
in the executing the same, they would, before this time, have been in
possession of that territory, for which the laws aforesaid are calculated.
Therefore the case stands thus: If we oppose civil officers in taking
possession of our farms, we are, by these laws, denominated felons; or if we
defend our neighbors who have been indicted rioters, only for defending our
property; we are likewise adjudged felons. In fine, every opposition to their
monarchial government is deemed felony, and at the end of every such sentence,
there is the word DEATH! And the same laws further empowered the respective
judge, provided any persons, to the number of three, or more, that shall oppose
any Magistrate, or other civil officer, and be not taken, that after a legal
warning of seven days, if they do not come and yield themselves up to certain
officers appointed for the purpose of securing them; then it shall be lawful
for the judges aforesaid, to award execution of DEATH, the same as though he or
they had been convicted or attainted before a proper court of judicature, etc.
The candid reader will doubtless observe, that the diabolical design of this
law, is to obtain possession of the New Hampshire grants, or to make the people
that defend them outlaws, and so kill them whenever they can catch them.

THOSE bloody lawgivers know we are necessitated to oppose their execution of
law, where it points directly at our property, or give up the same: but there
is one thing is matter of consolation to us, viz. that printed sentences of
death will not kill us when we are at a distance; and if the executioners
approach us, they will be as likely to fall victims to death as we: and that
person, or country of persons, are cowards indeed, if they cannot as manfully
fight for their liberty, property and life, as villains can do to deprive them
thereof.

THE New York schemers accuse us with many things, part of which are true, and
part not. -- With respect to rescuing prisoners for debt, it is false. As to
assuming judicial powers, we have not, except a well-regulated combination of
the people to defend their just rights, may be called so. As to forming
ourselves into military order, and assuming military commands, the New York
possies, and military preparations, oppressions, etc. obliged us to it.
Probably Mess. Duane, Kemp, and Banyer, of New York, will not discommend us for
so expedient a preparation; more especially since the decrees of the 9th of
March, are yet to be put in execution: and we flatter ourselves, upon occasion,
we can muster as good a regiment of mark's-men and scalpers, as America can
afford; and we now give the gentlemen abovenamed, together with Mr. Brush, and
Col. Ten Broeck, and in fine, all the land-jobbers of New York, an invitation
to come and view the dexterity of our regiment; and we cannot think of a better
time for that purpose, than when the executioners come to kill us, by virtue of
the authority their judges have lately received to award and sentence us to
death in our absence. There is still one more notable complaint against us,
viz. That we have insulted and manaced several magistrates, and other civil
officers, so that they dare not execute their respective functions. this is
true so far as it relates to the magistrates. But the public should be
informed, what the functions of those magistrates are: they are commissioned
for the sole purpose of doing us all the harm and mischief they possibly can,
through their administration and influence; and that they might be subservient to
the wicked designs of the New York chemers. These are their functions; and the
public need no further proof than the consideration that they are the tools of
those extravagant lawmakers; and it must be owned, they acted with great
judgment, in choosing the most infernal instruments for their purpose,

DRACO, the Athenian lawgiver, caused a number of laws (in many respect;
analogous to those we have been speaking of) to be written in blood. But our
modern Draco's determine to have their's verified in blood. They well know we
shall more than three, nay, more than three times three hundred, assemble
together, if need be, to maintain our common cause, till his majesty determines
who shall be and remain the owners of the land in contest. " Wilt not thou
possess that which Chemoth, thy God, gives thee to possess?" So will we
possess that which the Lord our God (and King) gives us to possess.

AND lastly, we address ourselves to the people of the counties of Albany and
Charlotte, which inhabit to the westward of, and are situated contiguous to the
New Hampshire grants.

GENTLEMEN, FRIENDS AND NEIGHBORS, PROVIDENCE having allotted and fixed the
bounds of our habitations in the same vicinity, which, together with the
intercourse of trade and commerce, has formed an almost universal acquaintance
and tie of friendship between us, and has laid such a foundation of knowledge,
that your people in general cannot but be sensible that the title of our land
is in reality the bone of contention; and that as a people, we behave ourselves
orderly; and are industrious, and honestly disposed; and pay just reference to
order and good government; and that we mean no more by that which is called the
MOB, but to defend our just rights and properties. We appeal to the gentlemen
merchants, to inform whether our people in general, do not exert themselves to
pay their just debts; and whether ever they have been hindered by the country's
MOB, in the collection of their dues. But as the magistrates, sheriffs,
undersheriffs, coroners, and constables of the respective counties that hold
their posts of honor and profit under our bitter enemies, we have a jealousy,
that some of them may be induced (to recommend themselves to those on whom they
are dependant, and for the wages of unrighteousness, offered by proclamation)
to presume to apprehend some of us, or our friends: We therefore advertise such
officers, and all persons whatsoever, that we are resolved to inflict immediate
death on whomsoever may attempt the same. And provided any of us or our party
shall be taken, and we have not notice sufficient to relieve them, or whether
we relieve them or not, we are resolved to surround such person or persons,
whether at his or their own house or houses, or any where that we can find him
or them, and shoot such person or persons dead. And furthermore, that we will
kill and destroy any person or persons whomsoever, that shall presume to be
accessory, aiding or assisting in taking any of us as aforesaid; for by these
presents we give any such disposed person or persons to understand, that,
although they have a license by the law aforesaid to kill us; and an
"indemnification" for such murder from the same authority; yet they have no
indemnification for so doing, from the green mountain boys; for our lives,
liberties and properties, are as verily precious to us, as to any of the king's
subjects; and we are as loyal to his majesty or his government, as any subjects
in the province: but if the governmental authority of New York will judge in
their own case, and act in opposition to that of Great Britain, and insist upon
killing us to take possession of our "vineyards" come on, we are ready for a
game of scalping with them; for our martial spirits glow with bitter
indignation, and consumate fury, to blast their infernal projections.

IT may be the reader, not having seen the law referred to in this piece, and
not being thoroughly acquainted with the long and spirited conflict that has
subsisted between the claimants under New Hampshire and New York, nor of the
progressive, arbitrary, and monopolizing disposition of the court party of the
latter of those provinces; may be apt to imagine that the spirit of this
writing is too severe, inasmuch as it destines whoever presumes to take us as
felons or rioters, to immediate death; but let the wise consider the state of
the cause.

1. PROVIDED we on our part be taken, we have by them laws the sentence of
death already pronounced against us, on proviso more than three of us assemble
together to maintain and defend our property, till his majesty determines the
controversy. And,

2. MAY it be considered, that the legislative authority of the province of
New York had no constitutional right or power to make such laws, and
consequently that they are null and void, from the nature and energy of the
English constitution; therefore as they merit no place among the laws of the
realm of Great Britain, but are the arbitrary league and combination of our
bitter and merciless enemies, who, to obtain our property, have inhumanly,
barbarously, and maliciously, under the specious and hypocritical pretense of
legal authority, and veneration for order and government, laid a snare for our
lives. Can the public censure us for exerting ourselves nervously to preserve
our lives in so critical a situation? For by the laws of the province, into
which we are unfortunately fallen, we cannot be protected in either property or
life, except we give up the former to secure the latter; so we are resolved to
maintain both, or to hazard or loose both.

FROM hence follows a necessary inference, That inasmuch as our property, nay,
our lives, cannot be protected (but manifestly struck at) by the highest
authority in the province to which we at present belong; therefore in the
interim, while his majesty is determining the controversy, and till he shall
interpose his royal authority, and subject the authority aforesaid to their
duty, or re-annex the district of disputed lands to the province of
New Hampshire, or some way in his great wisdom and fatherly clemency, put the
distressed settlers under New Hampshire, on an equal footing with our brother
subjects in his realm; we are under necessity of resisting, even unto blood,
every person who may attempt to take us as felons or rioters as aforesaid; for
in this case it is not resisting law, but only opposing force by force;
therefore inasmuch as by the oppressions aforesaid, the New Hampshire settlers
are reduced to the disagreeable state of anarchy and confusion; in which state
we hope for wisdom, patience and fortitude, till the happy hour his majesty
shall graciously be pleased to restore us to the privileges of Englishmen.

Signed per ETHAN ALLEN, SETH WARNER, REMEMBER BAKER, ROBERT COCKRAN, PELEG
SUNDERLAND, JOHN SMITH, SILVANUS BROWN.

Bennington, April 26, 1774. When Casar reigned king at Rome,
St. Paul was sent to hear his doom;
But Roman laws in a criminal case,
Must have the accuser face to face,
Or Casar gives a flat denial. --
But here is a law made now of late;
Which destines men to awful fate,
And hangs and damns without a trial.
Which made me view all nature through,
To find a law where men were ti'd,
By legal act which does exact
Men's lives before they are tried.
Then down I took the sacred book,
And turned the pages over,
But could not find one of this kind,
By God or man before.
T. R.



APPENDIX,
CONTAING conclusive arguments in favor of the validity of the New Hampshire
grants to the westward of Connecticut-river; setting forth the injustice and
invalidity of the New York subsequent interfering grants, with observations on
the jurisdictions of the spective governments to those lands. And remarks on
the state of the right of the colony of New York, etc. And on the narrative of
the proceedings subsequent to the royal adjudication, concerning lands to the
westward of Connecticut-river, etc. published at their sessions, 1773.

THE Appendix was written by the writer of the Vindication to which this is
annexed, and was printed at Hartford, by Mr. EBENEZER WATSON, (deceased) 23d
September, 1774.

SECTION I.
AS the claimants under New Hampshire rely on their charters from that
government as the predicate and ground of their title to the property of the
land in contest; so, on the other hand, the claimants under New York, predicate
and ground their title to the same land on the validity of their patents from
New York: This brings the point in issue between the respective claimants to
this single question, namely, Which of the said governments conveyed the fee of
the land in contest? For it is self-evident both could not. And up in exploring
the controversy, and animadverting on the merits of the different claims, be it
which it will that may be allowed to stand the test, and adjudged valid, it
will of necessity invalidate the other. In the discussion of this subject, and
searching into the merit of the respective claims, it is necessary to inspect
into the validity of the grant from king CHARLES to the duke of YORK, from
which foundation only, the government of New York deduce their right of
patenting the lands in contest; yet the matter of fact is, that neither the
government of New York as such, or any individual therein, has ever had any
conveyance of any land from the duke of York, nor does any landlord or person
whatever, in the government hold the fee or property of their land, by virtue
of any conveyance from the duke of York; but they hold the fee of their lands
on a very different footing, viz. by conveyance from the Crown; yet, if it be
conceded to, that king Charles gave to his brother James duke of York, the fee
of the lands west of Connecticut-river to the head of Delaware-Bay; and
allowing the fee to be still vested in him, his heirs or assigns, upon this
hypothesis no person in the province of New York has the fee or property of
the land they possess, the fee remaining the property of the duke of York, his
heirs or assigns. And further, upon the same principle, those identical patents
under the seal of New York, which were laid on the New Hampshire grants, are in
their own nature, equally null and void, with all other conveyances of land in
the said province which have been given by the crown, the fee thereof being
vested in the duke of York, etc. So that the grantees under New York and
New Hampshire, are both, upon this stating of the case, equally destitute of
the fee of the land contested for: But, upon this stating, the grantees under
New Hampshire, have the argument of settlement, and occupation, and possession,
on their side; which is abundantly sufficient to give the priority, and
preference of title to them; so that neither the government of New York or
their patentees, gain any thing by building their title on the said grants to
the duke of York; for if there be any thing in it, it defeats their own title
as well as that of New Hampshire, proving too much for their purpose, or
nothing at all. But, if the lands contained in the duke of York's grant
reverted back to the crown, then the duke of York's patent became extinct,
null, and absolutely void, and is as though it never had been; whether the said
reversion happened in consequence of the said duke's abdicating the throne --
turning papist, or by any formal surrendery, or by any means whatever, provided
the fee became revested in the crown, then the said charter became extinct, as
aforesaid; so that whether the fee of the land in dispute still remains in the
said duke of York, his heirs or assigns, or reverted, or was surrendered to the
crown, none of all this will in the least justify the government of New York or
its patentees, in founding their pretensions of title to the lands aforesaid,
by virtue of the aforesaid grant from king Charles to the duke of York. For,
take the argument one way, and it overturns both the title of New York and
New Hampshire also, leaving the latter in occupation and possession of the
disputed premises, and that only, being entirely destitute of the fee; and the
New York claimants destitute of the least color of title whatsoever. But, take
the argument the other way, viz. Provided the fee of the lands aforesaid
reverted and been revested in the crown, then the said lands at the time of
first granting were crown lands the same as though the duke of York had never
existed. But the truth of the matter undoubtedly is this, the under proprietors
all except William Penn, who had the several countries parcelled out to them by
the duke of York, which was contained in his grant; surrendered their charters
to the crown, whereby New York and New Jersey, became royal governments: This
then being the state of the case, the lands in dispute became crown lands, and
the governor of New Hampshire, as well as New York crown officers, or king's
agents, and it is of no consequence to the king which of his governors grants
his land, if so be they be granted to and settled by loyal and industrious
subjects, thereby adding to the revenue of the crown and enlarging and
strengthening the kingdom. This being presupposed, and admit for supposition
only, that the governor of New Hampshire exceeded his proper limits in granting
crown lands, must the grantees who have settled those lands, paid one of the
crown officers for granting the same, and expended their ALL, in settling and
cultivating his majesty's wilderness land, and who are truly loyal subjects, be
turned off the said land by thousands, and reduced to starving poverty,
together with their numerous families, because one of the crown officers either
ignorantly or designingly imposed upon the people by granting crown lands over
his bounds? This would be extreme wrong, the more so as it cannot be supposed
that the subjects are capable judges of the jurisdiction of governments, and
consequently there should be the greatest care taken to guard the subject from
injury in all cases of this nature; the truth of which will more fully appear
by the following considerations, viz. That notwithstanding the supposed error
in granting the said lands, yet the great end of the crown in granting of it is
completely answered; and provided the subjects i. e. the settlers are quieted
in the fee and possession of the said lands, they will not be injured, so that
upon this hypothesis, neither king nor subject would sustain damage: Indeed no
person in the realm could have just cause of complaint. True, the respective
governors of New York may insinuate, that upon this state of the case, the
governor of New Hampshire has cheated them out of their fees for granting the
said lands -- though it is evident, if crown officers are faithful to the king
and subjects, they could take no more money for granting crown lands, than a
reasonable compensation for their trouble, and the other governor's being
supposed to grant the lands, saves the said governor of New York the trouble;
so that the argument is brought to this single point only at last, that upon
supposition the governor of New Hampshire exceeded his proper limits in
granting those lands, yet neither king nor subjects are injured, (provided the
claimants under New Hampshire hold the fee of the said land as above) except
the governors of New York, and if they be supposed to be honest men, the
trouble of granting the land would be equal to their fees had they granted it;
so that they have not been injured a whit more in this case, than they be
supposed to have injured the subjects by taking exorbitant fees for granting
the same lands; which to them is no injury at all, but a providential check to
the exercise of their avarice. So that the respective governors of New York, in
an equitable sense, are no loosers in this affair; or at most the privileges
would be so very inconsiderable as to make it mere trifling to mention it,
especially when set in competition with the shocking and universal destruction
that would overspread a large country of his majesty's good subjects, provided
they be dispossessed of the lands aforesaid. This seems to be the genuine
sequel of the argument, even upon the Yorker's own stating it.

SECTION, II.
IT is not conceeded to on the part of the claimants under New Hampshire, that
the governor did in fact exceed his proper limits in granting those lands, the
contrary will abundantly appear from the following considerations, viz. Before
and at the time the said governor of New Hampshire granted those lands they
were reputed to be within his jurisdiction, this was the opinion of both
learned and unlearned, the wise as well as simple, thus is was universally
planed in all ancient and modern maps down to the year 1764, when, by royal
determination, the jurisdiction of New York, was extended over this disputed
district of land. But the general opinion before this royal adjudication was,
that the province of New York extended its jurisdiction but twenty miles to the
eastward from Hudson's-river, so general was this opinion, that the best maps
of the two respective provinces, and the history of New Hampshire adopted it as
settled; it is of very great weight in the question to show how universal this
maxim was, and that the unprejudiced and accurate geographer Mr. Mitchel, in
his map composed so late as the year 1755, which with great propriety and
certainty ascertains the same limits, this map has the more authority as it was
according to the certificate of Mr. Pownal, secretary to the board of trade,
and was undertaken with the approbation and at the request of the lords
commissioners for trade and plantation, and is chiefly composed from draughts,
charts, and actual serveys of different parts of his majesty's colonies and
plantions in America, great part of which have been since taken by their
lordships orders and transmitted to the office of the governors of said
colonies. This twenty mile line was so far from being deemed unfavorable to
New York, that we find the commissioners from that province so late as the year
1767, made an offer to those of the Massachusett-Bay to let a line at twenty
miles distance east of Hudson's-river be the division between their respective
provinces, which the latter commissioners would not then agree to it, being
thought by them too much in favor of New York, so little it seems did New York
commissioners conceive their claim as far as Connecticut river could be
supported.

THOUGH it is true in the year 1771 the province of New York b^^^ public act of
their general assembly, did annex all that part of the province of the
Massachusetts Bay, to the westward from Connecticut-river, to their county of
Albany; and it is likewise true that in the year 1773, the governors of the
respective provinces met at Hartsord, in Connecticut, and came to a mutual
agreement to settle that line at twenty miles distance eastward from
Hudson's-river, which was the hypothesis of that settlement, which has since
been ratified by his majesty.

THE report of the lords commissioners for plantation affairs in 1753, states
the following facts, from which is necessarily inferred that New Hampshire
extended its jurisdiction to the westward of Connecticut-river, -- "There are,
says their lordships, about 60,000 acres of land situate on the west side of
Connecticut-river, which were purchased by private persons from Connecticut, to
whom the land had been laid out, by the government of the Massachusetts Bay as
an equivalent for two or three townships which the latter purchased from the
former, this tract of land by the determination of the boundary line between
the provinces of New Hampshire and the Massachusetts Bay in 1739 is become a
part of New Hampshire." -- Thus we have their lordships sentiments that the
jurisdiction of New Hampshire extended over part of the very lands in contest,
westward of Connecticut-river, as long ago as the year 1739, at which time
New York never dreamed of extending their claim to Connecticut-river. -- There
is another glaring and indisputable evidence of the former western extent of
New Hampshire, viz. Relative to sort Dummer which was built by the Bay province
in 1724, and garrisoned at their expense a great number of years; but upon its
being excluded from their jurisdiction by the settlement of the jurisdictional
line, between them and New Hampshire in 1739, the Bay province represented to
the government at home, that the said district of land and fort Dummer, having
been determined to be the property of New Hampshire, they were no longer
obliged to garrison and maintain it, and praying, that as it was necessary to
the defense of the country, that New Hampshire might be directed to support it.
In consequence of which, an order passed the king and council in 1744, that the
governor and commander in chief of New Hampshire, should forthwith move the
assembly, in his majesty's name, to make a proper provision for that service;
and at the same time informing them that in case they refused to comply with so
reasonable and necessary a proposal, his majesty would find himself under a
necessity of restoring that fort, with a proper district of land contiguous
thereto, to the province of the Massachusetts Bay, who cannot with justice be
required to maintain a fort no longer within their boundary. In consequence of
this, New Hampshire, did maintain this fort, and paid a demand of arrears for
its maintenance, to the Massachusetts Bay. In the mean time New York was never
a competitor for the burden, willing as she is to enjoy the advantage of
granting and engrossing the said lands.

THIS being the case, the government of New Hampshire by the royal decree, was
obliged to maintain fort Dummer, and it being on the west side of
Connecticut-river, and on this very identical district of land now in dispute,
can that government be justly charged with granting lands in the province of
New York, when but a little before his majesty in council had adjudged the same
lands to be in the said government of New Hampshire and ordered them to defend
it, as by maintaining fort Dummer, etc. Surely at that time New Hampshire did
extend its jurisdiction westward of Connecticut-river; otherwise the king had
ordered the government of New York to have maintained fort Dummer. Nothing can
be more flagrantly evident than, that the government of New Hampshire had a
right to grant crown lands where the crown compelled them to defend. From hence
it appears, that the government of New Hampshire had a legal right to grant the
lands now in dispute, and that, that government and his majesty's good
subjects, the grantees of and settlers on the said lands, acted upon honest and
honorable principles, in granting, purchasing and settling the same, and on the
other hand it appears, that the government of New York in re-granting the same
land, acted quite the reverse; and the more unpardonably so, as they granted
great part of it in open defiance to his majesty's authority manifested unto
them by his express prohibition, dated the 24th day of July 1767.

FROM what has been already elucidated it appears, that the administration of
Great Britain had adjudged in 1739 and confirmed in 1755, that the government
of New Hampshire extended westward of Connecticut-river, and that this was the
general sense of the nation (till ascertained as aforesaid) is real matter of
fact. -- True no determination of his majesty or reports of the lords of trade
had before particularized how far the government of New Hampshire should extend
west of Connecticut-river: but such determinations of their's mightily
strengthened the common opinion, nay, fully confirmed it, that that government
extended westward to a twenty miles distance east from Hudson's river. This was
the opinion both of king and subjects at the time the government of
New Hampshire granted those lands; and adventurers could not conceive of any
intermediate boundary in one place more than another, between Connecticut-river
and the twenty mile limit aforesaid; nor had they any apprehension that the
government of New Hampshire would extend to the westward of that limit. This
twenty mile line took universal and deep impression on the minds of
geographers, and was the understanding of the British empire, and was thus
portrayed in all former maps. The certainty of this general opinion may be
further illustrated from the consideration that none of the British subjects
applied to the government of New York for grants of those lands, till after the
alteration of jurisdiction in 1764, except it be, as is pretended by the
New York scriblers, that their government extended patents from within the said
twenty mile line across the same, and on some part of the premises in dispute,
many years before the government of New Hampshire granted those lands -- which
will be hereafter considered: But, would further add, it is matter of dispute
whether the administration at home would recognize those patents granted by the
government of New York, on the premises aforesaid; though antecedent to those
granted by New Hampshire, inasmuch as the royal adjudication in 1764, could not
antecedently empower the government of York York to grant them lands, which by
royal adjudication of the line of jurisdiction between New Hampshire and
Massachusetts Bay, fell within the government of New Hampshire in 1739, as
aforesaid. However, for argument only, we will suppose the governments of
New Hampshire and New York had each of them equal authority to grant those
lands -- then on this stating the case, prior granting would of consequence be
priority of title. The first conveyance, upon this hypothesis, being good and
valid both in law and equity, must necessarily defeat any subsequent grant from
the crown or its representatives, being as authentic, to all intents and
purposes, as any conveyance of the fee of land from the crown can possibly be.
-- Thus it appears upon this most favorable concession to those on the part of
New York, that the argument preponderates in favor of the claimants under
New Hampshire, as their grants are prior to those of New York, (except in the
instances of the old parents, yet to be considered.)

FURTHERMORE, it appears by the express words of the New Hampshire grants, that
the grantees were not only entitled to the fee of the lands therein discribed,
but also to all the enfranchisements, and each and every of the privileges and
immunities that by law his majesty's subjects in the province of New Hampshire
enjoy; so that at the same time the grantees were vested with the fee of the
land, they were enfranchised with, and entitled to all the privileges and
immunities contained in their charters; as the holding of fairs, choosing town
officers, and making and mending their own roads, etc. It is therefore humbly
conceived, that provided it should be the future pleasure of his majesty, to
continue the said lands in the jurisdiction of New York, (which by the settlers
aforesaid is hoped will not be the case) that the claimants and settlers under
the said grants, will nevertheless have his majesty's gracious approbation to
enjoy without let or molestation, the privileges of incorporation therein
contained; the grantees having ever considered those privileges as inseperably
connected with the grant of the fee-simple.

SECTION III.
FROM the facts and reasons that have been advanced in the foregoing sections,
it manifestly appears, that the title of the claimants under New Hampshire to
the lands in question is indefeasible; yet still there are sundry
considerations that may serve more abundantly to confirm and establish this
title beyond hesitation. As,

FIRSTLY, The far greast part of the extent of jurisdiction of the province of
New York, and great part of New Hampshire, depended entirely on his majesty's
pleasure, being wholly in the arbitration of the crown, to be either curtailed
or extended. The real grant on which the original circumference of the
government of New Hampshire founded, extended but sixty miles from the sea into
the country, to the westward, terminating about twenty miles cast of
Connecticut-river. This government was afterward enlarged by his majesty's
commission to Benning Wentworth, Esquire governor of that province, directing it to
extend to the westward until it should meet with his majesty's other
governments. Which clause of western extention in the said commission, as well
as the royal adjudication of the boundary line between this government and the
Massachusetts Bay in 1739, and report of the lords of trade in 1755, and many
other arguments mentioned in this and the foregoing sections, all on the part
of New Hampshire, amount to sufficient evidence, that their government extended
so far west as twenty miles east of Hudson's ^^er. And with respect to the
province of New York, its original northen circumference terminated south of
the city of Albany, and afterward, as plantations are extended northerly,
either on patents procured immediately from the crown or government, or mere
settlements on extra-provincial lands, commissions from the king, to the
respective governors were enlarged, as in the example following, viz. A. M. Esquire
captain general, governor and commander in chief in and over the province of
New York, (then follows the enlargement,) and the territories depending thereon
in America. -- These territories are that extension of jurisdiction beyond
their first circumscribed limits, terminating south of Albany, called the
province. This territorial extension of jurisdiction is altogether in the
arbitration of the crown to curtail or extend as before represented. This being
the case, the respective governors can no other way be judges of the extent of
their jurisdiction, but by directions given them in their commissions, together
with his majesty's express proclamations, and public determinations relative
thereto, as in the instance of the royal adjudication in 1764; a publication of
which, by his majesty's order, gave his subjects to understand, that it was his
pleasure that the territorial jurisdiction of New York, should extend to the
west banks of Connecticut-river, which includes the disputed premises within
that government; before this it was impossible for the subjects to know it; if
they could have understood it without his majesty's proclamation certifying the
same, such proclamation would have been needless and impertinent. The truth of
the matter is, his majesty in 1739, determined New Hampshire government should
cover the present disputed premises; he altered his determination in 1764,
whereby New York extended its territories over the same land. And the king has
an undoubted right to alter and regulate the jurisdiction of royal governments
as may seem to him mete, so long as his royal power exists; and for the
New-Yorkers to amuse people of common sense, pretending that it is the ancient
and indisputable right of the colony of New York to extend to the west banks of
Connecticut-river, as its eastern boundary, is the very height of folly. It was
in the nature of things absolutely impossible his majesty himself should have
known that to have been the case the moment before he determined it, and
equally inconsistent that the subjects should know it before his majesty
proclaimed it.

FURTHERMORE, it appears by the representation which was laid before his
majesty by Lieutenant governor Colden, as an inducement to prefix the west
banks of Connecticut-river, the eastern boundary of the province of New York --
That they were arguments of convenience, holding up to view that it would be
greatly to the advantage of the inhabitants on the New Hampshire grants, to be
under the jurisdiction of New York; which arguments are incompatible with the
idea of antecedent right of jurisdiction. Likewise, from hence we may see the
inconsistency of that government or its patentees, in founding their right in
fee to the lands in contest, by virtue of the said royal adjudication of the
boundary line on the west banks of Connecticut-river; inasmuch as it cannot
operate to their advantage antecedent to the date of that adjudication, and
afterward cannot be considered any thing more than a mere line of jurisdiction
between the respective governments.

IT should be furthermore considered, that neither governments were vested with
the fee of those lands; their case in this respect, is quite the reverse of
that of proprietary governments, who have a right to appropriate the soil. In
royal governments, it is true, the governors have a delegated authority from
his majesty to grant crown lands; and in such governments it is a prerogative
of the crown to alter the limits of jurisdiction; his majesty has a right to
re-annex the disputed premises to his province of New Hampshire, (in which it
formerly was, and on the faith of which the claimants under that government
purchased and settled the same lands) or incorporate it into a new government,
or continue it under the present jurisdiction, as his royal wisdom may discern
to be best for the governed: But, upon such alterations of jurisdiction,
private property is never changed or subverted. For, if the property of the
subject be in the arbitration of the crown, and liable to the same vicissitudes
and changes with jurisdiction, this would destroy the very nature of property,
and would render a king absolute, and despotic, which is perfectly inconsistent
with the constitution of the kingdom. -- Therefore, to convey or alienate
property, is the sacred prerogative of the rightful OWNER. -- Kings and
governors (in the kingdom of Great Britain) cannot intermeddle therewith. There
is indeed as much difference between the change of jurisdiction, and transfering
of the property of the subject, as there is between light and darkness,
although since the said royal adjudication in 1764, the New-Yorkers, have
endeavored to blend them together to answer sinister and lucrative purposes. --
They were sensible, undoubtedly, that such the aforesaid arguments were
conclusive against their monopolizing the fee-simple of said lands; and as it
is very common for people, who are upon a design of engrossing the property of
their neighbor, to set up some specious pretense of right, to vindicate
themselves from the imputation of dishonor and reproach; so in the present
case, the New Yorkers endeavored to draw the curtain of the duke of York over
their knavery, and under the feigned character of heirs, to that apostate duke,
claim the lands aforesaid, and fancy themselves the owners of towns, (fields)
and houses that they builded not.

SECTION, IV.
ALTHOUGH the arguments contained in the foregoing sections are full and
conclusive, relative to the nullity and nothingness of the duke of York's
grant, at least, such part thereof as concerns the present dispute; and that
neither the government of New York or its patentees gain any manner of title to
the land in contest, by predicating it on the validity of that grant, yet the
general assembly of the said province in their state of the rights, etc.
venture the stress of their whole cause thereon, and deduce all their arguments
of title to those disputed Premises therefrom: It is therefore partly out of
compliment to them, as well as more fully to invlidate, and apparently
demonstrate, to every capable judge, the utter insufficiency and desect of
title to those lands, by conveyance from the government of NewYork, that the
grant of the duke of York is here brought under consideration: and in order
thereto, it is necessary that the second grant be here inserted, which is
transcribed from the New York pamphlet Verbatim.

EXTRACT of King CHARLES the Second's Grant of the Province of New York, to his
Brother JAMES, Duke of York.
CHARLES the second, by the grace of God, king of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, defender of the faith, etc.
To all to whom these presents shall come, greeting:
Know ye, that we, for diverse good causes and considerations, have, of our
especial grace, certain knowledge and mere motion, given and granted, and by
these presents, for us, our heirs and successors, do give and grant unto our
dearest brother, James, duke of York, his heirs and assigns, all that part of
the main land of New England, beginning at a certain place, called or known by
the name of St. Croix, next adjoining to New-Scotland, in America; and from
thence extending along the sea coast, unto a certain Place called Petuaguine or
Pemaquid, and so up the river thereof to the furtherest head of the same, as it
tends northwards; and extending from the river of Kinebeque, and so upwards,
by the shortest course of the river Canada northwards: And all that island or
islands, commonly called by the several name or names of Matowacks or
Long Island, situate, and being toward the West of Cape Cod; and the Narrow
Highgansetts, abutting upon the main land; between the two rivers there called
or known by the several names of Connecticut and Hudson's river, together also
with the said river called Hudson's, and all the lands from the west side of
Connecticut-river, to the east side of Delaware bay: and also, all those
several islands, called or known by the names of Martin's Vineyard, and
Nantuckes, otherways Nantucket; together with all, etc. Dated the twenty-ninth
day of June, in the twenty-sixth year of the reign of king CHARLES the second.

It appears from the sequel of the representations, narratives and arguments
contained in the New York pamphlet, that the government of New York do not
pretend to any conveyance of the fee of the lands in contest from the duke of
York. But their grand hypothesis is, that the jurisdiction of their government
from the first establishment, was predicated on, and bounded by the descriptive
limits of the said grant; and consequently, that the disputed Premises was
never in the government of New Hampshire; and, that that government never was
vested with authority to grant those lands, and also consequently, that the
grants by them made, are in their own nature void. This is the sum of the
New York arguments relative to their title to those lands. Here

FIRST, it is necessary the descriptive Limits of the above rehearsed Charter
be brought under Consideration; which includes the countries of St. Croix,
adjoining New-Scotland, Pemaquid, the river Kenebeque, and the islands known by
the names of Martin's Vineyard, Nantucket, etc. All these countries lying east
of Connecticut-river, and within the actual jurisdiction of the provinces of
the Massachusetts Bay, New Hampshire, etc. and at present not contended for on
the Part of New York. Their general assembly, in the "state of the right." etc.
had done well to have informed the public, whether their "ancient and
indisputable right" of jurisdiction extended to every part of the descriptive
limits of the grants aforesaid, and if not, to which part it was circumscribed;
and when done, and by what authority; whether their governors commissions, at
any time, particularized and determined to what part of the limits of the said
duke's grant their jurisdiction should extend, more than another, or to the
whole; or, whether any royal edict or proclamation, had ever thus given them
such predicated limits of jurisdiction: this is absolutely necessary for them
to do, in support of their title to the lands in question. And furthermore, it
is requisite for them to demonstrate that those lands were actually contained
in such their former limits of jurisdiction: but, if the government of New York
from royal determination, cannot extend jurisdiction to any one part of the
descriptive limits of the grant aforesaid, more than to another; then, on this
hypothesis, their jurisdiction includes the whole limits contained in the
grant, or none at all; that it includes the whole, will not be pretended, and
that any party, as predicated on them limits, cannot be made to appear: but on
the contrary, it appears his majesty and council had no reference to any part
of the limits of this grant, in determining the boundaries of the jurisdiction
of New York in 1764, as may appear from the royal order itself, an extract of
which is as follows: His majesty with the advice of his privy council, does
order and declare, That the west banks of the river Connecticut, from whence it
enters the province of the Massachusetts Bay, as far north as the forty-fifth
degree of northern latitude, to be the boundary between the said two provinces
-- that parrallel of latitude is also established it is north boundary. The
source of Connecticut-river is supposed to be something to the northward of
latitude forty-five, and comes much from the north-east, a considerable
distance after it passes that latitude; but it is notorious, that the source of
Hudson's river is far south of it; so that by comparing the descriptive limits
of the duke of York's grant, with those expressed in the royal order, they will
be found to be materially different. The limit of that part of the duke's grant
which respects the present arguments, is in the words following: Together also
with the said river called Hudson's river, and all the lands from the west side
of Connecticut-river to the east side of Delaware-bay; which limit in any
possible construction of it, can include but part of the disputed premises,
(which said premises extend and are bounded on the forty-fifth degree of north
latitude,) as will more fully appear in a further discussion of that line. But,

FIRST, it is manifest that the king and privy council, in determining the
extent of the jurisdiction of the province of New York, did not proceed upon
the idea of that government's having any antecedent right of jurisdiction to
those lands. Had that been the case, the royal order had been predicated on the
boundary lines of the duke's grant afaresaid, and could not have comprehended
any more land than from the west side of Connecticut-river to the east side of
Delaware-bay; and these bounds are so loose, vague, and indeterminate, that it
is altogether impossible to found a line of jurisdiction thereon, as will more
abundantly appear by the following observations on the descriptive limits
thereof, which may be seen at large in the fore part of this section.
Therefore, such part only as is necessary for the consideration of the
indeterminate bounds before spoken of, is here quoted; which, after describing
the situation of Long Island, and that it abuts upon the main land between the
two rivers there called or known by the several names of Connecticut and
Hudson's river, begins the description under consideration, together with the
said river called Hudson's river. Observe, that as the description of this
river is not immediately connected with any foregoing or following discriptions
in said grant; nothing more can possibly be included in it, but a description
of the river only, exclusive of one foot of land on either side. The second
description and all the land from the west side of Connecticut-river to the
east side of Delaware-bay. The best mathematition on earth cannot ascertain
these limits, except upon arbitrary principles, as there can be no prefixed
place on Connecticut-river where to erect the first bounds; and as to any
particular place on the "east side of Delaware-bay," where to erect a second,
is altogether undetermined in this description: But, inasmuch as it includes
all the land from the west side of Connecticut-river, etc. there is a little
better foundation to establish the first bounds than the second. It seems in
order to include all as aforesaid, it would be necessary to extend either to
the head of the river, or to the most northerly extention of the whole stream,
to make the first bounds; and provided this imaginary bounds should extend
north of the forty-fifth degree of northern latitude, it would so far exceed
the settlement of the line in 1764. Be this as it will, the most northerly part
of the river, which would most likely be the head, would be the most favorable
on the part of New York, for to establish a first bounds, and from thence to
extend a straight line to some place on the east side of Delaware-bay; this is
something of a natural construction, on the indeterminate descriptive limits
aforesaid, without exploring Connecticut-river, which in this case is
necessary. And, first, in tracing said river to its source, it is found toward
it is extremity, to come much out of the north-east. This being the case, a
straight line from its head to Delaware-bay, would cross said river and include
a large tract of land on the east side, and perhaps cross the river sundry
times; the consequences may be drawn thus, that where the line may be supposed
to cross the last time ought to be the first real north boundary, of the
"ancient and indisputable" limit of jurisdiction of New York. For, if the
bounds at the head of the river before spoken of, be so established, it would
include considerable land on the east side of the river, within the old
boundary of New York, which is contrary to any idea to be gained from the
discriptive limit aforesaid, viz. and all the land from the west side of
Connecticut-river, etc. Still it may be queried whether there may not be
another proposed first boundary better purporting with the description of and
all the land from the west side of Connecticut-river to the east side of
Delaware-bay, between the head of the river, and the place where the imaginary
line was supposed to pass? To this it may be answered, that a place between
these two, so far up the river as in tracing a straight line from thence, to
Delaware-bay, would not cross the river, may better agree with the above
description: Still, from none of these imagined lines, from the different
imagined bounds, or from any other projected, possible, first bounds, can such
a straight line be ascertained, till the place for the south-western boundary
on the "east side of Delaware-bay" be established? And the vagueness of the
descriptive limit is so great, that it cannot be determined whether that bounds
shall be at the northern extremity of the east side of Delaware-bay, or at the
southern, where it communicates with the main ocean, or at any other
intermediate place between these two: so, that from the uncertainty of the
second bounds, it is impossible to establish the first, so as exactly to
include "all the land from the west side of the said river to the east side of
said bay," and no more. And,

THUS it is demonstrated from the vagueness, uncertainty and obsoleteness of
the discriptive limits of the grant to the duke of York, before quoted at
large; that it is in the nature of things absolutely impossible to ascertain
it. From hence follows a second necessary inference, viz. That it is equally
impossible and contradictory, that governmental jurisdiction should be
predicated thereon; for an ideal uncertain jurisdiction, in its own nature
incapable to be determined, is in reality none at all. And from hence follows a
third inference which determines the sequel of the argument on the subject of
property, concerning the lands in question, to be in favor of the claimants
under New Hampshire: For, it is in the last place equally contradictory and
impossible, as in the case of the absurdity of ascertaining the limits of the
pretended "ancient" jurisdiction of New York, predicating it on vague and
undeterminate boundaries, that, that government should predicate their right to
the fee of lands, by them thus unascertainable; for as uncertainty and natural
impossibility of a jurisdiction's being rendered determinate makes it in
reality to be none at all; so the idea of property, predicated thereon is
equally impertinent. True it is, by the royal determination in 1764, the east
line of New York extended to the west banks of Connecticut-river. Which may be
foundation for conjecture, that that limit might have reference to a
description in the duke's grant aforesaid, "and all the lands from the west
side of Connecticut-river," etc. Yet when the representation made by lieut.
governor Colden, to his majesty in council, as mentioned in this pamphlet,
under the head of the narrative, etc. comes to be considered, it will reflect
light on this point. The arguments made use of in the said representation were
those of convenience and advantage to the settlers on those lands to be in the
government of New York: and, that the west banks of Connecticut-river was a
good and certain boundary," etc. These were undoubtedly the preponderating
motives of determining the west banks of Connecticut-river to be the east
boundary of New York, and such arguments are utterly inconsistant with the
notion of an "ancient indisputable right" of jurisdiction.

THERE is still another consideration which may be of moment in the observation
of this, so trumpt up, "ANCIENT RIGHT OF JURISDICTION" of the province of
New York, to the lands in contest: If it be admitted a line should be drawn
from the most northerly part of Connecticut-river to the most northern
extremity of Delaware-bay; still, it is by no means probable such line would
include more than one half (if so much) of the lands in dispute so far as may
be judged from the latitude and longitude of the respective objects: for
considering the course of Connecticut-river, which is nearly from north to
south, except toward its extremity; and the sea coast, from the river's mouth,
together with Delaware-bay, forming also an indened line, to the south of west;
the land included in these limits, by a line drawn from Connecticut-river to
Delaware-bay as aforesaid, would (excepting the small promontory formed by the
mouth of the bay and the ocean) lie in the figure of an obtuse angled triangle;
and the course of the said line from the river to the bay, according to occular
survey, would be from the northeast a southwesterly direction: which very badly
comports with the present north and westerly exercise of jurisdiction of the
government of New York, at Crown-Point, Detroit, etc. -- It may here well be
observed, the settlers under New Hampshire seem to be in a critical situation;
every arbitrary measure under the present administration of the government of
New York, is excercised against them; and provided they flee to the eastward to
procure inheritances, there they are fore-closed, the descriptive limits of the
said ancient jurisdiction covers them, (to wit) the countries of St. Croix,
Pemaquid, Kenebeque, Nantucket, Martin's Vineyard, etc. -- Yet there is another
large unknown country to the west and northwest, which has been but partly
explored; and provided these people, instead of fleeing, to the eastward,
should turn their course to those countries; there, it is indisputable but that
New York would encircle them with another odd description of domain contained
in their governor's commissions, i. e. A. B. captain general governor and
commander in chief in and over the province of New York, next follows the
description hinted and the territories depending thereon, in America.

FROM the foregoing descriptions of the government of New York, it appears they
lay claim to so extensive a domain three different ways, or have three
different modes or modifications in comprehending and engrossing their
progressive limits. As,

1stly. THE Province of New York which falls short of and terminates
considerably south of the city of Albany.

2dly. "THE territories depending thereon in America." These territories
comprehending such plantations, on extra-provincial land, as are and have been
carried on adjoining to the province till its territories, are at present
extended to Detroit, and the neighborhood thereof, etc.

3dly. The limits of the duke of York's grant, and inasmuch as the grantees and
settlers on the lands in dispute, hold their title under New Hampshire, and
that government had for several years exercised their jurisdiction over those
lands, even till 1764. -- Therefore in this case the government of New York
could not extend their territorial sort of jurisdiction over the premises; for
such sort of jurisdiction might be challenged on the part of New Hampshire (if
it should be admited at that time said premises were extra-provincial lands)
and that with far the most propriety. Inasmuch as that government had granted
the land and began settlements thereon. Add to this the following clause in
governor Wentworth's commission, which they viewed to be of great weight in
this case, which, after describing the former limits of New Hampshire, and from
thence extending west till it meets with his majesty's other governments. Add
to this also, the reasons held forth in the chain of arguments, contained in
the three first sections; all which were too potent for the New York
territorial sort of dominion to frustrate. At that juncture, therefore, the
lawyers, land-jobbers, politicians, etc. planed out the aforesaid three modes
of jurisdiction predicating it on the descriptive limits of the grant to the
duke of York. And on this new modled plan breathed an air of "ANCIENT AND
INDISPUTABLE RIGHT OF" jurisdiction, and consequently to the fee of the lands
in contest.

THE first intimation that ever saluted the ears of the public, asserting it
to be the ancient right of the colony of New York, to extend to
Connecticut-river as its eastern boundary, was discoverd from a proclamation
given under the hand of William Tryon, Esquire governor of the province of
New York, etc. and dated the 11th day of December, 1771. His proclamation
begins after the following manner: Whereas it is the ancient and incontestble
right of this colony to extend to Connecticut-river, as its eastern boundary.

THIS was drawing a positive conclusion from fictitious, and till that time,
unheard of premises; and rather influenced people in the several governments,
to purchase and settle under New Hampshire, than diswade therefrom; for common
fame and common sense, were a barrier against the belief of this New York
doctrine, which from the time of the royal adjudication in 1764, was by the
proclamation aforesaid, antidated to "ancient." That this doctrine till then,
was incontested, is thought to be true; for it had but peept to public
consideration, and has ever since been contested.

SHOULD this their new hypothesis be admitted; yet, as has been before
observed, these limits could include but part of said lands, according to the
best judgment that can be formed without an actual and accurate survey of the
descriptive limits of said grant; which if the New-Yorkers can do and fairly
demonstrate, to any able mathematicians, and competant and impartial judges,
that they have rightly ascertained those limits, it is engaged on the part of
the claimants under New Hampshire, that they shall yield up to the land-jobbers
of New York, their lands and labors: an object which undoubtedly would be
grateful and pleasing to them; and which they have many years been in pursuit
of, and have hitherto had the mortification to be baffled. It is verily
incumbant on the government of New York, in order to found title to those land
on this new scheme.

FIRSTLY, to ascertain the limits of their imaginary bounds. This the claimants
under New Hampshire, will expect completed, or hear no more of those "ANCIENT
AND INCONTESTIBLE" boundaries of New York.

SECTION, V.
THE general assembly of the colony of New York, in their state of the right of
that colony, etc. page 3d, wave the right of the English by first discovery, as
being foreign to their purpose, and that the Dutch possessions are only
material to be supported; and claim no further right by way of the Dutch, but
priority of possession. Yet in the same page inform, when the first war between
England and Holland became inevitable, king Charles the second, by letters
patent dated the 12th day of March 1663-4, granted to his brother the duke of
York the tracts of country, which comprehend New York. To render this gift
effectual, before the war was proclaimed, a fleet and land forces were sent out
to remove the Dutch and put the duke in possession. -- The circumstancies that
attended the making this grant, and sending the armament to render it
effectual, is a sufficient reason to determine that the government at home, at
that time, viewed the Dutch settlement as an intrusion, and possession (which
is all they rely on) gained by trespass, in legal construction, is no
possession at all. That the English had prior right to all the countries from
forty to forty-eight degrees of north latitude, by virtue not only of discovery
by Sebastian Cabot and others, but by being in actual possession of several
parts of the premises, is matters too well known to be disputed.

WHETHER there was real seisin in the crown or not at the time of granting
these countries, is not truly in question; since every grant so made is
incontestibly valid against the king, his heirs and successors; and the colony
of New York being entirely dependant on the crown of Great Britain for their
title; priority of charter is therefore necessary to be determined.

THE grant of king James the first to the council of Plymouth, bearing date at
Westminster, the 13th day of November, in the eighteenth year or his reign,
comprehends all the lands, islands, etc. from forty to forty-eight degrees of
north latitude, through the main land from sea to sea. "On the 19th day of
March 1628, the council of Plymouth under their common seal, did grant to sir
Henry Roswell, sir John Young, and others, their heirs and associates for ever,
all that part of America, lying between the great river there, commonly called
Monomack, alias Merimack and Charles river, within the space of three miles to
the northward of the same river, called Monomack, alias Merimack, or to the
northward of any or every part thereof, and in length and longitude of and
within all the breadth aforesaid, throughout the main lands there, from the
Atlantic or western sea or ocean on the east part, to the South sea on the west
part."

THIS deed of sale at the suit of the grantees, with a charter of
incorporation, was granted and confirmed by king CHARLES the first, the 4th day
of March 1629, wherein the limits are exactly the same with those in the
Plymouth conveyance; and the proviso of CHARLES, that the actual settlement of
the subjects of other christian states to determine the extent, the same as was
the proviso in James's grant to the Plymouth company.

THIS same charter of incorporation was adjudged void in the high court of
chancery of England in 1684; from which the assembly of New York in their
state, etc. page 5th, take occasion to say the title of that colony now solely
depends on their new charter of 1691. Nevertheless, the right of soil to all
and every part of the deed of sale aforesaid, remained indefeasible; for, only
animadvert back to the Plymouth conveyance, and observe, that the right in fee,
was by them conveyed to the grantees; and trace it to king CHARLES'S charter of
incorporation, which only vested the grantees with powers of government. Though
it is true, this charter contains all the formality necessary in the conveyance
of the fee; yet is, so far as respects the fee, no more than a duplicate of
what was before granted, which neither adds nor deminisheth; and it is easy to
see, that the court of chancery could not vacate or make void, at most, any
thing more than those incorporate privileges; and likewise as easily
discernable that nothing more was attempted. Thus the colony of the
Massachusetts still hold their right in fee, by conveyance from king JAMES to
the council of Plymouth, who were their grantors.

IN the next place it may be observed, that in 1691 the privileges of
incorporation were restored; though our authors, in their state etc. endeavor to
curtail the colony of the Massachusetts, by construing their last charter to
extend no further west than the east limit of the colony of Connecticut. Their
words are these, "these words (as far as) being in the case of the grant of the
crown on the suit of the party, in legal construction, carry the
Massachusetts Bay colony no farther westward than till it meets the colony of
Connecticut, and not to Connecticut-river, and much less to the westward of
it." Be these bold assertions as they will, and provided it be here admitted,
for argument sake, that the powers of jurisdiction of the province of the
Massachusetts Bay be ever so much curtailed, yet one proposition we can verily
be assured of viz. That it is not in the power of king or chancery to curtail
or deprive them of their property.

IT is to be further observed, that however our authors may criticize upon the
gramatical or legal construction of selected words or phrases; yet, a little
attention to the following real facts, will clearly point out the inconsistency
of such sophisms.

FIRSTLY, Connecticut charter, granted by king CHARLES the second, the 23d day
of April 1662, was bounded and extended in length, by and with the
Massachusetts first charter, granted by king CHARLES the first, the 4th day of
March 1629, which incontestibly extended agreeable with the aforesaid
discriptive limits of the deed of sale from the council of Plymouth, to sir
Henry Roswell, sir John Young, etc. and extended through the main land in
longitude to the south sea on the west part.

THIS charter, as above, being nullified in the high court of chancery of
England in 1684, and restored again in 1691, wherein the west extent of limit
is predicated by that of Connecticut, and this west limit of Connecticut being
predicated by the old charter of the Massachusetts Bay, and expressly extending
in longitude to the South sea on the west part, exactly extends the present
charter of the Massachusetts Bay, with its powers of jurisdiction to all, and
every part of the limits of the old nulled charter. This is the natural and
legal sense of the present charter of the colony of the Massachusetts Bay,
predicated on undeniable facts.

IN the next place it is necessary to consider the charter of Connecticut, which
our authors inform should not extend west of Connecticut-river, in the words
following: This being a crown grant on the suit and petition of the grantees,
is to be taken most beneficially for the king. The descriptive words, and the
intention of the grant, will in legal construction be satisfied by giving the
colony the same length as the Massachusetts Bay; and it is plain both from the
recital and the saving clause in the Plymouth patent, on which the
Massachusett's title was founded, that the latter could not in any sense,
extend to the westward of Connecticut-river. As this their assertion is founded
on the hipothesis of Connecticut charter's being predicated on that of the
Massachusett's, and therefore the arguments before exhibited on that head, are
equally conclusive for the establishing the western extent of Connecticut,
nothing more is necessary for that purpose, but a recital of the discriptive
words of their charter, granted subsequent to their purchase from the council
of Plymouth by king CHARLES the second, the 23d day of April, 1662, bounded on
the east by Narraganset-river, commonly called Narraganset-bay, where the said
river falls into the sea; and on the north by the line of the Massachusetts
plantation; and on the sea, and in longitude as the line of the Massachusetts
colony, running from east to west: that is to say, from the said
Narraganset-bay on the east, to the South sea on the west part. Thus it appears
and only by the demonstrations aforesaid, but from the express words of the
descriptive limits of the charter itself, which cannot admit of a double
meaning, (curious as our authors be in the art of playing with words, they have
not attempted to obviate their literal meaning,) that it is the unquestionable
right of the colony of Connecticut to extend its western boundary to the South
sea on the "west part;" and in this that colony agree, who are now challenging
their right in fee to those limits, and actually making plantation, as at
Susquebannah, etc.

BY this time, undoubtedly queries will arise in the mind of the reader, what
will become of the grant to the duke of York, if the Massachusett's and
Connecticut colonies extend "to the South sea on the west part?" The following
intelligence from our authors will introduce an answer to this query; who,
after describing said grant further inform, in page 3d of the state, etc. That
a fleet and land forces were sent to remove the Dutch, and put the duke in
possession. Accordingly, on the 27th day of August 1664, the Dutch governor
Stuyvesant, surrendered by capitulation, all the countries the Dutch then
possessed, to king CHARLES the second; when among other terms it was
stipulated, that all the people shall remain free denizens, and shall enjoy
their lands, houses, and goods, wheresoever they are within this country, and
dispose of them as they please. Thus, by conquest, the king became revested
with his right to the lands conquered: for, as the king had antecedently
disposed of the estate the crown was possessed of in these countries, to the
colonies of Connecticut and the Massachusetts Bay; therefore, his right now
could not extend any further than the actual conquest, which, in legal
construction, must be satisfied with, and can extend no further than the actual
possessions described in the forementioned capitulation. A further information
is in page 4th, To remove any doubt of the validity of the dukes title, either
from the want of seisin in the crown when it originated, or on account of the
intermediate conquest by the Dutch, it was confirmed to his royal highness by
further letters patent, dated the 29th day of June, 1674. That there was want
of seisin in the crown at the time of first granting, is incontestible; for, as
above said, the king by antecedent grants had divested the crown of its right,
and by this conquest became revested: So that from this, occasion will be taken
to say, that in fact the province of New York was originally sounded on
conquest, and the limits of it, as before mentioned, circumscribed by the Dutch
possessions pointed out in the terms of capitulation. However unfavorable this
conclusion may be thought on the part of New York, yet, as the crown had prior
to either of the duke's grants, disposed of its right to the Massachusetts and
Connecticut colonies -- if it was not thus founded on conquest, it has no
foundation at all; and its having any place for existence, is but an "intrusion
on the rights" of those other colonies. Furthermore, it is mysterious and
contradictory, admitting that that government was thus founded, to suppose the
duke could be lord proprietor; inasmuch as by the conditions of capitulation,
the fee then acquired to the crown, passed to the Dutch inhabitants, who then
became English subjects.

THOUGH this tract of land now in contest, was contained in the original grant
to the council of Plymouth, yet as they never made any conveyance of it,
therefore it reverted to the crown on the surrender of that grant, the 7th day
of June, 1635. From which it may be objected, on the part of New York, that the
above conciseness in the circumscription of the boundaries of their colony is
too great; for, that the grant to the duke must hold good where the crown, at
the time of granting, was vested with a right to the lands granted. In answer,
it has been argued in the preceding section, that it is very uncertain whether
the limits of the duke of York's grant included this tract of land, or if any,
how great a part; and that the limits of said grant could not be ascertained --
and that governmental jurisdiction, and property could not be predicated on
such obsolete and uncertain bounds. It was also demonstrated in the first
section, and will be further observed in this, that the duke of York's grant
reverted to the crown, and that the landholders in the government of New York
hold under the crown, and that, if it did not revert to the crown, the fee is
still in the duke, his heirs and assigns, and no landholders in the government
are vested with the fee of the lands they possess, etc. This argument and
conclusion is founded on the New York hypothesis, exclusive of the herein
mentioned article in the Dutch capitulation.
It would be too tedious as well as needless to recite the arguments that have
been offered in the three first sections, which is humbly conceived are
abundantly sufficient to answer the aforesaid objection, and fairly demonstrate
priority of title to be in favor of New Hampshire; to which the courteous reader
is referred for a consideration.

As has been before observed, the design of the duke of York's grant was to
include the Dutch possessions; or in other words, that it never was valid any
further than to such possession, which by conquest, reverted to the crown, and
no farther than these limits, to interfere with the charrer colonies of the
Massachusetts and Connecticut. And as a twenty miles line to the eastward from
Hudson's river would include the most eastern extent of the aforementioned
possessions, the reason why such a line was agreed to as the boundary between
the colonies of Connecticut and New York: But, as these possessions to the
northward of Connecticut, fell far short of this twenty mile line, or were so
inconsiderable and uncertain as not to come within the capitulation reserve;
therefore the Massachusetts colony contended with New York for a further
western extent than twenty miles east from Hudson's river; but the restless
government of New York, ever uneasy within its own boundaries, presumed
unrelenting, to intrude on, and contesting for the just rights of the
Massachusetts, by extending their patents far to the eastward of twenty miles
from Hudson's river; in consequence of which the greatest disturbances have
arisen between the inhabitants of the respective colonies, and sundry of the
conflicts so severe, that human blood spilt in the contest redened the hands of
the intruders; but finally a boundary line was agreed to by the respective
governments in 1773, at a twenty miles distance from Hudson's river, which has
since been ratified by his majesty.

IN the state of the right, etc. page 4th, is the most extraordinary account of
alienation of property that is to be found in the annals of history. The duke
continued proprietor and chief governor of this province till he ascended the
throne, when his right merged in the royal authority, on his abdication it
passed to king William, his successor, as lord proprietor and royal sovereign.
That upon the duke's accession to the throne his right of government merged in
the royal authority will not be denied; but, that his right in fee consequently
passed to king William as his successor, wants greater proof than a bare
assertion; our authors should have explained this matter; it is taken for
granted they will not pretend that king William was heir at law to the duke's
estate, and they mention no conveyance from the duke to the king, but say the
"duke's right merged in the royal authority;" to suppose it is possible that
right should pass to king William, as lord proprietor, is so great an absurdity
that it wants a name.

In the same page they further inform, that in the duke of York's commissions
to his several lieutenant governors Major Edmond Andross, on the first day of
July 1674, and Colonel Thomas Dongan on the 30th day of September 1682, among
other description of the boundaries of this province are expressly comprehended
all the land from the west side of Connecticut-river to the east side of
Delaware-bay. Note, those commissions were nom the duke before he ascended the
throne; undoubtedly in his commissions to his lieutenant Governors, he had
reference to the limits of his grant, to determine their boundaries: but after
his abdication, and the accession of king William and queen Mary, we find a
commission from their majesty's to Henry Slaughter, to be materially different.
King William and queen Mary, by their commission, dated the fourth day of
January, in the first year of their reign, appointed Henry Slaughter, to be
governor of the province of New York, and the territories depending thereon in
America. The same assembly (styled our authors) further inform, that in all
subsequent acts and commissions this colony is described by the same words, the
province of New York, and the territories depending thereon in America. No
arguments need be used to prove, for it is self-evident, their majesty's had
some different idea of the province of New York, than what had been before
described by the duke's commissions to his lieutenant governors, and a little
attention to the original state of that government, will explain that
difference. Our authors further inform, page 17th, The Ransselaer family are
not indebted to the government of New York for their estate, they continue to
enjoy it by an act of justice and not of favor; it was originally a Dutch
colony of itself, granted to their ancestors by the Dutch West India company,
who held it as a part of New-Netherlands, under the states general. On the
surrender in 1664, their rights were secured to them in common with the rest of
the inhabitants, by the beforementioned article of capitulation granted on the
surrender of the country, by Col. Nichols, the commander in chief under the
crown, and lieut, governor under the duke: the faith of government was pledged
for their security, and their estates were confirmed under the seal of this
colony in the year 1685, not by mere act of the provincial governor and
council, but by an express order of king James the second. They further inform
page 5th, so long ago as the year 1685, king James the second, by letters
patent under that seal granted to the Ranssclaer family the manor
Renselaerwyck, extended from Hudson's river both on the east and west sides
twenty-four miles. This manor includes the city of Albany, and extends near
twenty miles to the southward of it; south of which terminates the province of
New York, expressed in their governor's commissions, so that this manor is
included in their second description of domain, viz. the territories depending
thereon, and exclusive of this clause in the commissions, antecedent to the
forementioned determination in 1764, the governors of New York could not
exercise jurisdiction even in the manor of Renselaerwyck, and moth less to the
northward of it, as settlements which lay contiguous to those limits seemed
necessarily to fall under the jurisdiction of that government. Thus their
territorial sort of dominion has been extended, without any prescription or
limitation, agreeable to the observation of their celebrated judge Smith, who,
speaking of that government, said it might well be accounted unlimitted.

IT may be further offered in objection on the part of New York, that allowing
the foregoing arguments relative to the territories, and that Renselaerwyck
was, before the era of the aforesaid determination, in fact annexed to the
government by the territorial clause in the governor's commissions; yet,
nevertheless the duke's grant must be valid to the northward of that manor, to
all the lands it originally covered. This cannot operate in favor of New York,
for, in addition to what has been before argued to this purpose, the reader is
desired to observe, that king James the second, who was this same duke of York,
abdicated the throne in 1688, and his estate reverted to the crown of England,
and this grant became vested in the crown, the same as though the duke or his
grant had never had an existance. -- Nor have any of their governor's
commissions, from Henry Slaughter, the first governor appointed by king William
and queen Mary, down to this present era, ever been predicated on, or had the
least reference to the limits of that grant.

SECTION VI.
THE government of New York make the greatest outcry against her sister
colonies, taxing them with intrusion, violence and encroachment; and at the
same time, are flagrantly more guilty of the same avaricious, unjust, and
hostile wickedness than all the rest of the English America. Their capricious
land jobbers have a surprising faculty in carrying their points; at the same
time they are encroaching upon their neighbors, provided they meet with
opposition, they will cry out in the most exagerating exclamations, violence,
riot, treason, etc. and at the same time, not hesitate to trample upon his
majesty's authority, (the particulars of which may be seen in the proceeding
narrative.) They are great advocates for law, order, and good government; these
are their borns of iron, and with them do they push the poor and needy, when
they get them into their net. Their way is as the way of a serpent upon a rock,
and it is difficult to trace their footsteps: They complain of the lawless,
factious, and riotous conduct of the settlers under New Hampshire; yet know,
that they themselves are the moving cause of all the disturbances they complain
of. It is incredible to suppose a collection of farmers exposed to the
perpetual fatigues and laborious toil of cultivating a wilderness country,
should under a just administration of law, become "a confederacy of
insurgents." Was it only that natural presumption being so much in favor of
those inhabitants, it is humbly conceived, that all wise and unprejudiced
persons will, at least suspend their judgments concerning them, till the
New-Yorkers can clearly evince, that these people are in reality, without
cause, tumultuous, disorderly, etc. And, inasmuch as the facts of this
controversy is so fully set forth in this treatise, the reader is thereto
referred for a clearer exhibition.

OUR authors' in order to maintain their claim to the lands in contest, and if
possible, to include it within one of the descriptive limits of the grant to
duke of York, tell us many strange things about the colonies of Connecticut and
the Massachusetts: that Connecticut "in legal construction" should not have
extended to the westward of Connecticut-river; and that their settlements west
of that river were an intrusion on the right of the colony of New York; yet,
nevertheless for peace sake, and rather than contest with "a powerful
neighbor," they settled with that colony at twenty miles distance from
Hudson's river.

THEY further inform, that the Massachusetts claim stands by no means in so
respectable a light as that of Connecticut, and in legal construction, should
extend no further westward than till it meets the colony of Connecticut, and
not to Connecticut-river, and much less to the westward of it. Our authors
being men of great learning and sagacity, soon extended their ancient right of
jurisdiction over such part of the Massachusetts colony as lay to the westward
from Connecticut-river, and this their scheme in stopping the western extension
of that colony where it meets Connecticut, may be reckoned as one among the
greatest of their political achievements. "And it is worthy a remark," that
had the Massachusetts colony extended west to the South sea, it could not have
met Connecticut, but must have extended parallel with it, in the same direction.

To give this pleasing scheme some kind of color, they argue the nullity of
the Massachusetts first charter, and introduce the duke of York's grant as the
oldest title, page 5th, the Massachtsetts charter was vacated, and the title of
that colony now solely depends on their charter of 1691.

YET they allow, that that colony obtained the right of soil from the council
of Plymouth, and that the charter of king Charles dated the 4th day of March
1628-9, This is the charter spoken of as vacated, which was done as has been
before largely treated of in 1684.
vested them with powers of government, (it is needless to animadvert on these
strange accounts) however, after they have charmed their imaginations with the
fruitless idea of extending their ancient tight to all that part of the Bay
province west of Connecticut-river, they complain bitterly of the encroachments
of the Massachusetts, page 8th. Under circumstances so favorable to the rights
of this colony, we have great reason to complain of the unwarrantable
encroachments under the authority of the government of the Massachusetts Bay,
by which a valuable tract extending from Connecticut-river, within twenty miles
of Hudson's river, has been wrested from us.

THEIR conduct seems the more inexcusable, as they must have known that such
encroachments were not only disrespectful to his majesty's authority, and big
with great mischiefs and disorders, but were highly injurious to private
property, great part of these lands having anciently been granted to his
majesty's subjects under the great seal of this colony.

THEN they proceed to recite their old grants, which they tell us cover the
country the whole breadth of the Massachusett's claim: The manor of
Renselacrwyck, granted in 1685, and extending twenty-four miles each side from
Hudson's river; and Westonhook, in 1705, which extends about thirty miles from
Hudson's river; and Hoosick, in 1685, which extends about thirty miles from the
river. It seems to have been a political and universal principle with the
government of New York, to begin their patents within the twenty mile line, and
extend them eastward of it, that by this means they might have opportunity to
encroach on, and jockey their neighboring colonies more or less, out of their
lands, as subsequent policy, intriegue and power, would renpracticable.

THAT government, thus extended their patent into Connecticut, one in
particular, into the township of Salisbury; and it has ever been their practice
to wrangle till they find by experience, that neither by sophistry, law, or
hostility, they can maintain their exorbitant claims, and then capitulate on as
good terms as they can; and conclude with branding their competitors with
dishonesty, encroachment and many hard names, and don't scruple to impeach
their governmental authority, (as in the case just recited of the
Massachusetts Bay) with being disrespectful to his majesty's authority, and
guilty of great mischiefs and disorders; although the authority of their own
government, by their unjust, avaricious encroachments on the Massachusetts even
to Conuecticut-river, laid the foundation of those disorders, and they might
have added bloodshed; yet their assembly have the impudence to palm it all
upon the authority of the Massachusetts.

THE claimants under NewHampshire are so happy as to be almost exempted from
any New York claims, by patents from that government prior to their's; the
aforesaid Hoosick and Wallumscock patents being the only ones of this nature,
the former includes about one quarter of the township of Pownal, on which part
were about four settlers, when it was granted by New Hampshire. This township
is bounded soucherly by the north line of the Massachusetts Bay, and extends
west as far as the Connecticut and Massachusetts colonies; the latter, i. e.
Wallumscock patent, was granted under the common seal of the province of
New York, the 15th day of June 1739. This patent is said to interfere with the
township of Bennington, and it is matter of dispute, whether in its first
location, it included more than about thirty or forty acres within that town,
though it seems the patent by its descriptive limits, extends further into the
town, and the patentees produce a map corresponding with those limits. This
monument is well known by the Bennington people, and is on the western edge of
the town; and there has never been a discovery of any lines of the survey of
that location to the eastward of this monument. The many circumstances of this
nature, amount to almost a certainty, that the patentees never made any actual
location further interfering with Bennington, than as aforesaid;
notwithstanding, as they have planned their patent, it includes about one
eighth part of the town; which lands are exceeding good in nature, and are
settled wholly underthe New Hampshire title, by industrious farmers, who form a
wilderness state, have cultivated and brought the most of it under good
improvements, with many valuable houses, barns and orchards; some of them
annually mowing at least eighty tons of hay, and raise other produce of the
country in proportion. Not the least improvements of possessions were ever made
in that town, except by these inhabitants; neither had they the least knowledge
of a pretense of any New York patents extending there till several years after
they had settled the land. As has been before observed, there were about four
settlers on that part of Hoosick patent, included in the township of Pownal,
when it was granted; and if the author has a right information, there has not
been any more settlements made under the New York title since, though there had
sundry families settled on the premises included as aforesaid, under the
New Hampshire title.

As the state and circumstances of such part of the townships aforesaid as are
included in the old patents, are materially different in many respects, from
the circumstances of the New Hampshire grants in general; it will therefore be
necessary that this matter have a particular consideration; and that none of
the aforesaid arguments be considered in this case but what are truly
applicable; and in this review of the case, it will be admitted, that the old
Wallumscock patent includes such part of Bennington as the plan the patentees
exhibit does contain.

IT is taken for granted that the royal determination of the boundary line in
1764 could not extend the government of New York antecedent to the date of that
order, which was a manifestation of royal power, and which was the sole cause
of that extention; therefore, at the time the government of New York granted
the forementioned old patents, they could have no greater authority for so
doing than what they were then in fact possessed of: It remains therefore to be
considered, whether the patents from the government of New York are valid or
not, so far as they interfere with the townships of Bennington and Pownal. And
firstly, it has been proved that the province of New York as described in their
governor's commissions, does not extend so far north as the city of Albany;
therefore the northern tracts of country which these patents of Hoosick and
Wallumscock cover, must be considered as belonging to their second sort of
domain, (to wit) the territories. It has also been shown, that these
territories are not circumscribed to any particular limity, but that they were
originally meant to include some ancient grants that were independent of the
province and adjoining settlements, on extra-provincial lands: probably that
government may have authority to grant land to the west and north-west, where
it is indisputably unappropriated, and where the claim of none other government
could interfere: but it will be insisted upon, on the part of the New Hampshire
settlers, which are included in the aforesaid old patents, that the government
of New York had no right to extend any of their patents to the castward of a
line equivalent to that which consticutes the bounds between New York and the
colony of Connecticut and Massachusetts. This limit was ever thought by the
people in general of the colony of New York, as well as those of the adjacent
colonies, to be the eastern boundary of New York, until the era of the late
determination, which extended it to the river Connecticut: and laboring men
that support the world of mankind, are obliged to form their judgments of the
jurisdiction of governments by the common received opinions of mankind they are
conversant with; and even admitting they make an erroneous judgment, yet, in
the present case, as the lands were of but little value, exclusive of their
toil and cultivation; and as the farmers in reality uphold the state, it is
therefore not only incumbent on the laws, but on the policy of the state to
defend them in cases of this nature -- it must be admitted that where the
limits of governments are clearly ascertained and notoriously known, that a
farmer trespassing in this manner on another's property, must bear the loss.
But, provided a country of people be generally under a deception as to matters
of jurisdiction, and purchase land and make great improvements, and all on a
mistaken footing; men in such circumstances should be considered in the most
favorable light. For, as not only individuals, but the country about them were
in the same manner deceived, and therefore, at the time of purchasing and
settlement, they were utterly destitute of the means of knowledge; yet,
however, it is not conceded to, that those farmers on whose account the present
arguments are exhibitted, are under a deception about this matter; for of all
sorts of governmental jurisdiction, the New York territorial was the weakest,
loosest and most vague; it was rather occasional and political, than positive;
and in its own nature almost or quite incapable of being extended faster than
settlements were actually carried on, or at most the lands exposed to this
territorial jurisdiction, should not be patented faster than his majesty's
subjects are disposed forthwith to settle. The necessity of granting so fast
may be pleaded on account of order -- the policy of government may demand it;
otherwise an occasional jurisdiction would be altogether unable to abilitate
the government to make conveyance of the right in fee; although it is
indisputable that such a jurisdiction in matters of mere government, is to all
intents and purposes, equal to positive jurisdiction; but with respect to
having a power to convey the fee of lands, is matter of doubt: But thus much
with propriety may be inferred, that a title so weak and impotent should not
claim superiority over the least conception of title whatever; a mere
possession is of itself abundantly sufficient to maintain the right in the
possessor, and on a judicious trial at common law, (could such an one be had)
would be adjudged paramount to it.

THERE is another consideration that must totally extinguish and obliterate all
possible remaining idea of right, that the patentees of Wallumscock may be
supposed to have the said tract of land included in the limits of the township
of Bennington. Only advert to the date of that patent, which is on the 51th day
of June 1739, and compare it with the time of the commencement of the
settlement of Bennington, which was in the spring of the year 1760, and there
will be found to be twenty-one years from the date of this patent, to the
beginning of the settlement under New Hampshire; -- in all this time there was
not the least settlement or possession made in the premises; although the
express condition of the patent was, that it should be settled in three years
from the time of granting. Possibly in all that time the patentees might have
got some Dutch tenants on some western part of the patent, which, with the
government of New York, may be denominated a fulfillment of the condition of
settlement; many large tracts having been patented, some since and others
longer ago than Wallumscock, which are yet mostly a howling wilderness. This
practice of the government of New York in extending their patents to the
eastward of a twenty mile line from Hudson's river, has ever been considered
as a disingenious and designing policy in that government; thereby to lay a
foundation for intruding on the rights of their neighboring colonies; and has
been attended with many disagreeable consequences, as has been before observed.
And as that government have given up their exorbitant claims where they
interfered with the right of the Massachusetts, it would undoubtedly be their
wisest way to do the same with respect to such claims as interfere with the
right granted under the great seal of the province of New Hampshire; and
instead of treating the people that have settled those lands under that title,
as rioters and felons; to exercise that justice and humanity toward them,
which becomes governors to the governed.

IT remains still, that there be a summary view exhibitted, relative to the
rule of right which should take place with respect to the settlers under each
government, that are settled on such part of the forementioned patents as are
included in the townships of Bennington and Pownal. And although superiority of
title is in favor of those under New Hampshire; nevertheless, as the line of
jurisdiction in those times of granting and settlement, was not expressly
ascertained or known. Under these circumstances, it would not only be bad
state policy, but great inhumanity and injustice to the subject; for either the
government of New York or New Hampshire to dispossess them, inasmuch as both
challenge a legal right; therefore, either title sealed and confirmed with the
sweat and toil of the farmer is abundantly paramount to the other.

OUR authors, in their appendix, page 19th misrepresent the plea of the
Bennington people, in saying, To reason on their own principles, if equity
confirmed the claims of others under New Hampshire, on account of priority of
interfering grants, it would have afforded a fatal plea against the people of
Bennington; because they ought then themselves to have yielded up all the lands
which are covered by more ancient patents. The people of Bennington, or rather
the claimants under New Hampshire, have ever insisted, that at the time the
government of New Hampshire granted those lands they had good right so to do;
but that New York had not. This matter is illustrated and proved by many
arguments, and real facts in this treatise, particularly in the 2d and 3d
sections, to which the reader is referred. It Is true, provided the Bennington
people had no further considerations in the matter of title, but the priority
of interfering grants -- according to this method of arguing, they ought to
yield up such part of that town as interferes with Wallumscock patent; but the
consideration of settlement is undoubtedly, with the many other matters,
material to be considered, as argued aforesaid.

SECTION VII.
HAVING gone through with the remarks on the New York pamphlet, so far as
immediately respects the title of those lands which has been the principal
cause of the publication of this treatise -- shall nextly proceed to detect
some notorious and dishonorable misrepresentations contained in the pamphlet
aforesaid, particularly in the appendix. In this brief review, it would be too
tedious, as well as needless, to trace the authors through all their disguised
and fictitious representations, and intricate windings. Shall therefore pass on
with noteing such of their exhibitions as are the most cruelly fallacious;
among which the story of the extention of the township of Bennington, merely by
a vote of the inhabitants at a town meeting, to the westward from where it was
intended to be granted, and within seventeen miles of Hudson's river, is the
most flagrantly opprobrious. The story may be seen recorded in the 4th page of
their appendix. The grantees of the township of Bennington, discovered that the
situation of the tract according to the intention of the grant, would be both
inconvenient and unprofitable, as it included a large proportion of mountain;
and they therefore, by no better authority than a vote of town meeting,
presumed to extend it to the westward within seventeen miles of Hudson's river.

As this representation in all and every part is entirely groundless, and no
pretense of proof to support it, but is the mere calumnious aspersion of those
who have an implacable haired to the Bennington people, a positive denial of
the facts alleged would be sufficient refutation of those facts. Nevertheless
as the assembly of New York have made a principal engine of this infamous story
of their own creation, to destroy the good character of the people aforesaid,
by representing them to the government at home as the vilest of insurgents and
outlaws -- and inasmuch as the facts alleged are capable of disproof by
mathematical certainly, and sundry demonstrations of this sort having been
actually made, (though not with a view of disproving this calumny, as it had
not then been published,) by admensurations of the distance from Hudson's
river, to the westerly line of Bennington, all which agree that it is at least
twenty miles. Mr. Samuel Robinson for once made an actual mensuration of that
distance, and found it to be twenty miles and thirty-five chains; his affidavit
and Mr. Ebenezer Wood's together with an attested copy of the survey of that
town by Mr. Matthew Clesson, the surveyor, is thought expedient to transcribe
in its following order, which will abundantly serve to exculpate the people of
Bennington from that odium wherewith they have been branded. The author is
furthermore especially directed by the inhabitants of that town, to request the
government of New York to vindicate what their assembly have before alleged,
by another accurate mensuration of the distance from Hudson's river, to the
westerly line of Bennington; and further notify that assembly, that as
omnipotent as they may conceive themselves to be, they must nevertheless recede
from the calumny wherewith they have abused the inhabitants of that town, or
continue under the relentment of those inhabitants: Which take an additional
affront at the ill usage, inasmuch as our opponents tell us page 3d, it is to
be transmitted for the information of the government at home; and further
inform that it was to guard against the impositions which from the want of
candor, they were apprehensive the said settlers, who "spared no art or act of
violence," would by their agents deceive the government at home, and therefore
they had undertaken to transmit a narrative of those settler's proceedings, for
the information of that government. It seems the said assembly fully resolved
that the settlers and agents from the want of candor, would endeavor artfully
to deceive, etc. and that themselves were as fully resolved to over match them
in a game of that sort, being greater practitioners than peasants: but artful
as they are, they made a fatal mistake in advancing for matter of fact that
which in its own nature is incapable of proof, and what has been disproved by
evidence of a mathematical nature, and capable of further dis-proof by actual
mensuration. It is no ways mavelous that those gentlemen which govern in that
assembly have an antipathy against the inhabitants of Bennington, who have had
a great share in defeating them in obtaining possession of the country of the
New Hampshire grants. It seems they are not insensible of their merit, for, say
they, it is to this township erected by a charter in itself void, and so
greatly abused, that we are to ascribe all the opposition which has since been
given to the jurisdiction of New York. It is evident that these gentlemen have
an evil eye upon Bennington inhabitants; for, when they mention the opposition
to their jurisdiction, they take care to repeat the aforesaid groundless
aspersion, by adding these words, "erected by a charter in itself void, and so
greatly abused." They still proceed upon this their favorite topic, and draw
particular inferences from it to their advantage, for by changing the situation
of Bennington, it is made to comprehend a large part of Wallumscock, which was
granted under the seal of this province so early as the year 1739. This their
scandalous assertion is twice repeated in page 8th. One of the passages is as
follows: Mr. Ingersoll, one of the most eminent counsel of Connecticut, and Mr.
Sylvester of Albany, were concerned for the defendants. When these gentlemen
found Breakenridge's farm to be within seventeen miles of Hudson's river, and
greatly to the westward of what the government of New Hampshire had admitted to
be the jurisdiction of New York -- they told him that it was impossible to set
up any principle for his defense. Accordingly, when his case was brought to
trial, he re^u^ed to confess the lease, entry and ousture, agreeable to the
rule, and the plaintiff being non-suites, obtained judgment in the succeeding
July term, against the casual ejector."

THIS is far from being the true state of the case. Sundry causes which had
been tried, were determined against the claimants under New Hampshire, and Mr.
Breakenridge perceived it was expending money to no purpose, to maintain a suit
at law against the New York patentees, as they had such a co^binaton of
interest with the judges, part of which were interested in the New York
subsequent patents which interfered with the grants under New Hampshire, though
not in those on trial. This, with many other things too tedious to
particularize, was the cause why Mr. Breakenridge would not defend the
aforesaid suit in trial; but there was not a word said, (as he informs me)
between him and his said attorneys, about his farm's being within seventeen
miles of Hudson's river; nor is it likely ever such a thing was mentioned in
Albany county; the contrary being so well known. Undoubtedly, this was wrote
"for the information of government at home," thinking the fallacy would not
there be detected it being at so great a distance.

OUR authors, page 10th, after giving a narrative of a riotous and tumultuous
outrage, committed by the inhabitants of Bennington, for which proclamation had
issued from the earl of Dunmore, against the principal authors of the
disturbance "which could not be brought to justice," then they introduce a
particular charge against Mr. Breakenridge, which is entirely destitute of
foundation, viz. That he was one of the principal rioters. To this they join
the former calumny of the westward extention of Bennington, "by a vote of their
town meeting;" and add to both these, the groundless story of Mr.
Breakenridge's council's inability to set up any principle in his defense, by
reason of his being seated "within seventeen miles of Hudson's river. "All
these fictions blended together, make considerable of a figure, in their own
words. James Breakenridge and Isaiah Carpenter, were two of the most
inexcusable of all the offenders: the first had seated himself within seventeen
miles of Hudson's river, where he knew it was impossible, on their own
principles, that he could be protected by the New Hampshire claim, he had
declined a fair trial, and suffered judgment by default. With respect to Mr.
Breakenridge's being active in any expeditions (the New-Yorkers denominate
riots, mobs, felony, etc.) it is well known through the country of the
New Hampshire grants, he has not. In the 18th and 19th pages of the appendix,
they repeat their former aspersion against the inhabitants of Bennington in the
most virulent and emphatical language -- And what is still more shameful, they
contend, they arm, they fight for lands, as a part of Bennington, which lies
within seventeen miles of Hudson's river, and which the government of
New Hampshire never claimed, but admitted to be beyond their jurisdiction.

As there can be no doubt but these gentlemen really wish these things to be
true, and having so frequently repeated them as being so, it is conjectured
they by this time begin to believe them, or at least think others may; but that
the impartial reader may have the real truth of the matter, the following
evidence is exhibitted.

"A plan of a township of six miles square (i. e. Bennington) lying in his
majesty's province of New Hampshire, laid by Matthew Clesson, surveyor, Abraham
Bass, John Hooker, Ezekiel Foster, and Samuel Calhoon, chainmen, in pursuance
of an order from his excellency, Benning Wentworth, Esquire governor of said
province, to Col. William Williams, lying six miles north of the province line
that was run by Mr. Richard Hazzen, between said government and the province of
the Massachusetts Bay, and twenty miles east of Hudson's river, viz. Beginning
at a crooked Hemlock tree marked W. W. six miles due north, or at a right angle
from said province line, said angle commencing at a White-Oak tree in said line
marked M. O. I. T. which tree is twenty-four miles east from Hudson's river,
allowing one chain in thirty for swag, (which allowance is made through the
whole following survey) and from said Hemlock tree west, ten degrees, north
four miles, to a stake and stones; and from said stake and stones north ten
degrees, east six miles, to a stake and stones; from thence east ten degrees,
south six miles, to a stake and stones; and from thence south ten degrees, west
six miles, to a stake and stones; from thence west ten degrees, north two
miles, to the Hemlock first mentioned, which survey was made November 1749.

(A copy.) Per Matthew Clesson, Surveyor." HAMPSHIRE, ss. October 30th, 1749.

Matthew Clesson, surveyor, John Tailor, Ezekiel Foster, and William Williams,
chain-men, on November 3d, 1749, John Hooker, Abraham Bass and Samuel Calhoon,
chain-men, were all sworn to the faithful performance of the respective
services aforsaid, and for the above survey.

Quorum, TIMOTHY DWIGHT, Justice Peace. (A Copy.)

THE deposition of Samuel Robinson, who, being of lawful age, says, He being a
surveyor, has laid out in lots, a great part of Bennington, and is confident
that the west line of said town is the line that Matthew Clesson run before the
town was granted (upon which said grant was made,) and as I have run all the
lands east, adjoining said line, and some on the west side, I never knew of any
other line that was called or known, or supposed to be the west line of
Bennington; but according to that line, the proprietors have settled, not
making any improvements in the least degree to the west of said line.

AND the deponent further says, That his excellency Benning Wentworth, late
governor of New Hampshire, gave a warrant to Samuel Robinson and George
Gardner, Esq'rs, and John Davoow, to get the line run and measured out from
Hudson's river; which committee employed the deponent as a surveyor, with
Timothy Abbot and John Drott, as chainmen, who were under the inspection of
said committee, and under oath, measured out from said river twenty miles,
according to the aforesaid governor's warrant; and then turning a right angle
north, ten degrees east, which they did, and found the west line of Bennington
to be east of the line your deponent run, thirty-five chains; and so the
proprietors of said town concluded the aforesaid Clesson line to be right, and
have conducted accordingly.

AND further, your deponent says John R. Blaker, Esquire of the city of Albany,
got some chain-men soon after your deponent had run the line, and measured out,
and told your deponent that Bennington west line was more than twenty miles
from Hudson's river. And Archebald Campbell, of Albany, deputy-surveyor, told
your deponent, that he had measured out, and sound it to be above twenty miles.
And further says not.

Samuel Robinson.

Sworn before me, in Hoosick,, the 29th March, 1774.

JOHN MALCOMB, Justice.

THE deposition of Ebenezer Wood, who being of lawful age, says. He being
chosen a select-man for the town of Bennington, and sent to perambulate the
west line of said town, which accordingly I did; which line John R. Blecker,
Esquire of the city of Albany, told your deponent was more than twenty miles from
Hudson's river, which was the line that Matthew Clesson run; and your deponent
never see or heard of any other line but that, for Bennington west line.
Further says not.

Ebenezer Wood.

Sworn before me in Hoosick, the 29th day of March, 1774.

JOHN MALCOMB, Justice.

SECTION VIII.
OUR authors in the twenty-seventh and finishing page of their narrative,
discover great invention and subtilty, who after giving an account of the
unfortunate circumstances of the town of Hinsdale which has, say they, "been
taken up by a royal mandamus." This township had first been granted by the
government of the Massachusetts Bay, and upon the settlement of the boundary
line between the Massachusetts and New Hampshire, in 1739, it fell within the
latter, and by them granted, and fully ratified to the inhabitants and
proprietors, who in addition to their title, had also the Indian right. This
township, by the determination of the boundary line between New York and
New Hampshire, fell within the jurisdiction of the former, and was by them
granted to Col. Howard, after it had been settled about seventy years. The
assembly of New York in order to screen their government from the imputation of
the blame justly due to so reprehensible a conduct, endeavor to palm it on the
government at home, see page sixth, with respect to Hinsdale, a township in the
south-east corner of Cumberland county. Even this is not to be ascribed to our
government, it proceeded from a much greater, and the highest authority. A
mandamus was produced from the crown, on the report of the board of trade, and
by the advice of the privy council, which vested the grantee with a right of
election, an act decisive in itself, and superceding the agency of the governor
and council here, and the usual forms. A very extraordinary representation! The
nature of a royal mandamus is diametrically opposite to this interpretation.
The right of election in the grantees, is restricted entirely to crown lands
which are unappropriated; in such lands, the grantee has a right of election,
and common sense may teach, that neither a mandamus or any other crown grant
cansubvert the property which the subject holds under the crown by prior
grants; and though there be ever so many alterations in the jurisdiction,
sundry of which have perplexed the town of Hinsdale, yet this should have no
effect on the property of the subjects. -- These grantees are likewise withheld
from interfering on the right of the Indian subjects. -- Yet, it seems Col.
Howard had the vanity to locate his mandamus on the old plantation of Hinsdale,
which was firstly appropriated by a purchase from the Indians; secondly, by a
grant from the government of the Massachusetts Bay, and thirdly, by the
government of New Hampshire, and fourthly, by an uninterupted possession and
occupancy about seventy years.

THE subterfuge the gentlemen make use of to rid their government from
dishonor, in making this last grant of Hinsdale, is very extraordinary; it
seems not well calculated "to be transmitted for the information of the
government at home!" who are undoubtedly competent judges of their own
mandamus's, and no doubt will easily discern their last error to be worse than
the first. Such preposterous granting of lands, is criminally injurious to the
subject, as it never fails to embarrass the different claimants with many
concomitant difficulties. Yet, still to cast the blame due to their government,
on the king's mandamus, is more daringly injurious to the highest authority in
the nation.

LASTLY, the manner of redress prescrided for the sufferers, viz. the old
proprietors of Hinsdale, is the most shocking piece of contrivance, page 27,
Hinsdale, a small township which has lately been taken up by virtue of a royal
mandamus, is alone unfortunate -- but even here the possessors may be relieved,
by a suitable compensation, equal to the value of their improvements in crown
lands, free from the expense of fees. These gentlemen in their great clemency
have also conceded that the New Hampshire settlers in general may be thus
considered, on the same terms, may be assigned to each of those who are seated
on the soil, actually appropriated to others by the government of New York, and
the possessions of which cannot for that reason be confirmed; such a proportion
of crown lands as the governor and council shall judge to be adequate to their
respective improvements.

THEN they proceed to describe the tract, a fertile and extensive country, in
the northern part of the county of Charlotte, and between Connecticut-river and
lake Champlain, still remains unpatented by their government, and might be
planted and cultivated by these people: -- What a surprising condescension
this! the posterity of the original proprietors of Hinsdale, especially, to be
allowed the privilege to pull up stakes, quit their farms and possessions,
houses, orchards, etc. and join company with the New Hampshire settlers in
general, and trudge off to the north-east part of the wilderness of Charlotte,
and there commence another settlement, leaving their pleasant habitations,
fields, tenements, and country, in exchange for a howling wilderness; a pretty
exchange! -- and this to gratify a number of New York cormorants. But, let us
stop a little and consider -- whether it would not be more righteous to change
the scene, and so the New York patentees remove their patents, that interfere
with the New Hampshire grants, and lay them in she wilderness of Charlotte, as
neither government have appropriated it.

A sufficient reason to be offered in savor of the latter of these projects,
is, that the settlers under New Hampshire, are in deed, and in truth the lawful
owners and proprietors of the lands they possess, as, it is apprehended, has
been fully demonstrated in the preceding sections. Although these gentlemen
have in the course of their narration, flung out very extraordinary hims of
rewarding his majesty's soldiery, by the distribution of those lands, yet they
may here again be reminded, (which may further serve as the above reason) that
his majesty's proclamation directed the soldiery to make their pitches on
unappropriated and vacant lands, this therefore they must do, at the hazard of
losing their grants or repitching. For those lands which being antecedently
granted by the crown, by the agency of the governor and council of
New Hampshire, must forever exclude the soldiery from pitching thereon; and put
it entirely out of the power or the government of New York, or the crown, to
grant them to a second person. And when it is considered, that the New York
land-jobbers have, long since purchased great part of the soldiery rights, and
that for a mere trifle, and laid them out of themselves, at their own risque;
their arguments on that subject cannot contribute greatly to the removal of the
New Hampshire settlers, to the exterior part of Charlotte.

OUR authors have given a tedious history of the suits at law, which have been
commenced by the New York patentees, against the claimants and occupants under
New Hampshire, and have exhibited many specious appearances of fairness,
equity, and impartiality in their trials. However, the reader must observe,
that in every of those, so boasted of candid trials, the defendants, by the
result, were to be dispossessed of their farms. They then continue to tell of
the entire satisfaction of the vanquished, (together with such of the
New Hampshire claimants as attended the courts) relative to the validity of the
New York title. -- Soon after this, they give a surprising account of riots and
outrages, committed by these settlers, and mention Allen by name, (who they
say, but a little before was so fully persuaded of the validity of the New York
title) as one of their leaders. This narrative is in itself incredible, it
cannot be supposed, that men who were convinced, they had had an impartial
trial at law, and of the insufficiency of their own title, and the authenticity
of that of their opponants, would raily to arm, in defiance of legal authority,
and in defense of their own invalid title; especially, after they had publicly
declared their own sentiments concerning that matter.

Now follows another quotation from our authors, which is no less than a
barefaced insult o^ those inhabitants, and one of the boldest of
misrepresentations. If the New Hampshire claimants imagined that they were
aggrieved by the decisions of our judges, the means of redress were in their
own power; and they ought to have sued their writs of error, and in the legal
and ordinary mode, to have referred their cause to the final sentence of his
majesty. But to expect a remedy incompatible with the administration of
justice, and the rights of the subject either bespeak the greatest ignorance or
presumption.

COULD they once get this established, that there should be no access to his
majesty or trial, but in this "ordinary mode," it would no doubt, be to their
entire satisfaction; trials in that government would then easily become
decisive; for in no case wherein the demand of the plaintiff is below the sum
of five hundred bounds, a writ of error in favor of the defendant can issue.
And the New York attorneys who compiled the New York statings, and are also
patented under that government, well knew that every action brought against the
New Hampshire claimants has been designedly laid below that sum. Yet they were
possessed of that extreme boldness to aver in express terms, that if the
New Hampshire claimants imagined that they were aggrieved by the decisions of
their judges, their means of redress were in their own power, i. e. by way of a
writ of error.

THERE is nothing exhibitted in this New York pamphlet which more sensibly
deserves resentment than their pretensions of indulgencies, favors, etc.
conferred on these claimants by that government -- To the honor of the
government of New York, it may justly be asserted, that the New Hampshire
claimants have received every mark of favor and indulgence which the
circumstances permitted. Such hypocrisy debases human nature, is the pest of
society, partakes of faishood and treachery; and what renders it pecularly vile
is that it usurps the feat of virtue, and destroys faith in communities, and is
the source of cruel jealousy. Had the govern-of New York been truly friendly to
those settlers, it had been returned again; and mutual good will supplied the
place of hatred and strife. But alas! so long as the fee of the country of the
New Hampshire grants is the object in view, by the government of New York, how
it is possible for peace and good order to take place, cannot well be conceived.
Well would it be for that government, and infinitely better for the settlers
under New Hampshire, were they annexed to some other government; but they say,
no. Query, why? The answer is easy. They would then loose sight of the
aforesaid desirable object: otherwise, surely they would be glad to part with
such rebellious subjects as they represent them to be. For the truth no doubt
is, that they are in hopes some better fortune may in future attend them. And
that they can take and execute some of the leading men among these inhabitants;
and so frighten and impose on the rest; and finally, by this means avail
themselves of their estates and subjugate the country. This is all they can
desire in continuing it under their jurisdiction. That they have in reality a
view to this, will further appear by some memorable sentences recorded in the
25th page of their appendix. "We may," say they, readily conceive, that
Breakenridge and his party, have abundant reason to wish for an alteration of
jurisdiction. The public crimes and private wrongs which they have perpetrated,
must make them look forward to the hour of tranquillity, with the most anxious
apprehensions. The injured may then demand satisfaction for all their
sufferings -- An atonement must then be made to the country, for the violation
of its laws. Here the New Hampshire settlers may read their intended doom, in
consequence of the ability of the government of New York. And one reason why
this government have not already destroyed the inhabitants of the New Hampshire
grants, with fire and sword, is their want of ability; and this inability, in
great part, consists in this, that the common people in the government, are
universally of opinion that the inhabitants have a good right to those lands,
and should not be molested in the peaceable enjoyment of them, and conseqently
will not assist their civil officers in taking possession of their tenements,
or them as rioters. That they are no further turbulent than what is necessary
to defend their persons and properties, from the cruelty and monopoly of their
rulers. This is the ground of all the lenity, forbearance and indulgence of
that government toward those inhatants; and it is hoped, if these excessive
favors should be passed over without their thanks, they may yet be excused for
the neglect.

As the design of this section was, in a concise manner, to point out some of
the most notorious extravagancies of the government of New York, the subject
cannot with propriety be passed over, without taking a short review of the
forementioned laws of that colony, which are the most apparent portraiture of
their horrid malevolence and caprice. Passing these laws, which are evidently
calculated with a design of extirpating the inhabitants, by them laws alluded
to from their goodly land, nay, from the face of the earth; is no less than
lavishly foaming out their own shame; laws that ought, and are contemned and
disregarded by every lover of virtue. Laws and society-compacts were originally
designed to protect the subjects in their property. Loyalty and subordination
to such government, is essentially necessary, for the good of society, and all
good and liege subjects will support such laws and legislators. But, as in the
present instance, when laws, in their original design and administration, are
degenerated from the good ends for which laws and government were instituted,
terminating in the ruin and destruction of the society it should secure and
protect; from the same principles, viz. self-preservation, the subjects are
obliged to resist and depose such government. And, inasmuch as those laws,
together with some remarks on them, are to be seen in the narrative part of
this performance, shall therefore conclude, with leaving the reader, from his
own meditations, to pass such sentence concerning this matter as may appear
reasonable.

SECTION IX.
IT may be of some moment, toward the close of this treatise, to exhibit a
number of special motives which induced those inhabitants to prosecute
settlements on the controverted premises. As,

FIRST, On the good faith of his majesty's grants, by the agency of the
government of New Hampshire, the validity of which has been sufficiently
argued. And,

SECONDLY, by engagement from a proclamation by his late excellency Benning
Wentworth, which for the more public information, is here inserted.

By his Excellency, BENNING WENTWORTH, Esquire Captain General, Governor and
Commander in Chief of His Majesty's Province of New Hampshire, in New England,
etc. A PROCLAMATION.
WHEREAS his honor, CADWALLADER COLDEN, Esquire lieutenant governor, and commander
in chief of his majesty's province of New York, has lately issued a
proclamation, of a very extraordinary nature, setting forth, that king CHARLES
the second, on the 12th day of March, 1663-4, and on the 29th of June, 1674,
did, by his several letters patent, of those dates, grant in fee to his
brother, the duke of York, among other things, all the land from the west side
of Connecticut- river to the east side of Delaware-bay; and therein also set
forth, and describes the bounds of New Hampshire; in which description there is
a very material mistake; besides, there is omitted the fact, on which the
description of New Hampshire depended, viz. His majesty's determination of the
north and western boundaries of the province of the Massachusetts Bay, in 1739.
And nothing can be more evident than that New Hampshire may legally extend her
western boundary as far as the Massachusetts claim reaches, and she claims no
more; but New York pretend to claim even to the banks of Connecticut- river,
although she never laid out and settled one town in that part of his majesty's
lands, since she existed as a government.

When New York government extends her eastern boundary, to the banks of
Connecticut- river, between New York and the colony of Connecticut; and to the
banks of said river, between New York and the province of the
Massachusetts Bay, it would have been full early for New York to declare that
the government of New Hampshire was fully apprised of the right of New York,
under the before recited letters patent to the duke of York. In virtue of the
final determination of the boundary lines settled by his late majesty, between
this government and the Massachusetts Bay, all the lands capable of
settlements, have been erected into townships, agreeable to his majesty's
commands, and a considerable revenue is daily arising to the crown, unless
interrupted and impaired by his honor's proclamation, which New Hampshire will
not be answerable for.

At present the boundaries of New York, to the northward, are unknown, and as
soon as it shall be his majesty's pleasure to determine them, New Hampshire
will pay ready and cheerful obedience thereunto, not doubting but that all
grants made by New Hampshire, that are fulfilled by the grantees, will be
confirmed to them, if it should be his majesty's pleasure to alter the
jurisdiction.

For political reasons, the claim to jurisdiction by New York, might have been
deferred, as well as the strict injunction on the civil power, to exercise
jurisdiction in their respective functions, as far as the eastern banks of
Connecticut- river.

The said proclamation carrying an air of government in it, may possibly affect
and retard the settlement of his majesty's lands, granted by this government:
For preventing an injury to the crown, of this kind, and to remove all doubts
that may arise to persons holding the king's grants, they may be assured, that
the patent to the duke of York is obsolete, and cannot convey any certain
boundary to New York, that can be claimed as a boundary, as plainly appears by
the several boundary lines of the Jersies on the west, and the colony of
Connecticut on the east, which are set forth in the proclamation, as part only
of the land included in the said patent to the duke of York.

to the end therefore, that the grantees now settled and settling on those
lands, under his late and present majesty's charters, may not be intimidated,
or any way hindered or obstructed in the improvement of the lands so granted,
as well as to ascertain the right, and maintain the jurisdiction of his
majesty's government of New Hampshire, as far westward as to include the grants
made:

I HAVE thought fit, by and with the Advice of of His Majesty's Council, to
issue this Proclamation, hereby encouraging the several grantees, claiming
under this government, to be industrious in clearing and cultivating their
lands, agreeable to their respective grants.

AND I do hereby require and command all civil officers within this province,
of what quality soever, as well those that are not, as those that are
inhabitants on the said lands, to continue and be diligent in exercising
jurisdiction in their respective offices, as far westward as grants of land
have been made by this government; and to deal with any person or persons, that
may presume to interrupt the inhabitants or settlers on said lands, as to law
and justice does appertain, the pretended right of jurisdiction mentioned in
the aforesaid proclamation notwithstanding.

Given at the Council Chamger in Portsmouth, the 13th Day of March, 1764, and
in the Fourth Year of His Majesty's Reign. B. WENTWORTH.
By His Excellency's Command, with Advice of Council, T. ATKINSON, jun. sec'ry.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
A THIRD and weighty inducement to the settlement of those lands, was argued
from his majesty's express order, prohibiting the government of New York from
granting any of those lands in dispute, which is as follows.

At a Court at St. James's, the Twenty-Fourth Day of July, 1767.
Present, the KING's most excellent Majesty. Archbishop of Canterbury, Lord
Chancellor, Duke of Ancaster, Lord Chamberlain, Eearl of Litchfield, Earl of
Bristol, Earl of Shelborne, Viscount Falmouth, Viscount Barrington, Viscount
Clarke, Bishop of London, Mr. Secretary Conway, Hans Stanley, Esquire
His majesty taking the said report" i. e. a report of the board of trade, --
into consideration, was pleased with the advice of his privy council, to
approve thereof, and does hereby strictly charge, require and command, that the
governor or commander in chief of his majesty's province of New York, for the
time being, do not, upon pain of his majesty's highest displeasure, presume to
make any grant whatsoever, of any part of the lands described in the said
report, until his majesty's further pleasure shall be known concerning the same.

A true Copy, WILLIAM SHARP.
Attest GEO. BANYAR, Dep. Secr.

A FOURTH, and last special Motive for the carrying on, and extending those
settlements, was from a report of the lords of trade, as follows,

EXTRACT from a Report of the Lords of Trade, to the Committee of his Majesty's
most Honorable Privy Council, for Plantation Affairs, dated December 3d, 1772.
UPON the fullest examination into all the circumstances which at present
constitute the state of that district between the rivers Hudson, and
Connecticut; out of which, the greatest disorders and confusion have arisen. It
seems to us, that the principal objects of attention in the consideration of
any measures that can be suggested for restoring public tranquillity, and
quieting possessions, are,

FIRST, those townships, which having been originally settled and established
under grants from the government of the Massachusetts Bay, fell within this
district, by the determination of the northern boundary of that province, in
the year 1740.

SECONDLY, Those grants of land made within this district, by the government of
New York, previous to the establishment of the townships laid out by the
governor of New Hampshire, after the conclusion of the peace; and which land
now lies within the limits of some one or other of those townships.

THIRDLY, Those townships, which having been originally laid out by the
governor of New Hampshire, either continue in the same state, or have been
confirmed by grants from New York, and also, those which have since originated
under grants from the latter of those colonies.

WITH regard to those townships which fall under the first of the
abovementioned descriptions; when we consider their nature and origin, and the
numberless difficulties to which the original proprietors of them must have
been subjected in the settlement of lands exposed to the incursions of the
savages, and to every distress which the neighborhood of the French in time of
war could bring upon them; and, when we add to these considerations, the great
reason there is to believe that the grants were made upon the ground of
military services against the enemy; we do not hesitate to submit to your
lordships our opinion, that the present proprietors of these townships, ought,
both in justice and equity, to be quieted in their possessions: And, that all
grants whatsoever, made by the government of New York, of any lands within the
limits of those townships, whether the degree of improvement under the original
grant had been more or less; are, in every light which they can be viewed,
oppressive and unjust: But as we are sensible that such subsequent grants made
by the government of New York, however unwarrantable, cannot be set aside by
any authority from his majesty, in case the grantees shall insist on their
title; we submit to your lordships, whether it might not be expedient, in order
to quiet the original proprietors in their possessions, to propose that all
such persons who may claim possession of lands within the limits of such
townships under New York grants, should upon condition of their quiting such
claim, receive a grant under the seal of New York upon the like terms, and free
of all expenses, of an equal number of acres in some other part of the district
lying between the rivers Hudson and Connecticut; and in case where any actual
settlement or improvement has been made by such claimants, that they should in
such case, receive fifty acres of waste land for every three acres, they may
have improved.

WITH regard to those grants made by the government of New York, which fall
within the second description, and upon which any actual improvement has been
made; they do appear to us to deserve the same consideration; and that the
proprietors thereof ought not to be disturbed in their possessions, whether
that improvement be to a greater or lesser extent: But we beg leave to observe
to your lordships, that in both these cases no consideration ought to be had to
any claim, where it shall appear that no regular possession has ever been
taken, and no actual settlement ever been made.

WITH regard to those townships which fall within the last mentioned
description, we submit to your lordships our opinion, that provided such
townships do not include lands within the limits of some antecedent grant, upon
which actual improvement has at any time been made, it would be advisable they
should be confirmed as townships, according to the limits expressed in the
grants thereof; and that all persons having possession of any shares in the
said townships, either as original grantees, or by purchase or conveyance, and
upon which shares any actual improvement or settlement has been made, ought not
in justice to have been, or to be in future, disturbed in the possession of
such shares; nor ought they to be bound to any other conditions, whether of
quit rent or otherwise, than what is contained in the grant.

THESE inducements are indisputably authoritative, and need no commentation:
Yet notwithstanding the priority and preferance of the New Hampshire title to
that of New York, and the so many corroberating and concomitant inducements to
the claimants under the former, to settle and cultivate those lands; yet the
assembly of New York, in sundry parts of their state of the right, etc. and
more particularly through the appendix, treat those inhabitants, merely on
account of such settlement, with the most extreme injury; who, instead of
arguing, only declaim against them, and go on in a gradation of consequences
drawn from false premises, till they have dragged them from their true
character of honest men, to that of usurpers, rioters, and felons. Although the
quotations from our authors have already been lengthy, yet that a precedent of
their injustice may not here be wanted, the following, from the third page of
their appendix is inserted.

BUT though the same principles have been explained, and enforced in several
acts and proclamations of government, as well as on repeated trials in our
courts of judicatory, they have left no suitable impression on the contentious
claimants under New Hampshire. On the contrary, in contempt of the dictates of
justice, the decisions of law, and the civil authority, have their
encroachments, which were few in number at the time of the royal determination,
been increased and extended in a tenfold proportion; and that in general by
men, who cannot plead that they were deceived or ignorant of the nature or
merit of their claim, which it appears, were too notorious to have escaped
their observation, but who in spite of every warning and remonstrance to deter
them, which human prudence could devise, engaged as volunteers on the side of
New Hampshire, and wilfully plunged themselves into the controversy. To
extenuate their own indiscretion and misconduct, calumny and misrepresentation
are their only resource; and accordingly without the least reason, they charge
the government of New York with partiality, and every land holder under it,
upon whom they have trespassed, with injustice and and oppression; asserting,
that because they have sanctified their claim by a wrongful possession, they
ought peacebly to enjoy the fruits of their usurpation. To mortify their
pretentions they have spared no art or act of violence, however criminal; and
after all, as if they were really injured, and the objects of regard, they do
not hesitate to carry their complaints to the throne, and by special agents to
solicit some extraordinary act of favor, by which their offenses may be passed
over with impunity, and their encroachments perpetuated in prejudice to those
who enjoy a clear title from the crown, under the great seal of New York.

As this clamorous quotation is already mostly answered, shall only remark, as
to those settlers extending their encroachments in a ten fold proportion, since
the royal determination. It has been fully evinced that this determination
respected jurisdiction only, and the before recited royal order and report of
the board of trade, were accounted sufficient to exclude all manner of doubts
in the minds of the New Hampshire claimants of the validity of their title.
They truly cannot plead that they were deceived or ignorant of the nature or
merit of their claim. This matter was elucidated by the highest wisdom and
authority in the nation; they rejoice in the clemency of their sovereign, and
in the wisdom and impartial justice of the honorable board of trade, exhibited
as aforesaid, upon which encouragement those claimants have greatly extended
settlements on those lands, in a more special manner on Onion river and lake
Champlain, between the township of Panton, which abuts on the lake opposite
Crown Point, and the said river, and north of it almost to the forty-fifth
degree of north latitude, and preparations are vigorously making to extend
these settlements to the very bounds of the province of Quebec It is seldom any
new country settles with such rapidity, notwithstanding the oppositions they
meet with from the government of New York: The expense of clearing roads,
building mills, moving to and settling in that wilderness country only for two
years last past, would amount to no very inconsiderable sum. And those settlers
from the foregoing reasons, do not in the least hesitate, but that they in so
fulfilling the conditions of their charters, have and are acting agreeable to
his majesty's will and pleasure; and that those labors will not only be for
their own emolument, but for the enlargement of the British empire, and
addition of the crown revenue.

THE assembly of New York have been very particular in their history of the
tumults and riots made by those settlers, in opposition to that government,
(many of which facts must be confessed to be true) though they have carefully
omitted their manyfold provocations, yet, with all their particularity have
given but a very imperfect idea of those transactions. I shall here, therefore,
waving particulars, give a general review of the economy of those settlers in
their oppositions to that government. For defending their properties, they were
indicted rioters, the next thing was to defend rioters; then they had two
objects of protection, viz. their persons, as well as property: They were at
first greatly intimidated at the empty appearance of law, that their opponents
were so conversant with, sometimes despairing of maintaining their possessions;
yet upon extremity, rather than quit their substance to the insatiable
ravishers, would rally and frustrate their designs: Thus, when the sheriff of
the county of Albany with his posse came to dispossess some of them, they most
generally, boldly took up arms and appointed leaders. Matters having come to
this, not long after, the inhabitants assembled and appointed committees of
safety in the several towns throughout their settlement; this general committee
have the conducting of the public affairs of the country for its security, till
his majesty settles the controversy. They have erected several companies, which
by the votes of the soldiers are furnished with officers, these companies form
a regiment which are known by the significant character of green mountain boys,
who are generally in the prime of life, well versed in the use of fire arms,
and of robust constitutions; probably no American regiment in an interior
defense could excel them, or that would willingly contribute to the support of
the crown of Great Britain; for it is observable, that such subjects that will
not fight for their property, will never fight for their king. And, the general
instructions from the committee, ever have been, not to act in any thing
against the government of New York, but on the defensive.

IT is in the nature of things impossible to pass a right judgment on the
conduct of the New Hampshire settlers, without taking into view the treatment
of the government of New York toward them. All cases must be determined upon
the peculiar circumstances attending; no act can scarcely be conceived of,
which, under certain attending circumstances might not be lawful. It will be
readily admitted on the part of those settlers, that, provided the government
of New York, and its patentees have a clear and incontestible right to those
lands; and that they are intruders, and by force and violence have maintained
such encroachments, then, they are truly guilty, in manner as the assembly of
New York have alleged: But on the contrary, if those settlers have a legal and
incontestible right to those lands, that they prosecute settlement on the good
faith of that title, and the sundry approbations of both their title and
settlement from the British administration, then, they are not guilty in manner
as those gentlemen have declared; and the impartial public, instead of viewing
them as usurpers, rioters and felons, will justify them in their conduct, and
esteem them as good members of society, liege subjects to the crown of Great
Britain, and good soldiers for defending their persons and properties.

THUS, is humbly submitted the state of the controversy, which has for many
years subsisted between the government of New York and the settlers under
New Hampshire; by impartial justice must every act stand or fall; if those
settlers are in the wrong, they are criminally so, but if not, then the
allegations of their opponents will be adjudged as futile and cruel.

FINIS.
ERRATA. -- P. 38. l. 21. read specious. -- P. 49. l. 3. r. specious. -- P. 49.
l. 25. r. depending.


