CONSIDERATIONS ON THE MODE AND TERMS OF A TREATY OF PEACE WITH AMERICA.

(...) pacis dulce est et RE^ SALUTARIS (...) NECESSARIA.

LONDON, Printed 1778: PHILADELPHIA: Reprinted, and Sold by HALL and SELLERS,
MDCCLXXIX.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THIS Pamphlet was printed in London about the Time Governor JOHNSTONE arrived
there. It was much read, and a second Impression called for.

CONSIDERATIONS, etc.
ALTHOUGH immediate peace is necessary for the welfare and safety of the
nation, and that peace cannot be had but by the acknowledgment of the
independency of America, in which all Europe, and indeed the whole universe are
interested; yet, because a formal acknowledgment of it would be most
humiliating to the pride of the nation, it is thought, by some, more advisable
to make use of expedients, and to obtain the necessary tranquillity, either

I. By way of truce; II. By silently and quietly withdrawing the troops from
the continent of America, and ceasing to act offensively; or III. By destroying
every thing before the struggle is given up, in order to cripple the Americans
in their future operations.
Every one of these ways are inadequate to the end.

In the first place, a truce made between Great Britain and America will defeat
what is, and ought to be, the first object of government; it will not only be
an acknowledgment, pro ^anto et pro tempore, of the claimed independency, but
will prevent the two people returning to their ancient good humor and harmony,
the great object of the proposed tranquillity; for such truce will be, as all
truces are, armed and full of suspicion.

2dly, To withdraw the troops and leave the Americans to themselves will not
have the appearance of the dignity, but sullenness of majesty; it will be a
proof of the present impotency, and future intention of this state, and,
consequently, will beget in the Americans present contempt, and future dread;
this contempt, and dread, will encourage and provoke on their part the
prosecution of the war, which is wished to be avoided: There is, however,
reason to think some such measure is now pursuing, the troops having been
ordered, it is said, to abandon New York. Whether this is done through
inability to maintain that post, or to succor the capital and essential parts
of the empire at this critical juncture, is not worth the present enquiry; it
is probable the ostensible reason will be given, that it is done for the
bringing about a treaty, the Americans having made this step one of the
alternatives necessary to be complied with before they would treat; to prove
this, however, the British force must be withdrawn from all the territories
claimed by the Americans; if a part is left any where, at Rhode Island for
instance, which perhaps is meant to be made a place of arms, the whole measure
will be abortive: It is worth recollecting, likewise, that when this
proposition, of either acknowledging the independency or withdrawing the
troops, was first made, America stood unconnected and free from real or implied
stipulations with foreign powers; the case is now so altered, that there may be
doubts whether she is able, or willing, to act in any thing without the concert
and concurrence of France; but, at most, this alternative is only a preliminary
of a treaty, the essential object of which is the American independency.

3dly, The retiring after having done all possible mischief is the council of
folly and malice; it proceeds from despair, and would for ever shut the door of
peace; it would produce an eternal abhorrence.

Should it be thought, on consideration, that neither of these expedients are
proper, for that Great Britain can now do nothing but acknowledge the
independency of America, yet that this acknowledgment ought not to be made
simply and unconditionally; it would be well for such to (...), that although
there was a time when this mode of (...) and bargaining might have been
proposed, and agreed to, that time is now past: There was a time when this
island might have offered independency to America as a concession requiring
some valuable return; at present, having vindicated, and possessing it in fact,
and being guaranteed in the enjoyment thereof by one of the greatest powers,
whose influence and example will induce others to take the same step, America
will not consider the acknowledgment of independence as a favor: The right and
power which she presumes she has to maintain herself in her present situation,
and the fear lest such a mode of bargaining might bring doubts on her
unquestioned right, and of setting a dangerous precedent to other nations for
her emancipation and purchase of freedom, will oblige her to insist on this
acknowledgment in the most perfect, absolute, simple, and unconditional manner.

If such acknowledgment is made, the object of the peace, which would
undoubtedly follow, would be obtained, the good opinion of America would be
secured, time would be thereby given for the removal of the present suspicions
and abhorrence, and for the return of the former amity and good will; it would
give an opening to the ancient intercourse, and a disposition of conducting it
with candor and liberality; the strength, resulting from thence, would be a
benefit, and not a terror, to this island: America would then, though
independent, be united in heart to Great Britain, instead of being, as she is
at present, independent and united with her enemies. This country, even amidst
her most cruel actions, assured herself of the return of the ancient good
humor of America; and, indeed, assured herself so much of it, that, however
strange it may appear, it is most certain, this her natural disposition was
made use of as an encouragement and provocation to the utmost exertions of the
most unrelenting war; for, do what you will, it was said, America would still
look up to, and wish to renew, her ancient connection with this island. Let
this supposed temper of America be tried in the only way now left; force has
been found not only ineffectual, but pernicious; let time do that which force
cannot do; let that time of peace and its desired operations be obtained by an
immediate, clear, and full acknowledgment of the independency of America.

Should all difficulties relative to the matter of a treaty be thus removed,
there would still remain difficulties relative to the manner of conducting it;
as government, however, has at length got rid of an embarrassment which had
been thought insuperable, and had long checked the proper course of business,
it cannot be doubted that either wisdom or necessity will induce it to adopt
the only mode of obtaining peace now left.

To treat with those who denied, and took up arms in opposition to the
authority of Parliament; to treat with declared enemies, and, above all, with
the unlawful and vagrant Assembly, the Congress, were once considered so
contrary to the dignity of government as not to be submitted to. The state of
things has produced a different sense in the minister; the Parliament has
empowered Commissioners to treat with that obnoxious body, thinking it was the
only medium through which peace with America could be had. On the same
principle, another mode must now be adopted; we not only want peace with
America, but with France, and the rest of Europe; but peace with the one cannot
now be had, nor indeed is it worth having, without peace with the other: we
must now negociate, and that soon, or an important part of Europe will
interfere, and thereby embarrass the negotiation with the adjustment of new
interests and claims. This can only be effected by an immediate application to
the American Commissioners at Paris. The proposition may at first startle the
people of this country, but the surprise will be soon got over, if the state of
affairs are duly considered -- Things once strange now appear familiar to them
-- Strange, however, as this may appear, the only mode of attaining peace is to
consider and make the American Commissioners at Paris MEDIATORS between
Great Britain and France; for, though inimical at present because of the
hostile disposition of this country, they have at bottom, as is supposed, an
attachment to it. Change, then, your disposition, and theirs will be changed;
they will be the friends of Great Britain in her ^^llen state, who have opposed
her in her hour of insolence; they must be considered better disposed to this
people than the hireling minister of any foreign state; and, if treated with
candor, may be trusted with security -- there is little doubt that France
would accept their mediation.

Should it be questioned, whether the American Commissioners at Paris have
powers sufficient to settle the subsisting differences, the doubt might be soon
cleared up by an immediate application; in the mean while it may be presumed
they have such powers: for, is it probable that the Congress should have
enabled their Commissioners to enter into treaties of commerce and eventual
leagues offensive and defensive, for the opening a new intercourse and for the
carrying on a war, without enabling them to continue the ancient connection and
preventing war? There is no reason to think their judgment so defective. Should
it, however, prove, on enquiry, they have not powers sufficiently satisfactory
to conclude a perfect treaty, yet no one can be so ignorant of the weight and
influence of the American Commissioners, as not to imagine their
recommendations will have the fullest effect with Congress. In the mean while a
suspension of arms may be obtained in Europe, on the credit, liberality, and
integrity of the terms proposed. This is a point of the greatest consequence in
the present state of the afrairs of Great Britain.

This form, and it is now perhaps little else, the Americans having the
reality, being complied with, Great Britain will prevent the impending mischief
and ruin which the combination of the Powers of Europe, interested in the
independency of America, will otherwise bring down upon her; and America will
obtain the only thing she wants: She wants nothing from Europe but peace; which
being had, she will show herself to Europe in general a most beneficial friend,
and to Great Britain in particular an essential one.

This will be manifest to any one who considers the nature of the northern
continent of America, and the state of Europe; it is not necessary here to
enter into this discussion. There is nothing more clear than that she really
wants nothing, and can supply the wants of Europe; this takes away all ground
of contention between them. If America stands in need of peace to settle her
governments, Great Britain stands in need of it for the support of her
existence; neither, therefore, have claims on each other, for the blessing
which is so necessary to both, but in proportion to the greater necessity of
one or the other. -- America, however, may perhaps be induced to make
stipulations of great importance to Great Britain.

She may agree not to pass the Cape of Good Hope, or go round Cape Horn; she
may disclaim all connection with Africa, and its accursed trade; she may engage
not only not to possess any part of the West India Islands, but guarantee to
England her possessions there. These are matters of great consequence to this
country, but of little moment to America: They are of little moment to America,
who wants not extended and distant territory; she has herself more land,
capable of every produce, than can be cultivated for ages to come; she knows
the mischiefs of the India trade, and shudders at the impiety of the African
one; the situation, and necessity of the Islands, will ever make them more
beneficially dependent on the Continent, than the claim and possession of
unlimited power over them; and their present political partition among the
several states of Europe, is more advantageous to her than their engrossment by
any one prince.

These things are suggested to show that the stipulations on these heads will
be observed, because the continent of America has no real interest in the
breach of them; -- a better ground for political faith cannot be had: But
although the continent of America has no real interest in the interruption of
the present possession of the powers of Europe, yet, actuated by the spirit of
hostility, if provoked, she will necessarily interfere, and give such
disturbance as to render their enjoyment highly precarious at least; and
thereby become, from necessity, a dangerous enemy, instead of being a
beneficial friend.

These stipulations are well worth the attention of the minister; but there
are, likewise, concessions, which might be made of the greatest consequence to
this country. She may be induced to take a certain quantity of her
manufactures, and supply her with naval stores for a certain number of years;
she may enter into engagements about the fisheries on her coasts, the
importance of which is well known; she might disclaim an interference with, or
interruption of, the trade to Hudson's Bay, the full value of which most are
ignorant of; she may, in short, secure, by articles of pacification and
commerce, the most profitable parts of the British trade, which will be greatly
endangered by the continuance of the present war. But let it be remembered that
these articles, stipulations and concessions, must be subsequent to, and not on
condition of, the acknowledgment of independency: The prior acknowledgment is
necessary to give validity and an obligatory force to the mutual engagements of
the two countries, which, without it, might in some future hour of chicane be
much questioned.

But, that this and other important matters may be gained, the application
ought to be immediate and open. The delay of doing what was right has increased
the public mischief, and daily embarrasses the progress of peace; it brought on
the American declaration of independency, and the French guarantee, and war, in
support of it. A farther delay will produce other fatal consequences. No one
can doubt the part which Spain will take, who knows the part she has already
taken. That Portugal will follow the dictates of Spain, now she is thrown into
her arms by the inability of England to protect her, is perhaps certain; her
interest, and her inclination, concur with her present necessity: Will the
Dutch stand out when the Americans shall declare, and the declaration, if not
already made, may be expected soon, they will not trade with any Powers that
shall not acknowledge her independency? The Dutch, against whom the act of
navigation was levelled, will rejoice at its substantial repeal, and eagerly
enjoy the freedom of the sea, and of commerce, on the terms proposed. Should
Great Britain come into the necessary measure after these powers, she will do
it with so ill a a grace, that her merit will be small indeed.

But, above all, the application ought to be open; it ought to be sincere and
candid in itself, and without disguise o^ mystery in the making. The former
applications, either of a public or private nature, have been defective on this
head; there has been deceit, at least it appears so to the Americans, in the
matter and manner of them. If application is now made to the Commissioners at
Paris, all underhand dealings must be omitted, because they cannot have the
desired effect; it is the attempt I would guard against, for the practice of
artifice cannot succeed. By the nature of the government of France, few things
done in that country can be kept secret; a negotiation with America can by no
means be concealed; it is the particular interest and honor of the American
Commissioners at Paris to discover to the French Court all such applications
from Britain; private attempts will, as the preceding ones have done, turn
against the minister; they will give the Americans, as they have in all matters
since the 16th of December last, much advantage in negotiation; it will give
them the merit of discovering to the French minister how much they are courted
by the English government, and, by consequence, induce him to court them more.

Not a single attempt to gain the Americans has yet succeeded, because candor
was wanting; the attempts were treacherous in themselves, and suspicious in
their manner. Men of all denominations and characters have been sent, some of
whom, under the mask of friendship, have (...) into the deepest political
discussions -- They were sent for that purpose, whatever their ostensible
pretenses were to the contrary -- they lost their errand; they were considered
as the tools of the minister, and not as the unreserved, undesigning and
confidential friends of the social hour; they played their parts, and were
perhaps deservedly played upon.

But whatever they were, they were suited to the business they were sent on.
The business must now have another complexion, and, by consequence, agents of a
different disposition. If the terms of accommodation are candid and liberal, as
the times require, the agents need not be men of noted learning, or political
abilities; depend more on the matter which is to be offered, than on the man
who delivers it. In truth, no man is wanted that answers only to the character
of an agent; a faithful messenger will do the business much better; the times
want not the adroitness of a politician, but the simplicity and good intentions
of a commen man, for the happiness of Great Britain and America.

Consider what the public and parliamentary Commissioners have done in America;
their success is now fully known: They are men of rank, note and confidence, of
various qualities and abilities; but, whatever rank, note, confidence,
qualities and abilities they may have, they are by no means the men proper to
have been sent: One of them, in particular, who has stepped forward most busily
in the commission, seems to betray it; he is abusive of those who have employed
him, for their insolence; and most flattering to the great qualities of his
enemies, who have opposed his country; he apparently justifies the one, and
condemns the other, for all their proceedings; and, instead of a Commissioner
of the King of Great Britain, paid an enormous salary for the discharge of a
public employment, he wishes to become the curious and wondering traveller, and
no more: If more is intended by this abuse, flattery and curiosity, it is such
an unworthy piece of business, as would warrant any one's imputing the failure
of the commission to the choice of him and his coadjutors, if there was not in
the commission itself an internal vice and cause of defeat.

In short, it is not by such means this country can be saved from the ruin
which the American dispute is likely to bring upon it.

The terms of accommodation ought to do their own business; they ought to be so
good as to recommend themselves; they will do it, if they are suited to the
times.

The American treaty, signed at Versailles the 6th of February, was supposed
here not to be perfect until ratified by the people of America, and therefore
the English Commissioners, arriving in the country before that event, would
easily set the whole aside by the offers of Parliament. The French King knew
better; he well knew his offers were such as insured to themselves the
approbation of America; he waited not for the return of the ratification; he
took his measures as if every thing was concluded. The event has justified his
judgment.

Notwithstanding what has been, and might be, said to induce a full and direct
acknowledgment of the independency of America, and an immediate and open
application to the Commissioners at Paris, there are, perhaps, those who think
it will be more for the interest and honor of the kingdom, to sue for peace in
a private manner in the closet of the ministers of France.

The object of this mode of application is to avoid, if possible, the
acknowledgment of the American independency; for it is thought there can be no
sacrifice, however great, which may and ought not to be made for the recovery
of the real, or at least the nominal, sovereignty of that country: They who are
of this opinion will go great lengths; they will perhaps offer Canada to
France, acknowledge her right, and give her fresh means of carrying on to
advantage the Fisheries on the Banks of Newfoundland, and confirm her in the
stipulated part of the American commerce. These and such like terms may
perhaps, after the distribution of a quantity of gold, be (...) to by some;
whether they will meet with a general approbation, and be accepted of by the
government of France, will depend upon its sense of their advantage to the
s^^te.

France will consider, in the first place, whether the independence of America
is not of more consequence by its actual benefit to her, and mischief to her
natural enemy, than the (...) enjoyment of these terms; whether it is not more
for (...) to accept them from America; whether America has (...) much right to
offer, and more power to make them good; and, whether America cannot always
offer better terms than Great Britain.

There are many other considerations, which will naturally (...) themselves to
the councils of France; it will, however, (...) worth while to fix our
attention upon the last, as it may (...) produce most serious consequences to
this country.

The breaking through the ancient system of Colonial government compelled an
interruption of commercial connec^^^^; the inforcement of the new adopted
measures, by the (...), obliged the Americans to take up (...) self defense;
the method of conducting that war made (...) of independency necessary; the
applications to the powers of Europe to concur in their subjection, made the
treaty and alliance with France unavoidable; in short, fresh instances of an
unrelenting disposition toward them did, (...), produce fresh instances of
disgust and retorted mischief. There is not one of these terms, which America,
being too (...) urged, will not offer and cannot make good; (...) may do more:
In particular, seeing the invet^^^^cy of the times, and that, after such an
application, there is no farther hopes of accommodation, she may be induced,
and indeed compelled, to take a step most fatal to this country; she may forbid
the entrance of the British flag into her ports; she may exclude all British
bottoms from her commerce, and lay treble duties on the importation of British
commodities.

The idea of excluding the island of Great Britain from the commerce of the
continent of America will be pleasing to all the powers of Europe. They will
rejoice at such a signal destruction of an envied monopoly; and perhaps
consider it, insultingly, as an act of justice, that that should be the only
state excluded from the coasts of America, which, arrogating the whole to
itself, had excluded the rest of mankind.

There is nothing exclusive in the original treaty of commerce and alliance
between France and America; this country was heartily told so, and thereby an
hint given, what might be. The necessity of affairs may give another turn to
the treaty. -- The longer the contention is continued, and the more violently
it is pressed, the more will the affections of America be alienated from
England, and the more firmly will they be fixed on France.

Nothing can be more absurd, dangerous and fruitless, than an endeavor to
procure an establishment of the former sovereignty by the means of France; it
is the interest of France, that you should have neither the former sovereignty
no^ peace. The independence of America is of more value to her than any thing
this country can offer; it secures every effect and benefit of the most humble
concessions, and does every possible mischief to her rival and avowed enemy.
The minister, therefore, may depend on it, she will side with America, who has
firmly withstood the various public and private applications to withdraw
herself from her engagement; -- it is both the inclination and interest, and,
after what has passed, the honor of France to consider her alliance sacred and
inviolable.

Should the offers of the minister be as considerable, or more so than what has
been suggested, reflect on the consequences -- they must be so considerable as
to enable France to prosecute her schemes with greater certainty in future, or
else she will certainly not forego her present advantage; they will be so great
as to give that court suspicions that they are only offered at this time to
gain a sovereignty, and former connection, by which the force of America may be
despotically collected, or artfully turned against her by the specious show of
moderation.

Nothing is more common than to hear of the insidiensness of France; it has
been, and ever will be, the constant topic of declamation of the good people of
this country; but whilst it is so, we cannot but wonder that a private treaty
should be entered into, and that such treaty should tend to enable that very
power to be more insidious, and should be entered into immediately after the
Commissioners of the King and Parliament of Great Britain had demanded of the
Congress -- Whether they could depend on the word and confidence of that court,
whose insidious interposition had, from the settlement of the colonies, been
actuated with enmity to both? -- The ministers must surely appear very simple,
or very insidious themselves, who can negotiate with such a power in preference
to these, of whom they have no real cause of distrust.

No one will put much faith in the Princes of any country. He that trusts to
any thing, but the operation of their interest, is a poor politician; and he
that complains of deceit, where there is an interest to deceive, will ever be
considered as a fool. But if he does complain, let him be careful to avoid the
justice of a similar accusation. France probably laughs at the charge of
insidiousness, brought against her by the court of Great Britain: When it was
brought, ungraciously brought, at the beginning of these troubles, against
America, it excited pity: America, however, who only felt an emotion, mixed
with sorrow and disdain, when she thought herself calumniated, expressed lately
the greatest indignation when the insidiousness of France was insidiously
alluded to. To America, the conduct of France appears magnanimous and liberal;
her offers are at the least apparently fair, and equal to her wishes; in
keeping to this appearance there is much political wisdom: But when
Great Britain offers to America every thing but independence, she shows the
extreme folly of insidiousness; she gives every thing, only to gain the right
and power of retracting every thing.

Let Great Britain then consider whether it is not, and ever must be, the
interest of France to support the independence of America; such consideration
will show the folly of treating with that power to betray it, that no offers
are sufficient to obtain her forbearance, but that she will either directly or
indirectly pursue her great and permanent interest, by supporting the Americans
in their opposition, and inciting other nations to hold up their forbearance
likewise as worthy of purchase.

But the particular incitement of France against this country is not necessary;
the very precedent is of itself sufficient to suggest to other foreign states
the part to be taken in the present circumstances: The purchase of peace is a
dangerous expedient; it stirs up fresh opposition, and opens the door to future
mischief. Should the direct or indirect forbearance of France be actually
obtained, it will perhaps be considered as a great point carried; for her
countenance and support, alone, are sufficient to enable America to set the
power of this island, even in its most flourishing condition, at defiance: But
there is hardly a Prince in Europe, whose assistance is not sufficient to
determine the die in the present state of British affairs; and there is not one
of them who is not sensible of his temporary and comparative strength. Should
France, therefore, be quieted, fresh adversaries and fresh claims will arise in
every quarter; every petty Prince, having an interest in the independency of
America, will expect a satisfaction for giving up his pretenses and interest:
Some may be satisfied with a little; but others of great rank, power, and
enmity to this country, will make important demands; may make such as will be
eventual sacrifices of its honor and interest, and which, nevertheless, in the
present situation of affairs, cannot either in policy or common prudence be
refused. Is it necessary to allude to Spain? If the forbearance of France is to
be purchased on the terms suggested by some, Gibraltar and Jamaica will be
moderate prices for the purchase of peace with Spain. With respect to the
Dutch, there can be no terms offered in satisfaction for their loss of the
American commerce, by the re-establishment of the former sovereignty; for the
Dutch value trade above all things.

In short, it is impossible for Great Britain to recover her former sovereignty
by any treaty with the powers of Europe; for all are interested in the
independency of America. If she had the means of gaining their present
acquiescence and forbearance, and of satisfying their several pretenses by the
most fatal sacrifices, yet her superiority over America would not be recovered;
nor, what is of more consequence at this juncture, would her peace be restored.
America is now of herself sufficiently able to baffle every hostile attempt;
neither dread nor despair will ever induce a submission. Hear her most solemn
determination; the Parliamentary Commissioners heard it to their confusion.

To suppose their minds less firm at the present hour than they were when
destitute of all foreign aid, even without the expectation of an alliance, when
upon a day of public fasting and humiliation, in their house of worship, and in
the presence of God, they resolved To hold no conference or treaty with any
Commissioners on the part of Great Britain, unless they should, as a
preliminary thereto, either withdraw their fleets and armies, or in positive
and express terms acknowledge the independency of the States -- would be highly
irrational -- Sooner than do it, they would commence treaties westward of
yonder mountain.

FINIS.

