THE SUBSTANCE OF AN ADDRESS TO AN ASSEMBLY in Bridgewater, MARCH 10, 1779,
Previous to the Administration of BAPTISM.

By ISAAC BACKUS, Pastor of a Church in Middleborough.

Published by Request.

PROVIDENCE: Printed and Sold by JOHN CARTER, at Shakespeare's Head, in
Meeting-street, near the State-House. -- Sold also by Mr. PHILIP FREEMAN, in
Union-street, Boston.

An ADDRESS, etc.
FRIENDS, BRETHREN, and COUNTRYMEN,
AS I am this day called to administer the ordinance of baptism among you, in a
way different from what you have been acquainted with, it is proper for me to
give you our reasons for so doing Since this year began, the spirit of God has
been evidently and powerfully working, by his convincing, converting and
comforting influences, upon many souls in Bridgewater. The person now baptized
was Mr. Seth Howard, in his 78th year; and though some raged against it before,
yet a large assembly that met behaved very decently.
, especially since this way has every where been spoken against, even so much
as to make some pious people suppose, that we hold the virtue of the ordinance
to be in much water; and that we are not only cruel to our own children, but
also so rigid as to exclude many good Christians from our communion, only for
their want of compliance with one particular mode; notwithstanding the apostle
says, "Neither circumcision avails any thing, nor uncircumcision, but a new
creature."

This, my friends, is a plain specimen of the conversation about these matters,
which has been received by tradition from our fathers; but whether it be any
better than vain conversation, a brief stating of the case may enable you to
judge. The faculty of speech was given us for the more easy communication of
our ideas to each other, for mutual benefit. But, after a long and tedious
debate of old, the great giver of this faculty said, "Who is this that
darkeneth counsel by WORDS WITHOUT KNOWLEDGE!" And one of the greatest masters
of reason and language in the English nation observes, that the way of many
disputants, even with regard to the WORDS upon which their arguments turn,
resembles a trader, who, in casting up his accounts, should take the figure 8,
and call it sometimes seven, and sometimes nine, as would best suit his
advantage. Yea, that many expositors, both of divine and human laws, by the
time they have done explaining them, make the WORDS to mean either nothing at
all, or what they please Lock on human understanding, b. 3, c. 10, p. 5 -- 12.
. Which vain deceit God has expressly warned us against, as what he saw would be
used, to impose ordinances upon us "after the doctrines and commandments of
men;" with a show of wisdom, though in reality only "to the satisfying of the
flesh." Gal. vi. 12, Col. ii. 8, 22, 23. For remedy against which, he commands
us to "hold fast the form of sound words;" and to turn away from such as have
"a form of godliness, but deny the power thereof." The form is to be held fast
"in faith and love, which is in Christ Jesus." A form is assumed to cover those
who are lovers of their own selves: Yea, "lovers of pleasures more than lovers
of God." 2 Timothy i. 13, and iii. 2 -- 5. A form of man's invention often calls
the natural offspring of professors, heirs of promise. The form calls them
"children of wrath, even as others." Ephesians. ii. 3. Yea, the form says, "that
which is born of the flesh, is flesh; -- ye must be born again." John iii. 6,
7. Compare these things with what the word of truth says of circumcision, and
it will bring us directly to the case in hand. Many believing Jews were not
only zealous for the continuance of circumcision to their children, but also to
have the same imposed upon the Gentile converts. To whom therefore the apostle
said, "In Jesus Christ neither circumcision avails any thing, nor
uncircumcision, but faith which works by love -- but a new creature.
Circumcision is nothing, and uncircumcision is nothing, but the keeping of the
commandments of God." Gal. v. 6, and vi. 15, 1 Cor. vii. 19. Once that was his
command; and while it was so, obedience thereto must be yielded by every
Israelite, or else he must be cut off from that church. But now that command is
out of date, which made their attempt still to obey it of no avail, to be
nothing; yea, in some respects, worse than nothing. And how can any token of
church membership, that is founded upon the covenant of circumcision, be any
better now than it was in the apostles days? For when many who were born in
that covenant, and had received the token of it, came to the first
administrator of baptism, he said, "who has warned you to flee from the wrath
to come? Bring forth therefore fruits meet for repentance; and think not to say
within yourselves, we have Abraham to our father; for I say unto you, that God
is able of these stones to raise up children unto Abraham." Matt. iii. 7 -- 9.
And our Lord's commission to his ministers is, to "teach and baptize," to
"preach the gospel to every creature: He that believes and is baptized shall
be saved." Matt. xxviii. 19, Mark xvi. 15, 16. Which order of things they
followed on the day of Pentecost, when "they who gladly received the word were
baptized. -- And the Lord added to the church daily such as should be saved."
Acts ii. 41, 47. Or, as an excellent author renders it, "the saved Edwards on a
right to sacraments, p. 53. Yet a noted minister in Boston has presumed to deny
that saving grace is a qualification, without which persons may not come to the
Lord's table. And of the visible kingdom of Christ he says. "The institutions
of this kingdom are all of them so contrived, as to be, at once, equally and
powerfully adapted both to begin and carry on the work of sanctification in the
souls of all that are members of it. The divinely appointed way, in which
persons become members of the visible church of Christ, is utterly inconsistent
with the supposition, that, in order to their being so, they must be the
subjects of saving faith, or judged to be so." Chauncy's five sermons on
breaking of bread, 1772, p. 95, 105, 106. This is one fruit of confounding the
Jewish and Christian covenants together.
." And this form, this order of things, appears in all their after proceedings.
And the divine promise to the church, "that all her children should be taught
of God," is explained by our Savior, as meaning such a teaching and learning
as draws every man of them to "come unto him." Isai. live. 13, John vi. 45. We
therefore would use every gospel means to draw children and others to Christ,
and then into his church; but know of no warrant for bringing them to baptism
"before they come to Christ." Many will allow that this was necessary in the
first planting of Christianity, who yet will have it, that the members of the
Christian church brought their infants afterward to baptism upon their faith,
because they say they are in the same covenant of grace which was made with
Abraham in Genesis xvii. But we ought to remember that Abraham had no warrant from
that covenant to circumcise any one but such as were born in his house, or
bought with his money. The first warrant which was given to that church to
admit strangers by households, was on the day when they came out of Egypt. Exodus
xii. 48. And the form of sound words is express, that Christ is mediator of a
better covenant, that is, not according to the covenant which God made with
Israel on that day. The one he calls "the first and the old covenant," the
other the second and the new covenant, and says, "he takes away the first that
he may establish the second." Heb. viii. 6 -- 13, and x. 9. And one of the
plainest points of difference betwixt those two covenants is this, that the
first took in great numbers that did "not know God, nor his forgiving mercy;"
the other requires that knowledge in every member, "from the least to the
greatest." Deuteronomy. xxix. 10 -- 13, Heb. viii. 10 -- 12. And though many would
have it, that this distinction is only in the efficacy of the administrations,
and not in the covenants; yet it is certain that the efficacy of the "covenant
of circumcision" was the same to Abraham, as that of the new covenant is to
believers now; as he looked by faith through that shadow. Acts. vii. 8, Romans
iv. 11. And if men had not daringly taken away these names which the book of
God calls the covenants by, and added thereto words of their own invention,
this controversy would doubtless have ceased long ago.

And had it not been for the like practice concerning the manner of baptism, we
apprehend we should never have heard sprinkling called a mode of baptism, any
more than we should have heard sprinkling called a mode of dipping: This being
the very meaning of the word baptism See Dr. Russell, in the Portsmouth
dispute, p. 105. And Dr. (...) body of divinity, vol. 3, p. 333.
For the word of truth says, we are "buried by it, buried in it;" and all know
that to be buried is to be covered. And the great design of that gospel
institution is well described by the before named excellent author, who says,

"That baptism, by which the primitive converts were admitted into the church,
was used as an exhibition and token of their being visibly "regenerated, dead
to sin, alive to God, having the old man crucified," being delivered from the
reigning power of sin, being made free from sin, and become the servants of
righteousness, those servants of God that have their "fruit unto that holiness
whose end is everlasting life," as is evident by Romans vi. throughout. -- He
don't mean, only, that their baptism laid them under special obligations to
these things, and was a mark and token of their engagement to be thus
hereafter; but was designed as a mark, token and exhibition, of their being
visibly thus already Edwards on a right to sacraments, p. 20.
."

This is an exact description of our sentiments concerning this matter, and
must we not act accordingly, for fear it should condemn the practice of others?
We abhor the thoughts of interrupting the worship of any who differ from us; or
of using any sort of violence, to enforce our sentiments upon them. And though
there have been Baptists formed into church state in this land for these 140
years, yet our adversaries have been forced to go above 100 years further back,
and over to a country 3300 miles off, in order to get any such thing to
reproach us with, that ever was done under the Baptist name. And this mean and
scandalous practice toward us was repeated in the Boston Gazette, no longer ago
than the first day of last month. But that is so far from being our case, that
in 1644 a law was made in Boston, to banish any man out of their jurisdiction,
that should only oppose infant sprinkling, or that should depart from the place
where any were going to administer it. In 1651, two Baptist ministers were
seized, only for peaceably worshipping God with a Christian brother at Lynn, and
were imprisoned and fined at Boston, where one of them was most cruelly
scourged. Four years after, a pious member of the church in Charlestown was
convinced that he had no divine warrant to bring his child to baptism; yet was
still desirous to continue in the communion of that church; but only for his
refusing to bring his child, or to stand up and look on when they sprinkled
infants, they censured and excluded him therefrom. And for his joining with
others in forming the first Baptist church in Boston, he was disfranchised,
fined, imprisoned and banished. And no tongue can describe all the deceit and
cruelty that Paedobaptists have been guilty of toward our denomination, from
that time to this. No longer ago than the 26th of last June, the worship of a
peaceable number of Christians, in this State, was violently interrupted, and a
horrid mockery of this divine ordinance was committed, in order to prevent
their acting in it according to their consciences. The proofs of the former
part of these facts may be seen in our Baptist history, p. 150, 216 -- 237,
359, etc. An account of this last affair was published Oct. 15, 1778,
Pepperell's answer thereto on Nov. 12, and our reply on Dec. 3. All in the
Boston Independent Chronicle.


. And the two greatest complaints that our opponents make against us at this
day are, because we refuse tamely to yield to such burdens, as they are not
willing to touch with one of their fingers.

I challenge their whole party to produce an instance, if they can, of their
communing at the Lord's table with any person that they did not think was
baptized; yet they have no better ground to accuse us of rigidness upon, than
because we refuse to do so.

Again, the greatest plea for our present war against Britain, is because she
claimed a power to tax us where we were not represented; yet our opponents here
have claimed and exercised such a power over us for these 140 years. And they
have no other color for their accusation against our denomination, of
disobeying government, or disturbing the peace of it, than our refusal of any
active obedience to that usurpation, and our plainly exposing the evil thereof
to the public. And had not the Britons as good a pretense to call the Americans
rebels upon, as any here have for the above accusation against us? Nothing
prolongs controversy more, than a mis-stating and misrepresenting of the
question in debate. The word of truth plainly speaks of those who get into the
Christian church without saving faith, as thieves who did not come in by the
door, but that they crept in unawares. John x. 9, Gal. ii. 4, Jude iv.
Therefore the question in hand is not whether thieves do not sometimes creep
into houses, or into churches; but it is whether when we see them we may
consent with them, or whether it is not our indispensable duty to turn away
from those who do so? Psalm. l. 16, 18, 2d Tim. iii. 5, 6. Yea, and to attend
closely upon the means and ways that God has appointed, for the guarding his
church against and purging it from all such evils. Matt. vii. 6, 15, 16, Luke
vi. 42 -- 45, Romans x. 10, 1st. Cor. v. 7 -- 13. We are far from supposing the
efficacy of baptism to lie in much or little water. It is wholly in obedience
to God, and in his blessing thereon. But how many are there of our accusers,
who will scarcely allow that infants can be saved without it? And I entreat you
to consider what tendency it must have, to tell persons that they were born in
the covenant of grace, and that they had the same sealed to them in their
infancy. For it is most certain, that natural birth, and all that parents and
ministers can do for us, can never raise one soul above the power of self-love;
and what dreadful work has that principle lately made among us? It has plainly
verified the words of HIM who says, "this know also, that in the last days
perilous times shall come; for men shall be lovers of their own selves,
covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful,
unholy, without natural affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent,
fierce, despisers of those that are good, traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers
of pleasures more than lovers of God; having a form of godliness, but denying
the power thereof; from such turn away."

And as it is certain, that Christianity was first planted and was propagated
through the world, for 300 years, by TRUTH and LOVE, without, and often
against, the use of secular force; can the power thereof be more plainly denied
in any way, than by declaring that natural birth and the doings of men can
bring us into it, and that it would soon fail if it was not supported by tax
and compulsion?

FINIS

