A SERMON DELIVERED AT HANOVER, (in NEW JERSEY) APRIL 22d, 1778. BEING THE DAY
OF PUBLIC FASTING AND PRAYER THROUGHOUT THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

BY JACOB GREEN, A. M.

N. B. The Scarcity of Paper has prevented the printing this Sermon till this
time: But it is thought it may not yet be unseasonable.

CHATHAM: PRINTED BY SHEPARD KOLLOCK, AT HIS OFFICE, 1779.

THE PREFACE.
IT IS the duty of every one to do what he can, in a rational friendly manner,
to promote the public good and prevent public calamity. For a man to withhold
what he thinks would be of public utility, is either not to be friendly or not
to be faithful. Where there are vices or prejudices and prepossession, it is not
likely that every truth can be properly exhibited, and urged, without offending
some.

My aim in the following discourse has been to speak plainly, without fear,
without partiality, without ill will to any; with hearty benevolence to the
public, not as pleasing man, but God who tries the heart. If some things in the
sermon should offend a number, I shall not be disappointed, and if the
publication shall be useful to any, may God have the glory.

A SERMON, etc.
WE are called upon by our civil rulers to set apart this day for fasting and
prayer. We are called upon by those who have the management or lead in our
public affairs -- who best know, and have the most comprehensive view of,
things in these United States. We have reason to bless God that those who go
foremost in affairs of state will call upon us to apply to God, yea will lead
us to the throne of grace for divine aid. The proclamation points out various
particulars that we ought to bear in mind this day. I might take the several
things in the proclamation as subjects of discourse; and I shall pay a due
regard to what is there said: but I shall mention several passages of
scripture, which I think we may properly have in view this day, and which if
you please you may consider as my text.

Jer. xxx. 11. Though I make a full end of all nations whither I have scattered
thee, yet will I not make a full end of thee: but I will correct thee in
measure, and will not leave thee altogether unpunished.

Isai. lviii. 6. Is not this the fast that I have chosen; to loose the bands of
wickedness, to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the oppressed go free, and
that ye break every yoke?

Romans ii. 1, 3. Thou art inexcusable, O man, whosoever thou art that judge:
for wherein thou judge another thou condemnest thyself; for thou that judge
do the same thing. -- And think thou this, O man, that judge them that
do such things, and do the same, that thou shall escape the judgment of God?

Deuteronomy. xxx. 9 The Lord will again rejoice over thee for good, as he rejoiced
over thy fathers, if thou shall hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God, to
keep his commandments and statutes, and if thou turn unto the Lord thy God with
all thy heart, and with all thy soul.

The great and glorious God, who made and governs the world, has an intuitive
view of all things in Heaven, earth and hell. He has seen from the first how
our American troubles came on, and how they have proceeded. He permits the
British court to oppress us, and has excited our resentment; excites us to
stand for our liberties civil and religious. We have a great and wise, an holy
and just, yet merciful God to apply to. When we consider our sinfulness we see
our need of his infinite mercy, and implore it. When we view our contest with
Britain we appeal to the justice of God with courage and confidence. By Britain
we are abused, oppressed, most cruelly treated: We have been forced into this
war. Liberty and other common rights of mankind we desired. These were denied.
The most abject submission to unreasonable terms has been urged upon us. We
cannot so meanly, so basely submit. We are contending for liberty. Our cause is
just -- is glorious; more glorious than to contend for a kingdom. A cause on
which we may hope for a divine blessing. Though our contention with
Great Britain is so glorious, yet have we reason to be humbled and abased
before God. We have reason to be humble and mourn for the many sins, the many
vices that prevail among us. God has a controversy with us: How very different
from that of Great Britain! God most righteously contends and corrects us for
our sins: in this case we have reason to submit, repent, and reform. Britain
contends and threatens ruin; in this case we justly vindicate ourselves, and
ought most vigorously to exert ourselves in a proper defense. I have always had
the firmest belief that we should prevail in our contest with Britain. But I
have always thought, and often told you, that God would scourge us for our
sins. What son is there whom the father chastens not? It Is common for God to
correct his people when working deliverance for them. Thus he often treated
Israel in the days of the judges. God often makes use of the worst of
instruments to correct his own people, while he calls upon them to repent and
reform. God corrects us by Britain, and loudly calls upon us to repent; while
the cruelty of our enemies, and the justice of our cause, is not forgot before
him. While I am obliged to point out many crying sins among us, I cannot help
animating you from the consideration that we are engaged in a glorious cause:
We are nobly contending for the good of millions yet unborn. In this cause I
would have you encouraged and emboldened, though I must lead your thoughts to
some disagreeable subjects. There are sins, great and aggravated sins among us.
God is angry and contending with us. We are this day called upon by our rulers
to fast and pray -- to confess and forsake our sins. It Is my duty to point out
the sins that abound, that are most provoking to God, for which he maintains a
controversy with us, and which we should sincerely bewail and speedily forsake.
I should be unworthy to occupy the place of a gospel minister, if through fear,
sloth, or any thing else I should neglect to do this. And if while thus
endeavoring to keep a good conscience, I should be obliged to point out some
deficiency in our rulers themselves, I should act in character as a minister of
Jesus Christ, and a friend to my country. The sins or vices which in my view
are most prevalent among us, and which it is proper I should this day point out,
and which call for reformation, are such as these:

Infidelity, profane cursing and swearing, neglect and contempt of religion;
selfishness, avarice, and extortion; supporting and encouraging slavery;
criminal languor and negligence in defense of our civil and sacred rights.

I. Infidelity, profane cursing and swearing, neglect and contempt of religion.
-- I put all these together because they are breaches of the first table of the
law. They are more immediately against God himself. Sins against God are in
their own nature the greatest sins. The greatest command, as our savior shows
us, is to love or show a proper regard to God. The breach of the greatest
command must be the greatest sin, for sin is the transgression of the law. In
the Jewish state sins against God immediately were ordered to be punished with
death; and most reasonably, because that state was a theocracy; God was their
king: And sin against him was high treason, was despising and opposing the
chief magistrate. And though God does not now require us to punish those sins
in the same manner; yet he, the moral governor of the world, is highly
offended, and will sooner or later enter into judgment for such iniquity, and
will punish those states where such sins abound. The sin of infidelity, is
great and most ungrateful. To deny and reject the holy scriptures, which is the
voice of God speaking from heaven to us; to treat it as a forgery and
imposture; to renounce and blaspheme the Savior who has died for our good,
must be very wicked and provoking, when it is considered with what clear light
and evidence the scripture is conveyed to us; by its own internal excellency,
most agreeable to the divine perfections; by the wonderful and exact fulfillment
of ancient and undeniable prophecy and predictions; and by a multitude of the
most wonderful and incontestable miracles. The sin of infidelity must appear
dreadful when we consider the worth of immortal souls; an eternity of happiness
or misery before us; when we consider how much Jesus Christ has done and
suffered for us; when we consider how God has distinguished us from the
heathen, and given us a happy opportunity to secure our eternal felicity. This
dreadful sin does awfully abound in our land; but, blessed be God, I trust I
may say not among our rulers: Therefore it does not so much expose us to
national or public judgments as if the leaders of the people countenanced it.

Profane cursing and swearing. -- What shall I say? I need not inform any that
it exceedingly abounds. Shall I say this is less criminal than infidelity?
probably in some inadvertent instances it may be. Infidelity is the more
deliberate sin: But to affront God to his face by profaning his sacred name is
shocking. To defy, and at the same time imprecate the vengeance of the
omnipotent, is most wicked and absurd. To dare the power and justice of God,
and call for damnation on themselves and others, is folly and wickedness beyond
what I am able to express. God himself has declared that he will not hold them
guiltless who take his name in vain. No sin has less temptation; no sin is less
excusable; scarce any sin shows a more hardened and impenitent heart. What an
amazing increase of this sin in our land in a few years! What an increase of it
in our army since it was first constituted! Then profane cursing and swearing
was forbid under proper penalties: See the rules and articles of the Congress
for regulating the army. Not only was that vice forbid, but for a time some
considerable regard was shown to those articles. But, alas! how little thought
of and regarded now, not only by the common soldiers, but by some, may I not
say many, of the officers themselves. Not only in our army, but through our
land, God is daily affronted and provoked by many thousands who in that impious
manner set their mouths against the Heavens.

Neglect and contempt of religion, or things sacred. -- The day that God
requires us to set apart to himself is disregarded and profaned. He that has a
right to dispose of all our time, allows us six days in seven for our own
employments and recreations, and requires us to devote one to himself. How
ungrateful and wicked to rob him of this! and yet how common. Not only the
sabbath, but religious people and religious exercises are treated with
contempt. The house of God, and the worship of God are despised. The man that
conscientiously scruples to comply with fashionable vices is shunned, is
treated with a sneer if not hooted at. Oh! how valuable, rather invaluable are
the means of grace. If we have immortal souls, if God has opened a way for our
salvation by Christ, what an unspeakable privilege is it to have a day and
season of grace; and what a provocation to have all that God has done for us
neglected and despised. By the work of redemption God designed chiefly to
display and illustrate his perfections in our world; and by our compliance with
the methods of his grace, and a cordial obedience to his law, we glorify him.
How provoking then to disregard all that God has done for us, and treat
religion with contempt. God has distinguished us from the heathen, and may we
not fear that by despising our privilege God may say of us as of Israel of old.
Amos iii. 2. You only have I known of all the family of the earth, therefore
will I punish you for all your iniquity.

II. Selfishness, avarice, and extortion abound, and cry to Heaven against us.
-- The selfishness I mean is that which is opposite to public spiritedness and
general benevolence. This is really the root of all the vices in the world;
more immediately of those which hurt our fellow creatures. A selfish person
will promote his own private interest at the expense of the public. He will
injure and oppress others to advance himself, if he thinks he can do it with
impunity. This narrow sordid disposition has abundantly appeared of late, at a
time when we have all had the loudest calls to deny self, and exert ourselves
for the common good. But instead of a public spirit which should have been the
moving principle in us all, there has in many appeared the most insatiable
avarice, and a greedy grasping at every thing within their reach; endeavoring,
at the expense of the public, to draw every thing possible into the narrow
circle of self. Hence the most shameless barefaced extortion; taking advantage
of others necessity; demanding a most exorbitant price for the commodities of
life, especially the most scarce and necessary articles. If we do not endeavor
in some good measure to do as we would be done by, and consider our neighbors
with whom we deal, as being a part of the same body with ourselves, and to be
advantaged as well as ourselves, we are not fit to be members of civil society.
God with indignation beholds our selfish, avaricious, oppressive practice: And
we may well suppose that for this, among other evils, he corrects us by
continuing the war upon us. What says the scripture, 1 These. iv. 6. That no man
go beyond or defraud his brother in any matter, because that the Lord is the
avenger of all such. Our continuing in this selfish, unfriendly, cruel
practice, under the rod of God, while his judgments are abroad in the land, is
an aggravation of our sin; and shows a perverse, incorrigible disposition, and
is an implicit justification of ourselves in our evil ways. It Is an aggravation
of the sin of oppression, and extortion at this time, that it is practicing the
same thing that we so loudly complain of in the conduct of Great Britain toward
us. Britain would have been at peace with us could they have extorted from us
every thing which they thought proper. And those among us who act upon the
principle of getting what they can from others by taking advantage of their
wants and weakness, are practicing the same thing which we are now opposing in
Great Britain, and which is the ground of that cruel war which this country is
now, and has so long a time been bleeding under. These extortioners and
oppressors among ourselves, would, if circumstances concurred and favored, act
as cruelly as the British ministry has done. God sees and weighs the conduct of
our British oppressors, and the conduct of extortioners among ourselves. His
judgments will sooner or later, in this world or the next, most dreadfully
overtake the guilty. Let us, let the inhabitants of the land fear and take
warning; repent and reform that we may not continue under the divine
displeasure, and fall under still heavier judgments. The selfish sordid
disposition that I have mentioned has no doubt produced that criminal languor
and negligence in the defense of our civil and sacred rights which the
proclamation mentions. Are we not too remiss in carrying on the war? Does it
not proceed from a selfish contracted principle? Are we not too fearful of
expending our property in the public cause? Is there not a too general
disposition to shrink away from the employment or expense of the war, hoping it
will succeed well, and end well, without our most vigorous exertion? But surely
we are every way called upon to exert ourselves in the present contest. The
importance of the cause calls upon us; the danger arising from remissness calls
upon us; our fellow creatures suffering in prisons and other confinements calls
upon us; our religion and civil liberty are at stake; yea, our all is at stake:
If we do not succeed we are undone. And shall we at such a time as this, by a
mean felfishness, avarice, and extortion, not only shrink back from so good and
great a cause, but even suck the blood, and tear out the bowels of our country.
Our extortion really tends to this.

III. Supporting and encouraging slavery, is one of the great and crying evils
among us. -- Can it be believed that a people contending for liberty should, at
the same time, be promoting and supporting slavery? What foreign nation can
believe that we who so loudly complain of Britain's attempts to oppress and
enslave us, are, at the same time, voluntarily holding multitudes of fellow
creatures in abject slavery; and that while we are abundantly declaring that we
esteem liberty the greatest of all earthly blessings? I cannot but think, and
must declare my sentiments, that the encouraging and supporting negro slavery
is a crying sin in our land. In our contest with Britain how much has been said
and published in favor of liberty? In what horrid colors has oppression and
slavery been painted by us? And is it not as great a sin for us to practice it
as for Britain? Thou that say a man should not steal, do thou steal? Is
not the hard yoke of slavery felt by negroes as well as by white people? Are
they not fond of liberty as well as others of the human race? Is not freedom
the natural unalienable right of all? What say the Congress in their
declaration of independency? "We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all
men are created equal, that they are endowed by their creator with certain
unalienable rights, that among these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of
happiness: that to secure these rights governments are instituted." -- Thus the
Congress. If liberty is one of the natural and unalienable rights of all men,
as doubtless it is; if it is self-evident, i. e. so clear that it needs not
proof, how unjust, how inhuman, for Britons, or Americans, not only to attempt,
but actually to violate this right? Britain is attempting to violate it; we in
America have a long time been in the actual violation of it. I have observed
that sins against God directly, are, in their own nature, the greatest sins;
yet there may be some particular sins against fellow creatures (which are also
sins against God) especially cruelty, so circumstanced, and so aggravated, as
to be the most crying sins of a particular people. Thus the transgressions of
Damascus, Gaza, Tire, Edom, Moab, and Ammon, for which God entered into
judgment, and would not turn away their punishment, were cruelty to fellow
creatures; because they threshed Gilead with instruments of iron, carried away
the whole captivity to deliver them to their enemies, pursued with the sword,
cast off pity, ripped up the women with child, and burnt the bones of kings into
lime. Amos first and second chapters. And I cannot but think our practicing and
patronizing negro slavery, is the most crying sin in our land. And that on this
account, more than any one particular thing, God maintains his controversy with
us. The reasons why I think so are two: First, because it is a most cruel,
inhuman, unnatural sin, most directly contrary to the whole law of God
comprehended in love, to love our neighbor as ourself, and do as we would be
done by. The slaves have never forfeited their right to freedom; it is as the
Congress say, a natural right, and an unalienable one. And if it is taken away,
it is violently taken. The Apostle Paul ranks men stealers (which is the sin we
are guilty of by the negro slavery) with murderers of fathers and murderers of
mothers, whore-mongers, defilers of themselves with mankind, liars, perjured
persons, etc. 1 Timothy i. 9. Secondly, because it is openly and avowedly doing
that which we are contending against with our British enemies, and look upon so
unjust and cruel in them. The whole of the present war, and all our struggles
under it, and our sufferings and hardships by it, are to oppose and shun that
from others, which we are tolerating and practicing ourselves, and that in a
greater degree than our enemies are attempting. If we were not blinded by
sinful self-interest, and criminal partiality, we could not but see and feel
the force of the Apostles reasoning in Romans 2. Thou art inexcusable, O man; for
wherein thou judge another thou condemnest thy self; for thou that judge
do the same thing. And think thou this, O man, that judge them which do
such things, and do the same, that thou shall escape the judgment of God.
Thou that preachest a man, should not steal, do thou steal? Thou that say
a man, should not commit adultery, do thou commit adultery? Thou that
abhorrest idols, do thou commit sacrilege? Thou that make thy boast of the
law, through breaking the law dishonourest thou God? These words show that we
cannot expect to escape the judgments of heaven unless we reform and are more
consistent. We are condemned out of our own mouth, and by our own practice. How
often has it been said in our day that liberty is the greatest human blessing;
and that it is oppressive and cruel to deprive us of it? How often has it been
said that slavery is more to be dreaded than death? On how many liberty poles;
on how many garments and ornaments worn publicly, have been inscribed these
emphatical words, Liberty or Death! How must these words sound in the ears of
those that are held in slavery by us? How must they sound in the ears of all
impartial persons? Especially how must they appear to the great governor of the
world, who is no respecter of persons, but will judge all persons by the law of
liberty and equity? I am persuaded these united American States must, and will
groan under the afflicting hand of God, till we reform in this matter. And our
case looks the darker in this respect, that it is an evil which the legislature
might remove. Sins and vices, that creep in among people, while laws and
magistrates are generally against them, are not so threatening to a state; but
if the political head is sick, and the heart faint, the danger is greater. How
justly might God say to us this day, as to Israel of old, Is this the feast
that I have chosen? To what purpose is the multitudes of your supplications?
When you spread forth your hands I will hide my eyes from you; your hands are
full of oppression and slavery. Put away the evil of your doings from before
mine eyes, seek judgment, relieve the oppressed slave. Is not this the feast
that I have chosen, to loose the bands of wickedness, to undo the heavy
burdens, to let the oppressed go free: The oppressed slaves: And that ye break
every yoke. I doubt not but we may succeed against our British oppressors even
if we should not free ourselves from the guilt of enslaving others. The cause
of Britain is most unjust, and our contest with them is most righteous. But
however we may be free from British oppression, I venture to say, we shall have
inward convulsions, contentions, oppressions, and various calamities, so that
our liberty will be uncomfortable, till we wash our hands from the guilt of
negro slavery. And our neglecting to reform in this matter may protract the war
to a distressing length, though we shall succeed in the end. And now how
righteous is it in God to permit oppression and extortion to prevail. Is it not
a punishment for our much worse oppression of the slaves.

Though the emancipation of the slaves ought to be managed by the legislatures,
yet the masters of slaves need not wait for that. If those masters had a true
spirit of freedom; if they abhored the very nature of slavery, they would soon
free themselves from such a blot in the character of freemen* I know there are
many in our land, who are sensible of this evil, and wish it remedied; but they
are generally persons not so immediately guilty, not being possessed of slaves,
and they are ready to say, what can we do? Let me observe, that there ought to
be petitions from the friends of liberty in every county to the legislatures of
the several states, humbly requesting them to take this matter under
consideration. If the legislatures would come into proper measures to free the
slaves in some suitable time, it would free our country from a load of guilt: I
say in some suitable time, for I suppose it should not be done at once, but
gradually.

I know it is objected, that this is not a proper time, that this cannot be
entered upon in this state of war and confusion. But let me observe, that if
this is one cause of God's controversy with us, and of his continuing to frown
upon us, the present is the most proper time to consider and rectify this
matter, that it may be a means of freeing us from our calamities. We might as
well say that we cannot, in this difficult time, raise men for our army,
because we are so straightened for help, and need our men at home; whereas this
is the time in which it must be done. To say this is not the proper time for
our legislature to consider the emancipation of our slaves, is, in my view, as
absurd as for a sick man to say his stomach is so out of order that he cannot
now take a disagreeable medicine, but will wait till he is better, and can take
it without such difficulty. I know there are many imaginary difficulties, and
many objections raised, but it is easy to get over them all except such as arise
from self-interest, and those will not easily be got over Many plans might be
offered for emancipating the slaves: If it would be of any importance I would
offer one in a postscript. It may be no one plan would suit every state; some
might choose one, and others another.
If we had a clear, rational view, of the worth, nature, and importance of
freedom; if we had a proper view of the criminal nature of enslaving others; if
we had a proper view of that tribunal, where judgment will pass without any
respect to persons, by the law of loving others as our selves, we should easily
get over all the difficulties that are in the case.

I would think as favorably as I can, concerning the guilty state of my
country, which I most heartily wish to prosper and enjoy the divine smiles. I
would excuse and extenuate, as far as possible, the unnatural sin of holding
fellow creatures in perpetual bondage. I suppose the sin is less aggravated,
because it is by many not thought to be a sin, and because it is so common. It Is
like the polygamy of the ancient patriarchs. That was a common evil, and not
duly considered. To marry several wives, and have a concubine or mistress
beside, was an unnatural evil, as God has created an equal number of each sex.
And for a person of a religious character to live in that practice now, would
be scandalous, and thought to be impious; and very justly. Yet this sin in
itself is by no means so great, so unnatural, so cruel, and so provoking to
God, as it is to keep in perpetual bondage those who have a natural right to
freedom, and have not forfeited it. Polygamy of old was a common sin and not
duly considered: And slavery being so common now, and not duly weighed, may
extenuate, but will not free from guilt. I have reason to hope this matter will
be considered and remedied, and that God will turn to us in mercy and prosper
us. We should not be discouraged, but repent and exert ourselves in the cause
of liberty, both against Britain and among ourselves. I know some serious
people, hearty friends to our country, are disposed to sink into
discouragements when they view the many vices among us, the frowns of God upon
us, and how few there are that pay any regard to the tokens of his displeasure.
The abounding of vice, and insensibility under the rod of God, is certainly the
darkest aspect in our public affairs. But still we may encourage ourselves in
the goodness of God, and every one, as far as his influence extends, attempt a
reformation, beginning with self. God is yet waiting to be gracious; he deals
with us as with a people whom he designs to save and not destroy. Though he
corrects, yet he shows us many favors. He remarkably appears for us, and
prevents our ruin; yea, gives us advantages against our enemies. We should
consider that correction is no sign of rejection. Things are yet in our favor.
Though the war is protracted, and we are so long held under the rod, yet all
things shall be for the best in the end. Nothing less than what we have
suffered would have done for us. Nothing less would have made sufficiently deep
impression on us and on posterity. Nothing less would have given us and
posterity a view of the worth of the privileges we contend for. How often is it
recorded by Englishmen that their ancestors have waded through rivers of blood
to enjoy the privileges of freemen. Our present difficulties will be
recollected with advantage to the end of time. If God is contending with us,
yet he deals with us as children for whom he designs mercy: We have many tokens
for good. It Is encouraging that our rulers regard religion, acknowledge the
providence of God, and call upon us to seek him, to repent and reform. And if
they are deficient in some things, yet they uprightly mean to discourage evil,
and promote virtue; and whereunto they have not attained, desire that even this
may be shown unto them. I cannot but hope this day may be in some measure such
a fast as God has chosen.

Some people are apt to think we have no reason to expect, and can scarce pray
for an outward blessing, while so many vices abound among us. Indeed we have
reason to be humbled and mourn, reason to repent and reform; but that we may
not sink into discouragements consider, that God who is infinite in goodness,
waits long to be gracious, and may yet try us with mercy as a means to lead us
to repentance. We may well pray for his merciful interposition, that being
delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we may serve him in righteousness
and holiness all the days of our life. Will some ask, what if we should not
return to God by repentance and reformation, but that we should continue in
sin, and vice continue to abound, as it has done two or three years past? I
answer, that would be truly lamentable, and a very dark sign, that would much
damp our hopes. God forbid it should be so. But in that case, I should expect
that God would yet try us with a mixture of mercies and corrections. That we
should be delivered from British tyranny, and have plenty in our land, with
internal commotions, divisions, convulsions, oppressions, and other
difficulties, while God gave us a space to repent and reform, which, if after
all we should refuse to do, we should be ripening for heavy judgments in some
future time. And how long an infinitely merciful and long suffering God may
deter those judgments, we know not. I cannot but hope, yea believe, that after
the war is over we shall set ourselves to reform many things that are amiss
among us, slavery not excepted. I must believe this great event, this important
struggle for liberty, will, in the end, be a means of putting an end to negro
slavery in this land, and to many other oppressions and impositions, which a
state of liberty is adapted to throw off and resist.

Our struggle for liberty is attended to through the world. All eyes are upon
us; and all that are not self-interested, or grievously imposed on by
misrepresentations, think our cause is just, and wish us success. Should we
obtain our end, this land of liberty could not be so inconsistent, could not
with any face continue and support slavery, and other oppressions contrary to a
state of freedom. On the whole, my friends, we have the greatest reason to
reform our lives, trust in God, and exert ourselves in our country's cause with
full confidence of success.

My dear friends, I cannot leave you without a repeated earnest exhortation to
repentance and reformation. Infidelity, profaneness, contempt of divine things,
avarice, oppression and extortion, are provoking to God. And if God be against
us, who can eventually be for us? All our exertions will be to no purpose if
God does not favor us. How easily can he disappoint all our schemes and
attempts? How easily can he send a sickness that will sweep away our army? How
easily can he deprive us of the fruits of the earth, and cause a famine? How
easily can he give some unexpected success to our enemies? How righteously
might he leave us to such contentions and animosities among ourselves as would
divide and destroy us? In all these ways, and many others, he has in times past
disappointed the hopes of those he has chastised or destroyed. Let us then be
deeply sensible how necessary it is that God be for us. That we be such a people
as he will delight in and bless: That we be reformed, humble, and benevolent.
If God be for us, we need not fear any that are, or can be against us. What a
happy land will this be, if it is a land of true religion! It will then be a
land of liberty, of peace, and plenty. We shall then live in love and peace
among ourselves: And many from other nations will flock to us as the most happy
people on the face of the earth. Were ever people more loudly, more kindly, and
compassionately called upon to repent and turn to God!

FINIS.
P. S. Plan or Scheme for emancipating Slaves.
MANY plans or schemes might be mentioned, but the following is proposed as
most favorable to the owners of slaves, and as freeing them gradually, year
after year, which in many respects might be best for them, and for the country,
viz. All that shall hereafter be born, and all that are now under five years
old, should be free, the males at twenty-one years old, and the females at
eighteen. All above five years, and under ten years of age, to be free, the
males at twenty-three years, and the females at twenty years of age. All above
ten, and under 15 years old, male and female, to be free at twenty-five years
old. All between fifteen and twenty years old, to be free in eight years from
this time. All between twenty and twenty-five, to be free in seven years from
this time. All between twenty-five and thirty, to be free in six years. All
between thirty and thirty-five, to be free in five years. All between
thirty-five and forty, to be free in four years. All between forty and forty
five, to be free in three years. All between forty-five and fifty, to be free
in two years. All between fifty and sixty, to be free in one year. And all
above sixty to serve during life, in order to be taken care of and provided for
by their owners.

In ths plan some would become free in one year, others in two, others in
three, and so on.

The owners might from principles of equity and benevolence, free many of them
in a much shorter tme than is here mentioned, and no doubt many would.


