POLICY, AS WELL AS HONESTY, FORBIDS THE USE OF SECULAR FORCE IN RELIGIOUS
AFFAIRS.

MASSACHUSETTS-STATE: BOSTON: Printed by DRAPER and FOLSOM, and Sold by PHILLIP
FREEMAN, in Union-Street. M,DCC,LXXIX.

The wisdom that is from above, is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy
to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, without partiality, and without
hipocrisy.

James 3.17.
THE necessity of a well regulated government in civil States, is acknowledged
by all; and the importance and benefit of true Christianity, in order thereto,
is no less certain. For the great Author of it assures us, that his disciples
are the salt of the earth, and the light of the world, Mat. 5.13, 14. That is,
his religion is as necessary for the well-being of human society, as salt is to
preserve from putrefaction, or as light is to direct our way, and to guard
against enemies, confusion, and misery. This is evident, because 1st, The
universal rule of equity, enjoined by our Lord, has the most natural and
effectual tendency to promote extensive union of any means in the world: And
both our friends and our enemies know, that our salvation and welfare, as a
people, greatly depends thereupon. 2d, His precepts plainly require, the
yielding to all their dues, faithfulness in every station, benevolence to all,
and the working ill to none. 3d, A regard to all these things is enforced with
the certain promises of his help and blessings, for time and eternity, to those
who please him; and with as sure declarations of tribulation and wrath,
distress and anguish, upon every soul of man that does evil. And who can help
seeing, that these things are as necessary to the welfare of society, as salt
and light are for our bodies? But if so, why have such quarrels and
oppressions, such deceit and cruelty, been practiced for many ages under the
Christian name? The answer in general must be, because many mistakes, and
corrupt principles have been covered with that lovely name; of which the
following are not the least.

1. A conceit that religion gives the subjects of it, a right of dominion over
the persons and properties of others. Which is as contrary to the laws of
Christ, as darkness is to light; Mat. 10.11 -- 14. Luke 10.5 -- 11. 1 Cor.
10.32; 1 Peter 2.12.
and is the evil that all contention comes from. Prove. 13.10. This moved such
as called themselves Christians in Europe, to claim the property of infidels in
America; from the poison whereof we are not yet thoroughly purged.

2. Instead of holding fast THE FORM of sound words, which requires our supreme
regard to God, and the loving of our neighbor as ourselves, men have invented A
FORM of godliness, to cover self-love with; under which they have been false
accusers, and fierce despisers of those that are good. 2. Tim. 1.13 and 3.1 --
5. Under this mask, one generation after another have cast the reproach of
their own wickedness upon others, and have made a prey of such as have departed
from their evils. Isai. 59.15. And what less than this, has been done to the
Baptists, for above two hundred years? It is most evident that the mad actions
at Munster, in 1533, proceeded from a conceit, that the sword was then
consecrated to the christian cause, so that those who had got it into their
hands were to enforce their religious sentiments thereby. Which conceit never
was admitted by any Baptist church that we know of, either in Britain or
America; yet the ruling parties in both countries, have held that evil fast,
while they have, not only reproached the Baptists with the scandals it has
produced, but also have often made a prey of them for departing therefrom.

3. By these means partiality has been established by law, and men have been
empowered to give away the money, and to judge the causes, of such as they were
interested against.

Testimonies against this iniquity, have not only been given by dissenters from
the established worship in this country, but also by some of the greatest men
among the congregationalists; though little regard was paid thereto. In 1656 the
town of Ipswich imposed a tax upon all the inhabitants, for a minister's
settlement, for which distress was made. -- Whereupon one of their greatest
rulers proved, from the first principles of government, that representatives
have no right to give away any money, but only for the good of the whole
community; and that the taking of it away from one person or party, and giving
it to another, was TYRANNY. Mass. history, vol. 3. p. 291 -- 309. Baptist hist.
p. 310 -- 312.
And one of their chief ministers, who had been attached thereto, till he saw
the same measures meted to them again, by the tyrant Andros; was so much
enlightened thereby, as to see, that a man has a right to all his temporal
enjoyments before he becomes a Christian, which he is so far from losing by
embracing Christianity, because he does not happen to be of the uppermost
party, that he said, "For an uppermost party of Christians, to punish men in
their temporal enjoyments, because they dissent from them in some religious
opinions, or with an exclusion from the temporal enjoyments which would justly
belong to them, is a ROBBERY." Dr. Increase Mathor's life, p. 59.
And in the year 1700, he plainly proved, that Christ has given the right of
choosing all church officers, to the brethren in each particular church; from
whence he asserted that it would be SIMONICAL to affirm that this sacred
privilege may be purchased with money. His vindication of gospel order, p. 67,
68.
And the town of Boston, where he was minister, procured a special act of the
assembly, to exempt them from this simony, which has been imposed upon the
country ever since. If any enquire how tyranny, simony, and robbery came to be
introduced, and to be practiced so long, under the Christian name? The answer
is plain, from the word of truth. It was by deceitful reasonings from the
hand-writings which Christ blotted out, and nailed to his cross. Col. 2.8, 14.
In those writings direction was given to Israel, to seize the lands and goods
of heathens, to make slaves of them; and in other respects, to make a visible
distinction in their dealing betwixt their own brethren and all others. A high
priest was also set up at the head of their worship, who, with his family, were
to have the whole direction thereof; and at whose sentence unclean persons were
to be excluded from their camp; unclean houses pulled down and removed; and who
had power to turn even a king out of the temple. And who can describe all the
superstition, blind-devotion and church-tyranny, that have been bro't in by
deceitful reasonings from thence! Whereas the new testament plainly shows, that
the church of Israel was typical of the elect among all nations. Their literal
enemies types of the saints spiritual foes, and the gain they made of them,
figurative of the advantages believers receive from tribulations and
persecutions. That their priesthood were types of Christ and his saints; and
officers are never called priests in the new testament, in distinction from
other believers. And in these and a great number of other instances, the
comparing of type and antitype together, is very instructive and edifying; but
the invention of officers, orders, and ceremonies, in the Christian church, to
answer to those of the Jews; yea, and to exceed them, as the Christian
privileges were to be the greatest, is the very way that mystery Babylon was
built; which mystery is ever to be known by these two infallible marks.

1 By not holding THE HEAD, even the ONE LAWGIVER, in whom the church is
COMPLETE; but imposing ordinances upon her, after the doctrines and
commandments of men, which have a show, but not the reallity, of wisdom. Col.
2.10, 19 -- 22. James 4.12.

2 By not allowing each believer to act as he has been taught, but others, puffed
up with a fleshly mind, assume the power to judge for them in religious
matters. Col. 2.7, 16 -- 18.

And can any religious establishment by human laws be found, without, at least,
these marks of the beast, and the number of his name, which is the number of a
man. In the typical state of the church, the number six, whether in weeks,
months or years, was descriptive of seasons of fatigue and labor, and the
seventh of each, were resting times. So the beast can get no further than the
toiling number, whether it be in units, tens, or hundreds. But those who had
gotten the victory over the beast, and over his image, and over his mark, and
over the number of his name, were seen by John, in his vision, standing upon
the sea of glass, singing the song of Moses; and of the Lamb. Rev. 1^ ^8 and
15.2, 3. Now as the pure word of God is compared to glass. 2 Cor. 3 18. James
1.23 -- 25. does not this vision represent the rest and joy that believers will
find, upon their getting victory over all the inventions of men, when they
shall stand and act entirely upon divine truth, which is as clear as crystal,
and enforced by divine influence, compared to fire? Jer. 23, 29. Rev. 4, 5, 6.
And is it not strictly true to say, that the whole of the late ecclesiastical
laws of this province, were commandments of men, which empowered the ruling
party to judge for the rest in religious affairs, and to enforce that judgment
with the sword. There has been so much of real christianity in this country,
from its first plantation, as greatly to check and restrain the poisonous
influence of this partiality; but the nature of it is never the better for
that. So far from it, that while some are trying to cover themselves with all
the good things that have been among us, and from thence are denying that they
have oppressed any; others are catching at those evils, to shield themselves
against the truth. Many in the State of Rhode Island, bolster themselves up in
an irreligious way, by the stories they have heard of the injustice and cruelty
which the Massachusetts and Connecticuts did to their fathers, under a
religious mask; while that very irreligion is often recurred to, as a
prevailing argument for a religious partiality in these other States. And
though we have great cause of thankfulness, for the light, to distinguish
things more clearly, which has lately been granted, and that our honored rules
have discovered so much of a regard to equal religious liberty; yet, lest the
same should be fully allowed, I hear that some plead, that if rulers have no
right to establish any way of religious worship for its own sake, they have a
right to do it for the good of civil society. The import of which plea, in my
view, is just this viz. That because religion is a means of great good to human
society, therefore rulers ought to improve their power to destroy the means, in
order to accomplish the end!

For the whole of religion is to fear God, and keep HIS commandments; with a
realizing view, that HE will bring every work into judgment, with every secret
thing, whether it be good or evil. And the teaching of his fear by the precepts
of men, is the direct way to confusion and ruin. Eccl. 12.13, 14. Isai. 29. 13
-- 21. God has expressly armed the magistrate with the sword, to punish such as
work ill to their neighbors; and his faithfulness in that work, and our
obedience to such authority, is enforced by those great motives. Romans 13.1 --
10. 1. Tim. 2.^, 3. But it is evident, that the sword is excluded from the
kingdom of the Redeemer, and that he gave this, as a sufficient proof, why it
did not interfere with the government of civil states. John 18.36. And it is
impossible to blend church and state together, without violating our Lord's
commands to both. His command to the church is, Put away from among yourselves
that wicked person. His command to the state is, Let both grow together until
the harvest. 1. Cor. 5.13. Mat. 13.30, 38 -- 43. But it has appeared for these
thousand years, that pure gospel discipline in the church, is very little, if
at all known, in state establishments of religion; and that instead of letting
conformists thereto, and dissenters therefrom, grow together, or enjoy equal
worldly privileges, the sword has been employed to root up, and to prepare war
against, all such as put not into the mouths of the established teachers, who
are the means of upholding such rulers as pervert all equity. Jer. 5.31. Micah.
3.5 -- 11. It is now well known among us, that the having of temporal property
in our own power, so as not to have it taken away without our consent, is the
turning point of all civil freedom. And it is evident, from the above passages,
and many others, that the arming any to take it away with the sword, under a
religious mask, is the greatest engine of tyranny in the world.

The celebrated Bishop of Gloucester wrote a volumn, about forty years ago,
wholly upon this argument, that rulers ought to keep up a religious
establishment for the good of civil society. He owns that the church was
originally a society, distinct from, and independent of the state: But denies
her being complete without an alliance therewith. Which is a plain mark of the
beast, as I have before proved. The motives that he says, the magistrate has,
for taking the church into alliance, are to preserve the essence and purity of
religion, to apply its influence for the good of the state, and to prevent the
mischief it might otherwise occasion thereto. To prove that the magistrate
should be concerned to preserve the purity of religion, he says, Observing
truth, is acting as things really are; he who acts as things really are must
gain his end; all disappointment proceeding from acting as things really are
not. Warburton's alliance between church and state. Third edition* P. 90 -- 92.
Very well. But does he prove that the cause of truth, will be promoted by the
alliance he pleads for? No; he is so far from proving that point, that upon
another turn of his discourse, he flatly denies it; and, in order to prove that
his scheme did not interfere with the right of private judgment, he positively
asserts, that for rulers to establish any religion because it is the truth, is
unjust, as they have no right to judge for others in such matters; and also
that it is absurd, to suppose such an end could be attained thereby; as the
established religion all the world over will be the magistrates; that is, says
he, For one place where the true religion is established, the false will be
established in a thousand. Page 248, 249.
And when he was told of this absurdity, he had no better way to answer it,
than by saying, I mean a legitimate policy, that ever pursues common utility.
Of which it seems he did not suppose there was above one in a thousand. Neither
can his scheme admit of so much as that; for in the same page he says, The
supreme magistrate is acknowledged head of the religion. Page 97.
And as Christ is the only head of the true church, and those rulers that are
nursing farthers thereto, bow down to the authority he has established therein;
they who set themselves up as heads of any religion are guilty of who^ed^m,
from whence no legitimate offspring can ever proceed. Isa. 49.23. Rev. 18.3.

Mr. Lock says, "A church is a free and voluntary society. No body is born a
member of any church, othewise the religion of parents would descend unto
children, by the same right of inheritance as their temporal estates; and every
one would hold his faith by the same tenure he does his lands; than which
nothing can be imagined more absurd." On toleration p. 17.
Yet in reality this imagination lies at the bottom of all this controversy. By
deceitful reasonings from the Jewish hand-writings, men have been brought to
imagine themselves to be born members of the christian church, and therefore
have had the token of membership put upon them in their infancy; and from
thence hold, that the same power which defends their lands, should support
their religion. Baptist history, p. 483.
And they have no better color for accusing the Baptists of extreme rigidness,
and of disobedience to authority, than because they cannot in conscience give
their assent to these two points. As for those who say, That religion would
soon fail from among us, and human learning also, if force was not used to
support ministers, let them consider, that those who have a form, but deny the
power of Godliness, are ever learning, and never able to come to the knowledge
of the TRUTH; and that they creep into houses, instead of going in uprightly.
2. Tim. 3.5 -- 7. It is most certain that Christianity was founded upon the
TRUHT; and that it prevailed gloriously, for three centuries, by the power of
it, without the help of the sword. And that deceit and amazing ignorance
followed the introduction of the sword to support ministers. And the town of
Boston have found equal religious liberty to be so friendly to human learning,
that for these thirty years past they have been chiefly beholden for ministers,
to distant colleges where such liberty is enjoyed, to the neglect of the
mercenary sons of Cambridge, though within sight of their own doors. Many of
whom by reading other men's works to country parishes, have got settled in the
ministry; after which the people have been compelled to support them from year
to year, let them be ever so little edified by them. Is not this a creeping
into houses? And though such are apt to turn a deaf ear to all the
remonstrances of scripture and reason, yet perhaps the following facts may
convince them, that it is out of their power to bring their old ecclesiastical
laws into our new constitution of government.

I. They have lost much of the religious influence which first introduced that
scheme into this country. Governor Winthrop, a father to that cause, was a man
of eminent piety and devotion, and of such self denial, as to sell an estate in
England of above six hundred pound sterling a year, much of which he spent in
promoting a religious settlement here; where, for all his vast pains and
services in the government, he had scarce a sixth part of that income for his
sallery. A like religious influence appeared in many other of their rulers. And
were can that party now find such ministers, to enforce their laws as the
famous Cotton, Hooker, Norton, Mitchel, and others were? yet with all that
help, their establishment was so weak, when it was fifty years old, that one of
their greatest ministers compared it to a small boat, and only one Baptist
society in the colony, to the ballast of a great ship, which would sink it.
Baptist history p. 494, 544.


II. The influence of religion is now against them. The two capital points of
purity and liberty that our fathers came to this country for, are, that none
should be received to full communion without a credible profession of
regeneration; and that a particular church thus constituted is the highest
religious judicature upon earth, to whom councils are only advisory. But
thirty-nine years after Boston was settled, a number of ministers assisted in
forming a church there; in open separation from the first church in the town,
because the new invention of the halfway covenant was excluded therefrom.
Ibid. p. 388, 405.
And the apostasy prevailed so fast, for thirty years, as to move Dr. Increase
Mather then to declare, that if it should do so for thirty years more, the most
conscientious people in New England would think themselves concerned to gather
churches out of churches. Vindication of gospel order. p. 12.
It was then become a matter of dispute, whether any church was entitled to the
protection of the laws, if she refused to be controuled in the choice of
ministers, by other ministers, and the parish. And forty four years after, that
question was desided in the negative, when, because the first church in
Canterbury refused to receive the minister they had provided for her, a
separate church was formed in the place, A like separation was made at
Middleborough the same year.
and said minister was ordained over it; and no better encouragement was given
to the first church, by the ordaining council, than only the use of their
influence with the legislature of the colony, that said church might obtain all
legal religious privileges whenever they desired it. Fish's examiner examined.
p. 76.
And because they did not desire any new incorporation from the state, but only
protection from injuries, their goods were spoiled, and their persons
imprisoned, for fifteen years to support a minister they never chose, and had
no more relief afforded to them, either by ministers, or civil officers, than
the priest and levite gave to the man that fell among thieves. Conscientious
people in other places waited a year, after Canterbury church was thus stripped
of all legal privileges, and then began to gather churches out of churches in
imitation of the first churches of this country. And though their ministers
have often been reproached with the name of lay-teachers, yet we can prove,
that their ordinations were derived, in a direct line of succession, from the
baptist minister that Dr. Mather helped to ordain in Boston in 1718 This is
mentioned to silence their cavils, and not because our authority depends upon a
local line of succession.
And now, within these ten years, it has plainly appeared, by their own
publications, that the ministers who are most earnest to keep up their
ecclesiastical laws, are against requiring a profession of regeneration in
order for full communion; and that they hold, that when a minister is settled
in any parish, the court must compel them to support him, until he, or other
ministers, consent to his dismission, even though the church should convict him
of scandalous immoralities. Baptist hist. p. 109, 110. See Bolton case.
Which has cooled the zeal of multitudes for those laws, and sundry of their
most capable ministers now appear against them. Six years ago one of them said
to Connecticut legislature, "The affairs of the state, are the proper province
of civil rulers; as to the church of Christ, be content to let it stand upon
its own proper gospel foundation, regulated by its own laws, and guarded and
enforced by its own sanctions. On this foundation she has stood, in her best
days; on this foundation she can yet stand, and must stand and live forever.
And though she may appear weak and feeble, and ready to fall; yet the
interposition of worldly power to establish her, and civil policy to defend
her, will only jostle her foundations, and sink her the lower." Election sermon
at Hartford, May 13, 1773, by Mr. We^more, (...), p. 21.
Which sentiments he confirms by the writings of Dr. Watts and others.

III Sensible experience is against those laws. Under our first charter earnest
attempts were made to establish the government of the church over the world;
and under the second, to establish the power of the world over the church. But
the effects of both have been so pernicious, that many cannot bear to hear of
them; and have made bitter complaints against me for publishing some of them to
the world. But if it be a crime in me to publish them, what must it be in those
who committed them! And will any now plead for a practice either under the name
of religion, or of doing good to human society, that will not bear the light!
Canterbury, Plainfield, and Ashfield, after using violent methods to support
their ministers, have been constrained to dismiss each of them, and to come
down to a friendly way of treating their neighbors, whom they had injured
thereby; and, in sundry instances, to confess their faults to them. And among
the many hundred instances of making distress for ministers support in our day,
I have not heard of one, but what has caused some conviction of the impolicy,
if not of the impiety, of that practice. Therefore,

IV. If it is continued among us, it must be by naked violence. It has
heretofore been covered with good words and fair speeches, but we now know,
that it is founded in partiality, and caused divisions and offenses, contrary
to the doctrine of Christ. Baptist hist. p, 133, 388, 524. Appendix p. 11.
And he commands us all, to mark and avoid such teachers, as we would escape
his curse. Romans 16.17, 18. Gal. 1.9. 2 John, 10, 11. Those who blend church and
state together, usually violate Christ's commands to both. His command to the
church is, Put away from among yourselves that wicked person. His command to
the State, is, Let both grow together until the harvest. 1 Cor. 5.13. Mat.
13.30.38 -- 41. But pure gospel discipline has been very little known in
state-establishments of religion; where conformists and dissenters, have been
so far from being allowed to grow together, in the enjoyment of equal civil
privileges, that the sword has often been employed to root up, and to prepare
war against those who put not into the mouths of the established teachers;
while such teachers have been the means of upholding rulers, in perverting all
equity; and so of bringing ruin, instead of good to the state. Jer. 5.31. Micah
4.5 -- 12. The Episcopalians covered their pleas for having bishops established
in America, with many plausible pretenses; but their wisdom failed them. For in
the midst of those pleas they have owned, that a bill for that purpose had
almost got through the parliament when Queen Ann died, which was defeated
thereby. And that though their party have been watching ever since, they never
could find such another favorable opportunity, 'till now in 1767. Chandler's
appeal, p, 50 -- 54.
And those who are versed in the history of the nation know, that the liberties
thereof were in eminent danger when the said Queen died, which never were in so
great danger since, till the scheme was invented to tax America; upon which, it
seems, Bishops were to have been sent over. To prevent which Dr. Chauncy
plainly denied that any state had a right to make religious establishments. And
though they tried to defend that right, yet, in reply to it, he said, "The
religion of Jesus, has suffered more from the exercise of this pretended right,
than from all other causes put together; and it is with me, past all doubt,
that it will never be restored to its primitive purity, simplicity, and glory,
until religious establishments are so brought down as to BE NO MORE" Chauncy's
reply to Chandler's defense. 1770. p. 144, 145.
These are the words of the minister, who has written the most, for these 40
years, to uphold the establishment we complain of, of any man upon earth. And
when I mentioned his first denial of that right last fall, a writer appeared in
the Boston Gazette of November 2, and charged me with ignorance, for calling
their ecclesiastical laws, an establishment; and with impudence and abuse, for
writing against them. And on Dec. 28, he said, "In our laws, which relate to
the settlement and support of ministers, I am not able to find any thing that
has the appearance of establishment. All the various denominations of
Protestants are treated alike -- all Protestants are, therefore, in the view of
our laws, A more glaring falsehood could not be uttered than this.
EQUALLY orthodox." Now as our legislature have constantly called those laws an
establishment, for these eighty-seven years, they are involved with me, in this
charge of ignorance; and as the party they were made for, refused to own the
truth in that respect, it seems that our honored Representatives thought it
high time to discard such learning, and to appoint a minister to preach to
them, who was in truth a friend to the liberty others made a false pretense of.
True wisdom is, therefore, so far from favoring those laws, that the folly of
fools has been now made use of to uphold them. Prove. 14.8. And can they stand
upon such a bottom! Men have three things to be concerned for, namely, soul,
body, and estate. The two latter belong to the magistrate's jurisdiction, the
other does not. There is a learned profession suited to each of these
interests; yet every man and every woman have long been allowed that liberty,
about physicians and lawyers, that has been denied them about soul-guides. And
can my dear countrymen any longer suffer officers to do that out of their
province, which they dare not do in it!

As no man can have a right to judge for others in soul-affairs, so they never
could convey such a right to their representatives; therefore, all the taxes,
to support religious worship, and judgments in such cases, that have been
among us, were a taxing of us where we were not represented, and imposing
judges upon us who were interested against us. Which measures God has again
meted to this country in a most terrible manner. Self-love, under the specious
name of government, and a concern for the public good, has moved, and now
moves, the Britons, to act toward us like incarnate devils. And self-love in
this country, by sinking our public credit, has exposed us to greater danger,
than all their fleets and armies could do. The sword, directed by wise
councels, has been the grand means of our defense against those invaders; and
infidels must see, that an invisible power has turned the scale in those
matters, one way and the other, from time to time, entirely out of the reach of
human foresight. And how strong is the argument from hence, for faithfulness in
all rulers, to the trust reposed in them; and faithfulness in their
constituents, to support them therein? yea, and for faithfulness also in
ministers and people, toward each other, as they will answer therefore to the
Judge of all. It was before proved, that the use of the sword, against such as
work ill to their neighbors, is expressly warranted by the new testament. And
the time when it is to be laid aside is plainly marked out in the prophecies;
namely, when the knowledge of God shall have such extensive influence, that
there shall be none to hurt or destroy, or even to make us afraid, Isaiah 11.9.
Micah 4.1 -- 4. In the mean time, the Redeemer has excluded the sword from his
kingdom, which he gives as the reason why it does not interfere with the
government of worldly states. John 18.36. And how can any be true ministers of
his kingdom, who cannot be content with all the support that his laws and
influence will give them! Although the comfortable support of religious
ministers, is most expressly required, both in the old and new testament; yet
the use of force to collect it, and against those who have testified against
that practice, has produced such effects in all ages, as none have been willing
to own. But the Judge cannot be deceived by their deceitful coverings; and
tells us all what will become of those who allow of such deeds, against plain
light to the contrary. Mat. 23.29 -- 33. Luke 11.46 -- 52.

Rulers, ministers and people, have now a fair opportunity given them, to turn
from and quit themselves of those evils; and I cannot but hope they will
improve it. Eight years ago self-love, under a religious pretense, had such
influence in our legislature, that we had no way left, to save our friends in
Ashfield from being robbed of their lands, but by an appeal to Britain. And if
that evil should be ingrafted into our new plan of government, we should have
no constitutional remedy against it left upon earth: For the Congress refuse to
be judges of such matters. We know that Tories had then the chief managment of
those deceitful and cruel proceedings against us; and also that the king and
council, did not give relief in that case, from a regard to equal religious
liberty, (which they deny at home) but for other ends. Therefore we have joined
as heartily, in the general defense of our country, as any denomination
therein; and I have a better opinion of my countrymen, than to think the
majority of them will now agree, to deny us liberty of conscience.

ISAAC BACKUS, Agent for the Baptists in this State.
Middleborough, August 13, 1779.

