A NARRATIVE OF THE CAPTURE and TREATMENT OF JOHN DODGE, By the ENGLISH at
DETROIT.

WRITTEN BY HIMSELF.

PHILADELPHIA, Printed by T. BRADFORD, at the COFFEE-HOUSE. MDCCLXXIX.

A NARRATIVE OF THE CAPTUTE and TREATMENT OF JOHN DODGE, By the ENGLISH at
DETROIT.
I Some time since left the place of my nativity in Connecticut, and, in the
year 1770, settled in Sandusky, an Indian village, about half way between
Pitsburg and Detroit, where I carried on a very beneficial trade with the
natives, till the unhappy Dispute between Great Britain and America reached
those pathless wilds, and roused to war Savages no ways interested in it.

In July, 1775, Captain James Woods called at my house in his way to the
different Indian towns, where he was going to invite them, in the name of the
Congress, to a treaty to be held at Fort Pit the ensuing fall; I attended him
to their villages, and the Savages promised him they would be there. Capt Woods
also invited me to go with the Indians to the treaty, as they were in want of
an interpreter, which I readily agreed to.

Soon after the departure of Capt. Woods, the commander of Fort Detroit sent
for the Savages in and about Sandusky, and told them that he heard they were
invited by the Americans to a treaty at Pittsburg, which they told him was
true; on which he delivered them a talk to the following purport: "That he was
their father, and as such he would advise them as his own children; that the
Colonists who were to meet them at Pittsburgh were a bad people, that by the
indulgence of their Protector, they had grown a numerous and saucy people; that
the great King nor thinking they would have the assurance to oppose his ju^^
laws, had kept but few troops in America for some years past; that those men
being ignorant of their in capacity to go through with what they intend,
propose to cut off the few regulars in this country, and then you indians, and
have all America to themselves; and all they want is, under the show of
friendship, to get you into their hands as hostages, and there hold you, till
your nations shall comply with their terms, which if they refuse, you will be
all massacred. Therefore do not go by any means; but if you will join me, and
keep them at bay a little while, the King, our father, will send large fleets
and armies to our assistance, and we will soon subdue them, and have their
plantations to ourselves.

This talk so dismayed the Indians, that they came to me and said they would
not go to the treaty, at the same time telling me what the Governor of Detroit
had said to them On this Mr. James Heron and myself, having the cause of our
country at heart, asserted that what the Governor had said was false, and told
them that the Colonists would not hurt a hair of their heads, and if they would
go to the treaty, that I, with Mr. Heron, would be security, and pledge our
property, to the amount of 4000 l. for their safe return. This, with the
arrival of Mr. Richard Butler with fresh invitations, induced some of them to
go with me to the treaty.

In the fall I attended a number of them to the treaty, where we were politely
received by the Commissioners sent by Congress. The council commenced; the
Indians, who are always fond of fishing in troubled water, offered their
assistance, which was refused, with a request that they would remain in peace,
and not take up the hatchet on either side. On the whole, these Indians were
well pleased with the talk from the Congress, and promised to remain quiet.

The Commissioners thinking it proper, sent the continental belt and talk by
some of the Chiefs to the Savages who resided about the lakes. These Chiefs
being obliged to pass Sandusky in their rout, Mr. John Gibson, Agent for Indian
affairs, requested me to accompany them, and furnish them with what they stood
in need of; on which I took them home.

On my arrival at the village I found the savages in confusion, and preparing
for war, on which I called a council and rehearsed the Continental talk, which,
with a present of goods to the amount of twenty-five pounds, quieted them. This
I informed Congress of* agreeable to their request, by express, and that the
Governor of Detroit was still urging the Indians to war.

Soon after this, a party of Savages from the neighborhood of the lakes, came
to my house on their way to the frontiers to strike a blow; I asked them the
reason they took up the hatchet; they replied, that the Governor of Detroit had
told them, that the Americans were going to murder them all and take their
lands; but if they would join him, they would be able to drive them off, and
that he would give them twenty dollars a scalp. On this I rehearsed the
Continental talk, and making them a small present they returned home, believing
as I had told them, that the Governor was a liar and meant to deceive them.

On this I thought proper to write the Governor of Detroit, what he was to
expect should he continue to persuade the Indians to take up the hatchet. He
was so enraged at the receipt of this letter, that he offered 100l. for my
scalp or body; he sent out several parties to take me without effect, till
having spread an evil report of me among the Indians, on the 15th of Jan. 1776,
my house was surrounded by about 20 soldiers and savages, who broke into the
house, made me a prisoner, and then marched me for Detroit.

It was about the dusk of the evening when, after a fatiguing march, I arrived
at Detroit, and was carried before Henry Hamilton, late a captain in the 15th
regt. but now Governor and Commandant of Detroit; he ordered me to close
confinement, telling me to spend that night in making my peace with God, as it
was the last night I should live; I was then hurried to a loathsome dungeon,
ironed and thrown in with three criminals, being allowed neither bedding,
straw, or fire, although it was in the depth of Winter, and so exceeding cold,
that my toes were froze before morning.

About 10 o'clock the next morning, I was taken out and carried before the
Governor, who produced a number of letters with my name signed to them, and
asked me if they were my hand writing? to which I replied, they were not; he
then said, it was a matter of indifference to him whether I owned it or not, as
he understood that I had been carrying on a correspondence with Congress,
taking the Savages to their treaties, and preventing their taking up the
hatchet in favor of his majesty, to defend his crown and dignity; that I was a
rebel and traitor, and he would hang me. I asked him whether he intended to try
me by the civil or military law, or give me any trial at all? to which he
replied, that he was not obliged to give any damned a rebel trial unless he
thought proper, that he would hang every one he caught, and that he would begin
with me first. I told him if he took my life, to beware of the consequence, as
he might depend on it that it would be looked into. What, says he, do you
threaten me you damned rebel, I will soon alter your tone, here take the damned
rebel to the dungeon again, and let him pray to God to have mercy on his soul,
for I will soon fix his body between heaven and earth, and every scoundrel like
him.

I was then re-delivered to the hands of Philip De Jeane, who acted in the
capacity of judge, sheriff, and jailor, and carried back to (...) dungeon,
where I was soon waited on by the (...) to read prayers with me; but it was so
extreem^^ (...), he could not stand it but a few minutes at a (...). In
conversation with him, I told him I thought it was very hard to loose my life
without a trial, as I was innocent of the charge aledged against me; he said it
was very true, but that the Governor had charged him not to give me the least
hopes of life, as he would absolutely hang me.

I remained in this dismal situation three days, when De Jeane came and took
out one of the criminals who were in the dungeon with me, and held a short
conference with him, then came and told me, the governor had sent him to tell me
to prepare for another world, as I had not long to live, and then withdrew. I
enquired of the criminal, who was a Frenchman, what De Jeane wanted with him,
but he would not tell me.

The evening following he told his brother in distress, that De Jeane had
offered him 20l. to hang Mr. Dodge (meaning me) but that he had refused unless
he had his liberty; De Jeane then said, that we should both be s^ot under the
gallows.

Being at last drove almost to despair, I told De Jeane to inform the Governor
I was readier to die at that time than I should ever be, and that I would much
rather undergo his sentence, than be tortured in the dreadful manner I then
was; he returned for answer, that I need not hurry them, but prepare myself, as
I should not know my time till half an hour before I was turned off.

Thus did I languish on in my dungeon, without a friend being allowed to visit
me, denied the necessaries of life, and must have perished with the cold, it
being in the depth of Winter, had not my fellow prisoners spared me a blanket
from their scanty stock. Thus denied the least comfort in life, together with
the unjust and savage threatening I received every day, brought me so very low,
that my inability to answer De Jeane's unreasonable questions, with which he
daily tormented me respecting innocent men, obliged him to notice my situation,
and no doubt thinking I should die in their hands, they thought proper to
remove me to the barracks, and ordered a Doctor to attend me. The weather had
been so extreem cold, and my legs had been bolted in such a manner, that they
were so benumbed and the sinews contracted, that I had not the least use of
them; and the severity of my usage had brought on a fever, which had nigh saved
them any further troubel.

After I had lain some time ill, and my recovery was dispaired of, De Jeane
called and told me that the Governor had altered his mind with respect to
executing me, and bid me be of good cheer, as he believed the Governor would
give me my liberty when I got better; I replied, that it was a matter of
indifference to me whether he gave me my liberty or not, as I had much rather
die than remain at their mercy; on which, he said, 'You may die and be damn'd',
and bounced out of the room.

When (...) so far recovered as to be able to sit up in my bed, my (...) being
afraid I should inform her husband of her tricks in his absence, told the
Governor that I was going (...) make my escape with a party of soldiers, that I
was well and could walk as well as she could; though at that time my legs were
still so cramped and benumbed with the irons and cold, that had kingdoms been
at stake, I could not walk.

On this information, De Jeane came and told me to get up and walk to the
dungeon, from whence I came; I told him I was unable, Crawl then, you damned
rebel, or I will make you; I told him he might do as he pleased, but I could
not stand, much more walks on this he called a party of soldiers, who tossed me
into a cart and carried me to the Dungeon: here, by the persuation of the
Doctor, who was very kind and attentive, I was allowed a bed and not ironed. By
his care and the weather growing milder, I got rid of my fever and began to
walk about my dungeon, which was only eight feet square; but even this was a
pleasure too great for me to enjoy long, for in a few days was put into irons.
The weather now growing warm and the place offensive, from the filth of the
poor fellows I had left there, and who were afterward executed, I relapsed. By
persuation of the Doctor, who told them unless I had air I should die, a hole,
about seven inches square, was cut to let in some air.

I remained ill till June, although the Doctor had done all that lay in his
power; he then let the Governor know, that it was impossible for me to recover
unless I was removed from the dungeon, on which he sent De Jeane to inform me,
if I would give security for my good behavior, that he would let me out of
prison. Being, by my usage and fever, reduced to a state of despondence, I told
him that it was a matter of indifference what he did with me, and that his
absence was better than his company: he then published (...) and several
gentlemen voluntarily entered (...) ^00 l. security for me, and I once more was
allowed to breath the fresh air, after six months confinement in a loathsome
dungeon, except eight or nine weeks that I lay sick at the barracks.

ON my going abroad, I learned that all the property I left in the woods, to
the amount of 15 or 1600 l. was taken in the King's name, and divided among the
Indians. As I had but little to attend to but the recovery of my health, I
mended apace. As soon as I could walk abroad, Gov. Hamilton sent for me and
said, he was sorry for my misfortunes, and hoped I would think as little as
possible of them; that as I was in a low state, he thought I had best not think
of business, or think of what I had left, as he would lend me a hand to recover
my losses. This smooth discourse gave me but little satisfaction for the ill
usage I had received at his hands; however, I was determined to rest as easy as
I could, till I had an opportunity of obtaining redress.

As soon as I found myself so far recovered as to be able to do business, which
was in September, I applied to the Governor to go down the country, but he put
me off with fine words, a permission to do business there, and a promise of his
assistance. I now settled my accounts with the persons with whom I was
connected in trade, and found myself 700 l. in debt. My credit being pretty
good, I set up a retail store, and as many of the inhabitants pitied my case,
they all seemed willing to spend their money with me. My being master of the
different Indian languges, about Detroit was also of service to me, so that in
a short time I paid off all my debts, and began to add to my stock.

In the spring of 1777, I heard there was like to be a good trade at
Machilimakanac, on which I applied to the Governor, and, with a great deal of
trouble, got a pass, went, and met with good trade. On my return Gov. Hamilton,
by several low arts, attempted to pick my cargo, which as it would spoil the
sale of the remainder, I could not allow. As he had no pretense for taking them
from me by force, it once more provoked him to wrath against me; he greatly
retarded my sales by denying me a permit to draw my powder out of the magazine;
also ordered myself and two servants to be ready at a moment's warning to march
under Capt. Le Mote on a scouting party with Savages: I told him it was against
my inclination to take up arms against my own flesh and blood, and much more so
to go with Savages to butcher and scalp defenseless women and children, that
were not interested in the present dispute: He said it was not any of my
business whether they were interested in the dispute or not; and added if you
are not ready when called for, I will fix you. Lucky for me he was soon after
called down the country, and succeeded by Capt. Mount-present as commander, who
ordered Le Mote to strike my name out of his books; but my servants with their
pay, I lost entirely.

The party of Savages under Le Mote went out with orders not to spare man,
woman, or child. To this cruel mandate even some of the Savages made an
objection, respecting the butchering the women and children, but they were told
the children would make soldiers, and the women would keep up the stock. --
Those sons of Britain offered no reward for Prisoners, but they gave the
Indians twenty dollars a scalp, by which means they induced the Savages to make
the poor inhabitants, who they had torn from their peaceable homes, carry their
baggage till within a short distance of the fort, where, in cold blood, they
murdered them, and delivered their green scalps in a few hours after to those
British barbarians, who, on the first yell of the Savages, flew to meet and hug
them to their breasts reeking with the blood of innocence, and showed them
every mark of joy and approbation, by firing of cannon, etc.

One of these parties returning with a number of women and children's scalps,
and three prisoners, they were met by the Commander of the fort, and after the
usual demonstrations of joy, delivered their scalps, for which they were paid;
the Indians then made the Commandant a present of two of the prisoners,
reserving the third as a sacrifice to the manes of one of them that had fell in
the expedition. Being shocked at the idea of one of my fellow creatures being
tortured and burnt alive by those inhuman Savages, I sought out the Indian who
had lost his relative, and to whom, according to the Indian custom, this
unhappy man belonged; I found him, took him home with me, and by the assistance
of some of my friends, and twenty-five pounds worth of goods, I persuaded the
inhuman wretch to sell his life to me. As the rest of the gang had taken the
prisoner about two leagues distance, and were making merry over him, we were
obliged to lay a scheme to deliver him from their hands, which we did in the
following manner, -- It being midnight and very dark, the Indian, myself, and
two servants, crossed the river in a batteaux to where they were carousing
around this unhappy victim. The Indian then went to his companions, and under
pretense of taking the prisoner out to answer a call of nature, he delivered
him to me who lay at some distance, and I carried him to the batteaux. As soon
as he found himself in the hands of his deliverer, his transport was too great
for his tender frame; three different times he sunk lifeless in my arms, and as
often, (...) the help of water, the only remedy at hand, I prevented his going
to the land of spirits in a tran^ joy. None but those who have experienced it,
can have an idea of the thoughts that must have agitated the breast of a man,
who but a few minutes before saw himself surrounded by Savages, whose dismal
yell, and frightful figures, heightened by the glare of a large fire in a
dismal wood, which must have harrowed up the soul of an uninterested bystander,
much more of one who knew that very fire was prepared for his execution, and
that every moment the executioner was expected to arrive. -- The executioner
arrives; he advances toward him; he loosens this unhappy victim from the tree
to which he was bound, no doubt, as this young man imagined, to be led to the
stake; but as it were in an instant, he finds himself in the hands of his
deliverer and fellow-countryman. This, as I said before, was too much for him
to bear; however I got his almost lifeless corpse to my house, where I kept him
hid. The Indian, according to our agreement, in an hour or two after I was
gone, returned seemingly much fatigued, and told his fellow Savages, who were
impatiently waiting to begin their brutal sacrifice, that the prisoner had
escaped, and that he had in vain pursued him.

Some time after this I found an opportunity, and made an agreement with the
Captain of a vessel going to Michilimakanac, to take my unhappy inmate with
him, but one of my servants being tempted, by a large reward that was offered
for retaking the above prisoner, informed De Jeane that he was hid in my house,
on which my habitation was soon surrounded by a partty of soldiers under the
command of said De Jeane, and myself, the young man and four servants were made
prisoners, and having demanded my keys, which I delivered, we were hurried to
goal and confined in different rooms. Here this unhappy young fellow, in high
expectations of seeing his friends, was once more plunged into the horrors of
imprisonment.

I was sent for and carried before the Commandant, where, on being examined who
was the person in my house, I frankly told him it was a young man whom I had
bought of the Indians when they were going to burn him, and that I meant to
send him to Canada to be out of the way of the Savages, but De Jeane, like
other men of bad principles, thinking no man could do a good action without
sinister views, said that he believed I had purchased him to serve my own ends,
and that he would find them out, which the Commandant ordered him to do as soon
as possible, and I was ordered to prison.

De Jeane then took my servant, who was his informant, ironed him, put him in
the dungeon, and, after keeping him three days on bread and water, the lad
almost frightened out of his senses, sent for De Jeane, and told him that the
day before I was taken up I had wrote several letters, and, on his bringing a
candle to seal them, that I said, if he told any one that I was writing to
Pitsburg, that I would blow his brains out. This suiting De Jeane's purpose, he
made the lad swear to it, and then set him, with the rest of my servants, at
liberty.

I was now once more called before the Commandant, who told me he understood
that I was going to send an express to his Majesty's enemies, in consequence o
which he had taken an inventory of my effects, and meant to send me to Canada.
I told him he was certainly misinformed, he then taxed me with what De Jean had
forced from my servant; asked me where I was writing the day before I was
taken. I told him to my correspondents in Montreal; and luckily for me a
neighbor of mine, having been at my house, was produced, who declared the
truth of what I said, and that, I being hurried, had given him the (...) carry
on board the vessel: This, with some other fa^^^ accusations, being cleared up,
I was once more released on giving fresh security.

Though myself and servants were, for want of a pretense for detailing us, set
at liberty, it was not so with the unfortunate young man whom I had purchased
from the Indian; he still remained in prison, daily tormented with the threats
of De Jeane, that he would deliver him to the Indians, which so preyed on his
spirits, that in a short time it threw him into a fever. I then applied to
Captain Montpresent, the Commandant, who gave me permission, and I removed him
to sick Quarters, where I hired Jacob Pue, of Virginia, his fellow prisoner, to
attend him: I also, when leisure would permit, attended him myself; but De
Jeane, who still haunted him, had so great an effect on him, that one day when
I visited him, he called me to his bed side and said to me, that De Jeane had
just left him, that he told him to make have and get well, as the Indians were
waiting for him. -- Pray, Sir, (said the young man to De Jeane) for God's sake
try to keep me from the Indians, for if they get me they will burn me. Keep you
from them, said De Jeane, you damned Rebel you deserve to be burned, and all
your damned countrymen with you, so you need not think Dodge can save you;
General Hamilton is now come up, and he will fix you all. I tried to comfort
him, and told him to be of good courage; -- Oh! replied he, I am almost
distracted with the idea of being burnt by the Savages; I had much rather die
where I am, than be delivered into the hands of those horrid wretches, from
whom I so lately, by your hands, escaped, the recollection of which, makes me
shudder with horror. He could say no more; he sank under it, and in a few hours
after death, more kind than his cruel tormenters, released him from his
troubles. I paid the last tribute to this my unhappy countryman, and had his
corpse decently interred, attended by the Missionary and most of the principal
Merchants of the town.

As Hamilton was arrived, I had every thing to expect that his malice could
invent, more especially as De Jeane, to whom his ear was always open, had told
him (as I was informed) all and more than what had happened during his absence.
About a month after the death of the unhappy young man above related, I had
occasion for some of my powder out of the Magazine; I wrote an order to the
conductor, according to custom, and waited on the Governor to have it signed;
on presenting it to him, he looked at it, and then looking at me with a
sarcastic smile, said. It is powder you want, you damned rascal, is it? at the
same time tearing my order and throwing it in my face; you have behaved
yourself very well, have you not? after my granting you your life, you would
not go with La Mote, would you not? says he, and starting up in a great
passion, as though he would strike me, put himself between me and the door.
What, says he, you have a damned deal of influence with the Indians; you can
purchase prisoners without my approbation, can you? you damned rascal. Sir,
says I, I am no rascal; not a word out of your mouth, says Hamilton, go about
your business and take care of me or I will fix you: I replied, it had always
been my study to take care of him; not a word, says he, go about your business,
and bless your stars I was not here instead of Captain Montpresent, for I would
have fixed you, you damned scoundrel. Here I took my leave, went home, and
determined to think as little of Mr. Hamilton and his usage as possible, till I
had an opportunity of getting redress.

Notwithstanding the hatred of Hamilton and De Jeane, I spent the forepart of
the Winter very happily, till the 25th of January, 1778, when several of the
Merchants of the town, got permission to go to Sandusky to trade, and as they
proposed encamping about two leagues from the town, myself and several others,
in a friendly manner, proposed and did accompany them in our sleighs to their
first stage; but on our return, I being a head, was challenged by De Jeane, at
the head of thirty or forty soldiers, by asking who came there? to which I
replied, John Dodge; he then ordered the soldiers to seize me and the two
Gentlemen in the sleigh with me, and forced us to return to the encampment we
had just left, where he seized the whole of the Gentlemen, who were going, by
permission, to Sandusky, with their goods, sleighs, etc. and carried the whole
of us, the next morning, back to the Fort, and charged us with sending out
goods to supply (as he politely termed it) the Rebels.

After being detained three days in prison, I was taken to De Jeane's house, to
see my papers, books, desks, etc. examined. They broke open my desk, pretending
to have lost the key. On searching, they could not find any thing worth their
notice, or what they expected to find. De Jeane then gave me my keys, and told
me to send for my desk and take care of myself, as he would watch me; I told
him, as he had taken it from my house and broke it, he should mend it and send
it home, before I would receive it: Stop a a little, said he, I will speak to
the Governor, and fix you yet if I can; he then gave me into the care of the
guard, and ordered me to goal. About the fifth day after this, not hearing any
thing from him, I sent for my violin, and was diverting myself, when Governor
Hamilton passed by, and enquired who was playing on the violin, to which the
Corporal of the guard answered, it was me. The next day, De Jeane waited me
with a Blacksmith, who soon clapped on a pair of hand-bolts; and now, says De
Jeane, I have fixed you, you may play the violin till you are tired; I asked
him what I had done to be treated thus; for that you must apply to the
Governor, replied he, for it is his pleasure that you are so: He then
threatened to put on leg-bolts; on which I told him, I did not value his irons,
but if he kept me prisoner, I should look to him for my property, (about
3000l.) Yes, says he, we will fix you and your property too, and then left me.
About six days after, I was taken to my own house, where two English and two
Frenchmen, by order of the Governor, took an inventory of my goods, and soon
after sold the whole at vendue, for about 1900l. New York currency. Thus being
a second time robbed of my property, I lay a prisoner as contented as possible,
without any thing material happening, until the first of May.

On the first of May, 1778, I was put on board a vessel to go down to Quebec,
and by some of my friends furnished with provision and necessaries for the
voyage; but of these I was robbed by De Jeane, and had it not been for some
Gentlemen, passengers in the same vessel, I must have suffered with hunger. On
the first of June I arrived at Quebec, where I was conducted to Mr. Printices,
the Provost Marshal: Ha, ha, says he, Mr. Dodge, Are you here? I have often
been told you were a damned rascal, doing all you could against government; it
is a pity Gov. Hamilton did not hang you when he was about it, as he would have
saved government a great deal of trouble. From hence I was conducted on board
the prison ship, Meriah with a number of farmers, taken off their plantations
by the Savages.

Two days after I was put on board the prison ship, we were visited by Mr.
Murray, Commissary of Prisoners, to whom I gave an account of my capture and
ill usage; he told me, he would speak to the General, and give me an answer.
Two days after, he again came on board, and told me, as it was very difficult
times, I could not have a hearing at present; I told him I wanted nothing but
what the English constitution allowed, and if I could not get that in Quebec, I
would apply to England; to which he replied, I had better be easy, for if I did
not, he would put me in irons again.

I remained on board the prison ship till the beginning of August, when Mr.
Murray came on board, and informed me that I was not to go with the prisoners;
but if I would give my parole, I should be allowed the liberty of Quebec. I
asked him the occasion I could not be sent with the other prisoners; he
replied, it was the Governor's orders: I asked him if I was to be allowed any
support; he said, not any. I told him it was very hard to be dragged from my
house, robbed of my property, deprived of my liberty, sent 1200 miles in irons,
and still be held a prisoner in the town of Quebec, without any allowance for
support: All my applications were in vain, I was set on shore under parole the
fourth of August, and the ship sailed with the other prisoners soon after.

The cause of my detention, as I was afterward told by Mr. Murray, was, that
Governor Hamilton, of Detroit, had wrote the General not to send me round with
the other prisoners; for if I got into the United States, he knew I would come
immediately upon him, and as I knew the country, was well acquainted with the
languages of the different Indians about the lakes, and had great influence
among them, should be the means of their losing the fort, which would be much
against the crown.

On my enlargement, I soon got acquainted with a number of gentlemen, who were
friends to the United States, and the cause in which they were engaged. Some
days after, going on shore, I fell in company with a Mr. Jones, who happened at
that time to be reading a letter sent by General Montgomery, while he lay
before Quebec, to Gov. Carlton, and on concluding it, said he hoped General
Montgomery was in hell, and that all the rebels would soon be with him; to this
I made a reply, words ensued, and then blows; he drew on me, but I parried his
thrust with my cane, so that I only got a small wound in my knee: He then made
a complaint, and I was sent for by the General, who threatened to put me in
confinement if I did not find security; this I soon found, and bonds were given
for me for two months; at the end of which, as they neglected renewing them,
and left me without parole or security, I hired an Indian guide, and on the
ninth of October, quitted Quebec. After a fatiguing march through the woods, on
the 20th of November, I arrived at Boston, where I was kindly received, and
politely treated by General Gates, who supplied my wants and forwarded me to
his Excellency General Washington; I waited on him, was politely received, and
sent on to Congress, having some matters relating to Canada worthy their
hearing.

Had the love of my country no ways prompted me to act against the tyranny of
Britain, I leave it to the world to judge, whether I have not a right to revolt
from under the dominion of such tyrants, and exert every faculty God has given
me to seek satisfaction for the ill usage I received; that if I had ten
thousand lives, and was sure to lose them all, I think, should I not attempt to
gain satisfaction, I should deserve to be a slave the remainer of my life.

FINIS.

