AN EULOGIUM OF THE BRAVE MEN WHO HAVE FALLEN IN THE CONTEST WITH
GREAT BRITAIN: DELIVERED ON MONDAY, July 5. 1779.

BEFORE A Numerous and Respectable ASSEMBLY of CITIZENS and FOREIGNERS, in the
German Calvinist Church, PHILADELPHIA.

BY HUGH M. BRACKENRIDGE, A. M.

-- Heroes then arose;
Who scorning coward-self, for others lived,
Toiled for their ease, and for their safety bled.
THOMSON. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY F. BAILEY, IN MARKET-STREET.

TO THOSE CITIZENS OF THE STATE OF PENNSYLVANIA, AT WHOSE REQUEST THE FOLLOWING
EULOGIUM WAS DRAWN UP AND DELIVERED,

IT IS NOW RESPECTFULLY INSCRIBED, BY THEIR MOST OBEDIENT, AND VERY HUMBLE
SERVANT, THE AUTHOR.

An EULOGIUM, etc.
IT is the high reward of those who have risked their lives in a just and
necessary war, that their names are sweet in the mouths of men, and every age
shall know their actions. I am happy in having it in my power, before a polite
assembly, to express what I think of those who have risked their lives in the
war of America. I know my abilities rise not to a level with so great a
subject, but I love the memory of the men, and it is my hope that the affection
which I feel, will be to me instead of genius, and give me warm words to
advance their praises.

I CONCEIVE it as the first honor of these men, that before they engaged in
the war, they saw it to be just and necessary. They were not the vassals of a
proud chieftain, rousing them, in barbarous times, by the blind impulse of
attachment to his family, or engaging them to espouse his quarrel, by the music
and entertainments of his ball. They were themselves the chieftains of their
own cause, highly instructed in the nature of it, and, from the best principles
of patriotism, resolute to defend it. They had heard the declaration of the
court and parliament of Great Britain, claiming the authority of binding them
in all cases whatsoever. They had examined this claim, and found it to be, as
to its foundation, groundless, as to its nature, tyrannical, and as to its
consequences, ruinous to the peace and happiness of both countries. On this
clear apprehension and decided judgment of the cause, ascertained by their own
reason, and collected from the best writers, it was the noble purpose of their
minds to stand forth in its defense.

THESE brave men were not soldiers by profession, bred to arms, and from a
habit of military life attached to it. They were the mechanics of the city, the
merchants of the counting house, the youths engaged in literary studies, and
the husbandmen the peaceful cultivators of the soil. Happy in the sociability
and conversation of the town, the simplicity and innocence of the country
village, the philosophic ease of academic leisure, and the sweets of rural
life, they wished not a change of these scenes of pleasure, for the dangers and
calamities of war. It was the pure love of virtue and of freedom, burning
bright within their minds, that alone could engage them to embark in the bold
and perilous undertaking.

THESE brave men were not unacquainted with the circumstances of their
situation, and their unprepared state for war. Not a bayonet was anvilled out,
not a fire-arm manufactured, and scarcely a charge for a fire-arm was in their
possession. No redoubt was cast up to secure the city, no fort was erected to
resist invasion, no gun mounted on the deck of any vessel, and no vessel
launched upon the stream of any river.

THE power of Britain, on the other hand, was well known, and by the lightning
of her orators, in a thousand writings and harangues, had been thrown, in full
force, upon their minds. They were taught to believe her (what indeed she was)
old in arts and in arms, and enriched with the spoils of a thousand victories
derived from the ancient captains and the heroes of her isle. Embraced by the
ocean as her favorite, her commerce was extensive, and she sent out her ships
of war to every sea. Her thunder was heard in the East Indies and the West, and
no fort or battery on the shore had been proof to her assault. Abounding in
men, her armies were in full force, her fleets were completely manned, her
discipline was regular, and the spirit of her enterprise by sea and land, had,
in most cases, insured her success.

THE idea of resistance to the power of Britain was indeed great; but the
mighty soul of the patriot drank it in, and, like the eagle on the summit of
the mountain, collected magnanimity from the very prospect of the height to
which he meant to soar. Like the steed, who swallows the distant ground with
his fierceness Book of Job.
, he attempted the career, and poured himself upon the race.

THE patriot quits his shop, his farm, his office, and his counting house, and
with every hope and every anxious thought prepares himself for war. The
materials of gunpowder are extracted from the earth; the bayonet is anvilled
out; the fire arm is manufactured in the shop; the manual exercise is taught;
the company is formed in battalion; the battalion is instructed to maneuver on
the field; the brigade is drawn forth; and the standard of defiance is planted
on the soil.

SHALL I mention the circumstances of the day when the sword was drawn, and the
first blood was shed; and shall I trace the progress of the war in the course
of five campaigns: The war of the enemy, which, like the ocean whence it came,
rolled its angry waves and beat upon our coasts, now ebbing and retiring to
itself; and now swelling, with a refluent tide, the several bays that open to
receive the rivers of America: The war of the American, which, like the bold
and steady winds that pass his mountains, met and tempested the ocean, whose
waves were seen to roll, and break, and dash upon the shore. Or shall I drop
the figure, and relate, in simple language, in what manner it has been fought
from Canada to Georgia, and from Georgia to Canada; from the ocean to the
mountain, and from the mountain to the ocean.

THE narration would require the space of an entire day: I can mention but the
sum of things; and only tell you that the inroad of the foe has been sustained
upon the plain, and the forward and impetuous bands have been driven over the
disdaining ground which they had measured in advance. The hill has been
defended, and the rallying and repulsed, and repulsed and rallying foe, has
been taught to understand that the valor of America was worthy of the cause
which her freemen had espoused. The wilderness has been penetrated, and the
current of the river has been stemmed, and the ridge of hills has been
surmounted in the march. The northern plains have been rendered hostile to the
Briton, and the proud city, thought impregnable, was scarcely safe, when, by
the combined fury of the two advancing bands, she was made to shake beneath the
storm of winter and of war. The southern plains have been rendered hostile to
the Briton, and the insurrection has been quelled, and the island and the fort
has been defended. The mid-land plains have been rendered hostile to the
Briton, and here it has been fought, foot to foot, and point to point, in
skirmishes, and night-surprizes, and in pitched battles, with alternate hope,
and dubious success for many hours. The enemy, beaten in one state has retired
to a second, and beaten in the second he has returned to the first; and beaten
in every state he has sought the water, and like a sea monster rolling to his
native element, the deep, has washed his wounds in the brine of ocean: Rising
from the ocean he has sought the land, and advanced with a slow and suspicious
step upon the hostile territory. War has again arisen, and it has been fought
from spring to autumn, and from autumn to the spring, through the heats of
summer, and the inclemencies of winter, with the most unabated ardour, and
unshaken perseverance. What tract of country has not been (...) with the
vestiges of war? What ground has not been cut with trenches? What hill has not
been covered with redoubts? What plain has not been made the scene of the
engagement? What soil of the whole earth has not been sowed with ball?

GREAT, in the mean time, have been the labors of the soldier marching to
receive the enemy in every state. Desisting from the march for a short night,
he has slept without tent or covering, exposed to summer winds and autumnal
dews; or in the solstitial month, he has built his hut, without nail or hammer,
and, on the bleak hill, has outwatched the cold stars, sentinels of the winter
sky.

THESE have been the toils of the heroes of our army: But those brave souls
whom we this day more particularly celebrate, have added more than toils
resulting from the calamities of life, even life itself. They have withdrawn
from the embraces of their friends; quitted every fond hope of eminence in
life, an idea very dear and flattering to the minds of men; they have bid
farewell to the sun and moon, and the sweet changes of the varied year; they
have rushed to war, and have fallen in the contest.

THESE of them have fallen in the long and laborious march, worn out with the
toils of the protracted and severe campaign. These have fallen by the fever of
the camp, amidst the unavailing tears of their companions. These have fallen by
the slow approach of wasting hunger, when, for many days, it has been heard in
the prison-ship (...), "There is no bread." These of them have fallen by wounds
not at once mortal. These have fallen when advancing on the enemy, they have
received the bayonet in their breast; or high in hope, and anxious of victory
Thucydides.
, they have instantly dropped, by the cannon or the musket ball.

FOR what cause did these brave men sacrifice their lives? For that cause
which, in all ages, has engaged the hopes, the wishes, and endeavors of the
best men, the cause of Liberty. LIBERTY! thou art indeed valuable; the source
of all that is good and great upon the earth! For thee, the wise and the brave
of every age have contended. For thee, the patriot of America has drawn his
sword, and has fought, and has fallen.

WHAT was in our power we have done with regard to the bodies of these men: we
have paid them military honors: we have placed them in their native earth; and
it is with veneration that we yet view their tombs upon the furzy glade, or on
the distant hill. Ask me not the names of these. The muses shall tell you of
them, and the bards shall woo Plato.
them to their songs. The verse which shall be so happy as to embrace the name
of one of these shall be immortal. The names of these shall be read with the
names of Pelopidas, Epaminondas, and the worthies of the world. Posterity shall
quote them for parallels, and for example. When they mean to dress the hero
with the fairest praise, they shall say he was gallant and distinguished in his
early fall, as Warren; he was virtuous, and prudent, and intrepid, as
Montgomery; he was young, and faithful, and generous, as Macpherson; he fell in
the bold and resolute advance, like Haslet and like Mercer; he saw the honor
which his valor had acquired, and fainted in the arms of victory, like
Harkimer; having gallantly repulsed the foe, he fell covered with wounds, in
his old age, like Wooster.

The names of these brave men shall be read; and the earth shall be happy,
where their bodies are deposited. Happy hills of Boston, where the God of arms
gave uncommon valor to the patriot. Here the muses shall observe the night,
and hymn heroic acts, and trim their lighted lamps to the dawn of morning. The
little babbling Mystic brook, shall hear the melody, and, stealing with a
silver foot, shall tell it to the ocean. Happy hills within prospect of
New York, where the enemy, rejoicing in his early strength, adventured and
fought, and where, detracting the engagement, he fled, with precipitation to
his ships: On these hills the tomb of the hero is beheld, and fancy walking
round covers it with wild and romantic shades. Happy grounds in the
neighborhood of Philadelphia, where the foreigner shall enquire the field of
battle, and the citizen shall say with conscious pride, as if the honor was
his own, this is the tomb of Witherspoon; that is the ground where the noble
Nash fell, Happy plains washed by the Ashley and the Cooper, and before the
walls of Charlestown, where the brave Lincoln now turns away the fury of the
enemy Virgil.
: Here has the hero fallen, or rather he has risen to eternal honor, and his
birthplace shall be immortal. His fame, like a vestal lamp, is lighted up: It
shall burn, with the world for its temple; and the fair assemblies of the earth
shall trim it with their praise.

I WILL felicitate America through all her plains, and on all her bending
rivers: Rivers over whom did the shade of silence brood, and, rolling down, you
had it not to tell of feats of valor to the listening groves. The Kennebec
could not tell of an adventrous band which had stemmed his current, and from
the cataract and the ridge of hills, had advanced beyond his source. The great
St. Lawrence could not tell of naval battles which had been fought upon his
lakes, or of engagements near his tide; but moved silent, though majestical,
along the ancient Huron, and Algonquin plains. The Hudson could convey no
account from the heights where the valiant Gates was successful: heights where
though the tombs of the enemy are chiefly seen, yet because they were brave, I
will admit you to renown, and clothe you with my praises Longinus.
: Even there shall the foot of bards wander, and the muses shall delight to
dwell. The Delaware, noble river, that rolls by these walls Philadelphia
, could relate of no fort defended on his island, or fort defended on his bank:
The fort of Red-bank, where Donop, advancing, fell with three hundred of his
followers, and on the eighth day, expiring with his wounds, penitentially
exclaimed, I fall a victim to my own ambition, and the avarice of my prince,
but deeply sensible of the kind treatment I have received from my enemy! For
this penitential sigh, and the just tribute of thy praise, O Donop, I will mix
thee with the fame of heroes, and on thy memory drop a tear.

BUT why drop a tear? I will lift my eye to fairer prospects, the woods, and
the plains, and the rivers of America. Smile, O woods! exult, O plains! and be
not insensible, O rivers! of the fame to which you are advanced. When, O
rivers! you roll your waters to the ocean, tell her that she wake not the
heroes who sleep upon your banks; chide her, that she roll her billows softly
to the shores. Nay, chide her not; for she herself has become partial to our
shores: The ocean has beheld the timber cut from the mountain, the vessel
rising on the stocks, launched upon the stream, and maintaining an equal
combat, on the British seas, with the ship of superior force. The ocean has
beheld the valor of our noble captains: when they have fallen, she has
embraced their bodies, and has borne them to the rising springs and the green
caves concealed beneath her surface. Ocean! thou did embrace the body of the
gallant Weeks, the intrepid Mugford, the adventrous Campbel: Ocean! thou did
embrace the body of the noble Biddle. Why should the heroes be disturbed with
storms? Ocean! let thy flow be calm over them: Soothe them on thy coral beds,
and kiss them with thy waves.

The waves of ocean, and the native earth, shall embrace the bodies of entombed
heroes; but the praise of men shall embrace their fame. The praise of France
shall embrace the fame of the heroes of America; for having early hailed the
rising stars of these states, she will love those, who on these shores, first
observed their course. The praise of America, with reciprocal affection, shall
embrace the fame of France; for having early hailed the virtue of her chiefs,
who, with the speed and the pleasant breath of the vernal gales over the
Atlantic wave, rushed to our assistance, she has loved them; and when they have
fallen, she has placed their bodies with her own heroes, and their fame in the
western heavens, that it may remain to tell to future husbandmen what we owe to
the illustrious house of Bourbon. France! with the laurels acquired on our
soil, thou have planted sprigs of the cypress: But let it not repent thee to
have shed thy blood in the noble cause of America. In this thou have become
Protector of the rights of mankind; and the fame of Louis XVI. is lighted up
for immortality. It shall burn above the circle of the night, and the wide
fields of heaven shall retain its luster.

HAVING paid that respect to the memory of these men, which the annual return
of this day demanded, it remains that we soothe the griefs of those who have
been deprived of a father, bereaved of a son, or who have lost a brother, a
husband, or a lover in the contest. Fathers, whose heroic sons have offered up
their lives in the debate; it is yours to recollect, that their lives were
given them for the service of their country. They have paid the debt; and they
shall be sensible of joy, when, with you, in a state of nobler and more
blissful existence, they shall behold their name* written on the jasper walls
and pearl shining (...) Book of (...).
of heaven. The angel of America shall write, with his diamond point, the names
of those who have fought at Lexington, at Bunker's-hill, on the lakes of
Canada, at Three Rivers, and before Quebec; the names of those who have fought
at Danbury, at Fort Stanwix, Fort Montgomery, Fort Washington; at the German
Flats, at Bennington, and on the heights adjacent to the heights of Saratoga:
The names of those who have fought at Trenton, at Princeton, at the Ash-swamp,
at the battle of the Short-hills, at Monmouth, and on every field of bold
encounter and successful action on the pleasant farms and cultivated soil of
Jersey: The names of those who have fought at Moore's Bridge in North Carolina,
at the Great-Bridge in Virginia, at Couch's mill, at Brandywine, at Germantown,
on the Schuylkill river, on the islands of the Delaware, and in every scene of
glorious action in the state of Pennsylvania: The names of those who have
fought the Indian, the mercenary of Hesse, of Brunswick, of Waldeck, of
Anspach, the horrid Briton, and the American himself leagued in thoughts of
hostility and murder, with the foreign enemy. The names of these shall be read
in the languages of heaven; in all languages that are, that have been, or that
yet shall spring from the use of men: They shall be read by Moses, by Joshua,
by David, by Daniel; by Phocion, Philopoemen, Cleomenes, Aristides, Plato, and
by Xenophen: They shall be read by Cincinnatus, Camillus, Fabricus, Brutus,
Cato, Cicero, and Caesar himself, who, though a tyrant, yet, from the greatness
of his mind, shall admire our achievements: They shall be read by Albuquerque,
Ximenes, Father Daniel, Sully, Henry IV. of France, Montesquieu, and Villars:
They shall be read by More, Harrington, Hampden, Sidney, Russel, Lock, and
Newton, who, while he casts his eyes upon the orbs of heaven, shall sometimes
drop his attention to their mighty revolutions, and shall read the inscription.
Great souls of ancient, and great souls of modern time! You shall read the
names of a Gardener, a Parker, a Cheesman, a Hendricks, a Vesey, a Bowey, a
Perry, a Knolton: The names of a Leech, a Waters, a Baxter, a Yates, a Morris,
a Fleming, an Anderson: The names of a Bush, a Houston, a White, a Shelburne, a
Bonner, a Haymond, a Dickinson, a Huger, and a Roberts: The names of a thousand
officers and soldiers, worthies of the earth, and bright lights of heaven; who,
by the cruelty of the enemy, the mistake of the sentinel, or the bold emprize
Spencer.
of valor, have fallen in the cause of America. You shall read the names of
these cut in glorious capitals, with the fair panegyric of their actions. You
shall admire the examples of that virtue which you know yourselves to have
possessed, and which has brightly beamed forth in others. You shall exult; and
joining in the acclamations of heaven, its arches shall ring with an Eulogium.

THE names of these shall be read more especially by the early navigators and
the first discoverers of America: The great Columbus, who with heaven-taught
sagacity and mighty reach of thought, conceived the apprehension of a continent
toward the west; with unconquerable fortitude of mind explored the sea
unknown, big with storms; and with greatly-merited success, attained these
shores: Americo Vesputius the Florentine, who from the pleasing relation which
he writ of his voyages, subsequent to the discovery of Columbus, was fortunate
to give his name to this continent: Cabot, who coasted North America from the
bay of Mexico to the cold seas, where the icy mountains roll; Raleigh, who
first hailed the native of Guiana, and the native at the mouth of the Roanoque:
You, mighty souls! shall behold the rising glory of the new world, which you
had discovered: You shall hail the independence of the States, and shall read
the names of those who have assisted to establish them.

THE names of these shall be read with equal admiration by the early settlers
of America: Men pious, and virtuous, and simple in their mode of life; who
hating tyranny, and loving liberty civil and religious; quitted* their native
island, adventured on the ocean, penetrated to these shores, and chose a
residence at once the boundary and the object of their emigration: Men patient
and laborious, who with industry cut the tree from the mountain, swept the
forest from the soil, erected habitations, and changed the wilderness to fields
of pasture and to cultivated valleys: A resolute and bold band of brothers, who
roused the serpent in the brake, the indian, and the wild beast, and fought
against the warrior of Europe, rendered hostile because of their connection
with Britain, once fondly called the Mother Country: An unwearied, a vigilant,
a deceased, but immortal race of men, who, as hewn pillars at the bottom of the
building, have supported the strength and dignity and riches, and
gradually-rising renown of America. O sky-inhabiting progenitors! you shall
read the exertions of these your immediate descendents, who have retributed to
Britain for the injuries and oppressions, and disdains you had received from
her: Who have quelled her invasion, quenched her fire Armstrong.
, repelled her hosts, humbled her spirit, dejected her arrogance, and erected a
trophy on the ample and distinguished field of gloriously purchased victory.
You shall arrive amongst the multitude of nations, and kindred and people
Revelations.
who shall pore, with the affections of a lover for the name of his mistress,
on the names inscribed by the angel. Fathers! dismiss every shade of grief, and
let the rays of immortal pleasure spring within your minds. You are happy in
having been the parent of him who is written with the heroes of his country.

SONS, whose heroic fathers have early left you, and, in the conflict of the
war, have mixed with departed heroes; be congratulated on the fair inheritance
of fame which you are entitled to possess. If it is at all lawful to array
ourselves in borrowed honor, surely it is best drawn from those who have acted
a distinguished part in the service of their country. If it is at all
consistent with the feelings of philosophy and reason to boast of lineal glory,
surely it is most allowable in those who boast of it as flowing from truly
patriot ancestors. We shall despise the uninstructed mind of that man who shall
obtrude upon our ears the idea of a vain ancestral honor; but we shall love
the youth, and transfer to him the reputation of his father, who, when the rich
and haughty citizen shall frown upon him as ignobly descended, shall only say
with modesty. I had a father who has fallen in the service of his country.

SISTERS of the youth who has fallen in the contest with the tyrant: He was
yours in his early bloom, and in his more advanced years; he was yours in the
evening walk; at the morning hour; in the several hours of unclouded happiness:
He was yours while he could be yours consistent with the will of heaven, that
he should be ranked with the heroes of his country. Sisters! weep not the youth
as the sisters wept Phaeton on the banks of Eridanus: He also was adventrous,
and mounted, aspiringly, a glorious car; but no foul ambition entered to his
mind; and no devious error marked his way. Serene and unmoved from his course,
he illumined the tract through which he rode; and though his orb is set, it is
but to new-dress his beams Milton.
, and to flame with fresh-spangled luster in the forehead Milton.
of a brighter sky.

MATRONS once joined in the bliss of connubial affection; but with attentive
eye you have not beheld the the husband of your fond expectation returning from
war Ossian.
. You will call to mind the delinquent lapse of those first hours, when the
pulse of early love throbed high in the breast; you will call to mind the once
pleasing scenes of the tenderest recollection, when unchecked and unlimited
confiance poured every secret to your souls: you will call to mind his
attentive correspondence, and the last letter which he writ: you will call to
mind every act, every word of the hero: you will call to mind these, and you
will weep, even though he has departed to Elysium. But why should you weep? The
praises of your country, and of the world shall console you It is now yours to
direct alone the education of your children: The sphere of honor is but
enlarged to you; and the path is laid open by which you may ascend to memory in
future ages, and be ranked with Cornelia amongst the Romans.

VIRGINS, whom in a few revolving moons the Hymeneal chain was to bind; but the
youth who had long sighed for you, and thought to deserve you by his valor,
has rushed to the war, and has fallen in the battle: Virgins! I do not mean to
restrain your tears, or to say that you shall not mourn: I only ask that you
bend not in sorrow over the earth where the hero is entombed. Here, can the
hero be entombed? He lives, O Virgins! he lives in yonder heavens: His fame
kindles bright above you: His worth shall be mentioned to your honor: His
valor shall array you in perpetual smiles: The shade of age, abashed, shall
not dare to to approach you: and men shall ever prize her beauty whom a hero
loved.

SIGHS for departed heroes take their rise in the sorrows of the heart; but
they are arrayed by the object which they mourn, like the blue mists of the
early day, which are tinged by the splendent beams of the rising sun. Cease,
gentle sighs! though your bosoms are arrayed with light: I cannot hail you now:
I mean to address myself to the surviving heroes of my country. You, I know,
weep not the fortune of these men; you rather envy them. But why, my
countrymen, shall envy of immortal actions touch your breasts? Your wounds and
services are honorable also. You have met the inroad of the bold invasion; you
have mixed in the rising and renewed war. Venturing on the burning edge of the
engagement, you have closed the furrowed ranks: And when the enemy have pressed
advantage, you have gallantly restored the battle; and the day won against
hostile numbers, and boasted discipline has crowned you with the ever-greens of
honor; and when after times shall speak of these who have risen to renown, you
also shall be mentioned with them. I will charge it to the golden-winged and
silver-tongued bards, that they recollect and set in order every circumstance;
the causes of the war; your early and just exertions; your many toils; your
hazardous achievements; your noble resolution; your unshaken perseverence;
your unabated ardour; your hopes in the worst of times; your triumphs in the
days of victory; your humanity, and god-like spirit of forgiveness to an
undeserving enemy: All these will I charge it, that they recollect and set in
order, and give them bright and unsullied to the coming ages. The bards, I know
will hear me, and will give them bright and unsullied, and preserved from the
least breath of detraction. With peculiar pleasure they shall convey the fame
of WASHINGTON, and of you, my gallant countrymen, who now repel the enemy upon
the plains clothed with your former victories: Washington, on whose early brow
the honors of a former war had budded: who had drawn fire and experience from
the valor he resisted, contending with the noble power of France: who embarked
a statesman in the cause of America; shone out a soldier in the war with
Great Britain; by equanimity and sweetness of temper, won the hearts of his
soldiery; by humanity and truth, commanded the unwilling esteem of the enemy;
and by prudence and courage, and fortitude, and perseverance, has become the
deliverer of his country: You, heroic chief, and you, my gallant countrymen,
shall go down to posterity with exceeding honor. Your fame shall appear on the
current of the stream of time: It shall rise and play with the breezes of the
morning: Men at rest, in the cool age of life, from the fury of a thousand wars
finished by their fathers, shall observe the spreading ensign: They shall hail
it, as it waves with variegated glories; and feeling, exultingly, all the warm
rapture of the heart, shall give their plaudit from the shores.


