Mr. Hitchcock's DUDLEIAN LECTURE.

Natural Religion aided by Revelation and perfected in Christianity. A
DISCOURSE Delivered in the CHAPEL OF THE University at CAMBRIDGE, IN THE State
of MASSACHUSETTS BAY. September 1, 1779. AT THE LECTURE FOUNDED BY THE Hon.
PAUL DUDLEY, Esquire

By GAD HITCHCOCK, A. M. Pastor of the second Church in PEMBROKE.

STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS. BOSTON: Printed by T. and J. FLEET, in Cornhill,
M,DCC,LXXXIX.

Natural Religion aided by Revelation, and perfected in Christianity.
In the first chapter of the book of GENESIS, 20th and 27th verses, it is
written, And God said, let us make man in our image, after our likeness: and
let them have dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air,
and over the cattle, and over all the earth, and over every creeping thing that
creeps upon the earth. -- So God created man in his own image, in the image
of God created he him: male and female created he them. --

THE Jewish Historian, furnished with materials from on high, has given us
this concise account of the origin of man: -- He tells us, That God created
him, male and female, in his own image, and after his likeness.

In conformity to the instructions thus received, and partly in consequence of
it, the wise and virtuous, in all ages and places, ascribing their existence to
the same cause, have believed, that the Spirit of God has made them, and the
breath of the Almighty has given them life.

Many and various have been the opinions of Divines, both ancient and modern,
in regard to what, and how much is intended by, and included in the Image of
God, wherein man is said to be created. Every similitude of God, and every
degree thereof, in the creature, man or angle, is doubtless so far his Image;
and so it appears to be explained, in his Image, after his likeness. Had the
Image of God in man been no where mentioned in the book of Revelation, but in
this part of sacred history, it is more than probable, there would not have
been such a diversity of sentiment about it; but that it would have been
confined (not indeed exclusively of the intellectual faculties of the human
mind, and the original rectitude of them, for there is similitude in these;
but) chiefly to that communicated right of sovereignty, which man received at
his creation: That as God was supreme Lord and Governor over all; so he should
be over the creatures of this lower world, and have dominion on earth. This
restricted sense appears to offer the most obviously of any from the history
itself: -- But as men advance in the powers of reason, in their moral
qualities, or in any kind of resemblance toward the Deity, the idea of his
Image in them, is necessarily varied, and enlarged: -- Hence it has been
differently spoken of in other parts of revelation; especially by the New
Testament writers, who have sometimes represented it as consisting in holiness,
And from this various use and signification of the Image of God in man, many
learned and good men have supposed, it ought to be understood from the first as
a complex idea, made up of several ingredients. So much I have thought not
improper to say in regard to the Image of God, in which man was created; and,
indeed, I could not well avoid it, as it makes part of the history, placed at
the head of this discourse. Sensible, however, of my inability to offer any
thing on the point, that has not already been much better done by others; and
the design of this Lecture demanding no such investigation, I should, perhaps,
have been acquitted if I had passed it in silence.

Other disquisitions are now to be made, which, it is hoped, will have some
tendency, "to prove, explain or show the proper use and improvement of the
principles of Natural Religion," which is our present subject.

For this purpose, and the more just arrangement of our thoughts, the creature
man, and the religion of his nature, shall be the subject of our promiscuous
inquiry: This will prepare the way for some observations and reflections, which
will close the present discourse.

The faculty of reason, with which man is endowed, enable him, by obvious
deductions from the contemplation of the beauty, order and majesty of the
world, and the evident impressions of power, wisdom and goodness, which it
every where bears, both to argue the being of a God, and to admit also, that
there is one, when told, that it must be so; and of consequence, to make
considerable discoveries in religion.

Religion, both natural and revealed, in the just and proper notion of it, has
an immediate respect to the Deity; and in this view, though not in any other,
it may be distinguished from just sentiment, and right action, which have no
regard to his authority. It is founded in the divine existence and perfections;
that is, if God did not exist, or if he were not possessed of those
perfections, which are necessarily essential to a self-existent Being, there
could be no religion. The perception of the obligation of religion on man
arises from his believing that God is, from the knowledge he has of his
intellectual capacities, the circumstances he is placed in, and the relations
he bears to the Creator. The obligation of religion, and the perception of this
obligation in the human mind are distinct and different ideas; and the former
must be supposed to exist prior, in the order of nature, to the latter. -- What
I intend is, that religion is naturally and in itself right: It is fit and
proper conduct in the creature to worship and obey the Creator, and it cannot
be otherwise, so long as the relations between them remain: But then the
obligation to do so is only felt, when, and so far as this is perceived to be
fit and proper. It is very possible for man, so far to abuse his intellectual
faculties, neglect enquiry and every rational deduction, as not to feel the
force of this obligation, or at least to have but dark, indeterminate and
confused notions about it. This is more or less the case with all such as have
fallen into any kinds of idolatrous worship. The perception of the obligation
of religion, in instances, where the proper object of worship is mistaken,
cannot be supposed equally clear and vigorous, as in those, where it is not;
for superstition, about which there is often the greatest zeal, is no other
than the corruption of pure religion. Men fall into the former, in the same
proportion as they lose the proper sense of the obligation of the latter. It
would, I trust, be far from the truth to affirm, that the obligation to worship
the One only living and true God ceases, in proportion as the perception of it
in the mind does so, or becomes less clear and manifest: Yet so it must be, if
the obligation of religion be not prior to, distinct from, and independent on
the perception of it. From the denial of this position, it will, I think,
follow, that if any individual among men should ever unhappily sink even below
idolatry itself, and so darken his notions of the author of nature, as to pay
him no kind of religious homage at all (which is no impossible supposition) the
obligation thereto would become totally extinct. This obligation, therefore, to
religion is to be considered as something permanent and fixed in the nature and
relations of things; founded in the divine Being and attributes, resulting from
the rectitude of his will, and suited to the rational faculties of men: Suited
I say, to their rational faculties; because, though it be an immovable
unabating principle of religious service to every one; yet is it not, I
suppose, exactly the same in all; that is, it does not demand precisely the
same services toward God from all. It would, indeed, do so, were the rational
faculties of men, their opportunities, means of moral science and improvement,
every where equal: But as they are manifestly various, and even widely
different, this obligation is to each, as (...) his faculties and opportunities
to know God, and his duty to him.

What were the intellectual capacities of the original progenitors of mankind
is difficult to (...) -- What has been often said of one of them, in
particular, his most extensive knowledge of natural things animate and
inanimate, their natures, qualities, uses and ends; and his comprehensive and
clear discernment of moral truths, is, I believe, mere hypothesis, altogether
unsupported by any thing recorded in sacred history, of what he ever said or
did. It appears extremly unphilosophical, as well as inconsistent with every
^^^^logical argument, to imagine, that, at the instant of his creation, he was
invested with as ample powers of reason and moral reflection, as he was made
capable of attaining to, and did, probably, afterward possess, The faculties
of this mysterious man for improvement in natural and moral science, were,
doubtless, every way sufficient for his necessities; for his duly observing the
law he was under, and to quality him for that higher and more perfect happiness
for which his benevolent Creator designed him. This, however, determines
nothing, as to the comparative strength of his faculties; or whether they were
greater, or less, than those of the generality of his posterity. The knowledge
he had, the moment of his being brought into existence (if, indeed, he had any,
besides the perception that he did exist) must have been communicated. But to
affirm, that the communication was coeval with his existence, or that his
knowledge was concreated with him, is to say much more than is necessary. It is
not only incapable of any proof, but is, moreover, unsupported by the argument
of analogy. We are, indeed, it must be acknowledged, very incompetent judges of
what Omnipotence can do. It far surpasses the comprehension of creatures,
boldly to assert, that God has not done, or cannot do, thus or so; merely,
because we have no conception of the modus of his operations. It is as daringly
impious, as it is weak and inconclusive arguing, and it directly militates
against the plainest fact in nature, the work of creation itself; for we do not
know how things were made. -- We are, notwithstanding, to judge of things, when
we have a right to judge at all, with the faculties which he has bestowed, in
the best manner we are able, and according to that rule which the known methods
of the divine conduct furnish us with. This rule, the best we have, leads us to
suppose, that the knowledge of the first man was communicated and acquired
after he had received his existence; and that it was not coeval, or concreated
with him. The same great and important ends would be equally obtained on the
former as on the latter supposition. No doctrine of religion, that I know of,
natural or revealed, would, in any degree, be affected, much less injured by
it: It is indisputably more consonant to the subsequent ways of divine
providence. We can have no conception of knowledge in man, or indeed in any
other creature, but that, which is made up of ideas gradually admitted, and
properly ordered by the understanding. We have, however, some color of reason
to suppose, that the first man's capacity to receive those ideas, out of which
he was to form his knowledge, was not as in after ages, by the slow degrees of
infancy and youth; but in more speedy and free succession, both by frequent
divine suggestions, and the continual presentation of external objects: This
being more adapted to the original manhood of his constitution, and the
full-made strength of his bodily senses. It is most probable, that he was
greatly aided by the Creator, in amassing and perfecting the furniture of his
understanding; that he was told who his maker was, as soon as he could make
proper use of such knowledge; and that the great variety of living creatures,
and thing inanimate, which he saw around him, had the same cause of existence
with himself, and were the care of the same providence. Hence, by deduction, he
would soon come to have some knowledge of the law of his nature, his dependence
on and duty to the Creator; and on every reflection would arrive to more
perfect notions hereof. Had he not been favored with the aids of intimation by
his Maker, but left to his own investigations, and improvements on ideas
admitted by the senses from outward objects only, however large we may suppose
his capacity to receive and make use of them; and however disposed we may be to
allow that he would, at length, by the deduction, of reason, have learnt to
consider himself as the effect of some cause; yet, I believe, it may be justly
questioned, whether it would not have been much l^^^er before he could have had
any notion of this cause being invisible. He would not, untaught, very readily
have had any conception of there being invisible (...), or have extended his
views beyond the visible world, or have formed any just and tolerable (...) of
a Being so spiritual and incomprehensible, as God. -- What conception could he
possibly have had at first, uninstructed, as we now suppose him, of the divine
unity, infinity and eternity, which are so essential to the proper notion of
the Deity? The knowledge of these was not to be obtained, but in a course of
just reasoning and deduction; and as imperfect as his notions were, so
proportionably imperfect must his religion have been. There appears sufficient
foundation from the history of the early periods of man's life to suppose, that
he received very great and seasonable helps from the Creator. It is manifest,
that he was favored with visits from his Lord; and some circumstances make it
probable, that they were frequent. It is, moreover, certain, that he was
instructed by him, in regard to his worldly conduct and temporal felicity.
Judging from the notions we now have of the divine character, which from
eternity is unchangeably the same, we cannot, we must not suppose, that less
care was taken of him, with respect to moral sentiment and religious worship.
Although the dispensation, man was at first put under, was that of strict and
rigorous law, "obey and live;" "transgress and die;" a dispensation, which
admitted of no promise of aid under any exigency, no provision of pardon for
any crime, for these would have changed it is nature; yet, it is no way
inconsistent with this dispensation, but, on the contrary, plainly deducible
from the perfections of the Deity, that man should be favored with every
necessary instruction with regard to the law itself; that he might have a full
understanding of it, he able to keep it, and apprised of the consequences of
obeying or transgressing it. Such instruction he received. As, by the same
means he learned, much sooner than otherwise he would have done, who had given
him existence, on whom he depended, and from what source the manifold favors
and blessings, with which he was so liberally encompassed, were derived; so he
was brought to know what the religion of his nature was. He saw the fitness, he
felt the obligation of loving and serving his Maker; of expressing his
sentiments of piety, dependence and gratitude, in such ways only, and by such
acts of external homage as the Deity should please to appoint. He perceived it
to be right, therefore his duty, to submit to the divine authority in all
things, to obey his will, to do his pleasure, in whatever instance made known;
in particular, with regard to that of his avoiding the interdicted tree. Had he
kept his station, as he might, had he opened and enlarged his rational
faculties, according to his advantages, and improved by those divine hints that
were afforded him; his sense of right and of religious obligation would have
been daily rendered more perfect and extensive. But he transgressed; and by
transgression, the dispensation of strict law ended; that of grace, under the
Mediator, commenced; and sin and death entered into the world. Whatever were
the ability and advantages of man to keep his original state and preserve his
primitive innocence, it is an incontestible fact, that his defection took place
in consequence of the first temptation. Scared history mentions no other; nor
have we any reason to think he ever resisted one. This, by the way, is no
argument of his possessing supereminent intellectual powers, of moral
discernment, above the common standard of mankind. -- He transgressed, and he
must die. This is the just demerit and threatened penalty of sin. His Creator,
however, did not forsake him; but continued his providential care and
watchfulness toward him. A plan of grace, on the foresight of transgression,
had been previously laid in the divine counsels, whereby both the actual
transgressor, and his posterity, who were now born to die, were, in future
time, to be restored to life, through him who is the resurrection and the life.
From this period, God has thought fit to treat with the creature man, by the
mediation of his Son, opening and discovering divine truths to them, as they
should be able to bear them, and were prepared to profit by them. Such
discoveries were made, at first, as appear to be adapted to the infant state of
the world. The knowledge which the first man had of the Deity, and of moral
obligation and truth, he, doubtless, communicated to his posterity. For, though
he must have greatly felt the unhappy biass of a depraved heart, yet we know
not that his intellectual powers, or mere knowledge of moral truth, were, at
all, impaired by the transgression. The contrary rather appears, as higher
orders of beings, who have also sinned, are, notwithstanding, represented as
being very sagacious and knowing, though indisposed to all good. But I hope,
whatever may be true of individuals, or even whole nations, since, that it will
not deserve censure, if we do not carry the moral indisposition of man, at this
time, so far as to equal it with that of Devils. The notions, which he now had
of a future state and an immortal life after death, must, I think, have been
collected out of that discourse which God held with him after his defection. --
The only possible idea he could have of immortality in innocence, is that of
continuance in life -- Obey and live. It did not accord with the nature of the
dispensation he was under, that he should have any other. What he now believed
about a future state, he made known to his children, with the grounds of it.
This called forth the exertion of their intellectual faculties, and they
improved, grew wiser, and had hope. -- This hope God was pleased afterward
greatly to strengthen, particularly by the translation of Enoch, whose piety
was conspicuous. The reason of man was sufficient, from hints, to deduce many
important truths; and to see the fitness and obligation of several things,
which, merely of itself, would not have been so soon or easily discovered.
Hence, I am inclined to think that natural religion is not so properly defined
to be that, which mankind have, or might come to the knowledge of, merely by
the strength of unassisted reason; as that, which reason sees to be right, and
feels the force of, when it is known, What reason knows to be fit, what it
assents to, approves and rests satisfied in, when it is perceived, though it be
offered to it, answers precisely the same purposes as to religion and moral
obligation, and indeed, as to its being the foundation and test of revelation
itself, that it would do, were it discovered in its own strength. To affirm,
however, that the reason of man cannot come to the knowledge of God and his
duty to him, by any contemplations and deductions of his own, is to say a great
deal too much. Reason, properly employed, will make very great discoveries, and
by attending to the constitution and order of things, be led up to their cause.
This notwithstanding, had the immediate posterity of Adam received no light
from him, or communications from the Deity, their progress in moral science
would, undoubtedly, have been very slow. It is evident, that God did not see
fit to leave them, merely, to their own investigations. He superadded his daily
assistance to the powers of reason, with which he had endowed them. He
manifested himself to them, and directed his own worship. There is no
accounting for the early practice of sacrificing on any other principle. Such
care God has, certainly, taken of man from the beginning. He even condescended
to reason with Cain, in regard to the mistake he had made in his offering.

Although natural religion is founded in the existence of God, and the relation
man stands in to him; and is, therefore, unalrerably the same, whether
understood by man or not; that is, it is an eternal truth, that the obligation
of religion results from such existence and relations; yet this has not been
discovered merely by the faculty of reason, exclusive of aid: but it has had
helps; it has been set to work; and when the discovery has been made, religion
has been found to be altogether agreeable to the understanding: it consents to
and feels the force of it, and it can no more reject or call it in question,
than it can those truths, which necessarily result from any other natural
relations, and the agreement or disagreement of ideas. We cannot, however,
argue, from natural religion's being founded in relations that cannot but exist
between the Deity and man, and the obligation of it being alike derived from
this source on all, that the quantity thereof to each must therefore be the
same. The notion of a general natural religion for the human race will, I
trust, on examination be found to be groundless, and no way consonant to the
nature of things. Natural religion has respect not to collective bodies of
men, much less to the whole mass of mankind, but to individuals; each one has
his own natural religion, and it is more or less as is the reason of each, or
at least, as it might be, were it duly exercised and improved. Indeed it makes
no difference here, whether we consider the reason of each man as it is, or as
it would be, had it been exercised and improved by every one to the utmost. In
either case it is possessed in unequal portions. On the latter supposition,
though each one would know more than he now does, or in other words, would have
more reason than he now has, and consequently, would have more natural
religion; yet there would be as real a diversity among men as there is at
present: -- That is, they would not all have the same quantity of reason, and,
therefore, could not all have the same quantity of natural religion; the latter
being always proportionate to the former.

Every man is accepted according to that he has, and not according to that he
has not. When the gifts of nature are small, and the opportunities and
advantages for the acquisition of knowledge inferior, the less will be
required. From him to whom one or two talents are committed the same
improvements will not be exacted as from him who has had five: -- For it is
equally true on the plan of nature, as that of revelation, that, to whomsoever
much is given, of him shall much be required. A sufficiency is given on either
plan by the benevolent author of both, if duly cultivated and improved, to
promote and secure the happiness of every one. Less capacities are filled with
less enjoyments. It is, notwithstanding a good, much to be desired, to have our
capacities enlarged, to know more of God and truth, natural and moral, that our
happiness may be also enlarged. The wise and good author of our nature has,
accordingly, so framed them, that happiness is made to depend on ourselves. It
is unnecessary, to observe, that I do not intend, it is so, exclusively of
those aids, which, from the perfections of the Deity, are to be expected under
the law of nature; and from his promise, under the dispensation of grace.
Happiness, I say, depends on ourselves; arises out of our own industry and
progress in those moral improvements, which are commonly made to better
advantage by the means of natural ones. The one does not, indeed, necessarily
follow from the other, as effects from causes; but there is a tendency in the
latter to beget the former; though, at the same time, from the principle of
human liberty, the effect may not be, and often is not, produced. The greater,
however, and the more extensive our knowledge is of natural, the greater may it
be of moral truths. The more we know of the latter, the more may we love and
embrace them, and conform to them, in temper and conduct toward God and the
world around us. This is natural religion. From this happiness results. When we
consider the intellectual powers of human nature, as original faculties to
attain knowledge by aid and suggestion; to improve every degree thereof; to
extend and enlarge it; to argue, by this means, the being and perfection of the
Deity from his works, and the obligation of the several duties we owe him, in
due and proper order, from his attributes; it is not easy to speak in too
exalted strains of them. -- They are truly great and noble. They have in many
instances been carried far. To what lengths they might be pushed, even in this
state, in regard of both natural and moral science, did not the decay and
dissolution of the body hinder enquiry, is impossible to determine. Of this,
however, we are certain, that the larger the stock of science is in any mind,
the better it is able to advance; the farther it goes, the farther may it go,
and the clearer will be it is apprehensions of there being things, yet to be
known; and the progress might be endless, as, in the other state, it will,
doubtless, be strictly so. The most rational and consistent notion we can form
of the condition of good men in heaven, is, that of continual advances in
knowledge and holiness; approaching toward the Deity, and perfecting their
image of him. Hence happiness must arise, and increase in just proportion. But
if the rational faculties of man are supposed to be left to discover truths
merely in their own strength, without aid or intimation, it will then be very
difficult to say how great they will ever show themselves, or what they may
possibly do. It is not manifest, that the trial has ever yet been made; the
contrary rather appears. And hence it may be justly inferred, that the wise and
benevolent author of our beings never designed, that the creature man, who was
so admirably formed, with capacities to receive by instruction and improve upon
every hint, should be left to the slow and uncertain acquisition of, and
progress in knowledge, by the sole exertion of his own faculties. The argument
from what man can now do, with the helps he has had, instructed and enlightened
as he is, to what he would, or could have done, without these advantages, is
inconclusive and illusory. Let the conjectures we have made, in regard to the
first man, turn out as they may, however great his knowledge, or in what way
soever he came by it, learned men, who have made the most philosophical
enquiries, generally agree, that his posterity came into the world destitute of
knowledge, or even the materials of it, having only capacities to receive it.

The opinion of innate ideas and principles, which prevailed for so long a
time, is now, almost, universally given up; and that of the human mind
receiving them afterward distinct and simple; comparing, compounding and
disposing of them, together with the perception of those operations, is adopted
in its room, as the original of knowledge. Succeeding generations are supposed,
in the mean time, to have the assistance of those who have gone before; for it
appears to be the plan of providence, that in addition to these sources, and
besides the communications, at any time, afforded by the Deity, man should help
man; parents teach their children; and, in the prophetic style, many run to and
fro, and knowledge be increased. What truths man possibly could discover, in
the due exercise of his rational faculties without aid, is one thing; what he
probably would, is another.

The most celebrated philosophers have not pretended to investigate the most
important truths of the moral kind, whereof they had no knowledge, (...) so
much as aimed to establish those on fixed principles, and render them plainer
by their reasoning, which have been handed down to them by tradition. This is
the case with several; with that weighty one, a future state of retribution in
particular. And what shall we say in regard to the clearest and most
fundamental truth in nature, that which is the basis of all other truth? In
what age or country has he lived, and what is his name, or his son's name, who,
without any previous intimation, merely by deduction and argument, has, in
fact, proved the divine existence? Though it is most undeniably to be done from
the things that are made; yet who has ever been put to the necessity of doing
it? If we look among the ancient or modern philosophers, who have attempted the
proof of the divine Being and perfections, either by arguments a priori or a
posteriori, do we not find them before possessed of the most essentially
necessary truth? The fact is, that it has been transmitted from the beginning,
and spread among all nations; and this has precluded the necessity of that
proof, which is very capable of being made; and indeed if it be allowed that
the divine existence is most incontestibly to be argued from his works (and
what can be more manifest?) and if the reason of man, in proper exercise, can
see, and does see that it is so; where then is the harm, and what can be
risqued, by supposing, as appears to be the case, that God has been before hand
with us, as he is, with respect to many favors, and has given us intimations
of himself prior to our reasoning about him?

To what has been advanced, I think the authority of St. Paul cannot be
opposed, who has said, The invisible things of him since the creation of the
world, are clearly seen, being understood by the things that are made, even his
eternal power and godhead; so that they are without excuse. The Apostle is
here speaking of the heathens, but for what does he blame them? And on what
account were they without excuse? Was it because they did not seek after and
find the true God, from his works, whom they had never before known? Does he
not represent them as knowing God already, but not glorifying him as God? As
not liking to retain him in their knowledge? And as holding the truth in
unrighteousness, because that which may be known of God, is manifest in them,
for God has showed it unto them? And does he not speak of them, as being
without excuse; because they had so far lost the knowledge they once had of
him, as to change the glory of the uncorruptible God into an image made like to
corruptible man, and to birds and four footed beasts, and creeping things;
when, at the same time, they had so clear and striking an argument, before
their eyes, of the invisible things of him; even his eternal power and godhead,
as the things that are made did afford them? and had afforded all mankind, ever
since they were made? This is evidently the scope of the Apostle's reasoning;
and the argument is truly powerful and convincing; there is no resisting its
force, where proper attention is given, If the things that are made are
sufficient to prove the being, as cannot be denied, much more are they so, to
preserve the knowledge, of God, in every rational mind. And the intellectual
faculties of men, duly employed, cannot but consent to this, and immediately
perceive it to be so. Without excuse, therefore, must they be, to lose the
knowledge of him, after they have once had it, and change the truth of God into
a lie, and worship and serve the creature more than the Creator, who is blessed
forever.

On what has been, thus far, discoursed of man; the capacities he is endowed
with; the means he enjoys of knowing God, and his duty to him; and the
proportionate religion of his nature, several things may be noticed.

First, we may observe, with the most undissembled piety and gratitude, that
the divine care of man, in every period, has been suited to the circumstances
he came under; commensurate to the exigencies of his condition; and calculated
to open and enlarge his views of moral science, and the most fundamental
principles of natural religion. In innocence, his Creator was his friend and
patron, his daily protector and guide; and this, in a way so consistent with
that liberty and active power with which he was endowed, as to leave room for
merit and self-satisfaction in the exercise of his own faculties. When he had
sinned, he did not depart from him, and abandon him to the horrors of despair
and ruin. Highly displeased and dishonored, as he certainly was, with his
transgression; and notwithstanding the fullest testimony he bore against it;
showing his extremest abhorrence, by suffering the consequences thereof to
come on, agreeable to the threatening; "in the day that thou eatest thereof,
thou shall surely die;" yet he took occasion, from this very act, to make
farther discoveries of his grace and kindness. He applied remedies against the
prevalency of sin and lust, which had now entered into the world, and corrected
and restrained their growth, by new instructions and appointments, adapted to
the degraded condition of humanity. He took the most effectual measures, had
they been regarded, to preserve and spread the knowledge of himself and his
worship in the world; and finally, to procure the restoration of men, from the
darkness of death to a state of immortal life and glory. The paternal care
which God saw fit to take of man, from the beginning of his weakness and
depravity, and the wise and gracious methods he has all along pursued, to
convey the most useful instruction to him, and keep a sense of religion and
moral obligation in his heart, cannot be recollected by us, in the present age
of the world, who so richly enjoy the benefits hereof, but with the most
pleasing astonishment and gratitude. By favoring man, with many appearances
from the angel of his presence, he declared himself and his ways to them, as
far as the necessity of their temporal concerns would admit, and their
capacities were able to improve and receive advantage by such instructions: He
communicated the spirit of prophecy to many, and some have supposed, as from
several intimations in sacred history it appears not improbable, that he made
it "hereditary, in the heads of families;" and for many years men enjoyed the
benefit of the tradition of the most useful and important truths, by the means
of longevity, through but very few hands. "There were but two generations from
Adam to Noah. So that we cannot well imagine that the knowledge and true
worship of God, during that time, Could be entirely lost, in any part of the
world."

After the general deluge, considering what had so recently happened, to
manifest the divine displeasure against iniquity, and make his power known, and
also that the world was, as it were, beginning anew; the most essential truths
of natural religion, as they were acknowledged, might be very well left, for
some time, to traditionary conveyance, and the common reasoning of mankind,
without any new communications from the Deity. But no sooner did men begin to
fall away. and corrupt and darken their notions of the one supreme God, and
incline to idolatry, than he saw fit to interpose to prevent it, and to take
various methods to invigorate the impression of himself, and some of the most
leading and essential truths, and enforce the obligation of religious homage.
And when, notwithstanding the paternal care, which God exercised over his
offspring, they had grown too generally refractory and disobedient,
obliterating their natural notions of him, and corrupting the first principles
of reason, even so far as to darken their understandings, and render themselves
unfit subjects of the divine communications: insomuch that he was, as it were,
obliged to withhold favors of this sort, as being no longer suitable for them.
This, I say, being the case, he did not fail to make use of other means, which
had now become more adapted to the obscurity of their understandings, and the
depravity of their hearts, to do them good; to recover their lost notions of
God, and the religion of their nature. He raised up and furnished certain
individuals of mankind, who had retained more just and rational notions of the
Deity and their duty to him, and of the general obligations of religious fear,
worship and obedience, than the rest, to guide, teach and instruct them, as
both themselves and these had before been taught of God. For this important
purpose, Abraham was called and very much distinguished, together with his
posterity, by notable discoveries of God and religion, and many benefits and
privileges, both of a temporal and spiritual kind. But, as a very eminently
learned and judicious writer has observed, -- "we cannot think, that it was so
much on his own account, that he was thus distinguished; or that, for his sake
only, faith, or sincerity, is said to be imputed to him for righteousness; but
rather for the common benefit of mankind was all this done; in order to make
him an instrument, in the hand of providence (and a fit one he was) to convey
the same faith and fear of God to all the nations round him." And besides
Abraham, there were many other persons, spread abroad in almost every nation,
who were burning and shining lights, in dark ages and places; and who,
notwithstanding the too great prevalency of idolatry, had preserved, some of
them, considerably pure and rational, others, by far more consistent notions of
the one true God, than the generality. Even the spirit of prophecy, which had
been possessed by many, before Abraham's time, did not utterly cease among the
several nations, in his day, nor soon after it, There were also other means of
conveying divine admonitions to men, and some were instructed by visions and
revelations; whereby the knowledge of God and natural religion was, in some
measure, kept up in the world. But that, which had the most direct and
distinguished tendency to enlighten mankind; to reform their idolatrous
practices and vices; and to recover and diffuse, among all nations, proper
conceptions of the power, justice and majesty of the God of nature, and the
religious obedience which he required and would accept of reasonable beings,
was his afterward giving a written law to the Jews; statutes and judgments,
more righteous than those of other nations; and making himself, as it were, the
political head of their state; guiding and regulating their moral governmental
and ecclesiastic affairs. In every part of which he seems to have had in view
the same divine intention, which he had prosecuted from the first, viz. That of
applying to, calling forth and aiding the human reason; and adapting his
providential care to the circumstances and necessities of mankind. God had
before, in various instances, revealed his will to particular persons for the
common benefit; that is, he had made it known, at such times, and in such ways
and degrees, as he saw best suited to accomplish his benevolent purpose of
informing men's minds, and giving spring to the exertion of their rational
faculties; but he never had, 'till now, written his law for their constant
perusal. The learned Bishop, to whom I am already indebted, and some others,
have supposed, with great probability, that Moses was divinely taught on this
occasion, and that this was the origin of letters. Nor was the law confined to
the Jewish nation; it had respect also to the stranger: And all nations had,
and were originally designed to have, a share of blessings, in the adoption and
blessing of Abraham, and the giving of the law. Accordingly the Jews were made
use of, in a great variety of ways, for the grand end of spreading the doctrine
of the divine unity through the world, and restoring and establishing the
essential principles of natural religion. Whether they pursued their own
inclination, in many instances, and aimed to be blessings to other nations or
not, is of no consequence to enquire; since, in either case, the divine plan is
carried forward; and "the rest of the world reap almost the same benefit by
them, whether they keep their law and prosper, or disobey it and are in
distress." By their rewards and by their punishments, by their victories, and
by their captivities, the name of Jehovah is made known, and the great truths
of religion spread abroad and confirmed.

Secondly, It is a just and obvious remark from the foregoing discourse, that
the divine conduct toward men in the several ages of the world, and in all the
darkness and diversity of their circumstances, has been calculated to furnish
their minds with such degrees of light and knowledge, in regard to their moral
state, and the necessities of nature, as to dispose them for the casier
reception of the gospel revelation, when it should be offered to them, and for
the many distinguished privileges and advantages, which it brings along with
it. Men see their wants by the means of light, and their having been accustomed
to receive it, prepares them for more. They can in reason, have no prejudice
against new discoveries, when they have been used to old ones; or to further
and more perfect assistance when they have already had some, though more
restrained and par^ial; yet always such as was best adapted to their moral
circumstances. The christian dispensation may be properly considered, as the
perfection of the general plan of conduct in this world, pursued by the Deity
with respect to the human race from the beginning. He early began in diverse
ways and manners to give them just notions of the religion of their nature; and
by his several dispensations, has been uniformly carrying forward the same
design; 'till it at length issued in the superior light and advantage of the
gospel revelation. It is not essential to the just and proper notion of natural
religion, that it should be discovered, by the mere strength of human reason;
it is sufficient if it be consonant to reason, and founded in nature The way
and manner of knowing it, does not come into the account; or make it more or
less natural religion.

Let a part of the human race, in some dark corner of the earth, be supposed
totally ignorant of all the natural religion that ever was in the world; let a
few of them be now so happy, as to discover it by contemplation, and the proper
use of their own faculties; and let them communicate it to the rest. In this
case, I ask would it not be equally natural religion in them all? And would it
make any difference here, if the communication should proceed from some other
quarter, or even from the Deity? If it has its foundation in the divine
perfections, and the relation there is between God and man; is not this enough
to constitute it the religion of nature, in whatever way men are supposed to
come to the knowledge of it? To speak, therefore, of what is called natural
religion and revealed, as though they were totally distinct, and essentially
and substantially different, is, I believe, to give an undue representation of
them both; and to administer very unnecessary support to the cause of
infidelity. The grand design of (...) in every instance, has been, either
directly or consequentially to open, enlarge and establish the genuine
principles of natural religion; that is, the religion that is adapted to the
nature and circumstances of the creature, man. In this way, and with this
design, the benevolent Father of the universe has gone on, with respect to the
human race, from the beginning down to the present time; rising in the
perspicuity and fullness of his manifestations; until he saw fit, in the
unfathomable depths of his wisdom, to bless the world with the Gospel
revelation, and the dispensation of his grace, under the immediate conduct and
administration of the Son of his love; wherein the great principles and duties
of natural religion are more perfectly taught, explained and understood; and
more clearly and authoritatively enforced and confirmed, than they had ever
before been under any former dispensation. There is now, by the means of the
Gospel, more natural religion in the world than the reason of man, with all the
assistance and instruction that has been given it, had ever before brought him
acquainted with; insomuch, that it may be truly affirmed, that those societies,
or even individuals, who have the most Christianity, have also the most natural
religion among them. It must, indeed, be confessed, to the praise of the divine
grace, that the Gospel has made glorious discoveries of things, which the
reason of man could never come to the knowledge of, but by revelation. They
are, however, such as have a tendency to promote the principles, and oblige us
to the practice of the several duties of natural religion. The general doctrine
of the mediation of Christ, and it is appendages; that of atonement and
justification in his merits; and, indeed, the several offices, executed by him,
in the great and glorious work of redemption, have for their object, the giving
men just views of the divine character; (...) sense of their own, and the state
they are in; forming them to proper tempers toward God and one another, and
leading them to a correspondent conduct: So that the scheme of Christianity is
calculated to subdue sin, which degrades human nature; and to direct and
influence men to act according to it is law, which dignifies and exalts it. But
I pass on to observe,

Thirdly, That if the Deity has seen fit all along to aid the reason of man by
frequent discoveries, according to its necessities, as we have heard, them no
objection can be justly formed against revelation in general; nor of
consequence against the christian revelation in particular, which is no other
than his continuing to do the same. It has been said, with great reason and
judgment, "That the several dispensations of what we call revealed religion,
have hitherto been, in the main, conformable to those of providence, in both
the natural and moral world." And if so, then revealed religion "may possibly
come from the same author, and receive yet farther increase, which these also
do, as they are better understood."

It is indeed owing, in part to the greater improvements, which later ages have
made in general science and literature, than former ages had done, that the
modern Deists know more, and more they do certainly know than their
predecessors, the ancient philosophers. But this is chiefly to be attributed to
the advantage of the christian revelation, which has been a rich blessing, even
to those who do not believe in it. One would be ready to imagine that we meet
the Deists on their own ground, and give them all their wishes, when we
undertake to show that the christian revelation is the fulfillment and
perfection of the same plan, which the Deity has pursued with men, from the
first; and that the great aim and tendency of it is to give them more just and
enlarged notions of the principles, and more strongly to oblige them to the
duties of natural religion. Whether this be the case or not, they themselves
will allow, is worthy their most serious consideration.

The discourse, we have now had, may remind us all of the singular advantages
we enjoy, in this age of light and inprovement, both to know and do our duty.
But I cannot help felicitating my young brethren the Students of this
university, in particular, on the peculiar blessedness of their situation, and
the prospects they have before them. In this seat of learning, kind Providence
has honored them with privileges above the common portion of mankind; or even
of those who are figuratively said to be lifted up to heaven, with respect to
theirs. And if they desire to answer the just and reasonable expectations of
God, their friends or their country from them, it should be their care, that
their literary and religious accomplishments rise in some proportion to such
happy enjoyments. When we are told of their general virtues, their regular
behavior, their easy submission to the good orders, instruction and government
of this society; or of their honoring themselves and this favored seminary, by
their literary performances, we are glad: Rejoicing in their personal glory,
and wishing them every blessing, we anticipate the happiness of future time,
when they shall be called forth to act their parts in places of trust and
eminence both in church and state. But we are made sorry with every report of a
different kind, and console ourselves only with the hope, that it cannot be
true. We, who have trod the paths of science before them, may possibly, as we
do most willingly, afford them our friendly aid, but they must not think to
bound their progress in literature by the limits that have been set to ours.
They must go beyond us. They enjoy happy opportunities for this. Their
advantages, by means of daily improvements, are better than ours were. And if
they do not surpass us, they will have a greater account to give up before God
at last. In addition to human literature, and the assiduous cultivation of the
liberal arts and sciences, which will lead them to an easier and more extensive
acquaintance with the foundations both of natural and revealed religion, their
minds must be furnished with divine science. They must acquire and cherish the
most reverential thoughts of the holy Scriptures, which are able to make them
wise unto salvation. Their hearts must be replenished with the divine grace.
They must know God, and Jesus Christ whom he has sent, whom to know is eternal
life. Wisdom is the principal thing: Therefore, get wisdom; but with all thy
getting, got understanding.

AMEN.

