ACCOUNT OF THE GOSPEL LABORS, AND CHRISTIAN EXPERIENCES OF A FAITHFUL
MINISTER OF CHRIST, JOHN CHURCHMAN, Late of Nottingham in Pennsylvania,
deceased.

To which is added a short MEMORIAL of the Life and Death of a fellow Labourer
in the Church, our valuable Friend JOSEPH WHITE, late of Bucks County.

DANIEL xi. 33. xii. 4. And they that understand among the People, shall
instruct many.
Many shall run to and fro, and Knowledge shall be increased.
PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, ON THE NORTH SIDE OF MARKET STREET
BETWEEN SECOND AND THIRD STREETS. MDCCIXXIX.

TO THE READER.
IN the perusal of the following pages thou will receive a pious man's plain
account of his beginning in the weighty work of religion, and his progress in a
life devoted to promote the cause of righteousness, and the real happiness of
mankind.

Having experienced the Spiritual baptism which is essential to salvation, and
abiding in a state of watchfulness and humility, he became, under the Lord's
Anointing, a well qualified instrument for the instruction and edification of
others in the way of Godliness, and by attending to the gift of Gospel ministry
committed to his trust, and performing the duties required of him, he witnessed
a growth from stature to stature, and attained to be an upright elder and
father in the church, being an example to the believers in word in
conversation, in spirit, in faith, and charity.

It is not for form sake or from a mere motive of commendation, that any thing
is here premised respecting the deceased; but as the ensuing narrative will be
likely to come under the observation of many to whom he was either little
known, or wholly a stranger, it seems necessary for the information of such
enquirers, to make known the estimation in which he was held by his brethren
with whom he was connected in religious society, who have given full
declaration of their christian unity and fellowship with him, and that his life
and conduct adorned the doctrine of the Gospel, which he was concerned to
publish.

The monthly and quarterly-meetings of which he was a member from their first
establishment, and who were many years partakers of his pious example and
labors, after recounting diverse of his visits abroad, which are fully related
by himself, testify, that

Although he was of a weakly constitution, and often infirm, especially in the
latter part of his life, yet he appeared to be much devoted to the service of
Truth and the good of mankind, and gave up his time for that purpose, when he
apprehended it was required of him, being favored with a sufficiency of
outward things, and we believe he stood loose from the world, and its
connections, not seeking, but refraining opportunities he might have had to get
outward riches; he visited neighboring yearly, quarterly, and other meetings
of friends at times to his last year, and was truly useful in the discipline of
the church, having a valuable gift in that respect, and was a good example in a
diligent care to attend all the meetings both for worship and discipline to
which he belonged, cautious of being forward in his public appearances, and for
the most part exampled us to silence in our meetings at home, especially in the
latter part of his time; yet when he did appear in testimony we think it may be
truly said his doctrine dropped as the dew, being lively, and edifying to the
honest hearted, though close, and searching to the careless professors, as well
as to the profane, and hypocritical.

The elders who have ruled well are to be accounted honorable, so the
remembrance of the fatherly, diligent, humble, upright, honest, and
self-denying example of this our deceased friend, as also his various services
in our meetings and neighborhood remain fresh, and of a pleasant savor to to
many minds.

Abstract from the testimony of the monthly meeting of Nottingham dated fourth
month twenty-seventh 1776, and signed by Samuel England, clerk.

Which is certified to be read and approved in the Western quarterly meeting
held at London Grove in Chester County, the nineteenth of the eighth month
1776, by Isaac Jackson, clerk.

In confirmation of the truth of which memorial concerning him, many others of
his brethren in various places can freely subscribe.

His deportment was grave, and reverent, his judgment sound and clear, in
matters of a spiritual or temporal concern, and his natural disposition being
cheerful, he sometimes discovered a turn of pleasantry in conversation, which
being careful to circumscribe within due limitations, rendered his company
innocently agreeable and instructive.

Being deeply sensible of the weight and solemnity of the Gospel ministry, he
manifested great circumspection and care, that it might be preserved pure and
unblemished from mistaken, or false appearances in himself or others, and in
the exercise of his gift, his declarations were plain, familiar, and concise,
accompanied with a fervent concern that his fellow believers and all others
might be brought to the sure knowledge of an holy living principle given to
direct and lead into true devotion of heart, and the practice of self denial,
consistent with the doctrine and precepts of Christ Jesus our Lord, for the
prevalence and enlargement of whose peaceable kingdom, he was earnestly
engaged, as the following narrative also makes evident, that with a degree of
propriety he might have adopted the language of an eminent minister in the
early age of the Christian church, addressed to the believers, " Knowing that
shortly I must put of this my tabernacle, even as our Lord Jesus Christ has
shown me; moreover I will endeavor that you may be able after my decease to
have these things in remembrance! for we have not followed cunningly devised
fables, when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ. 2 Pet. i. 14-15-16."

What he has written, and left us is now recommended to thy perusal and
consideration, in which if thou art seriously attentive, and not superficial,
thou may under the Divine blessing receive profitable instruction in
righteousness, which is the intent of the publication.

Philadelphia, 9th Month, 1779.
AN ACCOUNT OF THE LIFE AND TRAVELS OF JOHN CHURCHMAN.
CHAP. I.
His early sense of the impressions of divine love, and spiritual conflicts in
his youth. -- Death of his father -- His marriage -- The settlement of a
monthly meeting at Nottingham -- His joining with other friends in visiting of
families the first and second time -- His being appointed an Elder, and first
appearance in the ministry, etc.

I Was born in the Township of Nottingham, in the County of Chester, and
Province of Pennsylvania, on the Fourth Day of the Sixth Month, 1705, and was
tenderly brought up in profession of the Truth by my parents, JOHN and HANNAH
CHURCHMAN, who were diligent attenders of Religious Meetings, both on the
first, and other days of the week, and encouragers of their children in that
practice, which is certainly a duty in parents so to do, and often owned by the
reaches of Divine Love, even to those who are very young in years, of which I
am a living Witness; for though I early felt reproof for bad words and actions,
yet knew not whence it came, until about the age of eight years, as I sat in a
small meeting, the Lord by the reaches of his heavenly love, and goodness, so
overcame and tendered my heart, and by his glorious light discovered to me the
knowledge of himself, that I saw myself, and what I had been doing, and what it
was which had reproved me for evil, and was made in the secret of my heart to
confess that, childhood and youth, and the foolish actions and words, to which
they are propense, are truly vanity; yet blessed for ever be the name of the
Lord! who in his infinite mercy and goodness clearly informed me, that if I
would mind the discoveries of his Truth, and pure Light for the future, what I
had done in the time of my ignorance, he would wink at and forgive; and Oh! the
stream of Love which filled my heart with solid Joy at that time, and lasted
for many days, is beyond all expression; indeed I was early taught to think
different from such who hold the perdition of infants, and am since confirmed
in fully believing that the sin of our first parents is not imputed to us,
(though as their offspring we are by nature prone to evil, which brings wrath)
until by the discovery of light and grace, we are taught to distinguish between
good and evil, and in the seed and inward principle that shows the evil, we
feel the enmity placed against the evil, and the author thereof, the devil, or
wicked one; if we afterward commit those things which we saw to be evil, we
then fall under condemnation, and wrath, and here every soul that sins must die
to the sin he has committed, and witness the being raised again by the power
of God, into newness of life in CHRIST JESUS, not to live to himself, to fulfill
the will of the flesh; but to live unto him, who died to take away sin.

I may not forget to relate this one thing; my father sent me about three miles
on an errand; I rode a mare which had a colt perhaps half a year old; on my
return home, the colt ran-away from the mare to a company of wild horses, which
were feeding not far from the path I was in, so I went home without the colt;
my father asked me where the colt was, I told him where it went from me; he bid
me go to the place with speed, that it might follow the mare home; I went, and
found the wild horses feeding on a piece of ground where the timber trees had
been killed perhaps about two, or three years; but before I went among the dead
trees, a mighty wind arose, which blew some down, and many limbs flew about; I
stood still with my mind turned inward to the Lord, who I believed was able to
preserve me from hurt; so I passed among the trees without fear, save the fear
of the Lord, which fills the hearts of his humble depending children, with love
that is stronger than death; I found the colt, which readily followed the mare,
and I returned home with great bowedness of heart, and thankfulness to the
Lord, for his mercy and goodness to me on this occasion.

It was my practice when I went to bed, to examine how I had spent the past
day, and to endeavor to feel the presence of the Lord near, which I did for
some considerable time prefer to all other things, and I found this practice a
great help to sleep sweetly, and by long experience I can recommend it to
children, and those also of riper age.

I suppose that no one living knew my condition; for I delighted to keep
hidden, yet quick to observe the conduct of others; I remember that a person
once at my father's who spoke about religious matters with an affected tone, as
if he was a good man; when he went away, I was near him, and when he mounted
his horse, taking a dislike to some of his motions, he called him an ugly dumb
beast, with such an accent, as bespake great displeasure, and grieved me much;
for I did believe, that a man whose mind was sweetened with divine love truly,
would not speak wrathfully, or diminutively, even of the beasts of the field,
which were given to man for his use, he did not make them himself; I relate
this instance, that it may be a warning to all, that they be careful of giving
offense to the little ones.

Notwithstanding I had been favored as before mentioned; yet as I grew in
years, I was much given to play, and began to delight again in several things,
for which I had before been reproved, and still by the divine witness in my
mind, was brought under judgment for; but having lost my innocence and covering
of the pure blessed spirit, I endeavored through fear to fly from the voice of
the holy spirit in my own heart; the enemy persuaded me, that I could never be
restored to my former state, because I had sinned against so great knowledge,
or if I was, the judgment through which I must pass, would be intolerable to
bear, so that I had better be cheerful, and take my ease and delight; but when
I was about nine years old, my father sent me to school to learn to read,
(having been taught to know my letters, and spell a little at home) in which I
took great delight, and thereby diverted myself from feeling my pain of mind,
for the great loss of my innocence which I had sustained; and although the man,
by whom I was taught, was poor, and sat in his loom, being a weaver, while the
children read to him, I improved very fast, and he soon put me to writing, and
finding my capacity full as ripe as is common in boys of that age, he began to
teach me Arithmetic; yet gracious goodness still favored me with conviction,
and by his spirit was witness against me, and in mercy the Lord visited me with
a sore fit of sickness, and by his rod of correction brought me a little more
to myself; this was in the forepart of the winter, when I was between nine, and
ten years of age, and being pretty well recovered for some weeks, I had in the
following spring a relapse of the same disorder, (the pleurisy) in which, by
outward correction with sickness, and inward judgment, he was pleased to draw
me to himself, which caused me to renew my covenant with him, and I did hope
never more to stray from him, to follow lying vanities, whose sweets I had
experienced to be bitter, yea exceeding bitterness in the end. I had taken
great delight from a child to play with whistles, and pipes, made of the bark
of small branches of trees, and of straws of wheat and rye; but now it grieved
me to observe children delight therein, and I ventured to tell my mind to some
of them concerning such things

Man is distinguished from other creatures not only by his voice; but by
varying the breath together with the orderly motion of tongue and lips; that
voice is made to convey the ideas of the mind, and thoughts of the heart to his
fellow creatures, and as he was created to glorify his maker, the end and
intention of his voice should be directed to promote his glory among men;
whether in things natural, or spiritual, that is of this life, or that to come;
music as now commonly used, and whistling and singing, have no such tendency;
but are rather diversions of the mind from what it ought to be employed about,
and therefore a base comsumption of precious time, which man must be
accountable for, which if enough regarded, instead of music, whistling, and
singing merry, foolish, and profane songs, many would have occasion to lament
and weep for their misspent time. I leave it as a caution to parents, to beware
of indulging their dear children in any thing, which may impress their tender
minds with a desire after music, or such diversion when they grow in years; but
that instead thereof, by living in the pure fear of the Lord, and near the
spirit of truth in their own hearts, they may be furnished with example, and
precept to direct the minds of their offspring, to attend to the voice of him
who called to Samuel in days of old, and remains to be the same teacher to his
people in this age; may his holy name be magnifyed for ever, and ever!

I retained my care, and circumspection for some time; but through
unwatchfulness, and a desire for play which led into lightness, and
forgetfulness, I lost this state before I was twelve years of age, and though the
Lord was near, and followed me by his reproof, in order to bring me under
judgment, I fled from it as much as I could; having let in a belief, that as I
had been favored to taste in so wonderful a manner, "of the good word of Life,
and power of the world to come, and had so shamefully fallen away, there
remained for me, no more sacrifice for sin; but a fearful looking for of
judgment, and fiery indignation," which as I thought seemed to burn in me to
that degree, that I was afraid to be alone, for it seemed to be loudly
proclaimed in me, that whether I eat, or drank, waked, or slept I was accursed,
and when alone I abhorred myself; but when in company used my utmost endeavors
to hide my condition, by being cheerful and arch in my discourse, and was
thought by most young people to have a knack as they called it, at jesting and
witty turns; yet even in this time, I entertained such a value for religion,
that I was not willing to reveal my situation; lest I should be a reproach
thereto, or discourage others from seeking happiness; but when night came, and
I went to bed, no tongue can express the anguish I felt, afraid to lay awake,
and afraid to desire sleep, lest I should be cut off from the land of the
living, and my portion appointed in utter darkness; I so far neglected my
learning, that when about thirteen years old, I could not read but in a poor
manner, though once noted to be a ready reader; I was not willing that good
friends should take notice of me, or look me steadily in the face; for I
thought they would discern my wickedness, and it would be a trouble to them, or
by their reproving me, add to my distress; I seemed to be left without any
power to resist what I knew to be evil, and being ashamed that I had so lost my
little learning, I sought to divert myself by endeavoring to regain it; my
former genius, and delight so returned, that when I was about fifteen years of
age, I had made great improvement, not only in reading, but in writing, and
arithmetic, and several branches of the mathematics, and began to value
myself in some degree thereon, and so got over the convictions of the divine
witness, which spoke trouble in me; nevertheless during this time I kept close
in attending meetings, hoping at seasons, that perhaps the Lord would
condescend once more to visit me; for a saying of an eminent pious man was
revived in my remembrance That if there remained a desire in the heart after
Redemption, as it was kept to, the Lord would again assuredly visit such in his
own time. So that I was fearful of neglecting meetings, if my parents had not
forwarded me, lest I might miss of the good intended for me; yet the subtle
working of the power of darkness was at times very great, suggesting to me that
all things came by nature, and that there was no God, no heaven, no devil; no
punishment for evil, religion a jest, and painful care about futurity a silly
whim, propagated to deprive people of pleasure; but blessed be the Lord! he
preserved me from that snare, for while I felt his judgment for sin, I believed
in his Being, and holiness, and I am indeed fully of the mind, that no man can
be an Atheist before he acts contrary to knowledge, when to allay the horror,
and anguish of mind, he feels for the commission of sin, he closes in with this
temptation. At other times, the same subtle power would tempt me to despair of
mercy, which if given way to, would lead to distraction; but the hand of the
Lord was underneath, though for my disobedience he suffered me to remain in the
wilderness, and to dwell among fiery serpents, until he had wasted that in me,
which lusted after forbidden things.

In this state I continued until I was about nineteen years of age, and as I
was walking one day to meeting, thinking on my forlorn condition, and
remembering the bread in my heavenly Father's house, when I was a dutiful child,
and that by straying from him, and spending my portion, I had been eight years
in grievous want, I inwardly cried, if thou art pleased again to visit me, I
beseech thee Oh Lord! visit my body with sickness, or pain, or whatever thou
may please, so that the will of the old man may be slain with the
transgression, and every thing in me, that thy controversy is against, that I
may be made a sanctified vessel by thy power; spare only my life, until my
redemption is wrought, and my peace made with thee!

About this time my father died in the tenth month, 1724, which was a great
loss to our whole family, and as he had allotted me to live with, and take care
of my mother, it became my duty to keep mostly at home; I spent near a year
much in the condition above mentioned; often out of hope of ever attaining to
that state, I had witnessed when very young; but in the fall of the year after
I had arrived to the age of 20 years; it pleased the Lord to remember me, who
had been an Exile, in captivity under the old taskmaster in Egypt spiritually,
and by his righteous judgments mixed with unspeakable mercies, to make way for
my deliverance; I was visited with a sore fit of sickness, which in a few days
so fully awakened me, that I had no hope of ever being again entrusted with
health; my misspent time, and all my transgressions were brought to my
remembrance, and heavy judgment was upon me for them; I was met with in this
narrow path, and could no longer fly from God and his spirit in my conscience,
whose sore displeasure I had justly incurred. I had heard of men who had been
notorious offenders, and fled from the justice of the common law, until they
became outlawed; such in a spiritual sense my case appeared to be; I thought I
had as it were heard an act of grace and free pardon repeatedly proclaimed, if
I would return and live uprightly for the future; but in the time of such
visitations, I concluded it was only to bring me under judgment to take me from
my pleasure, for that mine offenses would never be pardoned, and so I had
withstood, or neglected those visitations; I now saw clearly, that herein I had
followed the lying suggestions of satan mine enemy: At this time my old will in
the fallen nature gave up it is life, and I cried, " I am not worthy to live or
enjoy favor, yet Oh Lord! if thou will be pleased to look on me with an eye of
pity, do what thou will with me, magnify thy own name, prepare me by thy
judgments and power that thy mercy may be shown in and by me, whether thou cut
the thread of my life, or shall grant me more days, which is only in thy
power;" now my heart was made exceedingly tender, I wept much, and an evidence
was given me, that the Lord had heard my cry, and in mercy looked down on me
from his holy habitation, and a willing heart and patience was given me to bear
his chastisements and the working of his eternal word of power, which created
all things at the beginning, and by which poor fallen man only is created a new
in the heavenly Image, and prepared to praise him with acceptance, who lives
for ever, and ever.

Whilst I lay in this condition, perhaps I was thought by those who watched
with me to be near expiring; but though I said little or nothing, I believe I was
quite sensible, yet exceedingly weakened, having for about twenty-four hours
felt more inward and inexpressible anguish, than outward pain, which was no
doubt great; I take it to be toward the morning of the fifth day and night of
my illness, that I felt the incomes and owning of divine love in a greater
degree than ever; for the prospect I had of so great forgiveness made me love
the more; for love is ever reciprocal. I remember, that I saw the morning
light, and thought all things looked new and sweet; I lay where the sun shone
near, or on my bed, and have sometimes since thought, that being weak, the
strength of the light and too much company hurt me; I leave this hint to excite
nurses and those who have the care of very weak indisposed people to beware of
letting over much light come upon them, or many visitors, except they be such
who are sensible of the weak by being inward and quiet, waiting to feel the
sympathy which truth gives, the company of such being truly refreshing.

It pleased the Lord so to restore me, that I recovered my usual strength, and
was frequently humbled under a sense of the tender dealings of a merciful God,
whose goodness and owning love I felt to be very near; I then loved retirement
and inwardly to feel after the incomes of life, and was often fearful lest I
should again fall away. In this time it was manifested to me, that if in
patience I stood faithful, I should be called to the work of the ministry; I
loved to attend religious meetings, especially those for discipline, and it was
clearly shown me, that all who attend those meetings should inwardly wait in
great awfulness, to know the immediate presence of Christ the head of the
Church, to give them an understanding what their several services are, and for
ability to answer the requirings of truth, for it is by the light, and spirit
thereof, that the Lord's work is done with acceptance, and none should presume
to speak, or act without its motion, and direction; for they who act and speak
without it, do often darken counsel, mislead the weak, and expose their own
folly, to the burden, and grief of sensible friends; it was in great fear,
that I attempted to speak in these meetings, and as I kept low with an eye
single to the honor of truth, I felt peace, and inward strength to increase
from time to time, and it is good for all who are concerned to speak to matters
in meetings for discipline, in the first place to take heed that their own
spirits do not prompt thereto, and to mind the time when to speak fitly; for a
word in season from a pure heart, is precious, and frequently prevents debates
instead of ministering contention, and when they have spoken to business, they
should turn inward to feel whether the pure truth owns them, and in that rest,
without an over anxious care whether it succeeds at that time, or not, so
friends will be preserved from being lifted up, because their service is
immediately owned; or if it should be rejected, or slighted, in this inward
humble state the labor is felt, and seen to be the Lord's.

It is a great favor from the Lord, that he is pleased to cover his children
with his pure fear, and array their souls with the garment of humility, that
they may stand in his presence with acceptance, waiting to be taught of his
ways, in meekness to be guided in judgment; these only feel the necessity of
minding that excellent exhortation Be ye steadfast, immovable, always abounding
in the work of the Lord. In a degree of reverent thankfulness, I bless the name
of the Lord through his beloved Son, that I then according to my measure knew
what I now write, it was a time of growing with me, I rarely passed a day
without feeling the incomes of divine life, and was favored strongly to desire
"The sincere milk of the holy word," that in humility I might grow thereby in
substance; but afterward I was left, and withdrawn from, so that for days, yea
many days together, I was without inward refreshment, and ready to fear that I
had offended my gracious Redeemer, and being thoughtful, and inwardly engaged
to know the cause, I had to consider, that children though they may be thriving,
and darlings of their natural parents, are not fit for much business, until
they are weaned, and although they grow finely, they are gradually taught to wait
the appointed time between meals, before they have much care of their father's
business, and are further prepared, so as to miss a set meal, or be a longer
time without outward food, before they are sit for a journey, and with these
thoughts, (leaving the reader to judge from whence they came) a hope began to
revive in me, that I was not forsaken, which indeed, as I kept patient, I was
abundantly sensible of at times, even those times which are in the Lord's hand;
for his children experience that the times of refreshment come from him, who
when he has exercised and proved them in his infinite kindness is pleased to
cause them to sit down, and condescends himself to serve them. Blessed for ever
be the name of the Lord who knows how to prepare his soldiers to remain
faithful, and to endure with patience (what the natural man would account)
hardness!

I had strong desires that elderly friends should be good examples to the
youth, not only in word, and conversation, but in meetings for the worship of
God, and it grieved me exceedingly to see any of them overcome with sleep, and
my concern for one friend on that account, was so great, that I knew not what
was best to do, and reasoned after this manner, Lord! thou know that I am
young, and he an elderly man, he will not take it well, that I should speak to
him, and perhaps I may yet fall; and if so the more I take upon me, the greater
my fall will be; besides, though I have spoken in meetings for discipline, when
truth has been strong upon me, yet out of meetings, I am not fit to reprove,
or speak to particulars: For I was cautious indeed in those days, of talking
about religion, or good things, from a fear of getting a habit thereof, and so
not know the true motion; which I thought I had observed to be the failing of
some. In this straight it came into my mind to go to the person in the night,
as the most private time, and manner; for if I took him aside before, or after
a meeting, others might wonder for what, and I might betray my weakness, and
reproach the good cause, and do no good, and if the friend should be displeased
with me, he might publicly show, what otherwise he would conceal after a
private deliberation; so in the evening I went, desiring the Lord to go with
me, and guide me, if it was a motion from him; when I came to the house it was
dark, I called, and the friend came out to see who was there, and invited me
in, I told him I was in haste to go home; but wanted to speak with him if he
pleased, and so passed quietly toward home, to draw him from the door, and then
told him my concern for him in a close, honest, plain manner, and without
staying to reason much, left him in a tender loving disposition, as I believe;
I returned home with great inward peace; when thou do, or give alms, let
not thy left hand know what thy right does, was an excellent precept; that left
hand of self should not act in such things, no matter how privately they are
done, they often answer the end better; neither is it a fault to lay things
low, and familiar, the truth will have its own weight, and accompany what it
dictates with its own evidence. My intention in writing this, is to encourage
the humbled careful traveller in the way of his duty. At some times, it
appeared to be likely to do most good to write my mind to some, which I did
with success, as I aimed only at a discharge of duty, in the most private
manner, and the good of those to whom I wrote.

When I had entered the twenty fifth year of my age, I accomplished marriage
with Margaret Brown a virtuous young woman, whom I had loved as a sister for
several years, because I believed she loved religion; I think I may say safely,
it was in a good degree of the Lord's pure fear, and a sense of the pointings
of truth, on both sides, that we took each other on the 27 th day of the
eleventh month 1729, (old style) in an appointed meeting at East Nottingham,
and I thought that our Heavenly Father owned us with his presence at that time.
The Covenants made in marriage are exceeding great, and I think they never can
be rightly kept, and truly performed without Divine assistance; and am
convinced, if all who enter into a marriage state would in the Lord's fear
truly seek his assistance, they would know their own tempers kept down, and
instead of jarring, and discord, unity of spirit, harmony of conduct, and a
concern to be examplary to their offspring would increase, and be maintained.

The Summer following, in the year 1730, a Monthly Meeting was settled at
Nottingham, (being before a branch of New-Garden monthly meeting) by the
advice, and appointment of the quarterly meeting; this brought a fear, and
weighty concern upon me, and many others, that the affairs of Truth might be
managed to the honor thereof; for we had but few substantial elderly friends.
In a sense of our weakness, it was the breathing desire of my soul, that the
Lord would be pleased for his own sake, and the honor of his great Name, to be
near to his children, and inspire them with wisdom, and judgment for his own
work; and blessed forever be his holy Name! I believe he heard our cry, and in
measure answered our prayers; being kept low, and humble, it was a growing time
to several. My affection to friends of New-Garden monthly meeting was so great,
that for many months after we parted from them, I seldom missed attending it,
and therein had great satisfaction, and some of their members frequently
attended ours, for our love toward each other was mutual.

When I was about twenty-six years of age, some friends were appointed to
perform a family visit, and being desirous of my company, I joined with them,
and therein felt the ownings of Truth in some degree; but notwithstanding I saw
at times the states of families, and particulars, yet not in so clear a manner
as I thought necessary to become my duty to open my mouth in the service, save
now and then, in a private way to particulars, of which none knew except those
to whom I spoke. At one house the friends on the service had a good
opportunity, several young folks, some of whom were not of the family being
present; I felt the Divine presence to be very near, and a motion to conclude
that sitting in supplication, and thanksgiving to the Lord, but was not hasty,
for fear of doing what was not required of me, so omitted it, and afterward
asked an experienced worthy minister, if he had ever known any friend appear in
a meeting in public prayer, before they had ever appeared in public testimony;
which enquiry I made in such a manner as to give him no mistrust of me; he
answered "nay, I believe it would be very uncommon," it struck me pretty
closely, but I kept my condition very private; having been exceedingly fearful
of deception, and now began to doubt whether it was not a delusion for me, to
entertain an apprehension, that I should be called to the work of the ministry;
the concern whereof had been at times very heavy upon me; though, no motion that
felt like a gentle command to break silence, until at the house before
mentioned; now I let in reasoning, and so departed for a time from my inward
guide and safest counselor, as all assuredly will, who place their dependence
on man for instruction, to perform duties required of them; or who forbear, or
reason against the humbling, gentle motions, and leadings of the spirit of
truth: Much safer it is to attend steadily thereunto for instruction, and
ability to perform religious services, which when so performed in meekness, we
ought to be tender of the sentiments of our brethren concerning them, and not
over confident of our call, and commission; for our brethren have a measure of
the same spirit by which we are taught, and have a sense and right thereby
given to judge of our service; a becoming dissidence of ourselves, and a
readiness to attend to the advice of such, is ever the badge of true
discipleship; humbling Divine Love teaches to esteem others, rather than
ourselves.

This was an exercising time to me, but I did not discover it to any one; I
seemed to be forsaken, though not sensible of much judgment for my omission of
duty, for I could with sincerity appeal to him who knows all things, that it
did not proceed from willful disobedience, but a fear of following a wrong
spirit, and a secret hope revived that my gracious Lord and master would not
quite cast me off, and blessed be his holy name! he did not leave me very long
before I was favored as usual, but had no motion of the same kind.

When this visit was over, I kept much at home, yet was careful to attend
meetings on the first and other days of the week, and found work enough to
watch against a lukewarm, indolent Spirit, which would come over me when I sat
down to wait upon God; though I came to the meeting in a lively warm engagement
of mind, I found the warfare against lukewarmness, sleepiness, and a roving
mind, must be steadily maintained, and if none of these hindrances were given
way to, the Lord when he had proved his children, would arise for their help,
and scatter his and their enemies, which my soul experienced many times beyond
expression: The Lord alone is all-powerful, and worthy to be waited upon and
worshipped in humility and reverent adoration of soul for ever. Indolence and
lukewarmness bring darkness, and death over a meeting, and when generally given
way to, occasion hard work for even the most livingly exercised friends to get
from under the burden and weight thereof; it was a mercy that I was preserved
seeking, and could not be satisfied without feeling the renewings of Divine
favor, by which I rather grew in the root of religion, though I thought very
flow, but had hope it would be lasting.

The love of truth, I believe it was, and a desire that the discipline, and
good order of the church might be maintained, made me willing to take
considerable pains to attend neighboring monthly meetings, which I think was a
blessing to me in some good degree, being thereby often instructed; and I have
often admired at the slackness of some, that suffer trifling things to keep
them from their meetings for worship on week days, and first days; for though
curiosity brings such to monthly meetings, they are seldom of any real service
when they come, not being sensible of that pure Divine Love, in which the
Church through its several members edifieth itself, and as any one becomes
truly sensible thereof, they will delight to wait upon God, with their brethren
and sisters, who is the fountain of pure Love, and so fills the hearts of his
humble, depending children therewith, that by it, they are known to be his
Disciples.

In the year 1731, our ancient and worthy friend William Brown, who had been in
the station of an elder many years, growing feeble, and incapable to to attend
the Quarterly Meeting of ministers and elders, Friends of our particular
meeting proposed me to the Monthly Meeting for that service, which brought a
close exercise upon me, considering myself a youth, and the weight of the
service; but after a solid consideration, I found most peace in submitting to
the meeting, with fervent inward desires, that the Lord would be pleased to be
with me therein, to preserve me from acting, or judging in my own will and
spirit, knowing that the service could not be performed but by wisdom,
understanding, and ability from him; when I attended those large and weighty
meetings of ministers and elders, the care and fear that was upon me is not
easily expressed; and may I never forget the gracious condescension of kind
providence, who was pleased to own me, by the shedding abroad of his love in my
heart, that I verily thought, they resembled the school of the prophets, the
High Priest, great Prophet, and Bishop of Souls, our Lord Jesus Christ being
president among them.

An apprehension that I should be called to the ministry, and a concern on that
account, had been, at times, for several years, weightily on my mind; but I now
again thought I was mistaken in that belief, and that it was only a preparative
to qualify me for the station of an elder, and thereby my exercise became
somewhat lighter for a time; the tenderness and love I felt to those engaged in
public ministry, was very great, and I believe I was made helpful to some by
giving private hints, when and to whom I thought there was occasion, in
plainness, simplicity and fear, which often afforded instruction to myself as
well as to them.

In 1733, I accompanied friends on another visit to families, wherein, at
times, I felt the opening of truth in the love of it, and a few words to speak
to the states of some, though in great fear, lest I should put my hand to that
weighty work without the real requiring of duty; and at one family, on a
morning pretty early, being the first we went to on that day, I thought it
would be better for the whole family, in a religious sense, if the heads of it
were more zealous in attending meetings: I saw the necessity of being examples
to children and servants, by a careful attendance of meetings for worship on
the first, and other days of the week; but I was so weak and poor, that I
doubted whether it was my duty to mention any thing thereof to them, so
concluded to omit it; by which I hoped to judge of what I had been about
before, and so grew easy in my mind, and as we were on the way to the next
house, I began to judge, that I had no real business to have said any thing at
any house; and having forborne in my own will, I was now left to my own
judgment for a time, At the next house, friends were particularly opened, and
tenderly concerned to speak to several states, and of several matters which I
thought instructive; but I sat dry and poor, and so remained during our passage
to the next house; where I fared no better, but worse; my feeling and judgment
being quite gone, as to the service in which we were engaged; and though I did
not say any thing to the other friends how it fared with me, yet they were
affected therewith as I apprehended; I was in great darkness and distress, and
sometimes thought of leaving the company privately, and go home, but again
concluded, that would not only be a disappointment to my friends, but
dishonorable to truth, which made me determine to go forward, and endure my
own pain, as much undiscovered as possible; my companions, as I before
observed, were affected, and all save one seemed closed up from doing the
service, and in the evening of the same day at the last house, all of them were
silent. There was a school-house near, the master being a friend, and the
children mostly belonging to friends, whom some of our company appeared willing
to visit, but others being doubtful, we omitted it, which now some thought was
not right, and therefore this cloud of darkness and distress came upon us, and
were willing to meet at the school-house next morning, to try if we could
recover our former strength in the ownings of truth, which being agreed to,
each took our way home, it being now night, and I alone, I rode slow, under a
deep exercise of mind, and humble inquiry into the cause of my own distress,
and after some time, being favored with great calmness and quietude of mind, I
was inwardly instructed after this manner, Thou saw what was wanting in a
family this morning, and would not exhort to more diligence, or amendment in
that respect, and therefore if they continue to do wrong, it shall be required
of thee; on which I became broken in spirit, and cried in secret, may I not
perform it yet, and be restored to thy favor? Oh Lord! I am now willing to do
whatsoever thou requires of me, if thou will be pleased to be with me; and
blessed be his name, in mercy he heard my supplication, and I was fully
persuaded that I must go to the house again; which I concluded to do next
morning, and went home with a degree of comfort, and being weary in body and
mind, slept sweetly, and awoke in the morning quiet and easy in spirit, and now
began to conclude, that I might meet my company, and be excused; but my
covenant of going was brought to my remembrance, and I was given to believe,
that peace was restored on condition of my performance; therefore I went to the
house, though several miles distant, before sunrise, the man of the house was up,
he invited me in, and I followed him, and sitting down by the fire (being cool
weather,) with my mind retired, I felt that I must not speak before the rest of
the family, but rather in private, yet was fearful of calling him out, being
unwilling to discover any thing to them; in the mean time, he went out, and
walked the way I was to go, I followed, and told him how I felt when we were at
his house the morning before, and could not be easy without exhorting him to be
more careful in several respects, and a better example to his family in his
attendance of meetings; he seemed affected, and said, he hoped he should mind
my advice; I then left him, and met my companions at the school house, and
enjoyed great peace. I leave this remark, to excite all to dwell in meekness
and fear, and to beware of the will of the creature, and the reasonings of
flesh and blood, which lead into doubting and disobedience; they who are
faithful in small things, shall truly know an increase in that wisdom and
knowledge which is from above.

Before we had gone through this visit, I attended the quarterly meeting of
ministers and elders at Concord, and as I sat therein, the unwearied adversary
renewed a former charge against me, by suggesting to my mind, that I might know
I had been wrong and under a delusion, in entertaining a belief I should be
called to the work of the ministry; for that all who had ever been rightly
engaged therein, it was in a cross greatly to the will of the creature, which
was not my case, for I was willing; this I felt to be true, and was therefore
now exceedingly distressed, not considering that I was made willing by the
weight of the exercise, which had been several years at times very heavy upon
me, until it seemed as a sire in my bones, and as though I was dumb with silence,
I held my peace even from good, and my sorrow was stirred, my heart was hot
within me, while I was musing the fire burned, Psalm. xxxix. 2, 3. While under
this conflict, a friend stood up with these words, Also I heard the voice of
the Lord, saying, whom shall I send, and who will go for us? Then said I, here
am I, send me, Isa. vi. 8. Showing, that to them whose will was rightly
subjected to the Lord, it became their meat and drink, to do the will of him,
who had subjected them by his divine power, and influenced their hearts with
his love to mankind; by which I was relieved, and my spirit humbled and made
thankful. Next morning being the first day of the week; I went to Kennet
meeting, and toward the close thereof, something appeared to my mind to offer,
but was fearful, that the motion for speaking was not enough powerful, and had
like to have forborne, but remembering what I had suffered by neglecting a weak
motion in a family visit, as already related, I stood up, and spoke a few
sentences in great fear and brokenness of spirit, and had solid satisfaction. I
attended the Quarterly Meeting of business at Concord on second day; on my
return from whence home, I let in the old reasoner, who suggested to me, that
if I was called to the public ministry, I had not waited for a sufficient
commission to speak; for some had been raised up with great power, and
authority they could not withstand, but that I might have been still and quiet,
the motion was so gentle and low, and that I must not think to speak in public
testimony in great meetings with so small a motion, and in so doing, I had
committed a sin that would not be readily forgiven, perhaps a sin against the
Holy Ghost; my exercise was great, but as I endeavored to be quiet in my mind,
seeking to know the Truth of my present condition, I was secretly drawn to
follow and attend to something, that spoke inwardly after this manner "if thou
wast to take a lad, an entire stranger to thy language and business, however
likely he appeared for service, thou must speak loud and distinctly to him, and
perhaps with an accent or tone, that might show thee to be in earnest, to
engage his attention, and point out the business; but thou would expect it
should be otherwise with a child brought up in thine house, who knew thy
language, and with whom thou had been familiar; thou would expect him to wait
by thee, and watch thy motions, so as to be instructed by thine eye looking
upon him, or pointing thy finger, and would rebuke, or correct such an one,
if he did not obey thy will on such a small intelligent information." I was
instantly relieved thereby, and leave my reader to judge from whence this
intimation came; believing it would be no crime in me, to judge it to be from
the Spirit of Truth, that was to lead and guide into all Truth.

When this meeting was over, being in the ninth month 1733, we proceeded to
finish our family visit, the part which remained was on the west side of
Susquehanna, at Bush river, and a few families begun to settle near Deer creek;
we were remarkably favored with the presence of our great and good Master, who
opened the states of families to us, and gave ability to speak thereto; may his
holy name be praised: The visit being finished, we returned home, and in a
short time after; as I sat in a week day meeting, I had a few words fresh
before me, with a gentle motion to deliver them, which I feared to omit, still
remembering what followed a former neglect, so I expressed what was on my mind,
and therein had peace, and afterward was silent for several weeks, in which
time I let in a fear, I was forsaken by my dear Lord and Master, whom I loved
above all things, for I had no openings in heavenly things, as I thought, but
was left poor and needy, yet I loved friends, and remembering a saying of a
minister formerly; We know that we have passed from death unto life, because we
love the Brethren, 1 John iii. 14. I hoped, that I was not quite forgotten;
some remarkable sentences had fixed in my mind sometime before, which I now
began to understand more sensibly, "ministry should be of necessity, and not of
choice, and there is no living by silence, or by preaching merely;" for
something in me was ready to wish to be employed, that I might have bread, for
when I found a motion to speak, I had the owning love of the heavenly Father;
which is and ever will be bread to his children; the creaturely will, would
choose and would be busy with questioning, is it not, or may it not be so and
so; this is that womanish part, which is not permitted to speak in the church,
it runs first into transgression, for want of learning of the husband at home,
or being in subjection to him, which if Eve had literally done, in stead of
reasoning with the serpent that tempted, me might have been preserved from
being a tempter. Our strength, preservation, health, and peace stand in our
entire subjection to the will of the Lord, whether in silence or speaking,
suffering, or reigning, still dwelling with the seed (Christ) in our own
hearts; humbly waiting for, and feeling after, his power to arise, who is the
Resurrection and the Life, and when he is pleased to appear, his children
partake in measure of his glory!

I continued in the station of an Elder, and some times delivered a few
sentences in public Testimony, which occasioned me to apprehend I should not be
in my proper place, except I requested to be released from my eldership; after
a time of weighty consideration, I modestly requested, that friends would
consider my case, for instead of taking care of the ministry of others, I stood
in need of the care of others, and that it would be relieving to my mind, if
they would nominate an elder in my room, which was taken into consideration for
a time; friends waiting I suppose to see what proof I should make of my
ministry. I attended the winter quarterly meeting of ministers and elders, and
had to give an account of the ministry at our meeting, the elders being called
to answer one after another in order, according to the settlement of the
meetings they belonged to, a fear struck me lest a form of words was too much
in general observed, particularly, "that the ministry was well received." When
my turn came, I could not be easy without varying that part, and instead of
saying, the ministry of the ministers is well received, I said, that I believed
the ministry of the public friends was generally approved of, and added, that I
did wish, that the ministry of all the ministering friends was better received
than I conceived it was; whereupon I was asked, what I meant, and under the
weight I felt on my mind, I replied, it was not from a thought of bearing hard
on the service of the public friends; but from the difference between approving
thereof, because they believed it to be right, and attending no further, which
would not do the work, but to put in practice what they heard recommended, was
only well receiving of it, and if that was really the case, our society would
appear more beautiful than at present; thus the matter closed, and I had peace
in the remark. I think this was the last meeting I attended as an elder; before
the next quarterly meeting in the second month 1734, another was recommended in
my place.

About this time as I sat in one of our own meetings, I felt a flow of
affection to the people, for many not of our society came there, perhaps out of
curiosity, several young ministers having come forth in public testimony, in
which extraordinary flow of affection, I had a very bright opening as I
thought, and expected to stand up with it very soon, but being willing to weigh
it carefully was not very forward, viewing its decreasing brightness, until
something said as it were within me, "is the woe in it," is necessity laid upon
thee, 1 Cor. ix. 16. And therefore woe if thou preach not the gospel. This put
me to a stand, and made me feel after the living presence of him, in whose name
and power I desired to speak, if I appeared in testimony; and not feeling the
pure life and power of Truth, so as to stand up, the brightness of the Vision
faded, and left me quiet, humble, and thankful for this preservation; the
drawing strength and lusting desire of the unstable, who center not to the pure
gift in themselves, are as the many waters, or sea of Mystery Babylon, for her
merchants to sail their ships and trade upon. This was a time of inward growing
to me, the welfare of the churches was strongly desired, and the extendings of
the love of the Heavenly Father, I felt at times to reach over sea and land, to
my great admiration; but however my heart was enlarged, I believed it was my
duty to retire inward, and wait with patience until my friends should so
approve of my ministry, as to recommend me as a minister, before I made any
request to go much abroad, though I went to some neighboring meetings, such as
I could go to in a morning, and return home at night, but not without
acquainting some elderly friends therewith, and desiring their company, which I
generally had.

In the winter 1735-6, William Brown my brother in law, my sister Dinah Brown
(then a widow,) and myself, were all recommended to the meeting of Ministers
and Elders, as ministers, and at this meeting I let a certain friend know, that
for sometime I had a desire to visit friends at Newtown, Middletown, Goshen,
Caln, and Bradford meetings, hoping that he would go with me, for without some
suitable companion I was not easy to go, because it would be necessary, that
notice should be given to answer the end of a visit, which he also thought
necessary, and let me know that he would take the needful care, which I
supposed was previously to inform some friends of each meeting, in order that
they might acquaint their neighbors if they had freedom, and I was easy, not
knowing but he would bear me company: On third day I was at the general meeting
of worship held at Providence, and at the breaking up thereof, the friend whom
I had spoken to, stood up and gave public notice, that I intended to sit with
friends at the meetings aforesaid, and named the days in order, and requested
friends would take proper care to give notice; at which I was exceedingly
surprised, and repented that I had spoken thereof; I would have gladly ran home
but for fear of bringing a reproach, and to me it seemed likely it would be the
case if I pursued the tract laid out for me; in this strait I was humbled even
to weeping; a sympathizing experienced friend came to me, and spoke
affectionately, bidding me not to be cast down, for it was heard with gladness,
that it was in my heart to visit those meetings, and that if I lived, and did
well, I must meet with greater trials. I suppose friends of those meetings knew
more of me than I expected, for I had carefully attended meetings of discipline
several years, and had been sometimes active therein; the meetings were
generally pretty full, and I believe truth owned my service, which was to me
great cause of thankfulness. In this little journey friends were very kind to
me, and I was afraid too free in manifesting of it; indeed there are many
indulgent nurses, many forward instructors, but too few fathers in the church,
who having been acquainted with him the great Alpha in their tender beginning,
and by dwelling in his holy counsel and fear, have the care of the members at
heart, and in the Wisdom of Truth know how to instruct, advise, and conduct
themselves toward such who are called to the Lord's work according to their
several dispositions, growths, and gifts received, in order that they might be
preserved growing in and by him, the Alpha, experiencing him, their beginning,
to be with them, and to be the Omega in their conclusion the First and the
Last, all in all, the Lord God over all, Blessed in himself and the Son of his
love, our holy high Priest and Instructor. For want of proper caution herein,
some have valued themselves above what they ought, and thereby reduced their
credit with others.

In the summer following I felt a secret gentle draft to visit the meetings in
the back parts of Chester, Philadelphia and Bucks Counties, which continuing
with me, and my brother in law William Brown having the like concern, we
acquainted friends at our monthly meeting, late in the fall of the year, and
had their concurrence, and I believe their good wishes for us; so in the tenth
month 1736, we proceeded, and went to Goshen, Radnor, and to a general meeting
at Haverford, and to an evening meeting at a school-house in upper Merion, and
over Schuylkill to Plymouth; we had good satisfaction mostly. I could see that
my brother grew in his gift, and after one of the meetings a wellmeaning friend
told me, that I was a seer, and knew the states of people better than they
could inform me at which I felt some secret pleasure, yet not without (as I
thought) a humble fear, knowing that flattery or unguarded commendation, if
listened to, is a kind of poison to young ministers, and sometimes makes them
swell beyond the proper size. At Plymouth, I had an open meeting, and it seemed
to me, as if what I had to say was received freely by the people, and after
meeting I was filled with joy to such a degree, that I wept, and dropped behind
my company, (to keep undiscovered,) in our going to a friends house, inwardly
prayed that it might be taken from me, for I feared, that by the natural part
in me, it was taken to excess. Next day we had a small meeting in Job Pugh's
house, where I thought I saw the states of particulars very clear, and had
something to say, which perhaps I delivered in too strong terms, considering my
age and experience in the ministry; a becoming fear, and modesty in expression
is very ornamental and safe for ministers, both young and old; after meeting,
we went home with Evan Evans to North Wales, who conversed but little with us,
but was grave and solid, and therein a good example to me; for sometimes young
ministers hurt themselves by too much talking, and draw from others of like
freedom, things not convenient for them to hear. The next day we were at
Northwales meeting, which was large, being first day, my brother W. B. appeared
in the forepart and had good service, afterward I stood up with a large and
good opening as I thought, but found hard work and soon sat down again without
much relief, which being a little unusual, I ventured to stand up again, and
with a zeal that exceeded my childish knowledge, laid on some strokes with the
strength of the man's part more than with the humbling power of Truth; for if we
deliver hard things to the people, we should ever remember, that we are flesh
and blood, and by nature subject to the same frailties; this would lead us
closely to attend to the power, and to minister only in the ability of Truth,
in the meekness, gentleness and wisdom which it inspires; I soon sat down
again, and in a moment felt myself left in great darkness, and friends broke up
the meeting in a minute or two after, which I soon thought was rather unkind,
as it seemed to show a public dislike, when a private admonition, which I
believed was my due, would have answered the end better; but when I knew they
held an afternoon meeting, I judged that I had infringed on the time, and the
weight of the trial settled still deeper on my mind; in the afternoon I sat
silent, and was very much dejected, and my good friend Evan Evans, an
experienced minister and father in the church, bid me be steady and inward,
looking to the Lord who knew how to deal with his children, and gently correct,
as well when they went too fast, as too slow; this fatherly tender hint fully
opened my eyes; for before I was in some doubt wherein I had missed; I now
believed he saw I was too zealous and forward, and believed also that he had
the judgment of Truth; this was enough for me; I abhorred myself, and was in
great fear that I should not be forgiven. Another friend told me that I only
felt an opposing spirit in some, whose states had been remarkably spoken to by
me, and desired me not to be too much cast down, for I had the mind of Truth;
this instead of relieving, rather added to my affliction, for I saw it would
have a tendency, if heeded, to take me from under the hand of the Lord, which
was heavy upon me, and something in me said, "Let God be true and every man a
liar, keep to the witness in thine own heart, attend to the Spirit of Truth
there, and mind its reproof:" Man through natural affection and sympathy may
err, and administer false instruction, but the other proceeds from the God of
Truth. I would have given all that I had to have been at home, for I greatly
feared that I should bring a reproach on the truth, the honor whereof was dear
to me; I hid my distress as much as possible, and proceeded to attend meetings
with my brother, whom I greatly preferrred, and was afraid to discourage by my
complaints.

We were at a meeting at Skippack, and at another at Perkioming or
New-Providence, in each whereof I had so much light and understanding as to
offer a few words, but the service lay chiefly on my brother; from thence we
went to Oley, where I had a few things to deliver in a friends house in an
evening sitting with his family, which was large; the friend in great
tenderness observed afterward, that revelation was not ceased, for their states
were very exactly spoken to, at which I marvelled, for I was greatly reduced,
and thought myself one of the poorest and most unqualified that ever traveled
in that great service, in which we were now engaged; this dispensation though
sorrowful to wade through, was very humbling and profitable for me, who perhaps
but a little before was ready to think I knew something about preaching, but
now knew nothing, that I might more fully understand that he who thinks of
himself "he knows any thing, knows nothing as he ought to know," to wit,
that all pure knowledge is sealed up in him who is the Fountain of Wisdom and
Knowledge, to be only opened by himself to his dependant children, by the
revelation of his own Spirit, when and to whom he pleases.

From hence we went to Maiden Creek, and to Richland in Bucks County, being
still low in my mind, yet favored for a few minutes in meetings, in which I
had a few sentences, and then was closed up again: I was like one who having
learned a few things, or rules in literal knowledge, was again turned back to
his beginning.

From thence we went to Plumstead in Bucks County; here I was rather more
enlarged, and to Buckingham, Wrightstown, Falls, Middletown, Bristol, and over
on the ice to Burlington in New Jersey, the weather being exceeding cold, and
came back again on the ice over Delaware the same evening to Bristol, and
thence proceeded to Byberry and Horsham meetings, and by this time I was
relieved from the depression of spirit I felt before, yet was under a humble
reverent fear, not forgetting the meeting at North Wales; I was in some degree
again admitted to behold the lifting up of the Heavenly Fathers countenance,
which makes the solitary rejoice. From Horsham we went to a meeting appointed
at William Hallowell's, the company of the man who undertook to show us the way
not being agreeable, we persuaded him to return, and so were left not knowing
the way to the house, which made me very thoughtful, lest we should miss our
way, and friends would then be blamed for neglect of duty toward us; as I was
thus pondering in my mind, a faith arose, that providence could direct, and
that moment I beheld the track of a man who had crossed the road we were in,
and felt a sudden turn of mind to follow the same, which made me quite easy; it
brought us to a field, where we found the fence down on both sides, and led to
the house where friends were gathered, and we were not discovered to be without
a guide, for which I was thankful, believing it to be the secret direction of
kind providence, and not barely chance. I relate this with a view to excite
such who may meet with difficulties, to rely on him alone who can show the way,
and give faith to follow, but man must be humble and quiet in mind, to
understand the inward gentle sense that Truth favors with; this small
gathering was owned in a good degree with the Divine presence.

From thence we passed to Abington and Frankfort meetings, and to Philadelphia;
and after visiting of those meetings, we turned to Germantown, and so over
Schuylkill to Merion meeting, where we met our worthy friend John Forthergill,
who had great and good service therein, with whom my brother W. B. returned to
Philadelphia to the quarterly meeting, which began next day, and while he was
absent from me I attended Springfield and Newtown meetings, when he again came
to me, we attended some other meetings until our quarterly meeting began, at
which was our friend John Cadwalader from Horsham, who had good service; after
which I returned home and was glad to sit with friends in our own meeting,
wherein I did not see it was my place to say much, but by example to recommend
silence.

Early this spring (1737*) the Lord was pleased to try me with poverty and
inward want, which brought me into great searchings of heart, and secret
enquiry into the cause, but could not understand that I had wilfully disobeyed,
neither stood convicted in my mind for doing amiss, but my poverty and inward
want increased, with distress and doubting to that degree, that I began to fear
I had mistaken, and took error for truth, and in my own imagination formed a
religion, and for the rebellion of my youth was suffered to go on until now;
and all that ever I had done was brought into judgment and reduced to nothing,
and the enemy endeavored to stir me up to impatience, and to persuade me, that
my transgressions would never be forgiven; many days of sorrow and nights of
sore distress I passed through, and began to despair of ever beholding the
Light of the Heavenly countenance lifted up toward me again.

Toward the last of the third month I went to Sadsbury, to settle a dispute
about the bounds of land and having something to do near Samuel Nutt's Iron
works on French creek, as I was going thither being alone and my inward sorrow
and distress very great, I thought I would now endeavor to vent it, were it
but in mournful groans, and drawing in my breath in order to vent it in a
groan, my inward anguish seemed to burn like fire, and I was instantly staid
from breaking forth, for I was persuaded my passion of grief if given way unto,
would go beyond bounds, to the tearing of my clothes, if no further, my heart
not being tender, I could not weep, which brought me to a more calm pause than
I had known for some time, and therein was ready to say, can the good hand be
still near to stay me, Oh! that I may have patience given, and resolution
strengthened to continue seeking, and if at last I should perish, that it may be
at his footstool; for a small space I had some hope of beholding again him whom
my soul once loved above all things; but in a few miles riding it began to look
pleasant to me, to go into some remote place where I should not be known. When
reflecting thus -- what! abandon mine acquaintance! violate my marriage
covenant, and leave my nearest connections! I suddenly knew this prospect of
pleasure was from the evil one, and something in me abhorred it as wicked, and
as it were closed my eyes therefrom; so that evening I went to the house of a
former intimate acquaintance to lodge, who received me kindly, and in the
evening brought a book containing some astronomical problems, and began to
converse very freely thereon, supposing it would be pleasant to me as
aforetime; but I was heavy in my spirit and inwardly thoughtful about something
of another nature, and he soon perceiving his conversation on that subject was
disagreeable, proposed my going to bed as fittest for a weary man, judging that
to be my present ailment, I was glad of the offer and immediately accepted
thereof. I saw now clearly, that when my mind was turned from delighting in
that wherein our former friendship consisted, my company was rather unpleasant
to him, I soon left his house in the morning, dispatched my business, and
returned home with as much speed as I could, without the least inclination to
go elsewhere; I believe my prayer was heard; for I had patience granted to me,
I say granted, because no man can endue himself therewith, and I think my
distress gradually abated after the time aforementioned.

When one has fasted, and suffered the want of natural food for a long season,
men or prudence will portion out the food they give to such with care, that
strength may be increased and the constitution preserved healthful and sound.
The Lord, whose Love and Care to his children does far exceed that of any
natural parent to his offspring, dealt with me in his tender mercy, giving at
times by the gentle touches of his Love, to feel that he had not forsaken me,
which in a few minutes would be again withdrawn, but though of short continuance,
was sufficient for me to own it was worth all my sorrowful longing for and
hereby he was pleased to let me experimentally know the value of Heavenly Bread
by the want or it having food and raiment I was now taught to be therewith
content; the renewing of heavenly favor, and the covering of the Holy Spirit,
so as to be admitted to stand before him in humble reverence with gracious
acceptance, was all my soul craved; I neither wanted this man's gift, nor the
other man's popularity and eloquence, but to be in mercy admitted into the
number of his family, and occupying mine own gift to his honor alone that gave
it. When Peter was examined by his Lord whom he had denied through fear,
"Love thou me more than these?" the third time answered; "Thou know all
things, thou know that I love thee:" He did not answer the question in its
full extent, viz. more than these with respect to the rest of the Disciples who
had not denied their Lord and Master, as Peter had done, who was nevertheless
looked upon with forgiving compassion, and therefore had need to love in
proportion; perhaps his honest confession and appeal to his Master's knowledge
might shorten his answer; his threefold charge of feeding the sheep and lambs
of his Lord, was necessary to gain his diligent attention to the work of him
whom he had three times denied; he to whom much is forgiven, loves much if he
is not ungrateful: No marvel that I met with this trial of my love and
affection, who so often (not through fear, but the desire of indulging my
creaturely will, had denied, or neglected to follow my Lord and Master who had
so early made me acquainted with his will, and who now had passed by mine
offenses, and called me to work in his vineyard; now I was made thankful for
favors which before had scarcely been owned as such; for to be preserved
inwardly watchful, and quietly resigned, to wait upon the Lord, though we
partake not of immediate consolation by the renewing of life, is a great
blessing, for which we ought to be thankful, as we cannot stay our own minds,
nor curb our thoughts; and I did believe that labor was healthful, created an
appetite and sweetened the relish of rest and food in a spiritual as well as
natural sense, and therefore I wanted not to eat the bread of idleness and live
on the labor of others.

After this trial which continued most of the summer, I was much favored with
the incomes of Divine Love and Life, and in the winter following visited most
of the meetings in Chester County, and some few in Philadelphia County, the
weather was very cold being about the middle of the tenth month when I set out,
and in my journey went to visit a worthy friend who was indisposed, and lodged
at his house, and as we sat together in the evening, he asked me why I chose
the winter season to visit my friends in, for many infirm folios could hardly
attend meetings, and said he was sometimes ready to query, whether public
friends do not take that time to serve their master, because they could do but
little for themselves. I was thoughtful and low in my mind before, and had some
reasoning whether it had not been better that I had staid at home than ventured
out on the service at that time of the year. Though I thought I had an
engagement sufficient when I set out; this query of his made me more
thoughtful, and added to my reasoning, but I soon recovered strength, and it
came fresh in my mind to ask him whether friends could eat to supply and
sustain their bodies in the summer, and partake also of spiritual food for
their souls in that season, so as not to labor in the winter and care for the
sustenance of their bodies, or assemble and attend meetings to worship and wait
upon God for spiritual food for their souls? he acknowledged I had by this
query satisfied him to the full, and said he was glad of my visit, and hoped
his talking as he did would not discourage me, for I believe he saw it brought
a damp over me at first, this answer I believe was given to me for mine own
help, and was encouragement to me through this journey, in which I had most of
the time Joshua Johnson of Londongrove for a companion, who was very agreeable,
and in my return home I felt great peace.

CHAP. II.
His Journey with Robert Jordan to the Western part of Maryland in the Year
1738. Also to the Quarterly Meeting at Shrewsbury in New Jersey -- And with
John Hunt through that Province -- His Visit to the Eastern-shore of Maryland
-- His Journey to Fairfax and Hopewill in Virginia in company with a Committee
of Friends -- And a second Time to the Eastern-shore of Maryland with John
Cadwalader, and companion -- And his Visit to New England in company with
Samuel Hopwood in 1742.

IN the Summer following I went with Robert Jordan to West-river yearly meeting
in Maryland, and we visited most of the meetings of friends in that province,
and his company was profitably instructive to me who was but young in the
ministry; I think I knew him well, he had a good gift of the ministry, and was
highly favored in the living openings of Truth, but was often low in mind and
very humble in spirit; one time as we were riding together, he lagged behind
for several miles, I asked him why he rode so slow, he made no reply, whereupon
I stopped until he came up, his countenance was solid, and looked as if he had
been weeping, I asked what ailed him, after some time he told me, that he had
been thinking of the great favors which man partook of, particularly in being
placed over the beasts of the field, and how easily they were broke, and made
subject to his will, what a small turn with the bridle would put them to the
right hand or the left, and on a gentle motion would amend or slacken their
pace, at the will or pleasure of the rider, and that man, the most noble and
intelligent creature, should so far neglect the duty of a willing subjection to
his Maker, who so highly has favored him with temporal blessings, and the
knowledge of heavenly things. I had been at that meeting about three years
before, having had some business to do for a friend of mine on the
Eastern-shore of Chesopeak, and crossed over the Bay to the Western-shore, and
was at the yearly meeting, and being grieved at the conduct of some of the
elders, whose age, if they had kept to the Truth and had been zealous for the
honor thereof, would have made them better examples; I spoke my mind plainly
to them, but not without proper caution (as I thought) both with respect to my
youth and their age; but some seemed a little warmed thereby, and asked for my
certificate, if I had any, I honestly told them, the principal business that
brought me from home was temporal, which having accomodated, I thought I might
attend that meeting without offense, if I did not misbehave myself. William
Richardson desired friends to consider what I had said, for he believed if they
did, they would perceive the young man had a certificate with him, that might
answer for one of a neighboring province to attend such a meeting.

It may not be unseasonable to relate that in the year 1736, one night as I lay
in bed, my mind was uncommonly affected with the incomes of Divine Love and
Life, and therein I had a view of the churches in New Jersey, with a clear
prospect that I should visit them, and in that prospect and the strength of
affection which I then felt, I said in my heart it is enough; I will prepare
for the journey as soon as I can hear of a suitable companion, for I do not
expect that I shall have a clearer sight than I now have, I soon heard of a
friend who had a visit to New Jersey before him, I spoke to him about my
concern, he let me know that he knew of a companion, and they had agreed upon a
time to proceed; after I had mentioned it to him and some other friends my
concern seemed to die away; but I remembered the resolution that I took up, and
that I then thought I would not look to be bidden again, and was fearful
something had drawn my mind from the proper attention to that opening, which
was the reason it seemed to go off; but the more I strove to look after it, the
duller it grew; I then sorely repented that I had spoken about it, and thought
it should be a warning to me in future; for I began to see there was a
difference between seeing what was to be done, and being bidden to do the thing
shown, besides this, I had to consider there was a time to bud, a time to
blossom, a time for fruit to set and appear, and a time for it to ripen.

And in the forepart of the winter (1738,) I thought it seemed to revive, and
when I saw John Hunt a friend from England, I believed I should go with him
when he went through New Jersey, and told him what I thought, at which he
rejoiced, for we were nearly united; so we appointed a time to meet at
Philadelphia, and when we had so far concluded, being about six weeks
beforehand, my concern, as I thought, soon withered away, and I began to be in
great fear that I had been again too forward therein, but after some time of
humbling exercise on that account, the Lord, whom I feared, from the Love with
which he was pleased to enrich my heart, gave me to remember, that when I made
the appointment with my friend, it was in his fear and great abasement of self,
and as I had seen clearly to make the appointment, it was my place to attend in
humble reliance on him for ability to perform the embassy; for the Lord who
calls and sends forth his own, will also provide all things convenient for
them.

When the time came, I set forward very poor and needy, which continued until
we entered our service; we took a few meetings before our general spring
meeting; and after attending that, we went to Woodberry, Piles-grove, Salem,
Alloways-creek, Cohansie, and so to Cape-may, and had some close work, but in
the main satisfactory to ourselves at least; after having several meetings at
and near the Capes, we went to Great-Egg-harbour and had a meeting there, and
another at the house of our friend Japhet Leeds, and so over the Marines to
Little-Egg-harbour river, and had two meetings with friends, in one of which I
stood up with a large opening as I thought, but after a short introduction, it
closed up, and I sat down again, which was some mortification to me as a man,
though very profitable, being thereby taught to know, that he that would speak as
the oracle of God, must, under the gentle burden of the word, in humble fear
wait for wisdom, utterance, and ablility to perform the service to the
edification of the church and his own inward Peace, and not to look after large
and specious openings, sometimes desirable to the creaturely part both in
ourselves and others, which must suffer famine.

At one of the meetings in these parts, coming very early, a friend belonging
thereto invited us to go to his house not far off, and he would put up our
horses to hay during the time of the meeting, saying that we must go to his
house to dine; but I felt a stop in my mind, and told him that our horses could
stand very well there until after meeting; it so fell out that neither of us
said any thing in the meeting, which nevertheless was to us satisfactory, for
we had a sense that the people had been fed with words, and had a hunger
thereafter, more than for the instruction of the pure word of Power and Life
nigh in the heart and mouth, that they might not only hear it but be found
doers thereof: after the meeting no one asked us to dine, but went away and
left us, and had it not been for the care of our kind guide that came from the
meeting we were last at, we should have been at a loss to have got forward; I
mention this to show how unacceptable silence is to such whose ears itch after
words.

From hence we went through the desert to upper Springfield, where we had a
satisfactory meeting, then taking the meetings Northward to Stonybrook and
Trenton, we returned to Bordentown, and so crossed Delaware. Some of the
meetings were large and very satisfactory under the owning of truth, the power
whereof was in dominion, and the name of the Lord praised, who is worthy
forever; and some were remarkably close and hard, which made me remember a
saying of that experienced minister and elder John Fothergill, that, "When he
was first in this country, he had some extraordinary meetings hereaway, the
people being industrious in a natural as well as spiritual sense, some of whom
were now removed, and their children possessed the temporal estates of their
fathers, and though their outward habitations looked spacious their meetings
for worship were dull and heavy, by reason of a wordly spririt, and their
indifference about heavenly treasure." One meeting which we were at was
remarkably hard; my companion J. H. was exceedingly exercised, under a sense
that the people were too rich, full, and whole in their own eyes, he sat the
meeting through and suffered in silence, but I had something to say very close
and particular, and felt a degree of the strength and power of Truth to clear
myself in an innocent and loving manner, and remembering they were brethren,
did not preach myself out of charity toward them, and so had peace. We went
home with an elderly friend, who in a stern manner asked me from whence I came,
and said I was a stranger to him, I answered him with a cheerful boldness; he
asked me what my calling was, I told him husbandry, he farther queried if I was
used to splitting of wood, I let him know I had practiced it for many years, he
again asked me, if I knew the meaning of a common saying of those who were used
to that business, "It Is soft knocks must enter hard blocks;" I told him I knew
it well, but there were some old wood that was rather decayed at heart, and to
strike with a soft or gentle blow at a wedge in such blocks, would drive it to
the head without renting them and the labor would be lost, when a few smart
lively strokes would burst them asunder; whereupon he laid his hand on my
shoulder, saying, "Well my lad, I perceive thou art born for a warrior, and I
commend thee;" And thus we came off better than we expected, for I thought he
pointed at my service that day; he was ever afterward very loving to me, and I
was inwardly thankful that the Lord was near to me, for which I praise his
sacred name. To be becomingly bold in the cause of Truth, at times is
particularly necessary, otherwise the weight of the testimony thereof would be
lessened, and a carping spirit set over it.

From Bordentown we went to Plumstead in Bucks-county, and on a first day had a
pretty good meeting, and to a monthly meeting at Buckingham, then to
Wrightstown, the Falls, and Middletown, which meetings were in a good degree
satisfactory, the reaches of the Power of Truth being felt to extend, for which
we were thankful; though in some of them, there is too great a want of faithful
members to put the discipline in practice against those that were disorderly,
and thereby brought a reproach on the Truth; we then went to Philadelphia, and
next day to Chester, from whence I went home the same day.

In the fall of the year 1740, I had some drawings in my mind to attend the
quarterly meeting at Shrewsbury, and was at several meetings on my way thither,
at one of which a friend appeared, who I thought had good service in the
forepart of his testimony, but as truth did not rise into dominion so high as
he expected, perhaps in too much zeal and creaturely warmth, he laid on a
little too fast, and continued until the life rather abated, and some tender
minds hurt; for it often happens that such to whom hard things belong, will put
them off, and those who are more tender and least deserving of such doctrine,
will take it to themselves to their own hurt. Oh! how careful ministers ought
to be whilst they are in their service, that they may be favored with an
inward feeling sense of the states to which they minister, and be influenced
with Wisdom from above to divide the word aright, in meekness, gentleness, and
holy fear, then truth will have its own weight, authority and power. After the
friend sat down, it became the concern of another in a few words, as it were to
number the slain, and search for the wounded, and set close and hard things
where they belonged, by describing their several dispositions in choosing and
refusing to take hard things. Afterward being in company with the friend above
hinted, and he being down in his mind and perhaps not fully knowing the cause,
asked me what I thought of the meeting, to which I was not forward to answer;
he said, tell me what I have done this day? whereupon I asked him privately and
in a pleasant manner, what Gideon did to the men of Succoth? Jud. viii. 16. at
which he was greatly humbled, fully understanding what I meant, and did not in
the least resent the hint; which I thought was truly great in him, and very
becoming a minister; for if we would instruct others, we should be exemplary in
taking instruction ourselves when necessary.

On my way falling in company with Robert Jordan, we had a freedom to propose a
meeting to the Anabaptists at Middletown, to which they readily consented, and
we had a profitable opportunity with them in their meeting house, and on the
same evening a meeting at the house of Hugh Hartshorne, to which several
baptists came; this was a time of favor, and I hope of service, it was
concluded by R. J. in solemn prayer and thanksgiving to the Lord, who is worthy
forever and ever. Just as the meeting broke up, I felt myself poor and inwardly
weak, to as great a degree as ever I had done, and looking toward my said
friend I saw he was in the same condition, for it seemed as if we had hardly
strength to stand; but a query of our dear Lord's came suddenly into my mind
and ministered relief viz. Who has touched me? Whereupon leaning toward my
companion, I repeated it to him, being my belief that it was as much for his
help as my own. He understood the meaning instantly without further
explanation, and was thereby also relieved. Perhaps some who may hereafter
peruse these lines, may think this is too bold for a mortal man to mention; but
having by a degree of experience known, that when the healing virtue of Truth
from the holy Physician of Souls, has flowed through an humble servant, to the
relief of some of the infirm and poor amongst the people, who have followed
physicians of no value, and spent all their living thereby, and no cure
wrought, notwithstanding virtue has gone through them as instruments or
conduits, they have felt inwardly weak for a time, that in humble abasement of
soul they might be taught to acknowledge, that the Kingdom, Power, and Glory
does belong to him alone, who is God over all blessed forever and ever.

From thence we went to William Hartshorne's at at Sandy-hook, and so to the
quarterly meeting at Shrewsbury, which was large in the several sittings, in
which was felt the power of Truth in a good degree; but many loose and rude
people of the neighborhood and parts adjacent coming together at such times to
drink, carouse, and ride races, are very hurtful to each other and disturbing
to friends. Then going homeward I had several meetings on the way, and enjoyed
great inward peace, and could therefore rejoice and ascribe the praise to the
Lord, who had called and enabled me to perform this service.

Having a concern on my mind to visit the meetings of friends on the Eastern
shore in Maryland, I laid it before our monthly meeting and obtained a
certificate in the tenth month; my brother in law James Brown bearing me
company; and we were at Caecil monthly meeting held at Chester in the eleventh
month, before meeting a friend informed me that he thought it would be best for
me to cross Chester river, and go directly Southward; I told him it might be
so, but I could say little to it at present; but some friends consulting about
it, and one being there who lived near the meeting house in Queen Anns county,
they thought he could give notice on first day to several meetings; so a friend
ventured to speak publicly thereof at the close of the meeting for worship,
without letting me know what he intended to do. I had been uncommonly
distressed as I sat in the meeting, from an apprehension that but few of the
friends belonging to that particular meeting were there, and when he published
where it was proposed I should be the ensuing week, I felt my mind opened and
turned another way, and stood up and told friends, that I did believe they
thought it most for my ease to lay out the meetings after that manner, but if
friends at that particular meeting would favor me so far as to meet there next
day, I should be glad to sit with them, provided they would please to let other
friends and neighbors who were absent know of it; for if I had a right sense,
there were several members not present, and I should be willing to be at Caecil
meeting on first day, and Sassafrass on second day, which was directly back,
and therefore told them it seemed easiest to my mind, though it would occasion
more riding, this being agreed to, we had a much larger meeting next day, for
many before were absent as I had thought, and I had a full opportunity to
discharge myself toward the lukewarm and indifferent, and disorderly walkers,
and had peace; I visited several families on seventh day to good satisfaction,
and was at Caecil meeting on first day, and the next day at Sassafrass, and had
to believe it was by the secret direction of the good shepherd, who never
fails his dependant children, that I was turned this way; for he was pleased
to own my service in these meetings by his presence in a good degree to the
praise of his own name, which is worthy forever: From thence we passed over the
Head of Chester by the bridge, John Browning, a friend from Sassafrass, going
with us as a guide, who some time before had been convinced of the blessed
Truth, by the inward operation of the Holy Spirit without any instrumental
means; he had been a member of the church of England so called, and for his
sobriety was chosen a Vestryman; but after a time felt a scruple in his mind
about taking off his hat, when he entered the Churchyard so called, fearing it
was a superstitious adoration of the ground, from its supposed holiness; but
would take it off when he entered the worship house, and walk uncovered to his
pew; but after a time could not uncover his head, till what they call Divine
Service began; which as he kept inwardly attentive to the scruple in his mind,
became very lifeless to him, who was inwardly seeking for substance and life;
and therefore withdrew therefrom; and after some time went to one of our
meetings, rather out of curiosity than expecting any good, but felt himself
owned, and had a taste of the peace which the world cannot give, and from that
time became a constant attender of our meetings.

We had a meeting at Queen Ann's amongst a people who for want of keeping to
the life of Religion, had almost lost the form: In conversation at a certain
house in the evening, I asked a friend, whether she was a friend's child or one
convinced of our principles, her reply was, that when she was young, she lived
at a friend's house, and took a notion of going to meeting with them, which she
had done ever since; Alas! when notion changes the will, and not that faith
which works by love to the purifying of the heart, the religion is without
reformation, empty and dead. From thence we went to Tuckaho meeting, and the
weather being very cold and rivers frozen up, several masters of vessels and
sailors came there and diverse others people of fashion with gay clothing; in
the fore part of the meeting there was an appearance made which grieved me, for
my heart yearned toward the people; the words that he began with were "Woe, woe,
to the crown of pride and drunkards of Ephraim;" and with very little
application sat down; it appeared to me as if the appearance of gaiety had
fired the creaturely zeal, which was the chief motion to this short sermon,
this with the cold wind blowing in at the door, much unsettled the meeting, it
being at the time when that remarkable snow fell which laid so long in deep
drifts this winter; whereupon I desired the door might be shut, which being
done, the house became more comfortable, and the meeting settled, and I stood
up with an heart filled with affection, having that passage of scripture before
me, in which the apostle Peter declared the universality of the Love of God, "I
perceive of a Truth that God is no respecter of persons, etc." and was much
enlarged thereon to my own admiration, and I believe satisfaction of the
people; the meeting ended sweetly with thanksgiving and prayer to the Lord for
the continuance of his mercy who is the alone author of all good, and worthy of
adoration and worship forever. After which we attended the several neighboring
meetings, through very severe cold weather, and the houses being very open and
unprovided with the means of keeping them warm, of which there is too manifest
a neglect in those parts, they were uncomfortable and unsettled; in this
journey my companion appeared in a few words in several families and meetings;
we reached home just before our quarterly meeting in the twelfth month.

In this journey, traveling in Talbot county, an elderly man asked us if we
saw some posts standing, pointing to them and added, the first meeting George
Fox had on this side of Chesopeak Bay, was held in a tobacco house there which
was then new; the posts that were standing were made of walnut, at which John
Browning above mentioned rode to them, and sat on his horse very still and
quiet; then returning to us again with more speed than he went, I asked him
what he saw amongst those old posts, he answered, I would not have missed of
what I saw for five pounds, for I saw the root and grounds of Idolatry; before
I went I thought perhaps I might have felt some secret virtue in the place
where George Fox had stood and preached, whom I believe to have been a good
man; but whilst I stood there, I was secretly informed, that if George was a
good man, he was in Heaven and not there, and virtue is not to be communicated
by dead things, whether posts, earth, or curious pictures, but by the power of
God who is the fountain of living virtue. A lesson, which if rightly learned,
would wean from the worship of images and adoration of relicts.

I was not many miles from home this summer, save to attend our own quarterly
and yearly-meetings; but in the fall having some drawings in my mind to visit
friends in the New-settlement in Virginia, I went with a committee of the
quarterly meeting, appointed to inspect whether friends at Fairfax were in
number and weight sufficient to have a meeting settled amongst them to the
reputation of truth, and we visited all the families of friends there, and had
a meeting among them to satisfaction; from thence we went to a place called
Providence or Tuskarora, from whence Mordecai Yarnal who was one of the number
went home, having heard that his wife was dead or likely to die; we had a
meeting with the friends there, who were glad to see us, and then went to
Hopewell monthly meeting to some satisfaction; from whence I went to a few
families settled up Shanondoa above the Three-top't Mountain so called, and had
a meeting amongst them, they were pretty much tendered and received the visit
kindly, especially such who did not make profession of the truth with us; I
admired how they had notice, for many came to it, and some ten miles or more: I
believe that the delight in hunting and a roving idle life drew most of them
under our name to settle there, so having discharged myself in a plain yet
loving manner, I returned to Robert M'Coy jun's, and having had several other
meetings thereaway, I went home with peace of mind and thankfulness of heart to
him who alone enables his children to answer his requirings, having rode in
this journey above four hundred miles.

This winter John Cadwalader and Zebulon Heston, in their return from a
religious visit to friends in Maryland, Virginia, and Carolina, were at my
house, and being desirous to visit some meetings on the Eastern-shore of
Maryland, I went with them to Sassafrass-meeting, and called to see the widow
and children of John Browning who had been dead about a month, and she gave me
in substance the following account of him, viz.

My husband was not long sick, but said, that he believed he should not
recover, and charged me to endeavor that his children should be brought up in
the way of Truth which friends profess; and if they incline to have trades, to
put them apprentice to real friends, not barely nominal ones, (which she said,
she was willing to do, though she had never yet joined to friends) and desired
she would not trust her own judgment, and named some friends with whom she
should advise in choosing matters; then said, when I am dead, bury me by my
father and mother in the grave-yard belonging to our family, and thou know
that I put a large gravestone at my father's grave, and there is one ready for
my mother's grave, which I did not put there, because I began to think, they
were more for grandeur than service; I sent for them from England, (not at the
request of my father) they are mine, and now I have a full testimony against
such formal tokens of respect; therefore when I am buried, before the company
leaves the grave, inform them what my will is, and desire their help to take
the gravestone from my father's grave, and carry it out of the yard, that it
may be brought home, and lay one in one hearth, and the other in the other
hearth of this new-house, and they will be of real service there; He had built
a new brick house and the hearth not fully laid.
which she promised him to observe, and told me she had complied therewith; he
remained sensible to near the last, and departed in a quiet resigned frame of
mind.

How weak are the arguments of such who make profession with us, and plead for
those grand marks of memorial or other tokens of distinction set up at or on
the graves of their deceased relations, and how soon would they subside, did
they but live so near the pure truth as to feel the mind thereof, as I fully
believe this our friend did, knowing that the name of the righteous will not
perish, but be had in everlasting remembrance, because their portion is life
for evermore, having entered into that Kingdom prepared for the blessed before
the foundation of the world.

This spring of the year 1742, I felt strong drawings of mind to visit friends
in New England, having had some view thereof several years before; and having
obtained a certificate, I set forward in the third month, and after visiting
several meetings in New Jersey, and one in New York, I attended the
yearly meeting on Long Island, wherein the power of truth was felt, and a great
openness to those of other societies, many of whom were present, particularly
the last day, and two priests who be haved solidly.

I then went with Samuel Hopwood (a ministering friend from England, with whom I
had traveled in this journey through part of New Jersey) to Ryewood, and had a
meeting there, where were a few solid friends, but others too talkative; and
being at Old-Seabrook had a meeting in an inn, on the first day of the week,
the people being chiefly Presbyterians, few attended besides ourselves, and
those of the family who were kind and civil to us; then going to Conanicut we
had a meeting with friends on that Island, and proceeded to Newport on
Rhode Island, and on the fifth day of the week attended the meeting at
Portsmouth, where we met with Lydia Dean from Pennsylvania, who was on a
religious visit to friends in New England, and many other friends coming to be
at the yearly meeting on this Island; it began on the sixth day of the week
with a meeting of ministers and elders, and two meetings for public worship,
one in the forenoon and the other in the afternoon, and were held in the same
order until the second day of the next week, when the meeting for discipline
began; this large yearly meeting in the several settings thereof was generally
solid and satisfactory; after which taking diverse meetings in our way, namely,
Portsmouth, Tiverton, Seconet, Accoakeset, and Aponigangset, and attending
their monthly meeting there, all which were in a good degree satisfactory, S.
Hopwood and myself embarked for Nantucket, and through the mercy of kind
providence arrived safe there, after a passage of three days and two nights,
occasioned by scant winds, and an Easterly storm which tore our sails very
much, being old and rotten, so that if some watchful friends on the Island had
not seen us in distress, and come with three whale boats, and took all the
passengers being twenty four of us from the vessel, we should have been in
great danger; for being near a sand bar, the vessel struck ground soon after we
left her, and by the violence of the wind was driven on shore: We looked on
this deliverance as a mercy from God, to whom several of us were bowed in
humble thankfulness for this particular favor: On the twenty-second day of the
fourth month the yearly meeting began, which though small on this day by reason
of the storm, was comfortable, the other sittings were mostly large and in a
good degree ownned by the power and virtue of Truth.

My friend S. Hopwood apprehending himself clear, inclined to return to the
Main-land, but no passage offered; and notwithstanding the meetings had been
generally attended by most of the Inhabitants of the Island, and large, yet I
was not easy without endeavoring to have some opportunities with friends by
themselves, as much as could be, which I obtained, besides attending their
usual week day meeting and in these sittings, it pleased the Lord to open my
way to deliver several things which had lain heavy on my mind; for although
some solid tender spirited friends lived on this Island, yet I saw there was a
libertine spirit secretly at work amongst some others, to draw away from the
pure inward life of religion and the simplicity of Truth, into ease and
liberty; after which I had great peace, and my mind was made thankful to the
Lord, who had owned my labor by a good degree of his presence and power.

Being now fully clear and a passage offering, on the second of the fifth month
we took leave of our friends, and landed the same day in the evening at
Seconnet, and on seventh day S. Hopwood and I went to the quarterly meeting at
Sandwich, and were at their first day meeting also, after which, I went back to
Seconnet, and had a meeting at Benjamin Boreman's; then returned to Sandwich
where I again met S. Hopwood, and on third day we had a meeting at Yarmouth,
and returning to Humphrey Wady's, we from thence went toward Boston, taking a
meeting with friends at Pembrook, reached that town on sixth day, and attended
their morning and afternoon meetings on first day, also one at a friends house
in the evening. I have here little to remark, save that religion seems to be at
a low ebb From Boston I went to Lynn, but S. Hopwood returned toward
Rhode Island; I had a meeting at Lynn, also at Salem, Newberry and Dover, being
the monthly meeting; the next day at Cachechy, and in the afternoon again at
Dover at the burial of Mary Whitehouse who was ninety five years of age; and on
second day morning, I was secretly drawn to have a meeting over the river on
the Kittery shore among friends, which was satisfactory to myself and them,
there being a tender people there: On third day morning as I lay in bed, I felt
my mind drawn toward the North-west, which was an exercise to me, for I had
before thought myself at liberty to return toward Boston; I arose about sun
rise, and asked the friend where I lodged, whether any friends lived at a
distance on that quarter, for that I had a draft that way, he answered no, and
asked how far I thought to go, I told him it did not seem to me to be more than
ten miles; he said there was a people about eight miles distant, which he
supposed was the place to which I felt the draft; I desired him to send a lad
with a few lines to some person that he knew, to inform them that a stranger
would be glad to have a meeting among them at the eleventh hour of that day, if
they were free to grant it, which he did and with his wife went with me; so
that we got to the place near the time proposed, and found a considerable
gathering of people, that I wondered how it could be in so short a time, not
more than three hours warning; they were preparing seats by laying boards on
blocks in a pretty in large new house, and soon sat down in an orderly manner;
I went in great fear and inward weakness, and at the sight of such a gathering
of people, and none of our profession among them except the friend and his wife
who accompanied me, and two others who joined us on the way, my spirit was
greatly bowed, and my heart filled with secret cries to the Lord, that he would
be pleased to magnify his own power, and blessed for ever be his holy name! he
heard my cry, and furnished with wisdom and strength to declare his word to the
people, among whom there were some very tender seekers after the true knowledge
of God; and the doctrine of Truth flowed freely toward them, the universality
of the love of God being set forth in opposition to the common predestinarian
notion of election and reprobation; when the meeting was over I felt an
uncommon freedom to leave them, for they began to show their satisfaction with
the opportunity in many words, so speaking to the friend who went with me, we
withdrew and went to our horses, and I immediately mounting, beheld the man of
the house where the meeting was held running to me, who taking hold of the
bridle, told me I must not go away without dining with them; I looked
steadfastly on him; and told him, that I did believe this was a visitation for
their good, but I was fearful that they, by talking too freely and too much,
would be in danger of losing the benefit thereof, and miss of the good that the
Lord intended for them, and my going away was in order to example them to go
home to their own houses, and turn inward, and retire to that of God in their
own hearts, which was the only way to grow in religion; so I left him, and
returned with my friend Joseph Eastees and his wife. Next day I was again at
Cachechy meeting where Lydia Dean and her companion Eliphal Harper met me, it
was a good meeting; from thence we went to Dover and had a meeting, and another
the same evening at the house of John Kenny, and being clear in my mind of
those parts, I returned, having meetings at Hampton, Salisbury, Aimsbury, and
Haverhill, at which last place, several persons were assembled with us who had
never heared the preaching of any friend before; there was great openness among
them, and we had a good meeting together, for which I was thankful to the holy
author of all good. Next day I again met with Lydia Dean and E. Harper, at
Stephen Sawyer's near Newberry where we had a meeting, at which I was concerned
to speak in a brief manner of the beginning of the reformation from the errors
of the church of Rome, and the sufferings of the Protestants particularly in
England, some of whose successors turned persecutors, and were very cruel to
those whom they called Sectarians; amongst whom the Presbyterians having
suffered persecution, in order to be eased therefrom, came into America and
settled in New England, expecting there to enjoy that reasonable right, the
liberty of their conscience; and in this their ease, forgetting the golden rule
of doing to others as they would be done unto, became, to their lasting
Ignominy, persecutors of the Quakers so called, even to the death of several of
them; and I had to speak of the nature and ground of persecution, and the great
inconsistency thereof with christianity: Several of the Presbyterians were
present, and an ancient man from Newberry, one of their leaders and an elder
among them, when the meeting was over, desired he might speak with me, I being
withdrawn into a little parlour, friend Sawyer came and informed me, that the
old man wanted to be admitted to me, to which I felt no objection, being quiet
and easy in my mind, though I expected he would be for disputing; when he came
in, he let me know that he had some observations to make to me; viz. he
supposed I was a man that had read much, or I could not be so fully acquainted
with the reformation, and that he also supposed I had a College education; as
to the last, I told him that I never had been at a school but about three
months, and the man I went to being a weaver, sat in his loom and heard his
scholars read; that I was so far from having a popular education, that I was
born in a wilderness place, where a few families had settled many miles remote
from other inhabitants; at which, lifting up his hands, he blessed himself and
added, "Heaven has then anointed you to preach the Gospel, and you have this
day preached the truth; but I can assure you, though I have been a Parish
officer, I never did take any thing from your friends the Quakers, for I am
against persecution; so God bless you with a good journey."

The next day I had a meeting at Ipswich in the house of Benjamin Hoeg, none
professing with us living in that town but himself and family; though there was a
friendly man, who, as I came late to the town the evening before, invited me to
lodge at his house, of which I accepted, and being weary slept well; in the
morning I heard a noise of high words in the street, and getting up I opened
the door of the parlour where I lodged, and through a passage into the kitchen,
saw a woman whom I took to be the mistress of the house, and went toward her;
but with a look of exceeding displeasure she immediately shut the door, so I
turned into my room again; after a while the landlord came to me, and told me
that he had been with the Burgess, who had given leave that a meeting might be
held in the Town Hall; but the priest and his two sons had since been with the
Burgess and forbad him, and that rather than displease them, he had withdrawn
the leave; the priest asserted that the Quakers were heretics, and had gone
about the town to forewarn his hearers against going to the meeting, which was
the meaning of the noise I had heard in the street; I felt very easy, and
desired that he would not trouble himself any further than to inform them, that
the meeting would be held at the house of B. Hoeg; for I did believe that the
railing of the priest would raise the curiosity of the people the more to come,
and so it proved: I asked him to show me the way to the house, that I might be
assistant in making provision for seats if occasion required, he said I must
take breakfast with him, which was soon brought in by the woman who had shut
the door as before mentioned: I asked him if she was his wife, he told me she
was, on which I arose from my seat and offered her my hand, asking her how she
did, but she in displeasure refused, and saying not a word, directly left the
room; after breakfast we went to the house where the meeting was to be held,
and there soon came a great number of people, and the priest also very near the
door, where he stood cautioning his hearers; but several came by an alley to
the back door, and others seemed little to regard him, that after a time he
went away, and through the goodness of the Lord we had a solid profitable
meeting; for I believe many were there whose hearts were reached and tendered
by the love and power of the Gospel of Christ, and among them I saw my scornful
landlady; it seems, a woman whom she valued had persuaded her to come with her;
before the meeting ended, I perceived her countenance was changed and her stout
heart tendered, and after it she came to me with her husband, and kindly
invited me to dine with them; I owned their love, and desired them to mind the
Truth by which they had been reached; so in humble thankfulness of heart to the
great Author of all living mercies, I left them, and went that night to Salem;
and tarrying one meeting the next day, passed on to Marblehead and had a
meeting in the Town Hall, the magistrates readily granting it, which was large.
I had to speak on morality, the nature and necessity thereof, showing that a
man could not be a true Christian without being a good moralist; I thought they
had need of a reformation in their morals, though they professed christianity in
a high manner; one thing is worthy of remarking, the select men and officers
were very careful to keep the rude boys and people that came to the door from
making disturbance, several of them walked to the door and spoke to them, and
rapped some on their heads with their canes to make them still; the meeting
ended to satisfaction without the least opposition; from thence, taking a
meeting at Lynn by the way, I went to Boston, and was at their meetings on
first day in the forenoon and afternoon, at both which, several came that were
not in profession with us, and truth opened the doctrine thereof to the people
pretty freely; but I was not easy to leave this town without having on
opportunity with friends by themselves, for which purpose it was held at Benja.
Bagnall's, and therein I was deeply bowed under a sense of the state of ease in
which some were delighting themselves in their imaginary seize, whilst
the pure seed lay under suffering; but blessed be the Lord, who was graciously
pleased to endue with a spirit of Love and tender compassion, and thereby
enabled me to discharge myself fully, and I was released from what had lain
very heavy upon me for several days; the next day I had an opportunity with
several friends at Samuel Pope's, and then left Boston pretty easy in my mind,
and went to Samuel Thayres at Mendam, who accompanied me the next day to
Uxbridge, where we had a meeting with a few raw, talkative people, which,
through the goodness of God, was nevertheless to some degree of satisfaction; I
returned with Sam. Thayre to his house, where I met with Hannah Jenkinson from
Pennsylvania, and we were at Mendam meeting together; she then went toward
Boston, and I to Wainsokett, and Providencetown, and had a meeting at each
place, the latter of which was a poor meeting, the people looking for words and
not waiting for the word of life in their own hearts; from thence I went to and
had a large and good meeting at Neshanticut, the Lord's presence being felt to
his own praise, and another at Greenwich; then proceeded to Smithfield and
Taunton, taking a meeting at each to some good degree of satisfaction; from
thence to Swanzey, Freetown, Rochester, and Cushnet, having a meeting at each,
at one of which, after I stood up to speak a few words in great fear, life
being low and as I apprehended the seed under suffering, I heard a kind of
sighing by one in the gallery, which seemed to bring death rather than to raise
life, and after I had spoken a sentence or two, it became exceedingly
burdensome; whereupon it came fresh in my mind to say; "can an Israelite sing
a true Hebrew song whilst the seed is in captivity and under suffering? an
attempt of the kind shows ignorance." At which there was a great silence and
the sighing ended, and I received strength to deliver what was on mind, and
truth was felt in a good degree to arise; the meeting ended well, and several
friends expressed their satisfaction with the service on that day. Being clear
of those parts I went to Rhode Island, and in a sense of the goodness and mercy
of the Lord who had helped me in my travels in his work, my soul worshipped
before him.

On the twenty-second of the sixth month I sat with friends at Newport in their
fore and afternoon meetings, and next morning left Rhode Island with a heavy
heart and had a meeting at South Kingston, where I met with Susanna Morris and
her sister Hannah Hurford, and the same day had a meeting at James Parry's, and
the day following we had one at Thomas Stanton's in Westerly, among a mixed
people of several societies, to whom I felt a stream of gospel love; but the
meeting was hurt by several appearances of one present who lived at no great
distance. Our manner of sitting in silence is so very different from the common
practice of most other religious societies, that it is no marvel if it should
be as time misspent to some, and fill others with wonder, which was the case
this day; and for want of a deep inward attention to the living word of Truth,
instead of instructing the people in the true way of worship in the love of the
Gospel, there may be a warm censuring of them for what they understand not, and
thereby raise a dislike in them, to the foreclosing of other service; and I
have sometimes observed hurt done by this means, by some who appeared in the
impatience, not having the weight of the work upon them; custom had taught the
people to look for words, and they were offended by words spoken not in season,
and therefore not fitly spoken; I left this meeting with sorrow, and after I
mounted my horse, the person who had appeared there three times, came to me,
and said "he hoped he had not hindered my service in it;" I reminded him, that
he had informed the people in that meeting, their looking for words had been
one reason, why the Lord had shut up the testimony of Truth in the hearts of
his servants, which I told him I did believe was not then the case; but that
his forward appearances had mudded the waters, unsettled the people, and marred
the service, so we parted; and feeling my mind drawn back toward Newport, I
went that evening to James Congdon's, and the next day to Newport, calling in
my way at James Parry's, where I found Lydia Dean very sick, she being so far
on her journey toward home, and on the fifth day of the week I was at two
satisfactory meetings there, and on seventh day had a small meeting at Nicholas
Easton's, and on first day two large good meetings at Newport, and next day
hearing that Lydia Dean was come to Samuel Clark's on Conanicut Island, I went
with several others to see her, and she returned with us to Newport, where
after a very short notice we had a large evening meeting, wherein the Lord was
pleased mercifully to favor us with his immediate presence to the glory and
praise of his own eternal name which is worthy for ever! After attending their
monthly meeting at Portsmouth, finding my mind clear and easy to proceed
homeward, Lydia Dean, Patience Barker, John Easton, and myself set out from
Newport, taking leave of friends in a tender manner on both sides, and were the
first day following at a meeting in Westerly, which was in a good degree
satisfactory, and passing through Connecticut to New-Milford, Oblong, and
Nine-partners, had meetings in each place; and having a great desire to be at
our yearly meeting for Pennsylvania and New Jersey, to be held at Burlington,
which was near approaching, we passed on, and took a meeting at Samuel Field's,
to which several not of our society came, and the opportunity was through the
goodness of the Lord profitable; we then proceeded as fast as convenient, and
reached Burlington on first day in the time of the yearly meeting, where many
friends were gathered, and Michael Lightfoot in his return from Great Britain,
with whom came John Haslam, and Edmund Peckover on a visit to friends in
America; this meeting was large and solid, at which I also met my dear wife to
our mutual, thankful rejoiceing; after the meeting I went home, where I found
things as to the outward in good order, for which I was humbly thankful to the
Lord, who had not only been with me by his heavenly presence in this journey,
and brought me safe home to my family, but had supported them in my absence;
blessed be his holy name for ever!

CHAP. III.
His Visit to Long Island -- Visit with others to the families of Friends in
Nottingham -- and to some families in Philadelphia and to the Mayor of that
City, also to the assembly of Pennsylvania in the Year 1748. -- His Journey
with Michael Lightfoot to the Yearly Meeting at West River in Maryland -- and
accompanied by Joshua Brown to diverse Meetings in Pennsylvania and New Jersey.
-- His considerations on Apprehending it his duty to visit Friends in Europe,
and proceedings in preparing to enter upon that weighty Service, to the time of
his leaving home in order to take shipping for London.

IN the Spring of the Year 1743, having drawings in my mind to make a general
visit to Friends on Long Island, I sat out in the third month, in order to be
at the Yearly Meeting at Flushing, which began on the sixth day of the week,
and continued until the second of the week following; it was large and signally
owned by the power of Truth in each sitting; the public service in the
ministry lay mostly on Edmund Peckover, who was there in his way to
New England; on first day I thought I had an engagement to stand up, and
considerable matter before me, and after speaking three or four sentences which
came with weight, all closed up, and I stood still and silent for several
minutes, and saw nothing more, not one word to speak; I perceived the eyes of
most of the people were upon me, they, as well as myself expecting more; but
nothing further appearing, I sat down, I think I may say in reverent fear and
humble resignation, when that remarkable sentence of Job, chap. i. 21. was
presented to my mind, Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I
return; the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the name of the
Lord, and for, I suppose, near a quarter of an hour I remained in a silent
quiet; but afterward let in great reasonings and fear lest I had not waited
the right time to stand up, and so was suffered to fall into reproach; for the
adversary who is ever busy, and unwearied in his attempts to devour, persuaded
me to believe that the pleople would laugh me to scorn, and I might as well
return home immediately and privately, as attempt any further visit on the
Island; after meeting I hid my inward exercise and distress as much as I could,
when night came I lodged with a sympathizing friend and experienced elder, who
began to speak encouragingly to me, but I said to him, that I hoped he would
not take it amiss if I desired him to forbear saying any thing; for if he
should say good things, I had no capacity to believe, and if otherwise, I could
not then understand so as to be profitably corrected or instructed, and after
some time fell asleep; when I awoke, I remembered that the sentences I had
delivered in the meeting, were self evident truths, which could not be wrested
to the disadvantage of friends, or dishonor of the cause of Truth, though they
might look like roots or something to paraphrase upon, and although my standing
some time silent before I sat down might occasion the people to think me a
silly fellow, yet they had not cause to blame me for delivering words without
sense or life; thus I became very quiet, and not much depressed, and was
favored with an humble resignation of mind, and a desire that the Lord would
be pleased to magnify his own name and truth, and preserve me from bringing any
reproach thereon; so I ventured to have meetings appointed, and my particular
friend and intimate acquaintance Caleb Raper of Burlington, being at that
meeting, went as companion with me, of whose company I was glad, he being a
valuable elder: We went first to Rockaway, then to Jamaica, Sequetague,
Setakit, Matinicock, Cowneck, and Westbury meetings, and at most of them I had
good satisfaction; the good presence of the Lord in whom I delighted above all
things, being witnessed to my comfort, and I believe to the edification and
comfort of the sincere in heart; but the testimony of Truth went particularly
sharp to the lukewarm professors and libertines in our society; that humbling
time I had at Flushing was of singular service to me, being thereby made
willingly subject to the Divine openings of Truth, and motion of the eternal
Spirit and pure word of Life, in speaking to the several states of those who
were present in the meetings, and life came into dominion, and the power
thereof overshadowed at times, to my humble admiration, blessed be the name of
the Lord who is worthy for ever and ever!

Then crossing Whitestone ferry we had meetings at West-Chester, Momarineck,
Rywoods, and Longreach, which were mostly to good satisfaction, we then went to
New York and were at their meeting, and in the evening had a select one with
friends, which gave me considerable relief, and I believe satisfaction to them,
and we were made thankful together in the renewings of the covenant of life;
from thence we went to a meeting at Newtown on Long Island, and to the
monthly meeting at Flushing, where friends gave me a certificate in return to
that I brought from home, in which they signified their unity with my service
on the Island; then taking leave of friends in sweetness of mind and inward
peace, being clear of those parts I returned homewards, and went to the Narrows
that night, but could not get over; next morning early crossed the ferry, when
there was a great swell, occasioned by the stormy weather in the evening and
night before, and having now no wind were obliged to row the boat over; in the
passage I remembered, that in crossing this ferry when coming on this visit, I
thought myself never much poorer, having only a secret hope and trust in the
holy arm of Power, and being now inwardly sensible of my own weakness, I had to
acknowledge that I went not forth on this embassy in my own will and strength,
and therefore craved only, that my blessed Lord and master would blot out mine
offenses, and yet enable me so to walk in humble obedience the residue of my
time, as to be favored with the answer of well done at the conclusion; and
knowing the nature and treachery of self, did not want to be entrusted with
much reward at present, choosing rather, that the Lord in his infinite wisdom
and mercy, should deal out to me my daily bread according to his own pleasure,
bipassed over this Jordan with my staff and now I am become two bands, was the
saying of Jacob Genesis xxxii. 10. As this saying of the good Patriarch came fresh
in my mind, I thought, that although I could not see myself much increased in
heavenly treasure, I came poor, and had only the staff of Faith to lean upon,
yet I had to bless the Lord that he was now pleased to favor me with the same
staff in my return, on the never failing strength whereof, I might with safety
evermore rely, and in holy resignation I had to praise his worthy name. I
proceeded with my friend Caleb Raper to Burlington, where we parted in much
love and nearness, in which we had traveled together, I reached home about
wheat harvest, and found my dear wife and family well.

I went not much abroad the residue of this summer, and the year following; but
was careful to attend our own and many neighboring meetings, also monthly,
quarterly and yearly-meetings in this and the adjacent province, some business
of a public nature, together with my own circumstances, necessarily engaged me
for several years, in which time, viz. in the spring of the year 1745, my dear
wife having drawings in her mind to visit the meetings of friends in Virginia,
Maryland, and North Carolina, obtained a certificate of the unity of friends
with her, to travel in that service with Jane Hoskins of Chester; and in the
same year I was nominated with several other friends to visit the families
belonging to our monthly meeting, which being large and many friends living at
a distance, was a laborious work, and not fully peformed until the fall of the
year 1747, when account was given that the service was perfected to a good
degree of satisfaction. In the winter following, I had it on my mind to visit
all the families of the particular meeting of Newark near Brandywine, who
seemed to be in a declining state as to religion, having dropped their week day
meeting, and often much neglected to attend their first day meeting, many of
the elderly friends being deceased, and their children almost turned to the
world, and united to the spirit, pleasures, and pastimes thereof; my brother
Wm. Brown, and his wife, and mine were with me on this service, and great
plainness was used in opening to many particulars the cause of their
declension, and as the love of truth engaged me in the service, I had peace and
satisfaction, and those visited seemed to receive the visit kindly.

In the spring of the year 1748, I felt drawings in my mind to visit some
families of friends in Philadelphia, of which I acquainted my brethren at home,
and having their concurrence, in the fourth month I joined with some friends in
the city who were sometime before appointed to the service, and we went in much
love from house to house, the Lord, by his good presence, being with us to our
mutual comfort; and as I attended to the drawings of truth, I found a concern
to go to the mayor of the city (accompanied by my good friend Israel Pemberton
the elder,) and was engaged to lay before him the nature of his office as a
magistrate, and exhorted him to take care that he bore not the sword in vain,
but put the laws in execution against evil doers, such as drunkards, profane
swearers, etc. and to be, in his authority, a terror to the wicked, and an
encourager of them that do well; he was loving and tender, and expressed his
satisfaction with the visit.

While I was in the city, the Governor called or summoned the members of
Assembly together, and in pressing terms laid before them the defenseless state
of Pennsylvania, in order to prevail with the house to grant a sum of money to
station a ship of force at Delaware capes, also to encourage the building a
battery below the city, which was began sometime before by subscription, but
likely to be too heavy for the undertakers; one night as I lay in my bed, it
came very weightily upon me to go to the house of assembly, and lay before the
members thereof the danger of departing from trusting in that divine arm of
power which had hitherto protected the Inhabitants of our land in peace and
safety; the concern rested on me several days, which occasioned me with earnest
breathings to seek the Lord, that if this was a motion from him, he would be
pleased to direct my steps therein, so that I might be preserved from giving
just cause of offense to any, for it seemed to be a very difficult time; many,
even of our society, declaring their willingness that a sum of money should be
given to the King, to show our loyalty to him, and that they were willing to
part with their substance for his use, though as a people, we had a testimony to
bear against all outward wars and sightings; I made no man privy to my concern
until a week had near passed; when one morning it became so heavy upon me, that
I went to the house of an intimate friend, who being just up invited me to come
in, and as we sat together, he had a sense that something of weight was upon
me, and asked if I was concerned about the assembly; whereupon I asked him, if
he ever knew of any friends going to the assembly with a concern to speak to
them? he answered nay, adding, but I have often wondered that they have not,
for I have understood that it was formerly a common practice for them to sit in
silence a while, like solemn worship, before they proceeded to do business. I
told him, that I had it on my mind to go to the house that morning and should
be glad of suitable company; he directed me to one whom he thought such, and I
immediately went to him and acquainted him with my concern; but as I spoke, I
felt that I had better go alone, and therefore told him, that if he did not
feel clear and easy to go with me, I advised him to stay; he replied "thy way
is before thee, but I believe I must not go:" I therefore returned to my
friend, who did not discourage me, though I had no company; being pressed in
mind, I went directly to the State-house before I took breakfast, and got there
just as the speaker, J. K. was going in, I beckoned to him and he came to me; I
told him I wanted to be admitted into the house, for I thought I had something
to say to them which seemed to me of importance; he said, it was a critical
time, and they had a difficult affair before them, and queried, whether I had
not better wait until the house parted, and another member being near, said, he
thought it would be best, and less liable to give offense, for there were
diverse members not of our society, and if I would wait until the house broke
up, they would inform all the members that were friends, and did not doubt they
would be willing to give me an opportunity to inform them what was on my mind.
I told them, that would give me no relief, for I had a particular desire that
those members who were not of our society should be present; believing that it
would be better for them to hear and judge for themselves than to have it at
second hand, as it might be differently represented; at which they were a
little silent; then I requested the speaker that he would go in and inform the
members, that a country man was in waiting who had a desire to be admitted,
having something to communicate to them, and if they refused he would be clear;
he readily and affectionately answered he would, and soon brought me word that
they were willing. There was a great awe over my mind when I went in, which I
thought in some measure spread, and prevailed over the members beyond my
expectation, after a silence of perhaps ten or twelve minutes, I felt as though
all fear of man was taken away, and my mind influenced to address them in
substance after the following manner.

My Countrymen, and fellow Subjects, Representatives of the Inhabitants of
this Province,
UNDER an apprehension of the difficulties before you, I feel a strong sympathy
with you, and have to remind you of a just and true saying of a great minister
of Jesus Christ in his day, The powers that be, are ordained of God. Now if men
in power and authority, in whatsoever station, would seek unto God (who will be
a spirit of judgment to them that sit in judgment) for wisdom and counsel to
act singly for him that ordained the power, and permitted them to be stationed
therein, that they should be his ministers; such will be a blessing under God
to themselves and their country; but if those in authority do suffer their own
fears and the persuasions of others, to prevail with them to neglect such
attention, and so make, or enact laws in order to their own protection and
defense by carnal weapons and fortifications, styled human prudence, he who is
superintendant, by withdrawing the arm of his power, may permit those evils
they feared to come suddenly upon them, and that in his heavy dispeasure. May
it with gratitude be ever remembered how remarkably we have been preserved in
peace and tranquillity for more than fifty years! no invasion by foreign
enemies, and the treaties of peace with the natives, wisely began by our worthy
proprietor William Penn, preserved inviolate to this day.

Though you now represent, and act for a mixed people of various denominations as
to Religion; yet remember the Charter is the same as at first; beware therefore
of acting to oppress tender Consciences, for there are many of the Inhabitants
whom you now represent, that still hold forth the same religious principles
with their predecessors, who were some of the first adventurers into this, at
that time wilderness land, who would be greatly grieved to see warlike
preparations carried on, and encouraged by a law consented to by their brethren
in profession, or others, contrary to the Charter, still conscientiously
concluding, that the reverent and true fear of God, with and humble trust in
his ancient arm of Power, would be our greatest defense and safety; and they
who hold different principles and are settled in this government, can have no
just cause of reflection if warlike measures are forborne, because they knew
the Charter framed, and the peaceable Constitution, and have ventured
themselves therein.

We may observe by sundry laws enacted in Parliament, when the Reformation was
but newly begun in England our mother country, there seemed to be wisdom from
above to influence their minds; may you be rightly directed at this time, many
of whom do fully believe in the immediate influence of Christ, the wisdom of
God, which is truly profitable to direct! It is not from disrepect to the King
or Government that I speak after this manner, for I am thankful in heart, that
the Lord in mercy has vouchsafed, that the throne of Great Britain should be
filled with our present benevolent Prince, King George the second; may his
reign be long and happy!

I acknowledged their kindness in hearing me with so much patience, and taking
leave, withdrew; several members followed me out and expressed their
satisfaction in an affectionate manner with my visit; and embracing each other,
we parted in a sense of the love and power of Christ Jesus our Lord, who, with
the Father, is worthy of all thanksgiving and praise for ever and ever.

After my service in Philadelphia was over, I returned home with peace and
satisfaction, and went not much abroad save to our quarterly and
yearly-meetings, until the spring following in the year 1749, when I went with
Michael Lightfoot to the yearly meeting at West-river in Maryland, in which
journey, the weather being hot and some weakness of body attending, it threw me
into a strong fever and a stoppage in my breast, that it was with some
difficulty I got home, and continued without any amendment a considerable time;
and one evening as I was preparing for bed, an imposthume broke, which I
suppose was on my lights because it came up my windpipe, almost strangling me
for a considerable time, that I expected I was near expiring, but felt a
resignation in this trying time beyond my expectation, which I took to be a
great favor from the Lord; there is no support like the light of his
countenance. I continued bleeding more or less many days, but gradually mended.
In the eighth month being pretty well recovered, in much love I felt drawings
in my mind to visit some meetings in the back parts of Chester, Philadelphia,
and Bucks counties, and part of New Jersey, and laying my concern before my
friends had their concurrence, and was accompanied by my kinsman Joshua Brown
through most of the journey; our first appointed meeting was at Radnor, in
which truth owned our service in a good degree, and passing over Schuylkill
went to Plymouth, North Wales, Skippack, and New-providence, which last meeting
for want of more careful notice was very small, and not being easy in my mind,
I had a singular freedom to let them know, that I would endeavor to be at that
place again on the second day following, and should be glad they would please
to give full notice thereof, and having a strong draught in my mind to turn
back to North Wales, I went the same evening to Robert Jones's at Skippack, and
next day to see a friend who had been a long time indisposed, with whom we had
a good opportunity, which I believe was of advantage to the friend, through the
goodness and mercy of the blessed shepherd of Israel; I also visited two other
friends, and we were comforted together in the renewing of heavenly goodness;
and on first day was at Northwales meeting, which was large and satisfactory,
and at Providence again on second day, where friends generally met, and I had
an opportunity to clear myself in a particular manner; then went to Evans's
meeting by the side of Schuylkill, and had a meeting the same evening at the
house of Thomas May, both which were to some satisfaction; afterward went to
Maiden-creek, Exeter, and Richland, and from thence over Delaware to Kingwood,
and visited the meetings in Burlington, Gloucester, and Salem Counties as far
down as Greenwich, and returned homewards by Haddonfield, from whence in my
going down, my kinsman Joshua Brown left me and went home; I called to visit
Hannah Cooper, whose husband had not long been dead, she seemed under
affliction of body and mind; I felt a near sympathy with her, and though we did
not converse much together, yet in the owning love of him who is a friend to
the afflicted, we were mutually comforted; she expressed her satisfaction in a
tender manner, saying that soon after I came her exercise was lightened, and
she was refreshed in a sense of the kindness of the Lord, in affording a
sympathy and inward feeling to the children of his family; my soul was humbled
in reverent thankfulness to him the author of all good, who is praise worthy
for ever. In the morning I had a passage over Delaware about the tenth hour,
which by reason of ice had not been passable for several days before; tarrying
in Philadelphia that night, I went next day to Derby meeting, and the day
following got well home, and found my dear wife and family well.

On my leaving home to perform this visit, I felt great inward weakness, and in
going from meeting to meeting, frequent humbling baptisms attended, in which
the present state of the church was seen, and the conditions of many spoken to
in the love of truth, which made me often think that it seemed like a farewell
visit, at least for a long time.

I may now make a remark which I hope will not be improper or unprofitable. As
I passed along in this visit, I observed some people would earnestly press me
to go home with them, and would say they would not take it kind if I did not,
and friends did not use to serve them so, that is, pass by them; yet I thought
there was not much of the innocent sweetness of truth to be felt at their
houses, or even about them; though they would say, why! thou have hit the nail on
the head, there is just such people among us as thou have spoken of; and seemed
as to themselves, safe and easy, when perhaps their religion lay much in
thinking that good friends were familiar with them and thought well of them; I
also took notice of another sort, who though they were not fond of having friends
to go with them, would speak well of their service, and deal it out liberally
to others in a censorious manner, and not look on themselves with a true
prospect which would have led them to smite on their own breasts, with a
feeling, short prayer, rather than apprehend themselves better than others,
when perhaps coveteousness and a worldly spirit had almost destroyed charity,
which is the sure product of true religion; a third sort, I beheld humbled and
bowed, whose words were few, and would frequently if they said anything, lament
the state of the society, and speak of their own weakness, and fear lest they
should not walk in the uprightness of truth before their own families and the
church, the dew rested on them in their humble situation; I was thankful in the
sense I had, that there were some few of these in almost every meeting, and I
had a firm belief, that some among the youth were under the hand of the great
preparer of men for his own work; these children are mostly modest and
diffident of themselves, sincerely affectionate, not over forward or fondling,
but lovers of truth in heart, to whom I felt great nearness of spirit,
believing they would grow, in the root of Life; I beheld some others among the
youth, whom I feared had too great a delight to live on the labors of others,
who nevertheless had been favored with the reaches of divine Love, but for
want of dwelling deep and humble with the pure witness in themselves, ran out
in the affectionate part, and were greatly delighted to hear truth's testimony,
and valued instruments according to their own liking; these, though they appear
as goodly flowers, for want of an humble acode in the vine, do sometimes wither
away as grass on the house top. If you love me, keep my commandments, was a
precept of our holy Lord and Master; to keep his commandments we must inwardly
dwell with his grace in our hearts, by which the law of the spirit of life is
known and understood, by the enlightening and everlasting sure word of
Prophecy, which will privately interpret, and secretly show to every man his
duty, and the calling of God, and abilitate to abide therein, and his law is
light and his commandment as a lamp to the feet of his people for ever.

As I sat in a week day meeting in the winter (1748,) which was held in a
private house, (our meeting house being burnt sometime before;) I felt great
weakness and poverty attending my mind, which occasioned a deep inquiry into
the cause; and after a time of inward waiting, the humbling divine presence was
felt in reverent profound silence, yet the gentle operation of the divine power
caused a secret inward trembling, and the following was uttered in a language
intelligent to the inward man, gather thyself from all the cumbers of the
world, and be thou weaned from the popularity, love, and friendship thereof. I
believed this to be the voice of the holy one of Israel, as a merciful warning
to prepare for my final change, or to stand ready for some service which would
separate me from temporal business and the nearest connections in life; and
from that time I endeavored to settle my affairs, and contract my little
business as well as I could. In the summer following I met with an unexpected
trial, for without my knowledge my name was put in the new commission for
justices of the peace, and endeavors were used to persuade me to be qualified
in order to act in that station, and some of my particular friends told me it
seemed providential, and they thought it was my place to accept thereof, as I
might be helpful by way of example to some in the commission who were friends;
for a short time I was exceedingly straitened, but my eye being fixed on the
Lord for counsel, it pleased him in great condescension once more to revive the
sentence before mentioned, gather thyself from all the cumbers of the world,
etc. which to me settled the point, and I became easy in mind, and humbly
thankful to my blessed instructor who had called me for other service.

After my return home from the visit to friends in New Jersey before related, I
felt such an inward silence for about two or three weeks, that I thought I had
done with the world, and also any further service in the church, and the
preparing hint was brought to my mind, with thankfulness that I had endeavored
in a good degree to practice it; and one day walking alone, I felt myself so
inwardly weak and feeble, that I stood still, and by the reverence that covered
my mind, I knew that the hand of the Lord was on me and his presence round
about, the earth was silent and all flesh brought into stillness, and light
went forth with brightness, and shone on Great Britain, Ireland, and Holland,
and my mind felt the gentle, yet strongly drawing cords of that love which is
stronger than death, which made me say, Lord! go before, and strengthen me, and
I will follow whithersoever thou leads. I had seen this journey near fifteen
years in a very plain manner, and at times for ten years, thought the concern
so strong upon me that I must lay it before my friends for their advice; but
was secretly restrained; being made to believe, that an exercise of that sort
would ripen best to be kept quiet in my own heart to know the right time, by no
means desiring to run without being sent; to see a thing is not a commission to
do that thing; the time when, and judgment to know the acceptable time, are the
gifts of God. The time I had to prepare for the journey was short, and
therefore thought it was needful to employ my time to the best advantage, and
as I had a desire to see friends of several particular meetings, namely
Bradford, West and East Caln, Uwchland, Nantmill, and Goshen, my sister Dinah
James went with me to those meetings, which through the goodness of the Lord
were solidly profitable, we had also a meeting at Henry Hockley's, near French
Creek Iron-works, which was to some good satisfaction, and so to the quarterly
meeting at Concord in the twelfth month, where I met my brother William Brown,
who queried of me where I had been, and what I had been doing? I told him, I
had been doing as he, and every honest man ought to do, collecting little debts
and paying where I owed, and endeavoring to settle my affairs; for that such
care was necessary when one expected a great sum would be immediately demanded:
In a few days after my return from the quarterly meeting, I laid my concern
before our preparative meeting, in order that friends might have a month to
weigh and consider it before I spoke for a certificate; for I wanted their
feeling concurrence in this weighty undertaking, firmly believing, that my
great and good Master would not require any thing of me in which my dear
friends could not concur, and though while the power of Truth was upon me, I was
made freely to give up; yet now home, and the near affection to a dear wife,
only son, relations and friends, were exceedingly quick and affecting, and
something in me seemed to have a choice, that my friends would judge that I was
too weakly and infirm in body, or not otherwise qualified for the service, and
if that should be their mind, I thought I should be clear; in the interval I
visited the neighboring meetings, and carefully attended to the motion of
truth therein; and in the first month, having the concurrence of the
preparative meeting, I laid my concern before the monthly meeting, and attended
our general spring meeting at Philadelphia, and my brother Wm. Brown having
spoken for a certificate on the like concern, it seemed pleasant to think of
crossing the Ocean together, and friends were for proposing a passage, and what
ship we should go in; but I felt a secret prohibition against being any ways
concerned about a passage until I had a certificate, and knew that I was fully
clear; so returned home. And having a desire to see friends in York county over
Susquehanna, I went there, accompanied by my brother James Brown, to the
meetings at Newberry, Warrington, Huntington, and Monallan, which were mostly
to a good degree of satisfaction, and in my return being humble and low in
mind, and ruminating on my European journey, which was before me, my spirit
seemed to sink, and my affection to my dear wife, and family, and friends so
awakened upon me, that it looked to me impossible to part from them and live;
but endeavoring to retire, blessed be the name of the Lord the helper of his
people! by whose power a silence was known, and by a gentle, instructive,
inward voice, my attention was gained, and my mind diverted from its pain by
the following query: "Suppose thou should lend a valuable thing to a
neighbor of thine, to be returned on demand, and thou should favor him
therewith from time to time, not only one year, but seven, and then should
see cause to demand it to be resigned; would thou not think that neighbor
ungrateful, if he did not resign it cheerfully, and with thankfulness and
acknowledgment suitable to thy kindness?" The proposition demanded my assent,
and my understanding was fully opened by the following application: "All that
thou enjoyest is mine, do thou love these things more than me? if not, why is
it so hard for thee to resign all to follow me? which made me cry, Lord! enable
me, and I will follow thee, it is only by thy strength I can do it;" and by the
gracious goodness of Christ, my great and good Master, I felt an humble
resignation to his will, who being all things to his people, is worthy to be
followed and obeyed for ever. Now I was led to believe this was the instruction
of the blessed spirit to me, and as I had much comfort and satisfaction
thereby, I am free to leave it as a hint, that others under trials of what kind
so ever, may be encouraged to look unto him for help, who is the Lord, mighty
to save, and able to deliver to the uttermost all who sincerely trust in him.

I returned home, and my certificate being signed in the second month, attended
our quarterly meeting at Concord in the third month, and went to Philadelphia
to see for a passage, and with my brother W. B. found one to our liking and to
the satisfaction of friends, which we also valued; I then returned home,
waiting until the ship was near ready to sail, and during that time visited
several neighboring meetings, taking leave of my neighbors and friends; and
on the first day of the fourth month (1750,) taking leave of my dear wife and
aged mother, I left home before sun rise, and went to Philadelphia that night,
spent the next day in visiting some of my acquaintance, and on the first of the
week attended three meetings; in the morning at the Bank, which was a
satisfactory good meeting, wherein friends where exhorted to attend on the gift
of God, for instruction and ability to perform every good word and work, and in
the afternoon and evening at the High, or Market-street house, which though not
quite so open as the other, were in the main solid good meetings.

CHAP. IV.
His Visit to Great Britain, Ireland and Holland, from the Year 1750 to 1754,
with diverse Observations on the State of our Religious Society in the course of
his Travels.

ON the fourth day of the fourth month (1750) being the second of the week, we
left Philadelphia, accompanied by several of our relations and friends to
Chester, and went on board the ship Carolina, Stephen Mesnard commander, (bound
for London,) where my brother Wm. Brown and myself took leave of them; and
passing down Delaware, went out to sea in the afternoon of the sixth of the
same month, and had a good passage, in which I was not sea sick, though my
brother was most of the time. We landed at Dover on the sixth of the fifth
month, being just five weeks from the time I left my own house, and we had to
rejoice with humble thankfulness, that, during the passage, we were careful to
keep our meetings in the great Cabin twice a week, in which we felt the
presence of our great Lord and Master, and therein were comforted. On the day
we landed we had a meeting at Dover to good satisfaction, then took passage in
a stage coach to Canterbury the same evening, and lodged at William
Patterson's, who entertained us very kindly; rested there on seventh day, and
on first day sat with friends in their morning and afternoon meetings to some
satisfaction; though I had little to say to them, I thought there was a tender
people in that city and W. B. had an open time; next morning taking our passage
in a stage coach, we reached London the same evening, and continued in and
about the city until the twenty-first of the sixth month, in which time I wrote
diverse letters to my wife and particular friends in Pennsylvania, and was
several times at each of the meetings in the city, in which I sat mostly
silent, under a great exercise of mind from a sense of a too forward ministry,
which rather disturbed the solemn quiet thereof than ministered instruction to
the humble waiting children, of which number I thought there were many in that
city; though it seemed delightful to those who loved to hear words eloquently
delivered, and to have the itching ear pleased, yet in heart were libertines,
and in practice disorderly walkers, I sometimes thought, that my silent sitting
was so ordered for an example to others for a more steady waiting in their own
gifts, to know life to arise into dominion in meetings, my exercise increased
so, that my sleep seemed to depart from me, and I remained as one sealed up as
to ministry, nor had I freedom to go from house to house to dine, or to make
many acquaintance, I was therefore censured by some as singular and narrow; at
length I felt great enlargement of heart toward other societies, though my mouth
was shut toward our own, and for a time, it seemed as if I must go and have
meetings among those who did not profess with us; and one day, as I was walking
toward Ratcliff Fields for the air, a draught of affection flowed so strong
toward some in high stations in government, that I concluded, that I must
declare the way of life and salvation through Christ Jesus our Lord among them,
feeling a greater openness that way than to friends; but making a stand, I
secretly cried, ah Lord! what then will become of the family whom thou drewest
me hither to visit; then, after a little while, that charge came into my mind
very fresh, Mat. x. 5-6. Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into any city
of the Samaritans enter ye not; but go rather to the lost sheep of the house of
Israel, which brought great sweetness, and an increasing heart-yearning for and
love to the household, and made me acknowledge, good art thou oh! Lord God, for
thy mercies endure for ever and ever, and I remembered that Nehemiah quietly
viewed the state of Jerusalem by night, and saw, that if I had any service to
do in London, the time for it was not yet come; I also remembered what came into
my mind at the second meeting I was in after my landing, in which I had but a
few sentences to speak, and the motion of life ceased, and I sat down, as I
have always found it safe to do, and felt inward poverty and weakness, yet a
quiet and attentive mind; but my brother W. B. had good service, and an open
time among the people, at which I did admire, and said in my heart; he is fit
to be sent abroad; but alas! I am one of the meanest servants that was ever
sent over the sea to preach the gospel; when this gentle caution came before
me; mind thy own business, and be faithful in thy gift, thou have a great
journey before thee and thy store is small; live therefore frugally, and spend
carefully, and covet not another's, and thou shall not want what is convenient
for thyself, and something to spare to the needy: Whereupon I desired with an
humble heart, to be preserved in patience and meekness, becoming a disciple of
my great Lord and Master, and therein to wait for renewed instruction and
ability, to labor in mine own gift without repining, however small.

In a few days I felt some openness toward the West of England, and informed
my brother W. B. thereof, who, after a little pause, told me that his way
opened Eastward; on some consideration of the matter, we concluded it was best
for each of us to mind the pointings of truth, though in some cross to our own
wills; for this prospect seemed to part us; and if we should endeavor to go
together for a time, and then part, some might judge there was a dislike, or
want of unity between us, and on communing with some of our friends, they were
of the same mind; so we resigned, and in much love and affection took leave of
each other.

Understanding there was an yearly meeting to be held in Somersetshire for
several of the Western counties, and having some drawings to attend it, I left
London on the twenty-first of the sixth month in company with my friend John
Hunt, at whose house I lodged, and John Pemberton who came over sea with us on
account of his health, and had a meeting that day at Stains, which was pretty
good and open, the next at Basingstoke, and so on to Salisbury, and Shaftsbury,
the two last being dull meetings, which is often the case where friends are not
careful to live near to truth, and reached to Ivelchester, the place where the
yearly meeting began, on seventh day in the evening the twenty-fifth of the
month; on first day we had two meetings in the Town Hall, and many people being
there, meetings were held at the Market Cross in the street at the same time; I
sat silent that day; on the next there was a meeting of ministers and elders in
the morning, in which I had some remarks to make respecting ministry; there
were also two public meetings the same day, one of which was dull, the other
more open, and on third day two meetings rather better, when the yearly meeting
ended; some meetings being laid out for me, John Hunt returned to London, but
John Pemberton concluded to go with me a few days, and his company was kindly
accepted of by me, he being a sober, well inclined young man. We went to
Ilminster the first appointed meeting, in which the good presence was witnessed
much to my comfort, for I saw that the Lord was near, and helped me in my gift
by opening the state of the meeting, blessed be his name for ever! I also had
an evening meeting at Chard, and next day at Yeovil which was large and open
for doctrine, then at Sherborn on the edge of Dorsetshire, from thence went to
visit the wife and children of Jonah Thompson at Compton, he being in
Pennsylvania on a religious visit; I had some good satisfaction in the family,
and tarried there a day; then went to the meetings at Long Sutton, Puddimore,
Grinton, Glastonbury, Shipton-mallet, and From, in which I had mostly, close
and plain service; yet not without a degree of the sweetness and power of
Truth, in a sense whereof I was often made humbly thankful to the Lord. Then
proceeding to Bath, was at the sorenoon and afternoon meetings there, and had
an evening meeting at Caleb Tyley's, which were in some good degree owned by
truth; but there is a want of weighty solid friends in this place, which is
much frequented by most sorts of people on account of the Waters; from thence
we went to Bradford, and Pickwick meetings; but not being clear at the first, I
returned, and had an evening meeting there, to which many came, and it ended to
satisfaction. Here I may note, that having a desire to see friends by
themselves, and something on my mind in a close manner to the society; when I
stood up and began to speak, the house was soon almost filled by others, who
would wait without, setting some one to watch when there was any thing spoken;
upon their coming in, the subject in my view closed, and an opening in a
doctrinal way presented, and my mind turned to it, and I believe it was to the
satisfaction of some seeking people present; after I sat down a few minutes,
finding no ease respecting my concern toward friends, I had a freedom to
inform the people, that the public service of that meeting was now over, but I
had a desire, that the members of the meeting would stay a little while; on
which a friend went to the door, and when the others had gone out shut it, and
the friends mostly kept their seats, and in a little time, the state of the
meeting came fresh before me again, and I had an opportunity to clear myself in
a very plain manner, showing that the greatest enemies to the truth, were the
professors of it, who did not observe the instructions of truth, or grace of
God in their own hearts; for although the doctrine thereof when declared by
qualified instruments, was clear and powerfully convincing, having the love,
and sweetening evidence of Truth with it, reaching the witness in their hearts;
yet when the eyes of such so reached, were turned to behold the steps and
conduct of the libertine professors among us, they were stumbled by their
example, and such were an offense to the little ones, and their portion by way
of comparison is hinted at by our Lord, when he says, Mat. xviii. 6. But whosoever
shall offend one of these little ones who believe in me, it were better for him
that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in the
depth of the sea. From thence we went to Westbury, and Lavington meetings, and
to the quarterly meeting for Wiltshire held at Devizes, which began on the
first day of the week, two meetings for public worship, and one in the evening
for ministers and elders, and next day for worship and business, but I could
see no time, nor room to clear myself to advantage for want of more stillness;
the service of meetings may be hurt for want of silence, and the minds of the
people become too unsettled to understand and hear to profit; in a sense
whereof, I left this place with an heavy heart, and went to Chippenham,
Corsham, Charlcot, and Melksham meetings, besides which had three evening
meetings, one at Pickwick in a School-house belonging to Thomas Bennet, with
his boarding scholars and others; one at John Fry's of Sutton Benjar, and the
other at Samuel Ru^ty's; some of which were good meetings; then leaving
Wiltshire we passed through Bradford, and Bath, and came to Bristol on the
twenty-second of the month, where I tarried until first day, the seventh of the
eighth month, constantly attending their meetings as they came in course, and
visiting several families as truth opened my way, my mind and spirit was bowed
very low in this city, under a sense of too general a declension and falling
away from truth, into pride, high-mindedness, and the spirit of the world, and
a conformity to the vain customs and fashions thereof, of which I frequently
made mention amongst them; I was at their two weeks meeting for business, and
quarterly meeting for inspecting the affairs of truth, and labored much to
encourage them to hold weekly meetings for ministers and elders, in order to
enquire how meetings for worship were attended by public friends, and whether
their ministry was acceptable, and the lives and conversations of ministers and
elders correspondent with their doctrine and profession, which care they had
dropped for sometime. I was at sixteen meetings in this city, and one at
Frenchay, and visited Anthony Purver's boarding school at that place, and being
easy to leave Bristol for the present, we went to Chewmagna in Somersetshire;
and after dining at John Hipsley's, had a religious opportunity in his family,
and the next day a meeting at Portishead, an evening meeting at James Players,
then to Claverham, Sidcot, and Mark, some of which were good meetings, a few
elderly friends here live near truth, and there was a visitation to the youth,
several of whom appeared tender and growing in religion; though many professors
are seeking after the gain, love, and friendship of the world, not enough
considering that Godliness with contentment is the best gain; our next meeting
was at Bridgewater, then at Taunton, and were comforted together with friends
in their morning and afternoon meetings; in the divine presence there is life,
and the living are made able to praise the Lord who is worthy. From thence
passing to Minehead, Milverton, Wellington, Spiceland, Columpton, having a
meeting at each place, we came to Exeter in Devonshire, and attended three
meetings there on first day, in each of which I had something to offer; but was
much depressed under an apprehension of the prevalence of a deistical spirit
over some, which, with the indifference of others about religion, and a light
forward zeal in some others, without the deep, inward, baptizing knowledge of
Truth, occasion the pure and ever blessed power thereof to be at a low ebb in
that city. When the children of the Lord know him their Redeemer to live by his
heavenly power in them, they know also that thereby they live, and feelingly
know his Truth and the precious testimony, and by this knowledge are influenced
with an holy, humble zeal, in love and meekness to work in his vineyard the
church, to the honor of God, and the edification and restoration one of
another.

Leaving Exeter, we went to Topsham and had a dark dull meeting, and staying at
a friend's house to dine, one at the table, who, as I understood, could not
spare time to attend the meeting, asked me if I was ever in New England, and
whether I could inform him what sort of a country it was? for, added he, I have
heard people say, that the corn (that is wheat) will not ripen there, but is
smitten with a rotting mildew which blasts the wheat in the ear; I suddenly
felt that I had need of being careful in answering, but knew not why; I
answered with caution, that I had seen wheat in that country which looked to be
well grown, but in the ear where grain should be, there was little else but a
black smut in form of a grain; I have heard, said he, that it would bear full,
good wheat formerly, and what can now be the cause why it is blasted, did
thou ever hear? On which I related to him a passage which I had heard, viz. Two
persons being in Boston had a curiosity to see the old prison, from whence
those friends were led to the place of execution who were hanged at Boston for
their religious testimony and principles, and an inhabitant of the town going
with them, brought them to the prison, and one of the men said to their guide,
is this the old jail where the friends lay who were hanged? an old woman who
sat knitting at the door, though not spoken to, answered yes it is, and we
feelingly know it, for a curse has been on the land ever since, so that it will
not bear wheat without a blasting, and we are beholden to other colonies for
bread. He replied with an air of jesting, I have heard so, but I believe
nothing of it. I told him we might observe, that the Almighty had sometimes
manifested his displeasure on a people or nation, by famine, the sword, or
pestilence for their transgressions, if we had a belief in the sacred writings
of the old Testament; he said, it could not be, that the Almighty who is Love
in perfection, and in himself infinitely happy for ever, should delight in
severity, and take vengeance on man the workmanship of his hand; some who are
narrow in their way of thinking may believe such things, but for his part, he
had Ideas more noble of the deity than to believe such notions; by which I
perceived he was a deist, and did not regard the Scriptures, and that it would
be vain to say much to him; having often thought it was very difficult to say
any thing to reach those sort of low freethinkers, who exercise themselves in
the wisdom which is from beneath, and dwell safely in their own imaginations
and conceits, whose communication is often infectious to others, and to be
perceived in the meetings and neighbourhoods where they reside.

From thence we went to went to Bovy, Newton-Bushel, Totness and Kingsbridge,
at the last, after the morning and afternoon meetings, we had one in the
evening with friends selected, which was to satisfaction; and hearing of one
family that lived many miles from any meeting, I had a desire to see them, and
went thither; I let the friend know, that I came there on purpose to see him
and his family, and should be glad to have them come together and be still a
little while, desiring it might be soon, for we intended to go that night to
Plymouth; he said it would not answer them at that time, his children being
employed in pressing out cider. I let him know, that I hoped I should not
detain them long, and if they lightened the press, the cider would not run
over; but could not prevail with him, though I informed him, that I had left all
my business, and had come some thousand miles to see my friends in this nation,
and hearing how remote he lived from meeting, had a particular mind to see him;
he replied that he should be glad it had suited them, but could not put his
business by at that time; so, with a heavy heart, I left his house and went to
Plymouth where we had a meeting the next day: Then to Germains, Liscard, Looe,
Austil, and Denny's (in Cornwall,) at which last place the people are mostly
employed in the tin mines, and we had a pretty good meeting, a visit from a
friend being acceptable to them, and they willing to leave their business though
poor people. From hence we proceeded pretty direct to the Land's-end, intending
to take the meetings on our return, and were at Penzance meeting on sixth day;
at this meeting my companion John Pemberton spoke a few words in way of
testimony, tender and broken, being the first time, and I thought had a good
degree of the savor of truth attending; and on seventh day, went to visit an
ancient friend sick and bed rid, near the Land's-end where formerly there had
been a meeting, and returned in the evening to Penzance; on first day had a
meeting at Marazion in the morning, and at Penzance in the evening: We then
turned Eastward, and attended a meeting at Falmouth, and five others in this
county of Cornwall; then passed through Devonshire, taking a meeting at
Oakhampton, and twelve others in Somersetshire, some of which were large and
open, for there came many seeking people to the meetings at Bridgewater, and I
hope some of those opportunities were through Divine favor profitable to some
of them; and not being easy in my mind to leave this county without being at
the quarterly meeting for business to be held at Glastonbury, I returned
thither, and was concerned to lay before friends the declining state of the
society in that county, and to exhort them to put the discipline in practice,
that the church might be cleared from disorders, which caused reproach; it was
thought by friends to be the most solid quarterly meeting which had been held
in that county for many years. From thence we went to Caln in Wiltshire, being
about fifty miles, and were at their meeting on first day the sixteenth of the
tenth month, where we met out friend and countryman Daniel Stanton from
Philadelphia in the course of his religious visit, and were glad in each others
company, though the meetings both forenoon and afternoon were but dull, the
people looking for words, were disappointed; the next day we went together to a
monthly meeting at Chippenham; the meeting for worship was held in the meeting
house, at the conclusion of which friends rose and went out; I asked them where
they were going, for I felt very uneasy, they said to do the business of the
meeting, and feeling a strong engagement to be with them while they transacted
the affairs of the church, I followed them, though it rained very fast; they went
into a spacious house where a room was prepared for the purpose, and a good
fire; I sat down with them though sorely distressed, they seemed to do the
business in a formal ready way; I endeavored to press them to weightiness of
spirit, that they might feel the state of the society and the need there was to
put the discipline in practice, for religion was at a low ebb in that county;
they seemed not to understand me, and indeed I found but little room or
openness to say much to them; they soon finished their business; when I rose up
and moved for going away, they informed me that friends staid to dine where the
business was transacted, and that the friends of the house would think it very
strange if I went away; so they told the woman that the friend was going away;
she met me in the Hall, and said, I must not go before I took dinner; I told
her I should, for that I had not freedom to stay to eat or drink in the house;
she asked me why? I pressingly desired her to inquire of the Truth in her own
heart and she might find the cause, so I went away, and a friend followed me
out, and showed me the way to his house where I left my horse, and there I
found Daniel Stanton, and my companion J. P. who went not to the meeting for
business; Daniel informed me, that he followed us to the door, but could not go
in, for he thought he felt the life of truth struck at, or trampled upon in
that house, and therefore returned to the other where we had left our horses,
and J. P. with him; I was glad that he had such a sense, and he expressed
satisfaction that I did not stay to dine, so we dined together, after which
Daniel went Westward, and we toward London, taking several meetings in our
way, and arrived there the thirty-first of the tenth month, and tarrying in the
city until the twenty-fifth of the eleventh month, in the mean time I carefully
visited all the meetings in great awfulness, being bowed in spirit under a
sense of a forward ministry, and sat chiefly in silence among them: I also
attended their meetings for discipline, namely one quarterly meeting, the
monthly, two weeks, second day morning meetings, and meeting for sufferings,
and was in much heaviness of mind, having a sense of a great neglect in some
who were active members, in not waiting for a true qualification to act for the
honor of God and edification of the church; nevertheless there is a remnant
who are concerned to seek his honor, and to wait for the influence of his
Divine Spirit and Power, to whom I was, at times, concerned to speak by way of
encouragement. To transact the weighty affairs of the church in as light and
easy a manner as men commonly buy and sell in a market, will always rather
bring death over a meeting than life.

We left London on the twenty-sixth of the eleventh month, and went to
Chelmsford in Essex, and the next day sat with friends in their forenoon and
afternoon meetings to pretty good satisfaction, through the goodness and power
of the Lord, whose presence was measurably felt among us to the praise of his
ever worthy name; then taking meetings as regularly as we could, we visited
that county in twenty-four days, and had twenty-three public meetings, and some
family sittings. My service for truth in this county was in a close plain way,
mostly with but few words; for it often appeared to me, that there was a
greater desire to hear, than to put in practice those things they were exhorted
to, for which I often mourned, and had a strong sympathy with the few sensible,
baptized friends amongst them; for brevity sake I close this general account
without further remark.

We then passed to Ipswich in Suffolk, and had a meeting with friends there to
some satisfaction, there being a tender sincere remnant among them; and taking
the East part of the county, we had ten meetings, and visited several
indisposed friends to good satisfaction; then went to Yarmouth in Norfolk, and
after attending their meetings in the morning and afternoon on first day, had a
large satisfactory one the same evening, many of the people of the town coming
to it; then going to Norwich we tarried with friends there about a week, in
which time I had four meetings in that city, and one at Lammas near it, and
also visited diverse indisposed friends, and had satisfaction therein. Intending
to visit all the meetings in Norfolk county, a friend undertook to lay them out
for me, and made a list of them, of which he gave me a copy, and told me, it
was the way to take the meetings with the least traveling; but I felt a strait
in my mind, which I had always found safe for me to attend to until I saw a way
open, and being thoughtful about it, I desired him to inform me, what meeting
bore most to the North East from that place, he told me it was North-Walsam; I
desired him to begin there, and name the meetings most regular afterward, and
I would tell him if the list felt pleasant as he went on; he then proceeded,
and we readily finished one which was easy to me; when I desired him to set
down the distances as he had done in the other, and on comparing them, we found
the last to be at least three miles less riding; he seemed to be pleased, and
said it was not the usual way of taking those meetings; I was willing to lay
out nine, but told him, I was not fully easy to venture the giving public
notice further, that perhaps the weather might be difficult; he said there
would be a general meeting in a few days, when friends from many meetings would
be together, and likely to have full notice very easily given for a few
meetings further, which he thought I had best leave to him, so we went forward
to North-Walsam, and had a satisfactory meeting, and taking the meetings in
course, came to the quarterly meeting of ministers and elders at Norwich; the
friend who laid out the meetings informed me, that if I had taken them
according to his first list, I should have interfered with a public friend at
several, who was then on a visit, and he thought there was a hand of providence
remarkable in turning me; for as we were both strangers, we should have been
straitened through a tender regard to each others service; he likewise let me
know, that he did not remember that their quarterly meeting began the next day
after the meeting beyond which I told him I was not free to appoint any, and
that having sent the list to a friend to publish at the general meeting before
mentioned, he had been obliged to attend that meeting to stop the notice
respecting the few meetings he talked of, otherwise I should have missed the
quarterly meeting, and he thought it would teach him to be more cautious in
future. I mention this occurrence with a degree of reverent thankfulness and
humility, with no other veiw than to encourage those ministers who are called
forth to visit the churches, to diligently and innocently attend to the motion
of truth, which the more we are humbled and inwardly quiet, the clearer it is
understood and felt; but as this is instruction for ourselves, it is safer for
us to treasure it up in our own hearts, than to make it too cheap by talking
thereof to others. This quarterly meeting, both in respect to public worship
and transacting the affairs of truth, was held to satisfaction, through the
Lord's favor, who will be near to them that diligently seek him, blessed be
his name for ever!

Then taking Ellingham meeting, we went to Thetford, and had a meeting with
friends there, both which were distressing, from a sense of the prevalence of a
ranting spirit: Here it appeared expedient to lay out meetings for the ensuing
week, in order that suitable notice might be given; and as they were named to
me in course by friends, I felt a remarkable desire to see the friends of one
certain meeting by themselves, at or near the eleventh hour of the day, although
quite a stranger to their situation, numbers, or state; and a friend being
present belonging to that meeting, I requested her care about it, and then went
home with Richard Brewster to Edmondsbury, and attended the meetings there on
the first day morning and afternoon, which were in the main satisfactory, and
in the evening had a meeting with a sick friend: In this town there is a
considerable number of hopeful friends. We then went to Ratlesden, Bardwell,
and through Livermore to Brand, the place where I had the desire to see friends
by themselves, as before mentioned, and coming to the friend's house whose wife
had been entrusted with the notice, I asked her if it was not time to go to the
meeting, she said, thou must ask my husband, appearing to be distressed; I
asked where he was, she replied in his warehouse, and sent for him; he coming
after a while, I suppose about twelve o'clock, I asked him the time of the
meeting, he answered at six in the evening (to be sure;) I told him, that I had
informed his wife of my desire that it should be at eleven; he replied, she
said so but I thought it would be dishonorable, for few only would attend it at
that time, for the people of that town were chiefly such as were obliged to do
their days work, which would be finished at six in the evening, when the house
would be nearly full; I told him, I did desire to see friends by themselves,
and supposed they could meet at any hour; he granted that they could have met
at the the time proposed; but said, he was a man of a more liberal spirit than
to want to eat his morsel alone, but was desirous his neighbors should partake
with him, and thought it his duty to endeavor to inform and help those whom he
apprehended were backward or ignorant in the performance of their duty, and he
said, that the end and intent of ministers going forth was to publish the
gospel, and he thought, to the more the better; I let him know that it was
necessary for those who were called to the work of the ministry, to know also
to whom they were called, or otherwise they might be mistaken, and go north
instead of south, or to a different nation or country; he answered, that he
believed if they were rightly called, the spirit would inform them where they
were to go; I replied very well, and when they are come to the right place, the
spirit would let them know what they have to do, he said, I believe so too.
Whereupon I told him, if I knew the language of that spirit that called me from
my native land to Old-England, it was the same that inclined me to see the
friends of that town by themselves, and afterward if I felt an enlargement of
mind, could have proposed a public meeting with the town's-people in the
evening; and why not one opportunity for both? he queried, adding "for I should
be willing that all the town might hear what thou can have to say us." I then
said to him, "if a certain great person on whom thy prosperity in all things
temporal did absolutely depend, should in singular kindness to thee, send a
messenger to acquaint or advise thee of some matter relating to thyself in thy
own particular conduct, in which thy prosperity, peace, and interest would,
without thy immediate care, be nearly affected, would thou judge it prudent
to say to the ambassador of such a friend, deliver not thy message to me, until
I call my neighbors and the people of the town to hear it, and so expose thy
own weakness to thy disadvantage, without benefit to thy neighbors? consider
it carefully, my heart yearns to the professors of truth in this town, and it
seems to me that my business at present was only with them, and as I cannot have
an opportunity according to my freedom and desire, I shall hold myself
excused:" He answered, if nothing but a meeting with friends will do, we must
send them word to come together as soon as they can; I told him, that would now
by no means do; for he was at present so chafed in his mind, that he could not
hear to much advantage; he then asked me what end would be answered by my
coming there? I told him, to detect such heady unsound members as he was, that
thought it dishonorable for a few friends to meet together to worship God,
though their number was more than two or three, to whom the promise was; he said,
then what will become of the meeting? I let him know he must look to that, who
had without orders headily appointed it, and so left him; and went to
Mildenhall, where a friend told me, that he being at the meeting aforesaid when
public notice was given, that it was on this wise, Friends and Neighbors!
"Please to take notice that a friend from America desires, a public meeting
here on wednesday next, at six o'clock in the evening," which circumstance I
did not know when I was at his house; on the whole I had inward peace in my
observations and conduct to this man, and many friends rejoiced; for several
had been overborn by him to their grief, and I was since informed, that he some
what laid the matter to heart, and was often heard to say, that he would not
serve any friend so again; after which we had many meetings in this county, and
passing into Cambridgeshire had eight meetings therein, and I thought the life
of religion was low in general, though there are a few tender friends in several
places; we then went to diverse meetings in Huntingdonshire, Northamptonshire,
Bedfordshire, and Hertfordshire, in which it was mostly my lot to point out to
friends the danger they were in, of losing the pure savor of truth, for want
of humbly attending to the dictates thereof in their own hearts, which had
already occasioned a dwarfishness among the professors in those parts; several
friends met us at Waltham Abbey from London, with whom we went to that city in
order to attend the yearly meeting, which began on the twenty-sixth, and ended
on the sixth day of the week, the thirty-first of the third month (1751,) and
in the several sittings thereof, both for public worship and the transaction of
the affairs of truth, was thought, by many, to be the most weighty and solid
meeting that had been known for many years; which was cause of humble rejoicing
and deep thankfulness to many friends, in that the Lord had vouchsafed his
heavenly presence in wisdom and power, to the praise of his sacred name;
several friends staying in the city after the meeting was over, we had a large
and satisfactory one on the seventh day of the week, and I tarried attending
diverse meetings until the sixth of the fourth month, then went to Chelmsford,
and sat with friends in their morning and afternoon meetings on first day, and
from thence to the yearly meeting at Colchester; but being taken ill of a
fever, was prevented attending more than one sitting of that meeting; yet
through mercy was resigned, and had peace; staid their meeting in that town on
the fifth day of the week, and the next day set forward with my brother Wm.
Brown, John Griffith, and my companion, in order to attend Woodbridge
yearly meeting, which began on the seventeenth of the month, and although the
fever had not left me, I was enabled to attend every sitting of it, which was a
large and solid meeting throughout, and friends were refreshed together;
praised be the Lord! whose mercy is great to his people; my companion J. P.
went with my brother to some adjacent meetings, but I staid the week day
meeting in this town, which was through Divine favor satisfactory. We met
again at the yearly meeting at Norwich in a few days, which concluded to
satisfaction, and friends were made truly thankful to the Lord for this
additional favor; we spent a few days longer at this city, and attended their
monthly meeting; after which, having a desire to visit a few meetings in
company with my brother Wm. Brown where Ranterism seemed to prevail, he having
the like concern, we took a monthly meeting at Wimondham, also the meetings at
Matssil and Ellingham, in which we were concerned to use great plainness to
clear ourselves on account of that ranting spirit; then went to Wareham, and
had a precious meeting with the few friends of that place, and to a very large
general meeting at Downham, many of other societies being there, and it became
my concern to recite the words of our blessed Lord, John v. 39-40. Search the
Scriptures for in them, ye think ye have eternal life, and they are they which
testify of me, and ye will not come to me that ye might have life, from whence
I had to show them the danger of trusting to information and knowledge, whether
by reading the Scriptures, or hearing them preached, and neglecting to attend
unto the inspeaking voice of Christ immediately in the heart, which is the only
sure interpreter of the scriptures, leading those who attend to his instruction
in the sure way to life eternal. Then parting with W. B. we went to Wisbich,
and Thornyfenn in Cambridgeshire, and taking diverse meetings in Lincolnshire,
we passed into the East Riding of Yorkshire, in which we had twenty four
meetings, and taking eight in the county of Durham, we came to Shields in
Northumberland, New Castle, and Alnwick Abbey, and reached Kelso in Scotland on
the first of the seventh month, where we met Susanna Fothergill on her return
home: We attended the morning and afternoon meetings at Kelso, on first day.
Alas! Truth is here at a low ebb, and feeling my mind not to be clear of
friends in this place, I desired to have a select meeting with them, which
Susanna and her companion attended, and we had an opportunity of clearing
ourselves of friends there, who had much fallen from the simplicity of the pure
Truth, into the modes, fashions, and customs of the world, in their dress,
language, and manners, and truth owned our service with a degree of its divine
authority; blessed be the Lord, the God of Truth! We then went to a meeting at
the house of John Cristy, at Ormston, to which many people came and behaved
quietly, and the doctrine of Truth opened pretty freely to them; from thence to
a meeting at Edinburgh, in which I had a sense that silence was best,
apprehending the people had been too much fed with words; after sometime one
stood up, and spoke of the excellence of resignation in ministers to speak, or
contentedly to be silent; to be anything, or nothing, as the Lord was pleased
to order; but a secret distressing fear attended my mind, that he was not
enough inwardly engaged to distinguish the order and motion of the Spirit of
Truth, from the busy imagination and will of the creature, unsubjected to the
Divine Spirit; and I found a concern to show the nature of true resignation,
and the low humble quiet that attended the minds of ministers, or hearers, who
had come to the real knowledge of it; the desire of such was turned unto the
Lord only for heavenly instruction, and an inward evidence of the life and
motion of Truth; for want of which, true Gospel ministry was sometimes
obstructed, and the reason of silence not fully understood; after I sat down,
the same person again stood up, and in a slow of words and a zealous tone,
said, that weakness, or the want of experience, led people to mistake both
their own and the condition of others; as he appeared to me to be actuated by a
confident, ranting spirit, my mind was greatly exercised after the meeting; I
remained at this place the two following days, being detained by rainy weather,
and attended the meeting in the morning of first day, at which I sat silent;
but the same person spoke sometime in words very encouraging to the auditory,
as if all was well with them, which tended to increase the exercise of my mind,
having a very different sense of the state of the meeting; I again attended
their meeting in the afternoon, when the same person seemed as if he intended
soon to stand up; but feeling the testimony of Truth strong against that
forward ranting spirit, and the sense thereof being weighty upon me, I
endeavored to keep under it in patience, and soon the concern of that person
began to diminish, and he to be drowsy, after which I had a favorable open
time to clear my mind, of the exercise that had been upon me.

Next day we passed over the Frith about seven miles broad, landed at Kinghorn
and rode to a town called Cowper, and the day following reached to the house of
one who esteemed himself a friend, near Montross, where we endeavored to have
a meeting, but he would not allow it, alleging, that it would do his people or
servants no good, and as for himself, he thought he knew as much of the Truth
as we could inform him; and indeed he seemed so whole and self righteous, I
thought it would not avail to say much to him. We were informed by a (...) who
accompanied us a few miles, that (...), in his younger years, had a public
testimony to bear for the Truth, but had for a long time left it off (as he
worded it,) and now, his men servants must not approach him with their heads
covered; If the Light in you become darkness, how great is that darkness. From
hence we went to Ury, the seat of Robert Barclay, grandson to the Apologist;
but had no meeting until we came to the Old-Town, near a mile north of
Aberdeen, which, was through the goodness of the Lord, somewhat strengthening;
from thence went to John Elmslie's at Old-Meldrum, and on first day morning
attended Killmuck meeting, and in the evening one at Old-Meldrum, to which many
people came, and, through Divine favor, these meetings were satisfactory; the
next day we had a select meeting with friends, of whom there are several here,
tender and valuable, and we parted in love; and going to Kingswells had a
meeting there with many friends and others, truth owning the service, which was
cause of humble rejoicing: Continuing at and near Aberdeen, we had a large
meeting on first day at Robert Barclay's. Although the descendants and children
of friends who were as bright stars in their day, may value themselves on the
worthiness of their parents; yet if they do not love and serve the God of their
Fathers with a perfect heart and an upright mind, he will will not own them
with his heavenly presence, but they will be as unsavory salt.

We then set forward on our return toward England, taking two meetings in our
way to Glasgow, where, on first day, we had also two which were large, open and
satisfactory, to which many tender inquiring people came, who behaved well, and
in the evening of the same day, had another with those called friends by
themselves, having a concern to lay before them the need they had (...) look to
their ways and conversation, that they (...) be as lights and good examples
among the people in that place, who were seekers after the Truth, and not give
them occasion of stumbling through an evil conduct: Then passing to Carlisle in
Cumberland, Morehouse, Scoby, Solport and Kirklington, in most of which
meetings truth seemed to be professed, but too few had the life thereof in
possession, which occasions hard dry meeetings. We rode to Cornwood in
Northumberland, and lodged at the house of a man who had been for several years
of a disorderly conduct, and much given to the excessive use of strong drink,
until he had very much impaired his constitution, but it pleased the Lord to
open his understanding, and make him acquainted with his blessed Truth, whereby
he was made free from that evil, and received strength to forsake his old
companions; but his joining with friends was a great grief to his wife, who
informed me, that through prejudice for a time, she would rather he had continued
his former course of living than to become a Quaker, until observing the
sweetness of his temper and the recovery of his health in some degree, with a
solid and sober conduct, she was reached, and made to believe in the power by
which he had known such a victory, and joined herself in the same religious
profession; they appeared to be steady friends: I would to God, that all
tipplers and drunkards would turn to that great prophet which is in Israel,
that they might by him be cleansed from that leprosy of sin! We had a
comfortable meeting the next day in his house, with his neighbors and some
friends; and on first day were at Allondale meeting, where are some solid
friends, though others much tainted with a spirit of Ranterism, which is a
confident, self righteous spirit and very hard to be won upon: After having a
meeting at Aldstinmoor, we passed to the meetings at Penrith in Cumberland,
Terril, and Strickland which is in a corner of Westmoreland; it was with some
difficulty we had the meeting at Terril, a man of that place saying, he thought
it needless, or questioned whether it would be to advantage, as most of their
members had been at Penrith meeting; but after the meeting he desired that I
would not take it hard of him for endeavoring to discourage me, owning that he
was mistaken; whereupon I cautioned him to be more careful in future, how he
discouraged such who had come so many thousand miles to visit them. Having
meetings at diverse places in the week following, I traveled in great pain and
anguish of mind, from a sense of the prevalence of a dark, deistical spirit
over many of the professors of truth, of which concern the Lord was pleased to
give me strength and understanding to clear myself both in public and private;
there is no power but his, that can enable his servants to do his work, and is
over all the powers of satan. On the next first day we were at Holme meeting;
in the forenoon I sat silent, one of the stock of the old Ranters was there and
very troublesome, accusing many friends, no doubt falsely, and in the afternoon
meeting I had not much to say, believing that old ranting spirit is rather fed
with words and and delights in contention, but found it my place to exhort
friends to retire deeply inward in all their meetings, humbly waiting to be
admitted into the heavenly presence, to know their place of feeding to be out
of the reach of such ranting spirits; for if they suffered their own spirits to
rise or resent their ill usage, the meeting would be the more disquieted. Our
next meetings were at Allonby and Broughton, from whence I went home with our
friend Christopher Wilson to his house at Graysothen, and the next day attended
the burial of a young man at Pardsay Hall, and the day following the burial of
a young woman at the same place, both of which meetings were very large and
solid, and I hope through divine goodness profitable to many. The first day of
the following week we were at two meetings at Whitehaven, in both which I had
some service under the influence and owning of truth: We put up our horses at a
friend's house who had been used to lodge public friends, but I was not free to
tarry there, being burdened with his conduct in the manner of his
entertainment, which was even to superfluity and grandeur, no way becoming the
simplicity of truth; so after showing my dislike therewith I went to the house
of John Harris at Highfield, his wife being with us, and rested there a day,
the weather being exceeding rainy; then going to the meetings at Cockermouth,
Isel, and Graysothen, we returned to Cockermouth and had a meeting with friends
by themselves, that is, without giving public notice, which was through Divine
favor to good satisfaction; resting another day with our friend John Harris,
we went to meetings at Pardsay Hall, and at Keswick, at which last I was
concerned to exhort the few friends there to keep up their week day meeting,
having a fear they were very slack on that account; we lodged at an Inn, where
we had the company of some of those friends, and in particular one who was a
public friend; some of them said, if he would attend the week day meeting, they
believed the rest of them would; which gave me occasion to observe to him, that
he did not example well, and ought to be more careful, as he had a public
testimony to bear for Truth; he replied, that he was obliged to be industrious
to support his family; but at last confessed, that, "He did not like to sit
with so few friends, for none else would come on a week day, and it was very
dull and poor sitting, and he liked to sit in meetings where there were many
assembled, for then he had something to say, so life did arise and all were
comforted and edified;" by which it appeared that he had greater satisfaction
in preaching than in humble silent waiting to experience the worship which is
performed in Spirit and Truth, to edification and comfort; I told him that I
feared he was too much a stranger to pure religion and the nature of divine
worship.

From thence we went to Hawkshead, in Lancashire, and had an evening meeting
there in a friend's house, and next day were at the Hight meeting, and then at
Swarthmoor where George Fox formerly lived, though it had been famous for the
prosperity of Truth, it is now at a low state there: We then went to Kendal in
Westmoreland, where we attended their two meetings on the first day of the
week, and after taking some other meetings in the neighborhood, returned to
that town, in and about which we tarried several days, and visited more than
twenty families and attended ten public meetings, many of which opportunities
were made precious through the goodness and great condescension of our Lord and
Savior; and in the school of our friend Thomas Rebanks I had an extraordinary
meeting; where many young folks not of our society were reached by the power of
Truth, which was comfortably over all, praised be the Lord for ever. In the
course of our visiting families here, during our silent sitting in one of them,
my mind was much taken up in thinking of a watch, and the several wheels and
movements thereof, until I was grieved at such trifling thoughts, as I esteemed
them, when suddenly there appeared something instructive therein, and I had a
freedom to say, the several parts thereof seemed to represent the excellent
inward faculties and gifts bestowed on man, and that though the wheels, etc. of a
watch were truly made, and placed in their proper order, there must be a main
spring to give them motion, so the gifts and faculties of men must have their
main spring and cause of motion to every good work, a zeal to the honor of the
Lord their creator, and a fervent holy desire to answer the end of their
creation; and as there is a regulating spring to a watch, so also there should
be the true knowledge of God and of themselves experienced in his light, to
preserve from going too fast, knowing by his heavenly instruction, that no
wisdom, zeal, strength, or ability, will enable to do the Lord's work to his
honor and the good of man, but that which God gives; and in order that a
watch may answer the end intended by (...) maker, there is a visible face and
hands to discover the inward motion, thereby showing time; so it is needful
that a man should be a co-worker with the spirit and gift of grace in his
inward part, that others beholding the light thereof might be taught to glorify
God, and in his light so to number his days and walk in his fear, as to die in
his favor: As a zeal for the cause of truth and a fear of falling short of
duty, may at times prompt man to rush on too fast, it is needful that he should
wait in humble reverence to feel the love of God, and the influence of that
knowledge and wisdom which is from above, and experienced by those who are
spiritual, that the end of all their labor may be in the spirit of meekness to
restore those who are overtaken in error, and that men may ever dwell in that
which gives ability to labor with success in the church of Christ, it is
needful that their minds should be enclosed in the bosom of Truth, in humble
retirement, to be preserved from the various tumults, cumbers, cares and
temptations of the world, which would otherwise clog their minds and deprive
them of their true spiritual sense and motion, and so in a watch it is needful
that all the inward parts, which are so curious, should be enclosed from damps,
vapors, motes and dust, otherwise it would thereby be deprived of its motion
and become useless for keeping time.

My intent in this relation is to show the infinite condescension of him whose
mercy is over all his works, to instruct the children of men, each as it were,
in his own tongue, or language suitable to his understanding; the man being by
trade a watchmaker, and seemed to be tenderly reached, and we parted in a
degree of sweetness; it was the Lord's doing and mavelous to me, praised be
his holy name for ever!

Being clear of Kendal, we took leave of friends in much affection and went to
a general meeting at Brigflatts in Yorkshire, and to visit our friend Alice
Alderson, who had been on a religious visit in our country with Margaret
Cowpland, whom we had before seen at Kendal where she lives. Alice was glad to
see us, and we found her tender in spirit and strong in her love to friends;
after attending meetings at Ravonstonedale and Grisedale, we rode to our friend
John Burton's, who with his companion William Backhouse, had also been in our
country on a religious visit; we rejoiced to see him and were comforted by his
grave conversation and conduct: We then went to a meeting at Dent, which was
large and savoured by the overshadowing of Truth in a good degree, in the
loving kindness of our Lord who is worthy of all praise for ever! Then taking
several meetings in Lancashire and tarrying two days with our friend William
Backhouse, which was an acceptable rest to us, the weather being very cold, the
ways bad and we weary, we came to Lancaster, and had an opportunity of visiting
our friend Lydia Lancaster, who several years past had visited our country; her
faculties of mind and love to friends appeared fresh and strong; from thence
attending diverse other meetings in that county, we went to our friend Samuel
Fothergill's at Warrington, where we continued from the second to the
fourteenth of the first month (New-stile) 1752, he and Susanna his wife being
tender and kindly affectionate, we were refreshed in their company, having
several meetings in that town and at Penketh, some whereof were made precious
by the ownings of Truth. After many other meetings in this county and
Yorkshire, we reached Richmond and had a meeting with friends there, and next
morning set forward with a guide for Masham, in order to attend a meeting
there, of which friends had previous notice, the distance was near sixteen
miles, the days short, and roads deep and miry; after we had rode five or six
miles, I desired our guide to mend his pace, fearing we should be late; a
little further we came to a place where the roads parted, and he taking the
left hand I became uneasy, and asked him if he perfectly knew the way; he said,
he thought he did, I let him know my being in doubt about it, and desired him
to inquire of a man we saw in a field at some distance; but he rode on yet
faster; when I told him that I was persuaded we had almost turned our backs on
the way we should go, at which he smiled; when we had gone about a mile, seeing
a man by the way side at work, I asked him if that was the way to Masham, he
replied, nay, for you have left it and must go back unless your horses can leap
over ditches very well, you may then save a mile, and pointing over a field
showed us a moor, on the other side whereof our right road was; our guide set
forward, we followed with some difficulty over the ditches, and he rode on a
gallop and soon left us; my mind inclined me to vary from his course and
espying a gate, called to him, pointing to it and proceeded thither, on which
he turned and came up, but said he believed we were wrong; I let him know that
my mind was easy to go that way, and in a while we came into a road at a public
house, which he knew to be right, so we just reached the meeting in time, which
through Divine favor was profitable and edifying. I mention this passage with
no other view than to encourage friends to be inward in their minds, and to
regard the secret sense which the pure Spirit of Truth sometimes gives on
particular occasions, for want of an inward stillness and attention thereunto,
the way is often missed in more respects than one.

At Masham we lodged at the house of John Kelden, who related to me something
that passed between a Knight of the Shire and one of his Tenants, a member of
our religious society, in manner following, viz.

Landlord. So John, you are busy?


Tenant. Yes, my Landlord loves to see his Tenants busy.


Landld. But John where was you that you was not at your quarterly meeting at
York the other day, I saw most of your stanch friends there, but you I missed?
The assizes are held at York, always at the time of the quarterly meeting.



Tent. Why thou know I have a curious Landlord, who loves to see his Tenants
thrive and pay their rent duly, and I had a good deal in hand that kept me at
home.


Landld. Kept you at home! You will neither thrive nor pay the better for
neglecting your duty, John.


Tent. Then I perceive my Landlord was at quarterly meeting, how did thou
like it?


Landld. Like it! I was at one meeting and saw what made my heart ach.


Tent. What was that?


Landld. Why the dress of your young folks, the men with their wigs, and young
women with their finery, in imitation of fashions; and I thought I would try
another meeting, so next day I went again, and then I concluded there was
little difference but the bare name, between us whom you call the world's
people, and some of you; for you are imitating of us in the love and fashions
of the world as fast as you can; so that I said in my heart, these people do
want a Fox, a Penn, and a Barclay among them, and so turned from his Tenant.

I thought it would be a pity that the true and solid remark of this great man
should be lost, understanding that it was rather expressed in pity than
derision.

From Masham we proceeded to visit many other meetings in this county, in the
course whereof we called to see good old John Richardson, who was strong in
spirit though feeble in body, and nearly blind through age, being about eighty
seven; and finding a draught to visit friends once more at Scarborough, we were
there on first day the fifteenth of the third month, and had peace in my own
mind, having done what I thought was my duty; but from a sense of the
prevalence of pride, which had occasioned a great poverty as to true religion
among the professors of truth in that place, I left them with an aching heart,
and went on our journey in order to attend the quarterly meeting at York,
taking meetings in our way at Pickering, Thornton in the Clay, and Huby. The
several sittings of this quarterly meeting were in the main satisfactory, but
not having time fully to clear myself, did not leave York quite easy; after
which, having meetings at Clifforth, Leeds, Gildersham, Bradford, Rawden,
Asquith, Fairfield, Keighley, Skipton and Lothersdale, we rode to Settle, and
then to attend the quarterly meeting at Lancaster, which began on the fifth day
of the week with a meeting of ministers and elders, and was comfortable; next
day was the meeting for public worship and the discipline, wherein we were made
to rejoice together and praise the name of the Lord who is worthy for ever,
went home with our friend Wm. Backhouse, and so to Kendal quarterly meeting,
which was satisfactory and very large; then set out for the quarterly meeting
for Cumberland, held at Carlisle, which began with a meeting of ministers and
elders, next day were held two public meetings, and the day following a meeting
for the discipline, which ended in the afternoon with another for worship; and
going home with Christopher Willson, we were at a good meeting at Pardsay Hall
on first day.

My mind had been for sometime drawn toward Ireland, and being desirous to
lose no time, we went to Whitehaven, several vessels being there nearly laden
with coals for Dublin; but on viewing the ships accompanied by several friends
from Graysothen, I had no freedom to take a passage in either of them, at which
I was much straitened, and inwardly turning my mind, Ireland was hid from my
view, and going to the house of a friend we sat a while still, and I had
freedom to let friends know that I had no prospect but the vessels might go
their voyage with safety, and did not decline a passage on that account; but
feeling a full stop in my mind, had no freedom to proceed any where at present,
save to return with our friends John and Hannah Harris to Highfield; we
therefore returned with them, and attended Pardsay Hall monthly meeting, where
I had freedom to propose that friends would enter on the service of visiting
families; they informed me that some years before they had nominated friends
for that service, but meeting with some discouragement they had not performed
it, and being about to turn over the book to see who were then appointed,
considering it was a long time since, they concluded it was better to proceed
to a new choice, but seemed at a stand about naming friends then; I had a
singular freedom to let them know, that although I was a stranger, I could point
out some who I believed would answer the service if they would submit to it:
After a solid pause, a friend said, as our friend has the matter before him I
am free that he should choose for us; to which I replied, that being a stranger
to their members, one might be chosen who was under some impediment, and
therefore it would be safer for the meeting to choose; but perceiving they were
at a loss, I pointed out a few friends in great fear, with a single eye to the
sense which I did believe truth gave me, and the clerk took their names; a
friend said he believed it was the truth which had made the chocie; I then
mentioned, that if they could soon enter upon the service, I found a freedom to
accompany them therein, if friends had unity therewith, which several
expressed, some women friends being also named by their meeting to join in it;
before the service was much proceeded in, a heavy concern came upon me from a
secret sense I had, that one of them was under the censure of some, by which I
feared her service would be laid waste, unless it could be removed, and although
I had no intimation of any thing of the kind from any person, I became heavily
exercised, and at length requested a friend to invite the man and his wife to
dine with him, who I apprehended were uneasy with the woman, and I desired her
and her husband to come to the same house in the afternoon, who accordingly
came, thus the parties being met unexpectedly to each other, I was humbled
under the weight attending my mind, and no others being present except the
friend and his wife at whose house we were, I ventured to let them know the
exercise I had been under some days, from an apprehension of a difference, or
prejudice subsisting between them, which if not removed would devour like fire,
by which I believed they were, already much affected, but as I had not received
information, more or less, I might be mistaken, and did not desire they should
say any thing on the subject before me, but honestly confer on it between
themselves first, and if it was so, remove the cause, and if nothing was amiss
then to let me know, that I might be warned to be more cautious in future; upon
which I left them, and walked by myself about an hour, when the man of the
house called me in, and they told me, that I was not mistaken, for that there
had been an hardness subsisting for sometime, which they hoped was now done
away; but when in the course of our visit, we came to the house of the friends
who had been uneasy, I felt it as fresh as before, and told them I did believe
they were not easy that the friend should go on in the service; to which one of
them answered, if she judges herself to be clear and others are easy, I have no
objection; whereupon I asked what others were meant; the man replied, her
husband and relations; and as the matter rested upon me, it appeared that
endeavors ought to be used for reconciliation before we could with
satisfaction proceed on our visit, and believing that the Lord had secretly
engaged me, I hoped he would accompany and bless the labor for the restoration
of peace, which in a few days he was pleased to accomplish, and then we
proceeded more cheerfully, and I think I may say that the Lord was with us, to
the praise of his great eternal name, who is worthy for ever.

We visited the families of friends in Whitehaven, Broughton, Cockermouth,
Pardsay Hall, Eaglesfield and Graysothen, and others remote, and had several
profitable public meetings in those towns and places adjacent; having spent
about seven weeks within the verge of Pardsay Hall monthly meeting and finding
my mind clear, we went to Whitehaven and took passage in the ship Globe, James
Grason master for Ireland on the eighth of the sixth month (1752,) N. S. and
parting with our dear friends in much love, set sail about the fifth hour in
the evening, and landed at Dublin on the eleventh of the same month, and were
kindly received at the house of Samuel Judd; as I was going to which, this
secret hint was presented to my mind, "Live retired, and be not suddenly
acquainted with any man." After dinner our kind landlord said, I do not well in
that I have not informed friends of your arrival, they will blame me; I
answered, let us first know that we are here, we have just come from sea and
are weary; for we had a troublesome passage by contrary winds and heavy rains,
John Pemberton my companion having been very sea sick, and myself a little so;
the next day we attended Sycamore Alley meeting, where we had the company of
Susanna Hatton, who had been in America with Ruth Courtney; we were at eight
meetings in Dublin, also at a monthly meeting, and a quarterly meeting for
their young people, in which I was deeply concerned under consideration of the
prevalence of pride and the world's fashions, which was declared to them in the
love of truth, and the Lord was pleased to favor several of the meetings by
his heavenly presence, to the praise of his holy name.

Leaving this city we went toward the North; at Drogheda there is a meeting
house belonging to friends, but they are there so declined we could not have a
meeting to satisfaction, we therefore went on to a meeting with a few friends
at Rathfreland in the county of Down, then to Monallen, where the meeting was
comfortable, and on first day had two meetings at Lurgan in the county of
Armagh, at which place pride and a worldly spirit much prevails; then taking
meetings at Newton, Lisburn, Hillsborough, and Ballinderry in the county of
Antrim, the last of which was a large good meeting; we had one at Antrim, where
the savor of Truth seems much lost by the few professors there; we then passed
on to the Grange meeting, which was very dull, through the prevalence of a
worldly dark spirit, and from thence to a meeting at Ballynacre and so to
Colerain, where we had a satisfactory opportunity with some of the town's
people who came to the meeting out of curiosity; but I felt no freedom to
express the sense I had of the state of friends then, and as the meeting broke
up I stepped to a young woman, a friend, who lived near the meeting house, and
desired her to step forward and turn the few friends in there, as she knew
them, and let the others go by, which she readily performed; when we were all
set down round the room, it soon felt to me that if I delivered my concern in
general terms, the intended end would not be answered, being in pain for their
good, and close matters spoken might be taken by such to whom they least
belonged, and being greatly humbled, I was desirous to be rightly instructed,
(not knowing their names) to speak to them separately; the Lord who never fails
those who humbly trust in him, showed me where and with whom to begin, and so
to the next, and mine eye being fixed on the person to whom I directed my
speech, each knew what was delivered to them in particular, and I hope the
opportunity was beneficial; for I had great peace: When the friends were gone I
asked the young woman, who seemed in some surprise, what ailed her, she said
that several were very exactly told their condition, and feared they would
judge her for an informer; I told her she need not matter that, as she knew
herself to be innocent. I mention this occurrence as a remarkable kindness from
the merciful Lord to the children of men, for their help and instruction, and
that his servants may be encouraged to wait upon him for instruction to
discharge their duty as faithful stewards in his sight, who knows the secrets
of all hearts, and taught his servant in old time to know the wife of Jeroboam,
though she feigned herself to be another woman. Blessed, and magnified be his
holy name who is over all worthy for ever and ever!

Then taking meetings at Toberhead, Charlemont, and Ballyhagan, we attended the
men's meeting at Lurgan, having a great desire to sit with friends there in the
management of their discipline, which was adjourned to this time at my request;
it began with a meeting for worship, men and women being generally together, at
the conclusion of which, the men went into the room where the meeting for
business was usually held, when after sitting sometime in silence, a leading
friend said, "This is only an adjourned meeting, and bid the clerk enter it and
they might adjourn to the usual time to do their business, when it would be
more select;" and the meeting sitting a while without proceeding any way, I
asked them what was meant by the words, more select, and further said, if any
persons were present that had not a right to sit there, they should withdraw,
they knew their own members; if they meant the friend who came with us, he was
a neighboring friend and an elder; and as for myself, I esteemed myself a
proper member of their meeting, as I came to visit them with the concurrence of
my brethren at home, and had certificates from them, wherein I was recommended
to friends in Europe and else where, and if I did any thing among them worthy
of censure, I should submit to their dealing, and therefore desired them to go
on with their business, for I had come thither with a concern to see how the
affairs of the church went on; so without more debate or much reply they
proceeded, and to my surprise, things of disorder had lain several years
without proper dealing with various offenders, such as drinkers of healths,
some that had been at cockfightings and races, and one or more marriages out of
the order of truth; which gave me an opportunity to clear myself fully of the
concern that had for some days lain with weight on my mind, which I believe was
acceptable to some secretly pained friends, however contrary to some others; so
that I left the place with a peaceful mind, and thankful to the Lord who had
given me an innocent boldness to assert my right of membership; for I believe
if we had not been there, the meeting would have been thought select.

We then went to Ulster Province-meeting at Ballyhagan which held two days, the
elders and other concerned friends here inquire into the state of things among
their members in the province, and it was in the main a satisfactory meeting;
from hence we went Southward, taking meetings at Castleshane, Coothill,
Ballyhais, and Old Castle, and to Ballymurry in Connaught, having a meeting in
a barn at Gailey with a few friends, it being the only one kept up in that
provice, except at Athlone, which we likewise attended, and came to James
Clibborn's at the Moat of Granoge, where we also had a meeting; although I had
traveled every day for more than a week with a fever on me and had eaten
little, occasioned as I thought by a cold taken by laying in damp beds, and was
now very unwell, but sat the first day meeting; next day my illness became very
violent, so that friends thought I should lay my body there, and sent for an
apothecary who let me blood, which somewhat allayed the fever and I fell into a
sleep, when I began to bleed again, which brought me very weak, that I was
awakened at midnight with great drops of sweat on my face, and sickness; and
calling my companion who watched with me, we found that I had bled much, the
orifice in my arm being very large and not carefully bound up; my kind landlord
and his wife being anxious about me, had prevailed with the apothecary to lodge
in the house, who being called to me, on his coming. I desired him to peel a
bladder and apply a thin piece of it about as broad as a halfpenny on the
wound; he asked for what; I told him he would see, and when it was applied I
requested him to hold his finger on the piece over the orifice so as to stop
the blood, until the plaster dried and stuck, which it soon did and it bled no
more; he said that he had not seen the like. I mention this for the sake of
others, for the bladder sticks as the blood under it dries, and will stop the
bleeding of almost any wound. Next morning a graduate physician of the town
came to visit me, and feeling my pulse, I asked him what he thought of me? He
making no answer, I said be not afraid to tell me, for I am not afraid to hear;
he replied, "that is happy for you," by which I supposed he thought I should
not recover; he viewed my spittle and said I was in a deep consumption, and
proposed my taking a vomit; I told him that I had not taken one many years,
besides as he judged my lungs were inflamed, a moderate purge was better; at
which he replied with an air of banter, "you are an odd patient, come, you
shall be physician and I will be apothecary;" I took him at his word and he
sent me a purge which gave me some relief; he visited me daily for a week, and
could hardly believe I should recover, though I told him I believed that I
should, he still judged my cough to be consumptive, and at length told me, if I
did recover to go home as soon as I could, for that the Lord was more merciful
than to require such an one as I was to travel as I did, and that I had already
acted as a mad man to travel so long time with that fever before I lay by; I
asked him, if he was master of a vessel at sea which had sprang a leak that
could not be stopped, what he would do? he replied, endeavor to make to the
next port for a dry dock to unlade and search out the leak; why doctor said I,
this is just my case, I saw no place to lay by until I came hither, at which he
laughed, and wished me well; I think I never was reduced to so weak a state in
so short a time, which might be occasioned by my great loss of blood; but the
Lord was pleased to heal me, that I gathered strength to admiration, and on
first day sat the meeting, which was comfortable, and continuing to recover
though not fit to travel, I tarried until fourth day and attended their monthly
meeting, and understanding they had been endeavoring to visit families, but
were backward in beginning, I told friends that I had a freedom to accompany
them in the work for a few days for their encouragement, and we accordingly
went with them to a few places to good satisfaction, and friends received
strength to go on with the service. Then taking an affectionate leave of our
kind landlord James Clibborn, and his wife who is granddaughter to Robert
Barclay the apologist, we went to meetings at Birr, Kilconnermoor, Cashell,
Killcommon, Clonsmell, Youghall, and so to Cork on the first day of the week,
where we also attended the men's meeting for discipline, and visited the
women's meeting, which were both to some good satisfaction; then going to
Bandon, we returned to an appointed meeting at Cork for parents and their
children, and having strength given me to clear myself, it was, I hope
profitable to many, being a large meeting; we then went to Malo, and had a
seasonable opportunity with a family of friends, thence to the Province-meeting
for Munster held at Limerick, the public and select sittings of which and for
the discipline ended comfortably; and after attending the week day meeting, we
went to a meeting at Ross, and returned to Limerick, and being unwell with a
cold we tarried their meetings on first day, which were large and satisfactory,
and in the evening had one with a sick friend; being clear, and taking three
meetings in our way, we proceeded to Leinster Province-meeting at Mountmelick,
which began on the sixth day of the week with a meeting of ministers, the next
day for worship and the discipline, and on first day morning was a large and
precious meeting, in the afternoon the town's people came in and it was a good
satisfactory meeting, though not so large, friends being mostly gone home. We had
a meeting next day at Tullamoor, and returning to Mountmelic had a satisfactory
one with the children in the school of James Gough; after the week day meeting
in this town we went to Ballacarrol, Ballanakel and Cooperhill, having a
meeting at each; then to Catherlough monthly meeting on first day, and the next
day to Athy, then to Ballitore which was through Divine Goodness attending,
made profitable, and we had also a satisfactory meeting with the scholars in
Abraham Shackleton's school; after a meeting at Newton we went to Samuel
Watson's at Killconner, whose wife (late Abigail Bowls) had been on a
religious visit in America several years past, she was now near her end, but
sensible and in a good frame of spirit, and greatly rejoiced to see us, and we
were mutually comforted in a sense of the Lord's presence, for which his holy
name was praised; after a meeting here and another at Catherlough we went to
Waterford, and sat with friends in their morning, afternoon, and evening
meetings on the first day, in all which having cleared myself honestly, my
spirit mourned under a sense of formality among the people, and a deadness to
the pure inward life of religion; then taking meetings at Ross, Lambstown,
Wexford, Randals-mills or Castlesaw, Cooladine, and several other places we
came to Wicklow, at which meeting many soldiers attended who behaved well, and
truth owned the service in a good degree. I have observed where the soldiers
came into our meetings, they were an awe to the rabble and loose people, who
are sometimes apt to be rude; from hence we went to Dublin in order to attend
the national half-years-meeting, and were kindly received by our old landlord
Samuel Judd and his family.

Leinster Province-meeting began on second day the sixth of the eleventh month,
both for worship and discipline, and on third day the national meeting, which
held four days; the several sittings thereof being in general attended with a
sense of Divine Goodness, and the testimony of Truth ran strong against
hypocrisy, covetousness, libertinism, and pride among the professors thereof;
but in a consolatory stream to the humble and contrite children of the family,
in a thankful sense whereof the name of the Lord was praised, who is worthy for
ever and ever! We tarried a few days longer with friends in Dublin, and then
went to meetings at Baltiboys, Timahoe, Rathangan, and Edenderry, and a
religious sitting in John Pim's family at Nurney, then returning to Edenderry
attended their monthly meeting, where having a concern to visit some families
of friends, we went to most of them in that town and to the house of a widow in
the country, where we had a good opportunity with her and her children; I asked
the friend who accompanied us, whether there was any other friend's house to
which we had not been; he said he thought not; but my mind had a draught to
some house and I pointed toward it, he then said he believed he knew where; so
we went to the place, and the family being called together, I inquired whether
there was not another belonging to the house, and was told there was; as soon
as he came, I knew it was the man whom my mind was concerned to visit, and
something I had to express reached and tendered him very much, he being
exceeding wild and fashionable and did not love to attend religious meetings,
but truth now reached him; on the first day following I saw him at Edenderry
meeting, where the visitation seemed to be renewed to him; I afterward heard
that he continued to be sober and thoughtful, and I was thankful to the Lord
that he was pleased to condescend in mercy to gather the outcast of Israel.
Being clear of this place, I returned to Dublin, and having a concern on my
mind to visit the families of some who made profession of truth but were
disorderly in their conduct, we began that service, being accompanied by
several friends, and the Lord was pleased to own the work. During our stay we
were careful to attend all the meetings in this city for worship and
discipline, one of which was a quarterly meeting for the youth, in which many
were tendered by the love of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord and Savior. We
visited about sixty families, in most whereof the Lord was pleased to favor
with authority to set the testimony of truth over the heads of the corrupt,
disorderly professors, and to influence with understanding to divide the word
and counsel of truth to the different states of those we visited; in an humble
sense whereof, let my soul obey and adore him who is alone worthy for ever!

As I apprehended the women's meeting to be slack of doing their part of duty
as true helps in the exercise of the discipline, and a proper care over the
flock and family of the Lord, a weighty concern attended me to express in
writing my sense of what was the proper business belonging to women's meetings,
which I showed to the men friends, and had their concurrence to lay it before
the women's meeting in order for their encouragement and practice in the wisdom
of Truth, and it was afterward sent to the women's meetings throughout the
nation.

The vessel in which we came to Ireland being ready to sail, and the master
desirous of our company to return with him, I felt so clear and easy that I
intended to go; but when he sent us word to come on board, I was more inclined
to stay that day, and went to meeting, being first day, and he sailed; but
meeting with contrary winds and dark weather, was obliged to put back into
Dublin harbor after about a week's fatigue; my being withheld from embarking,
I thought was a remarkable kindness and favor from my great and good Master;
praised be his name! we had afterward several good meetings, in some of which
it became my concern to recommend silence by example, of which they stood in
much need; and on the twenty-third of the first month (1753,) after having
traveled in Ireland thirteen hundred and fifteen miles, and had one hundred
and thirty-four meetings, besides many family visits, feeling my mind to be
fully clear, we went on board a ship of Whitehaven, Allen Wilson master, having
in much love taken leave of our friends; and after a short, but stormy rough
passage of about twenty-three hours, arrived at Whitehaven with hearts humbly
thankful to the Lord who had preserved us; the master saying, that he had not
known the like for twelve years, although he had sailed between the two ports
very constantly. Next day after our arrival, our friend John Harris of
Highfield, with whom we had left our horses, brought them to us and we went
home with him, and visiting the meetings in the neighborhood, several of
which, particularly the last at Pardsay Hall, were large and precious
opportunities, and I thought I could perceive that my former painful labors
among them had been blessed, for which I was truly thankful to the holy head of
the church and master of the assemblies of his people. From thence we went to
Lortonhall and had an evening meeting with the people of the town, to which
came the priest and most of his hearers, and although the craft and conduct of
the hirelings were much set forth, all was quiet and it ended well.

From thence we went to Kendal and staying a general meeting there, proceeded
to diverse others in Yorkshire, and Lancashire, and to one we had appointed at
Coln, where are no members of our society, and though a poor dark town in respect
to religion, the people behaved soberly, and many were tendered by the gentle,
yet powerful reaches of Heavenly goodness; and I may say, that in riding
through some towns in England where no friend dwelt, I felt a secret salutation
of love to the inhabitants, though as a seed yet ungathered; but my present
business in general was to the children of the family, that when it shall
please the Lord to open the eyes of others to behold Zion, no stumbling block
might appear to offend the beholders, or dim her heavenly beauty.

From hence passing to Halifax we had a large open meeting there, and diverse
others in Yorkshire, until we came to our friend John Haslam's at
Hansworth-Woodhouse, then to Sheffield, where we visited some families to our
satisfaction, and after attending two meetings in Derbyshire returned to J.
Haslam's, and again to Sheffield, and sat their morning meeting on first day,
and in the afternoon attended the burial of Ellen Atwick, a friend of good
repute, to which many people came and I had a favorable opportunity; being
then clear, I went to Blythe in Nottinghamshire and had a meeting, and several
in other towns this week, and reached Rawcliff in Yorkshire on first day; on
the night before I had a dream which much affected me; "I thought I heard a
kind of melody and singing at my left hand, whereupon I said, What do ye
rejoice at; which continuing I said, your singing is somewhat like David's
rejoicing before the ark, but I see it not, and heard a voice on my right
saying, the ark is in the land of the Philistines, where it was taken through
the wickedness of the priests and sins of the people, who removed the ark from
Shiloh to strengthen them in battle;" whereupon I awoke and was under some
exercise for a time, concluding it was ominous, but saw no further, until we
went to meeting in the forenoon, where I soon heard a kind of tuneful sighing,
which kept increasing, and turning my head to discover from whence it came,
found it to be at my left hand; after a while a person stood up and spoke a few
sentences of extraordinary enjoyments which were to be felt; my mind was
pained, and after he sat down I stood up and said, What are ye doing? and what
do you feel to occasion this rejoicing? and should have proceeded to have told
them my thoughts, but instantly my dream came into my mind, and so with little
addition sat down very sorrowful; after the meeting I went to dinner, but could
not eat much or be cheerful; at the afternoon meeting we had the same tune
until my spirit was afflicted; but laboring to know that quiet which is not
easily disturbed, I received strength in a loving frame of mind to inform them,
that I feared they were mistaken in their states and conditions, for that death
reigned, and it was rather a time of mourning: And as truth arose in some good
degree, that floating formal sea became dried up; and in the evening having the
company of the chief singer among them, I had a singular freedom simply to
relate my dream to him, with a desire that he might examine whether the ark
enclosing the pure testimony was preserved safe amongst them; which shut up
further conversation. In a few days after, an intimate friend asked me how I
fared there, I repeated to him my dream, and he told me it was very
significant, for that a withering had taken place in that meeting, and that
person had several children who were married to such that did not profess with
us, and being treated with as a parent, he said it might be a means of
increasing the meeting, if those they had married came to meeting with them,
and discouraged friends from dealing with them, lest it should prevent them.

Then taking a meeting at Selby, we proceeded to the quarterly meeting at York,
which continued two days, and was a good meeting; here we met my brother Wm.
Brown to our mutual comfort after a separation of nineteen months; we soon
parted again, he going towads Lancaster and we to several meetings in Yorkshire
and some in Lincolnshire; in some places I observed the form to remain and life
to be wanting, and in others the professors of truth are too generally declined
from both; true life gives birth to a true form; but the mere form will never
produce the life of Truth. From hence we went to Retford and Mansfield, in
Nottinghamshire, and at the last town had two meetings, one of which was with
friends by themselves; for it did not always appear convenient to deliver too
publicly, those things which tended to the reproof of some disorderly walkers
in the family, lest it should rather harden than restore and heal, especially
where their conduct did not occasion open reproach; then taking a meeting at
Broughton we went to Nottingham, and had three meetings there on first day, and
the next at Oxham with a few friends who were glad thereof, being sometimes
missed by travelers; the day following we had an appointed meeting at
Nottingham to satisfaction; in this place they are troubled with some ranters,
who force themselves into meetings for discipline: Friends were exhorted to
keep up the testimony of Truth in the meek humble spirit thereof, in which its
dominion will stand for ever; we then spent some time in visiting many meetings
in Leicestershire, taking one at Oakham in Rutlandshire, where some innocent
friends live, and I think it is the only meeting of friends in that county; at
Boswellstreet we had a meeting with some who had been lately convinced, but had
not yet known a true establishment in humbly waiting for the power of Truth, to
give a solid growth in pure religion; the same evening we had a meeting at
Coventry to good satisfaction; and the week following came to Dudley in
Worcestershire, where we lodged at James Payton's, whose sister Catharine was
preparing to go on a religious visit to America; staying the meeting on first
day in Dudley, we went to diverse others in this county and Warwickshire, and
came to Eaden in Northamptonshire, at which meeting many people came, some of
whom were very unruly, but the power of Truth prevailing, it ended quietly,
praised be the Lord who is allsufficient for his own work! visiting several
other meetings in this county, at one of them held in an evening at
Chipping-Norton there where many tender young people, to whom I felt a
salutation in the love of Truth; but before I thought it safe for me to stand
up, a young man not much like a friend stood up, and began to exhort them to be
faithful in discharging whatsoever the Lord required of them, and how eminently
he would be with, and qualify them for his work, as though they were all
appointed to enter upon some extraordinary great service; at which my mind was
much grieved, for I thought it would be more suitable for them deeply to retire
and wait for the virtue of Truth and sap of life, to experience a growth in
grace and the knowledge of God, that they might be prepared to work out their
own salvation; to expect a young tree to produce abundance of fruit before the
branches are come forth and spread with strength to bear it, is not reasonable;
the words "sit down," passed through my mind for some time, and at length I
spoke them so as for him to hear, which I perceived by a small stop he made;
but going on again, I said prithee friend sit down, which he did, but I felt
that my saying so, surprised the people and perhaps offended some, and that it
would be in vain to deliver what was on my mind, so expressing a few sentences
only, I sat down very sorrowful, and the meeting ended; I was informed by a
friend at our lodgings that he was one lately come from the Methodists, which I
before apprehended by his appearance; on going to bed I was much concerned lest
it should hurt him, and deeply sought to know whether I had not spoken to him
in a selfish spirit, because he had taken the time of the meeting appointed on
my account, and feeling love toward him, I prayed in spirit that the Lord
would be pleased to preserve him from harm thereby, and that if I had done
wrong, I might be made sensible of rebuke for my future instruction; when in
great calmness I understood that it would not hurt him, so I went into a quiet
sleep; after a meeting the next day at Sibbard, a woman friend who was at the
meeting the evening before, desired me to send by her a message, or write to
the young man, for she was fearful he would go beside himself; I told her that
when I spoke to him I thought myself right, and knew what I was about; but now
I could not see what to do at present, and to act by her direction was
dangerous, so we parted and in about a week after, a friend let me know that
there was no danger of his receiving hurt, but hoped he would be benefited.

From hence, taking a few meetings on our way, we arrived at London on the
seventh of the sixth month, and next day attended Grace Church Street meeting,
and in the following week the yearly meeting, which was comfortable and solid,
diverse weighty matters being therein proposed for consideration from several of
the counties, which centred rather to benefit, though in the management of the
affairs, there appeared in some, a disposition to oppose what they thought to
be new, notwithstanding the same things appeared very expedient to others, who
from their prospect thereof, might urge their sentiments rather too strongly; a
prospect of the Lord's servants truly disciplined, armed and qualified for his
work, and of such who equip, arm and arrange themselves, and move by their own
direction, was presented to my view in a dream one night during the time of
this meeting; "I thought I beheld two armies set in array against each other,
one of them well armed with swords and muskets; the other had no formal weapons
for their defense; but a charge given them by their general to keep their
ranks, and gently to march directly forward as he should lead, no man reaching
forth his own hand to defend himself; they joined in battle, and when one of
the unarmed soldiers was borne hard upon by his opponent, he reached forth his
hand at arms length, when a sword took off one of his fingers, and the blood
sprinkled on several of his fellow soldiers; whereupon knowing the orders
given, I cried out, if that hand had not been so stretched out, this wound
would not have been received, and so I awakened." And on the morrow was fully
convinced that in transacting the affairs of Truth, the honor of God should be
our only view, with a single eye to his direction, and self made of no
reputation, which will be a shield against all reflections and personal
censures; for it so happened, that a valuable zealous friend being strongly
reflected on as being a prejudiced party, and being a little warmed thereby,
made an overhasty, and perhaps too warm a reply, which is apt to stir up
warmth in those who depend on no other guard than their own armor, and with
their own strength use a selfish weapon; by this unguarded reply, the friend
brought a reproof on himself and some others, that were united in the cause of
truth; the victory belongs to the Lamb for ever, who when he was spit upon and
reviled, did not again revile.

After staying in London and attending the Peel-meeting on first day, and the
meeting of ministers and elders on second day morning, we went to Chelmsford
and rested a day or two with our friend John Griffith, attended their week day
meeting and a general meeting at Easterfordkelvedon, and proceeded to the
yearly meeting at Colchester, which held three days and was a time of Divine
favor; then going to Ipswich and to a monthly meeting at Woodbridge, we there
continued on first day, and on the next began their yearly meeting, which held
until the fourth day of the week, in all eight sittings, some whereof were
large and very good. No praise to him that wills, or to him that runs, but
to the Lord alone that shows mercy; and there being a marriage at the meeting
on fifth day, I had an open time, wherein I had to set forth, that as man in
the beginning was taken from the earth or clay by the hand of the Lord, and a
life breathed into him different from the earth, by which he became a living
soul, and stood in the image and liberty of his Creator, but falling from the
heavenly image and liberty therein through transgression, is now of the earth,
earthly in his love and liberty, so he must now be separated from the earthly
low estate which stands in the transgression and death, by the Regenerating
Word of Power, and transformed by the renewing of his mind, will and
affections, and placing them on heavenly objects; for as the potter separateth
the clay from the other earth, and tempers it by itself before he forms and
makes a vessel thereof, so must man by the operation of the Heavenly hand, be
tempered, wrought, prepared, and thereby freed from his own stubborn will, and
made submissive to the Heavenly Will, that he may not be marred on the wheel,
but bear the turning of the heavenly hand until he be formed a vessel to
honor; but if the will of man does not become subject, but stands in
rebellion, the Lord who said, my spirit shall not always strive with man, has
power over the clay to reject that which will not be wrought into a vessel for
honor, and suffer it to be marred in its own stubborn will; and when an
earthly potter has formed a vessel for use, he carefully sets it aside,
until it be prepared to bear a further operation, to harden and glaze it for
the use for which it is made; if man should put even water into an earthen
vessel formed for that use, before it is hardened and prepared by fire, he
would both mar the vessel, and expose that which was put therein; let not such
therefore who have known the heavenly hand of power so to prepare them, that
they are willing to be whatsoever the Lord should make of them, marvel if the
Lord should be pleased to set them by a while for the trial of their faith; if
the earthly potters vessel should crack in drying, it would be marred, so if
these vessels of the Heavenly Potter keep not the word of his patience in this
their drying season, to prepare them for the operation of the Heavenly fire and
furnace, in which the Lord will sanctify and fit his vessels for the use of his
holy sanctuary, they will also be marred; but otherwise they will come forth
vessels to honor in his house, etc.

I thought this was a remarkable good meeting, the praise thereof belongs to
the Lord alone. We had also a select meeting with friends, and visited several
families in the town to satisfaction, truth owning us together, and after a
good opportunity at a friend's house in the country on our way, we went to
Norwich and attended their meetings on first day, the yearly meeting began the
next, and ended on fourth day after seven settings generally large and
satisfactory, through the overshadowing of Divine Goodness: I continued in this
city several days after, visiting of families and steadily attending their
meetings, and had some open satisfactory opportunities. My way now opening for
Holland we went to Yarmouth, several friends accompanying us, and on the
twenty-sixth of the seventh month embarked on board the ship Three Brothers,
Richard Smith master, my companion John Pemberton being willing to continue
with me.

On the first day of the week following, we landed at Rotterdam and lodged at
an inn; next morning feeling my mind drawn forward, we went in a stage wagon
to Turgow, and from thence in the tract-skute to Amsterdam in the evening, the
Metropolis of South Holland, and were conducted to friends meeting house at the
Three-hooks in Princes-street, in which Michael Laars and his sister lived, and
were kindly received and rested the next day.

I found a concern to visit the families of friends in this city, in which
service we spent most of the week to our satisfaction, John Vanderwarf junr.
being interpreter; we also attended their week day meeting, in which Peter
Linders was interpreter. On first day following the meeting in the morning was
pretty large, and many people came to that in the afternoon, some of whom
behaved rudely; but Truth came over, and they were stilled, and seemed to
depart satisfied; we continued here until their week day meeting again, which
many not of our society attended, and it was to general satisfaction; I then
felt my mind drawn toward North Holland, and taking passage in the tract-skute
passed through several towns and arrived at the city of Hoorn, where we were
met by our friend Cort Hendricks, who took us in his wagon to his house at
Twisk, in North Holland the same night, being accounted eighteen miles from
Amsterdam to Hoorn by water, and from thence to Twisk by land six miles; here
also finding the like concern, we visited the families of friends, and had a
meeting with them in the evening together; next day we went to Abbey Kirk, a
village about two miles distant, where about five or six families of friends
live, whom we visited also; the friends in general seemed to receive our visits
kindly, except one family, where I was concerned to speak of, and open that
saying of our dear Lord, Except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of
the Scribes, and Pharisees, etc. for I was much burdened under a sense of a
self-righteous, whole, exalted spirit, and in opening that passage, was also
led to speak of the Parable of the Pharisee and Publican who went up into the
temple to pray, which probably touched the heads of that family, and I felt a
strong opposition in them, and perceived the passage was not pleasing to our
interpreter, I could not shake off my burden, yet was preserved quiet in my
mind, having honestly done my part, and so returned to Twisk, where the meeting
was held for both villages, and on first day morning the meeting was pretty
large, friends being generally there; but our interpreter had most of the time,
so that he was too overspent to interpret much for me; several not professing
with us attended in the afternoon, and I had a satisfactory time with them
early in the meeting, when an awful sense of truth seemed to be over us, after
which our interpreter had something further to say; I have often lamented the
increase of words, and a repetition of former experiences without the renewing
of life, which disposition seems to prevail in too many, to the burdening of
sensible members in our society.

As we sat this evening in a friends house at Twisk two elderly women came in,
professors of truth but very talkative: I had seen them several times before,
and as often been burdened with them, and now had something in particular to
speak; but feared that such plain dealing would be too strong for our
interpreter, who appeared to be very sociable with them; therefore I delivered
my mind without singling them out, several others being present; these women
took it to themselves, but not in such a disposition as I desired, being
disturbed, and following us to our lodgings made their complaint to our
interpreter, bidding him ask me if I took them to be such persons as I had
described; if so, they desired to know what I had to accuse them with? at first
it put me to a stand, but being still, I soon thought it was providential, that
they thus gave me an opportunity to clear myself of the burden I had borne on
their account, and told them, that to enter into particular charges was not my
business, but was free to let them know that I had been in pain on their
account from the first time I saw them, and that if I had a true sense of their
states, they were not such as they ought to be, but had lost the favor of what
they professed to enjoy, and could so freely talk of, "and told one of them
that I took her to be dark and ignorant of her own state; and the other, that
she was too light and chaffy in her spirit, and that they both wanted the true
clothing of the Lord's children, which is humility of heart and reverence of
spirit, which would season all their conversation and conduct, that they would
not be stumbling blocks to their neighbors, as I feared they were: I also told
them, that I believed when I spoke as I did at the friend's house it belonged
to them, in which I was now confirmed, for had they been sincere hearted, they
would have borne it without flinching; but now they had shown that their sore
places were touched, and I dared not to lessen the weight of what was then
said, but desired them to receive and ponder it well; for I was sure it was
delivered in love, and believed it to be a visitation to them in their old
age." Which being interpreted to them, they spoke something to the interpreter
which I did not understand; then one of them said, she had yet love in her
heart for me: I told her that I had nothing but good will toward her, and so
they went away.

After which, the interpreter told me, he had known these women many years;
that I had a true sense of them, and he had delivered my words honestly, and
hoped they would do them good.

We next had a meeting with friends of Twisk by themselves in a private house,
in which we were favored with the savor of truth, the sincere hearted being
refreshed, and the disorderly warned to be more careful.

After taking some refreshment, we hasted to attend another meeting appointed
for us at Abby-Kirk in the afternoon, which was held in the same house where I
felt the opposition before mentioned: I soon was sensible of some matter in my
mind to divide to the people; first to a low afflicted state, and things opened
pretty clear, and were interpreted readily; but proceeding to the other states,
I felt the current obstructed, and the force of my sentences evaded, and had a
sense that the minds of the friends of that house were shut up against what I
had to deliver, so I forbore going on, and the interpreter soon began and
continued to speak near an hour; when he had done, I felt a great weight on my
mind, and desired him to interpret a few sentences for me, he did not seem very
free, saying, "let it be short then," the substance was, "That I had come in
love to see them, and was in no way prepossessed or informed concerning any
person or case among them; yet found they were shut up against what I had to
deliver; nevertheless I could not be easy without letting them know, that I did
believe, unless they humbled themselves, and were stripped from that
self-righteous wholeness, wherewith they had clothed themselves, they never
would grow in the life of true religion; but would be as stumbling blocks to
the sincere hearted among them," so I went out of the house and returned to our
lodging, not having freedom to stay there longer. Our interpreter who tarried
with them after we were gone, told me that they judged a certain friend who had
been in Holland sometime before and spoken very closely to them, had informed
me concerning them, and I thought the interpreter also favored that sentiment,
which made me not to wonder at the opposition I had felt both in him and them;
whereupon I told him, that until that time I never knew that the friend whom
they thus judged had been there, and that I had never heard of their names, nor
the name of the town until I came with him, and desired him to give it in
charge to a friend of Twisk who was present with us, to let those friends know
from me, what I then said of my innocence.

Feeling myself now pretty easy respecting that place we returned toward
Amsterdam, accompanied by two friends to Hoorn, where no friends now live, though
formerly there were, and sometimes meetings have been held there; and I had
some thoughts of having one; but being under discouragement, had almost
concluded to proceed on our way; but in walking through the city to the skute,
which was to set off for Amsterdam in a few minutes, I felt my mind affected
with a sense that my great and good master was near, and desired with earnest
breathings to know his will, and if he would be pleased to be with me, I was
willing to do the same, as he should require and enable me; I then felt such a
stream of love toward the inhabitants, that I was convinced there was a
visitation to them, as though the Lord would in his own time gather a people
there; as yet I had not disclosed my mind to any one, although I felt a draught
back; when seeing a young man in the street, I desired the interpreter to ask
him if he thought we could have a meeting in that town, to which he readily
answered that he believed we might, and taking hold of my baggage said, if we
would please to return to his house, he would endeavor to procure a place and
acquaint the people, which he very punctually, and with great speed performed,
and we met about four in the afternoon at the house of Cornelius Olyslager, and
had a good opportunity with a tender friendly people, several of whom were
reached and tendered by the virtue and savor of truth, which spread freely;
for which the giver of all good was reverently praised, who is worthy for ever.
The people departed in much love, and we returned to the young man's house,
where we were affectionately entertained that night; we should have been glad
to have conversed with the people, but could not understand their language, yet
had a sense that they were satisfied with the meeting.

Being accompanied by this kind young man Dirk Meschaert, our landlord, to the
track-skute, we took leave with tears on each side, and arriving at Amsterdam,
we sat with friends that afternoon in their week day meeting to satisfaction,
having traveled in North Holland about seventy four miles by boat and wagon,
we then visited the remainder of friends families in this city, and were
comforted therein, the Lord being pleased to own our labor, and I pray it may
be blessed to them; on first day morning we had a large solid meeting, at which
were several strangers, particularly two young men, Italians, supposed to be
princes, who behaved well, also many of the citizens who had never been at a
friend's meeting before. The afternoon meeting was also large, but some of the
lower sort who came to gaze out of curiosity, behaved rude, yet it ended better
than I expected; there seemed to be an openness in many to hear the testimony
and principle of Truth declared; but it is a dull way to speak by an imperfect
interpreter.

On the twenty-second of the eighth month was held what they call their yearly
meeting, which was attended by several not of our society; but it has little
more than the name of a yearly meeting, the discipline of truth being much lost.

Feeling some concern still to continue on my mind toward the friends at
Abby-Kirk where I was sensible of the opposition before hinted, I had freedom
to write them a letter; but on considering that the friend and his wife to whom
I wrote were persons of note, I was fearful that their resentment might hurt
some others, and having a tender concern toward the sincere hearted, it was
with me to prepare the way by writing an Epistle to friends of the meeting at
Twisk, to which those of Abby-Kirk do also belong, both which I got a friend of
Amsterdam to translate; that to the meeting I sent immediately that it might be
read on a first day, and directed the other to be sent soon after.


That to Friends at Twisk was as follows.

Dear Friends,
THE honest and sincere hearted amongst you, I salute in Gospel Love; and as I
do believe there is a small remnant that are desirous to know and witness the
peace of God in your hearts, and a sure hope of receiving the answer of
well-done at the conclusion of your time in this world, mind the instructions
of the spirit of Christ Jesus in your own hearts, for it is that which leads
into all Truth; it shows unto man, of what sort the thoughts of his heart are,
and it witnesses against every bad word and action: It was the Spirit of Truth
that taught the children of God in all ages, it was by this Spirit of Truth
that our worthy elders were led from the lo-heres and lo-theres which are in
the world; it established them on the true foundation, viz. the revelation or
teaching of the Spirit of God in their own hearts; by this they were upheld
under sore afflictions, and outward sufferings from the powers of the earth; by
this they were preserved in the unity of the spirit, in the bond of peace."

"Dear Friends, beware of letting out your minds after the doctrines and
teachings of men, who have not the word of Life committed to them to preach in
the Love and Power of Truth: For if ye do, ye will be unstable and wavering,
and a wavering man is as a wave of the sea, tossed to and fro with every
contrary wind of doctrine; neither look you too much to the example one of
another, but wait to receive in yourselves, a sense of what ye ought to do and
to join with, and what ye ought to be separated from, then will you be able to
judge what you hear and see; because you have the spirit of Truth in your own
hearts, for that is the true rule, judge and guide, which leads into all Truth.

Since I was with you, I have often thought, that you will never grow strong in
the truth, nor teach the principles thereof one to another, until you be
obedient thereunto in your own hearts, and act and behave in all things
according to the pure witness thereof in your own selves; this makes living,
sound, steady members, zealous both of love and good works, in themselves and
amongst their brethren and sisters.

Dear Friends, be careful to meet together, and admonish those that fall short
of their duty herein: And when you are assembled, wait on the Lord with a mind
turned inward, and if ye do wait in Faith and Patience, the Lord will be found
of you, and reveal himself in the midst of you, to your comfort and consolation.

With sincere desires that every good thought, and secret enquiry after the
knowledge of God, in each of your hearts, may be strengthened and blessed, do I
remain your affectionate friend,

JOHN CHURCHMAN.
Amsterdam, 23 d of the 8 th Month, 1753.

A Copy of my Letter to the Friend and his Wife here follows.

My Friends,
I Have had an exercise on my mind ever since I came first into your house, to
visit your family, which was on the eleventh instant, I came an entire
stranger, free from any information from man concerning you, but as soon, as I
came into the house, I felt the innocent life of truth and pure seed of the
kingdom oppressed in you.

Our dear Lord said, Learn of me, for I am meek and low of heart: His Spirit in
us if we take heed thereto, will teach us to be meek and low in heart; at this
day his teaching is the same, and will remain to be so to all his followers
forever: Oh may you be humble, for it is the humble that the Lord does teach of
his ways; and the meek he guides in judgment: But the whole and self-righteous,
who are wise in their own eyes, and prudent in their own conceit, the Lord will
hide the mysteries of his pure wisdom from these; but to the babes who are
truly changed, and born from above; and those sucklings who are weaned from the
breasts of the world, and its wisdom, and are leaning on the breast of Christ
their beloved, desiring the sincere milk of his word, that they may grow
thereby; unto these the Lord will reveal true Knowledge, and Wisdom from above;
and that wisdom is pure, peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, and those
that have the same in possession, they have the seasoning virtue of Truth; they
have salt in themselves, and are therefore preserved in peace and unity with
the pure Truth, and also one with another; such professors who inwardly know,
and receive the most holy Faith, they know the same to work in them by love, to
the purifying of their hearts: These are Jews inward, circumcised in heart,
true Israelites indeed, in whom there is no guile; and their righteousness
exceeds that of the scribes and pharisees.

I heartily wish that you may (in your old age) be concerned to know the Life
of pure Religion; a sense of the want thereof in your family, burdened my life
whilst I was in your house, which was the reason why I could not be free to eat
and drink with you.

In order to discharge myself toward you, have I written these few lines,
desiring that you may examine yourselves, and see if there be not a cause, --
and in the love of Truth, which leads us to deal plainly one with another,

I remain your real Friend and Welwisher, JOHN CHURCHMAN.
Amsterdam, 23 d of the 8 th Month, 1753.

We continued with friends in this city and attended their two meetings on
first day, and in the evening had an opportunity with several to satisfaction,
for our love rather increased; next morning feeling my mind clear of friends in
Holland, I was easy to return toward England, and accompanied by several to
the skute we took leave and went to Turgow by water, from thence by wagon to
Rotterdam, in all about forty-two miles, there are no members of our society
left in this city; we went to see the meeting house and had some thoughts of
having a meeting; but being the time of a great fair, which occasioned a
concourse of rude people, there was no prospect of having one to advantage.

John Vanderwaarf junr. came with us to Rotterdam, with whom we parted in much
love early on fourth day morning the twenty-ninth of the eighth month, and went
on board the same ship which brought us hither, it having made a voyage to
England and back since; we sailed with a fair wind down the Maze to the Briell
before noon, when it becoming contrary, we lay at anchor until first day
morning, then proceeding, we passed over the dangerous sands and so to sea, and
arrived at Yarmouth about one the next day, and had a meeting with friends the
same evening.

In this journey to Holland, we traveled by sea and land about five hundred
miles.

From Yarmouth we went in a chaise to Norwich, where friends were rejoiced to
see us, and we were thankful for our safe return, and being concerned to spend
some more time among them in this city, we visited a few families and attended
their monthly meeting, also their two meetings on first day, which were dull
and heavy; the minds of the people being too much outward, I found it my place
to recommend silence by example more than by words, in both those meetings.

Next day in company with other friends I went to visit Hannah Lucas, a school
mistress, who was newly convinced; she was in a low state of mind; our visit
was to mutual satisfaction, being comforted together.

At their week day meeting on third day, I had a seasonable time to discharge
my mind toward friends in that city, in which I was led to deal plainly with
them: They are a loving people to strangers and each other; but there is a want
of weightiness of spirit, and of a proper care in the exercise of the
discipline of the church.

Before my going to Holland I was at the shop of a barber in this city several
times to be shaved; the second time I was there, I had to wait a while for my
turn, he having no assistant; and when others were gone out he told me, he was
sorry I had to wait and hoped he should have my custom, and that if I would
come on Saturdays and Wednesdays in the forenoon I need not wait; but in the
afternoon others came; I asked him what days of the week those were which he
called Saturday, and Wednesday? he seemed to wonder at my ignorance, but knew
not how to tell me otherwise; I said, I do not read in the Scripures of any
days so named; he replied, that is true; for what reason then, said I, do
thou call them so; because it is a common custom, said he; suppose then, said
I, that we lived in a heathen country among infidels who worshipped Idols,
should we follow their customs because common? he replied, by no means; I then
said, If I have understood rightly, the Heathens gave the days of the week
those names: I never heard that before, said he, pray for what reason? I
answered they worshipped the Sun on the first day of the week and named it
after their idol, Sunday; the Moon on the second day of the week, so came
monday, and the other days after other idols, for they had many gods; third day
they called tuesday after their idol Tuisco; and after the idol Woden, fourth
day they called wednesday, and fifth day after their Idol Thor they called
thursday; from Friga, friday; and after Saturn they called the seventh day,
saturday; and as I believe in the only true God and Jesus Christ whom he has
sent, and expect Eternal Life by no other name or power, I dare not for
conscience sake own the gods of the Heathen, or name a day after them; but
choose the names which the days were called by, when the most high performed
his several works of creation, viz. first, second, third, and so on, which is
scriptural, most plain and easily understood.

He seemed some what affected with the information, and I desired him to
inquire into the matter for himself, and not to think that I designed to impose
upon him; the next time of my going to his shop, he showed me some papers
whereon he had began to learn Algebra, and asked me how I liked it; I said it
might be useful to some, but that I could take up grubbing or follow the plough
without studying Algebra, as he might also shave a man, etc. without it;
besides I found it a more profitable and delightful study to be quietly
employed in learning the law of the Lord written in mine own heart, so that I
might walk before him acceptably.

On my return from Holland to Norwich, a man ran to me in the street putting a
paper into my hand, and immediately left me, whom I soon found to be this
barber; the letter contained an innocent child like acknowledgment to me for my
freedom with him, as is before mentioned in language rather too much showing
his value for me as an instrument; and believing him to be reached by the love
of Truth, and in measure convinced of the principle thereof, I thought it best
to leave him in the Lord's hand for further instruction, to learn by the
immediate teachings of the Holy Spirit, that his love might be centred on the
true beloved of Souls; for want whereof many are hurt, looking outward and
growing in head knowledge, seeking the esteem and friendship of men, from whom
we are to cease, his breath and life being stopped at the Lord's command.

I mention this passage with a view to stir up my friends of the same holy
profession, to let their language in words be the real language of Truth to all
men, in purity of Spirit, and not to name the days of the week or months after
the heathenish idolatrous customs, saying for excuse, that they to whom they
speak do best understand them, and it saves them any further explanation, which
excuse is far from proceeding from a disposition apt to teach, and letting the
Light of Truth shine as they ought. Neither do men, said our blessed
instructor, light a candle and put it under a bushel; but on a candlestick, and
it gives light to all that are in the house, Mat. v. 21. Nor does the Lord
enlighten his candle, that is the spirit of man, with the pure knowledge of
Truth, that we should cover it, either with an easeful disposition to save
ourselves trouble, or hide the work thereof under the covering bushel of
worldly saving care, after the gain and treasure of this world; but that it may
stand on the candlestick, and thereby crown those who are thus favored with
the holy Light, that as a city set on an hill they cannot be hid.

The corrupt language of you to a single person, and calling the months and
days by heathen names, are esteemed by some to be little things; but if a
faithful testimony in these little things, was blessed in the instance before
mentioned, even to the raising an earnest inquiry after the saving knowledge of
God and his blessed Son, whom to know is Eternal Life; perhaps such who baulk
their testimony to the pure Talent of Truth given them to profit withal, may
one day have their portion appointed with the wicked and slothful servant, see
Mat. xxv. 24-25. etc.

After the last mentioned meeting I found my mind easy to leave Norwich, and
went with Richard Brewster and wife to Wymondam that evening, and next day to
Edmondsbury, where feeling an engagement of mind we staid eight days, attending
their several meetings, and monthly meeting, which is composed of five
particular meetings, where, under a sense of a forward formal ministry, my soul
mourned and was clothed with sorrow; the next day we had a precious meeting,
and the same evening another with the ministers and solid friends, in which it
became my concern to set forth the care they ought to exercise over each other,
and how necessary it was to deal plainly with those that did not keep their
places: Truth owned us together and I believe the opportunity will be
remembered.

My mind being drawn to toward Wales, my companion John Pemberton who had been
with me three years, having traveled together in much love and unity,
inclining to go toward London, we parted in the same love, and I, accompanied
by my kind friend Richard Brewster, went to Henry Gray's at Godmanchester in
Huntingdonshire, and the next day to Wellingborough in Northamptonshire, and
were at their two meetings on first day the twentythird of the ninth month,
which were heavy for want of more faithful inward laborers; that evening I had
also a sitting with a sick friend.

Next morning my friend R. Brewster returned homewards, and several friends
coming to take leave of me, I had an opportunity to remark to them the reason
that their meetings were so dull and cloudy; for I thought I clearly saw there
was a neglect among them of putting the discipline in practice, where disorders
were evident; and that this neglect had caused them to suffer, which would
still continue and increase, until they set the testimony of Truth over the
heads of such who by disorderly walking had brought a reproach thereon: The
friends were affected, and acknowledged they believed it to be the case amongst
them. We parted in tenderness and I proceeded on my journey with an income of
solid peace, and after riding thirty seven miles reached Banbury in
Oxfordshire, and the next day Eatington in Warwickshire, where I met with my
friends Richard Partridge and Mary Weston of London, and we were truly glad to
see each other, spending the day together and had a meeting with friends in the
evening to our mutual comfort; we went in company to Warwick and Coventry, and
at the meeting at the last place, which was comfortable, I thought I sensibly
felt the benefit of the painful labor I had been exercised in when there
before; R. Partridge returning to London, Mary Weston went with me to the
quarterly meeting at Leicester, which began with a meeting of ministers and
elders, and one for worship and discipline was held the same day; the service
in which lay heavy upon me, and Truth favored, the power thereof being felt to
the comfort of many; and I wish that season may not be forgotten by the members
of that meeting; on the first day following I went to a general meeting at
Badgeley, and had an evening meeting at Daniel Lythal's at Polesworth, who has
a large family of hopeful tender children. I next went to Allen England's at
Tamworth, and had a satisfactory opportunity in his family, to which I had felt
a drawing in my mind for some time; but did not know that it would fall so in
the way to the quarterly meeting at Stafford; which I attended and there met my
friend Joshua Tofft, in company with whom I returned to Ridgeley, and next day
had a meeting at the widow Morris's, and another that evening at Uttuxiter,
from thence to Leek, and after a favored meeting went home with Joshua to
Hargate, where after resting one day, had another meeting at Leek, and an
opportunity with some friends at Joshua Strangman's, wherewith I had a degree
of peace.

Accompanied by J. Tofft I went to a general meeting at Eaton in Cheshire, then
to Macclesfield, Stockport, Morley, and Farnly, the last of which was a good
meeting; there my friend Samuel Fothergill met me, and we went to a meeting at
Sutton; the next day Susanna Fothergill and her brother Alexander came to see
me, and we had a comfortable time together at Thomas Hough's, being owned by
Truth; I was next at a labourious meeting at Newton, though it ended well, and
after it I met again with Joshua Tofft at Edgebury, and had a meeting the next
day at Middlewich, then at Nantwich, and Chester, from whence rode to John
Bellows at Stretton; my traveling and labors through Cheshire was in a
particular close manner, though there are some solid friends in that county.

Passing to Shrewsbury in Shropshire, I was at a meeting on first day at
Colebrookdale and had some close work; but Truth seemed to give victory, and in
the evening at Abraham Darby's house had an opportunity, in which the testimony
of Truth prevailed to the tendering some high and lofty young people; whose
faults were told them in the power of the searcher of hearts, for which the
sincere were truly thankful.

Next day returning to Shrewsbury, I went to visit Benjamin Thomas and Richard
Bellows, who had been confined in prison about four years and a half for their
conscientious refusal to pay tithes, and we had a comfortable season together
in the jail, feeling the living presence of the Lord, which makes his people
free, even in prisons.

The day following had a meeting in this town, and one in the evening at the
house of John Young, both which afforded some peace; but the life of Truth is
at a low state in Shropshire, and the professors with us few in number.

I then passed into North Wales, to Charles Lloyd's at Dolobran in
Montgomeryshire, John Young being with me, and had a meeting there, at this
place there was formerly a large meeting; but it is now much declined; from
thence we went to Tydenigarrig in Merrionethshire, and had a meeting with a few
sincere friends at the house of Lewis Owen; after which I proceeded on my visit
to the other meetings in this county; first at Llwindu in the family of
Humphrey Owen, which was a comfortable time, though no other friends live in this
place; then at the house of John Goodwin in Esgingoch in Montgomeryshire, where
were several tender friends; but the living are scarcely able to bear the
weight of those professors, who although they know the truth, do not abide
therein, and so are as withered branches cast forth. Next was a pretty large
and satisfactory meeting at Talcoyd in Radnorshire, then at Cwm, and
Gluerindrew, and on a first day at Penbank, where are many professors, though but
few solid friends; after which at Penplace and Caermarthen, which last meeting
was much to my satisfaction, the few friends here being of the better sort;
from hence to Haverfordwest with friends by themselves mostly, and staying
their meetings on first day, that in the afternoon was open and satisfactory as
to other professors who came in; but pride and worldly mindedness has much
hurt the members of our society, though there are a few tender friends. In the
evening I had another opportunity with friends, and was enabled to relieve my
mind among them with a degree of thankfulness; next meeting was at Jamestown,
and in the evening of the day following at Larn with the people of the town,
who behaved civilly, but seemed barren as to religion in a right sense; there
is but one in this town in unity with friends, and he seemed near his end, whom
I visited. After crossing a ferry near a mile broad, not without great danger,
being driven on shore and the wind very high, the boat was likely to fill with
water, that I was obliged to go over a marsh to Caermarthen, being thankful for
the deliverance, where I had a public meeting with the town's people, to a good
degree of satisfaction, and next morning met with my brother Wm. Brown at
Swanzey, and we were made joyful in the company of each other; here we had two
meetings, and another with friends selected, in which he got some relief; after
his leaving me here having a concern on my mind I visited the families of
friends, though not without fear; but felt the help and strength of my great and
good master, who furnished me with power and skill to discharge my duty, both
to the lukewarm and the corrupt disorderly professors, without wounding his own
children, some of whom there are in this town; I stayed their meeting on fourth
day, which season being divinely favored, I pray may not be forgotten, the
power which alone can enable to tread on scorpions or serpents, and preserve
from the force of deadly poison being over all: The honor, praise, and glory,
be ascribed to the Lord who is worthy for ever!

Next day I rested, and in a degree of humble thankfulness made these remarks.

I continued many days longer in this town, in which time had diverse meetings,
some whereof were very satisfactory, many of the town's people attending, and
the good hand of the Lord was stretched forth toward them; for which I was
truly thankful; after spending sixteen days among them I went to Llantrishon,
and the next day had a meeting at Trewaruge; then one at Hillary with a tender
enquiring people, also at Cardiff with a seeking people, who had separated
themselves from the public worship and met together in silence; this
opportunity was an instructive season to them. On the first day following I was
at Pontipool, where at two meetings I had many close things to deliver,
observing want of order among them; in the evening had an opportunity with some
of the friends most active in the discipline, and endeavored to discharge
myself; and on third day a large and pretty open meeting; being detained by a
great snow, I had another meeting with friends of the foremost rank on sixth
day, in which I cleared my mind of a great burden, which I had borne on account
of a formal ministry among them; my next meeting was at Shere-Newton, which was
pretty large though dull, the favor of Truth being much lost among friends here;
yet I was favored with strength to discharge myself, and in the feeling sense
of peace went that night to the passage over the Severn, and next day to
Bristol, my friend and kind landlord James Griffiths bearing me company from
his own house at Swanzey.

On third day I attended their meeting in Bristol, but fat in silence, and was
very heavy hearted under a sense of a forward spirit, which would prompt to
answer the expectations of the people, and is apt to prevail on some who seem
to be called to the work of the ministry; but Truth only blesses its own
motion.

I continued in and near this city about four weeks, attending their several
meetings, but did not feel relief from the burden I was under, and on the
fifteenth of the first month (1754,) hearing that my brother Wm. Brown was at
Ann Young's at Erthcot, I went there to see him, and we were comforted in each
others company, and next being their meeting day, we attended it to our
refreshment; from whence we returned together to Bristol, where we tarried
until the twenty-sixth, in which time I had several open meetings, which set me
at liberty to leave that city, when we again parted, and I took meetings at
Ulverstone, Thornbury, Sadsbury, Dedmartin, Tedbury, and two at Nailsworth, and
another there in the evening, when I had an opportunity to the ease of my mind,
heavily oppressed on account of the formal professors of truth, to the comfort
of the faithful, and caused thankfulness.

From thence calling to visit the widow Fowler who was in affliction, I went to
meetings at Painswick, Gloucester, Ross in Herefordshire, Almerly, Leominster,
and Uphan, where I visited the wives of the two friends before mentioned, who
are imprisoned at Shrewsbury for their testimony against Tithes; then returning
to Leominster attended the monthly meeting there, in which truth owned us, and
taking a meeting at Broomsgrove went to Worcester, and on first day was at two
comfortable meetings, and another on third day, and the next day attended the
quarterly meeting, which was a precious time, wherein friends were comforted;
and finding a concern on my mind I went into the women's meeting, wherein the
power of Truth accompanied, which is the crown of our religious meetings, here
is a tender feed especially amongst the female sex, which will thrive if this
Divine power is kept unto.

Being now clear of this city, I departed with peace to meetings at Tewskbury,
Cheltenham, and again to Nailsworth, where I was at two meetings, which though
hard, I had an evidence that the Lord had not forsaken his seeking people.
After attending a conference with several friends endeavoring to compose a
difference, which ended to satisfaction, I proceeded to the quarterly meeting
for Gloucestershire held at Tedbury, where I again met with my brother W. B.
Divine Goodness and a good degree of the authority of Truth attending in the
time of worship, and in transacting the affairs of the church.

Next day my brother went to Bath and I to Cirencester, where I had a hard and
dull meeting, the professors of truth having too much departed from the favor
thereof; at another in the evening I had an evidence of having discharged my
duty; then proceeded to meetings at Farringdon in Berkshire, Litchfield,
Burford in Oxfordshire, Milton, Stow in Gloucestershire, Chipping-Norton,
Charlbury, Witney, Abingdon, Warbury, North End, and from thence to High
Wiccomb, where the weather being very cold I tarried six days, visiting several
families of sick friends, and the last public meeting being in the evening,
many of the town's people attended, and it was a solid opportunity. From thence
I went to Amersham though with difficulty on account of the snow, and on first
day had a meeting at Chesham; then to Hampstead, and had there a meeting, which
was much enlarged by the scholars of Wm. Squire's school, several of whom were
affected; then having a good opportunity with friends at Albans, I went to
London, where I remained seven weeks and three days, visiting the meetings and
felt much of the weight and burden of the service before me there, and in the
opening and authority of Truth, I had to speak to the present date of our
society, not only to the instruction of the seeking children and comforting of
the mourners; but also by way of rebuke to the disorderly, and close warning to
the rebellious.

During my continuance here I felt my mind drawn toward Wiltshire, and thought
of attending the quarterly meeting there; but on the day on which I expected to
set forward, I found a stop in my mind; though not relieved from a solid concern,
which engaged me to enquire secretly what I should do; for notwithstanding this
concern to Wiltshire, my burden respecting London seemed rather to increase;
but as I kept quiet, I found my heart warmed in love and my mind opened, and
influenced to write an Epistle to that quarterly meeting, which with
thankfulness I then esteemed a great favor from my great and good Master,
being in a poor state of health, the weather unfavourable, and the journey
long. So in the opening of truth, I wrote as follows.

To Friends in Wiltshire.
HAVING had strong desires in my mind for your welfare in the truth, I purposed
to have attended your quarterly meeting, but being let at this time, and not
knowing that I shall ever have an opportunity to see you, I feel a freedom to
visit you with a few lines in the opening and love of truth, which flows to
you-ward.

Dear Friends, male and female, old and young, as many of you as are desirous
to be called the Children of God, and followers of Christ Jesus, be humble,
that you may be taught of him; for it is the humble that he teaches of his
ways; and be ye meek and low in heart, that you may serve him in your
generation, and one another in his pure fear, so you will know him for your
rest, and his peace your quiet habitation.

My soul has mourned, and is in some degree covered therewith at this time,
under a sense that the love of the world, and its pleasures and earthly
delights, abound in too many, (which is iniquity) and because thereof the love
of many toward God waxes cold; and for want of witnessing the love of God in
a pure heart, the mind becomes at ease, lukewarm, and indifferent about the
things which belong to our peace and future happiness, and so fathers and
mothers, masters and mistresses, become dull, if not dead to that holy concern,
which should ever excite them, both by example and precept, to instruct and
train up their children and servants in all Godliness of life and conversation.

Oh dear Friends! search your hearts, and diligently enquire whether something
has not subtly crept in, and stolen away your affections from God; and the
deep attention of your minds from the instructions of his Holy Spirit of Truth;
and if this becomes your concern, I fully believe that the Lord will bless you
with enlightened minds to see, and willing hearts to give up all to the fire
and sword of his Word and Spirit, that your hearts may be purged, and made
tabernacles and temples in which he would take delight to dwell: For if the
soul is chaste in Love to God, and the eye of the mind single to the
instruction of the spirit of truth, the whole body will be full of Light: It is
herein that the children of God are preserved safe in their own secret steps
before the Lord, and free from giving occasion of stumbling to others.

I am fully persuaded there is a remnant amongst you, who feelingly know, that
the living sense of the presence and power of God, in your meetings both for
worship and discipline, is not plentifully enjoyed, but is at a low ebb: And it
is in my mind to let you know what has appeared to me to be as one great
reason, viz. There are many professors of the truth amongst you, who delight to
be accounted of as friends in esteem in the society; who have a smooth and
fawning behavior, and flattering tongues, and do seek the love and friendship
of such who are friends of truth, for their own honor and credit, and the
reputation of self. Dear Friends, of such beware, for their friendship is
poison, and their intimate fellowship, if cleaved unto, is benumbing, even to
insensibility: And for want of a clear discovery of that spirit, some of the
tender and sincere hearted amongst you have suffered.

In whomsoever earthly mindedness prevails, or the love of the world and its
friendship; there is a secret giving way to, and a gradual reconciliation with
its sordid practices; and the eye that once saw in the true Light, becomes
closed or dimmed, if not wholly blinded by the God of this world.

Liberty is then taken by parents, and indulgence is given to their children;
which occasions pain and distress of heart to those who have not lost their
sight and feeling: But some, for fear of being rebuked and disesteemed by such
who have a sense of them, will court their affections; with which bait they
have been taken, and so have been afraid to speak their minds plainly lest they
should offend, or drive them further from the society; concluding there is a
tender thing in them, because they seem to love friends: And so many who might
have made great progress have lost ground, for want of speaking truth to their
neighbors; and thus the infection of pride, libertinism, and earthly
mindedness has spread and prevailed, even to the hurt of some families, that
were once exceedingly grieved therewith.

Wherefore, my dear Friends, fear God with a perfect heart, and in his Light
watch over your own selves and your families: So shall your hearts be warmly
influenced, and filled with holy zeal, and love to God and his Truth; in which
you will be bold to act in your meetings for discipline, and in the power of
God, which is the authority of the church, you will be able to judge those who
walk disorderly; and being faithful therein, you will remove the stumbling
blocks, and roll away the reproach which is imputed to the church.

Then would the Lord feed such his faithful laborers with his Heavenly Bread,
and honor them with his Life giving, presence and whether the disorderly would
hear or forbear, the Lord would be the shield and exceeding great reward of his
people, and fill their hearts with praise to his name, who is worthy forever
and ever.

JOHN CHURCHMAN.
London, the 4 th of the 4 th Month, 1754. Let this be read in your men's, and
women's meetings.




I have before hinted, that in my traveling to the meetings in Wiltshire, and
attending the quarterly meeting in the seventh month, Old Style, 1750, I was
straitened to clear myself toward them, which occasioned me to leave them in
pain of mind, but now having sent them this epistle I was made easy, believing
they would read it, and send copies thereof to their several monthly-meetings,
which would be likely to be heard by more friends than if my concern had been
delivered in the quarterly meeting only; enclosing it to an innocent friend at
Chippenham, I desired him to deliver it to the said meeting, which I afterward
understood he did, and that friends had answered my request.

Now feeling my mind easy to leave London for a while, I went to Esher in
Surry, was the next day at a large meeting at Kingston on Thames, which was
pretty open as to doctrine, the people seemed attentive and several much
tendered; there are but few friends here.

I then visited diverse other meetings in Hampshire and Berkshire, being made
thankful to the great author of all good, who had been with me in the journey
under my indisposition of body; coming to London I met with many friends from
different parts of the nation in order to attend the yearly meeting, which
began on the second day of the sixth month, and continued ten days, being a
very large and in the main a solid meeting; many weighty affairs relating to
our religious society were therein considered, it was then also agreed, that in
future this meeting should begin with a meeting of ministers and elders, on the
seventh day of the week at the third hour in the afternoon, that enquiry might
be made into the state of the ministry in general, which I hope may be attended
with good service hereafter.

On the eleventh of the sixth month and third day of the week, after the
parting meeting I went from London to Margarets in Hertfordshire, next day
attended a yearly meeting in Hertford which was very large.

The next day I accompanied several friends who were appointed to visit a
monthly meeting, the members of which paid tithes, and contended for liberty so
to do without censure; we had a conference with them, in which the testimony of
Truth being set over them for that time, they were taken and confounded in
their own arguments.

After this I attended a general or yearly meeting at Baldock, which was very
large and satisfactory, returning next morning to London, I was truly thankful
that I had been enabled to attend these three meetings, enjoying great peace in
my labors there, which lay heavy upon me; my gracious and good Master gave me
wisdom, boldness, and strength to clear myself in the love and power of Truth,
to the tendering of many hearts; may I ever remember his mercies to me, and be
enabled to bless and praise his holy name, who is worthy for ever!

Continuing in and near London about ten days, I then went to a large
satisfactory meeting at Rochester in Kent, where were several clergymen, who
behaved well; next day had a meeting at Loos in the house of Thomas Crisp with
a few friends and diverse others; then going to my friend William Pattersons, at
Canterbury, I was at their meeting in that town, and the day following had one
on the Isle of Thanet, where there are a few friendly people; the meeting next
day at Dover was pretty open; on first day I was at two meetings at Folkstone,
which were dull and heavy, though there are many friends in that place, amongst
whom I was favored with strength to ease my mind.

I then visited the Meetings at marsham, Ashford, Tenterden, (to which friends
of Colebrook came,) Gardnerstreet, Lewis, Brightelmstone, Ifield, Horsham,
Shipley, Arundle, and Chichester, when finding a concern to visit the families
of friends in this city, I spent two days in the service and had same close
exercise, though a good degree of peace; I also attended their two meetings on
first day, which were heavy and laborious; for though here are some tender
people, yet the spirit of the world has brought a blast on several professors.

From hence I went to Gosport in Hampshire where we had a meeting, also one in
the evening at Portsmouth, Jno. Griffith and Jerem. Waring being with me; then
going to Southampton, went in a boat to Cowes on the Isle of Wight, and the day
after had a good meeting at Newport, likewise one in the evening with the
town's people, after another opportunity with friends, returned to Cowes where
I had another with a few of our brethren, so went back to Southampton, and on
first day the twenty-first of the seventh month attended two meetings at Pool
in Dorsetshire, which were dull and laborious; a worldly libertine spirit has
brought a blast on many: Next day we had a meeting with a few friends at
Weymouth, then at Bridport, truth seems at a low ebb in Dorsetshire: The next
meeting was at Ringwood in Hampshire, which was dull; where the life of Truth
is not abode in, people will wither. The same evening we had a meeting to
pretty good satisfaction at Fordingbridge; then one at Alton, at which place we
had another very satisfactory meeting, on first day, and that evening at
Godalmen; the next day had a meeting at Capel in Surry and in the evening at
Darking; on the day following at Ryegate and in the evening at Croydon; from
whence on fourth day morning the thirty-first of the seventh month coming again
to London for the last time, I spent eight days more with friends in that city.

On my coming here from Albans, on the nineteenth of the third month before
mentioned, I felt great fear to possess my mind, having at sundry times before
spent about thirteen weeks in that city, mostly under a close exercise of
spirit, without an openness to say much in public or private to obtain relief;
so that to go thither again appeared to me like entering into a cloud, although I
was secretly bound in spirit to proceed; but attending all the meetings as they
came in course, I felt a gradual openness and strength to decare those things,
which before had been sealed up, being now made sensible that every opening or
vision, which the Lord is pleased to manifest to his servants, are not for
immediate utterance; but the Lord who gives judgment should be carefully
waited' upon, who only can show, by the manifestation of his heavenly light,
the time when, and by the gentle putting forth of his arm of power, abilitates
in the opening of his spirit, which gives tongue and utterance to speak the
word of Truth, in the demonstration of the spirit and power, that opens a
door of entrance in the hearts of them who hear. Our dear Lord said, For it is
not ye that speak; but the Spirit of your Father, which speaks in you, Mat.
x. 20.

Now as my service opened and strength increased, I was invited by some to
their houses to dine, who before looked on me with indifference; but now said
they should be glad to see me there to be more acquainted; but as I felt on my
first arrival in this city, a secret prohibition from going much from house to
house without inward leave, so now the same restraint continued with me, left
by going to such places 1 might somewhat contradict by example, the precepts
which Truth had directed me to diliver in public, to wit, a life of self-denial
and temperance in eating and drinking, with a steady inward attention to the
teachings of the Spirit of Grace, in order to know an establishment of heart
thereby, as being the certain duty of every follower of Christ Jesus our Lord.

Thus I think I have seen that there is great need to be exceedingly careful,
when the Lord is pleased to reach unto and convict disorderly walkers by
instrumental means, that we do not lessen the weight of Divine reproof, by
being familiar with such as if all was well; for they are apt to be fond of the
instrument through whom they have been reached, and if by their fondling, they
gain the esteem of such a friend, it seems to heal them before their wounds are
searched to the bottom; so that I rather chose retirement, and to live as
private as I well could; now I also saw, that if I had fought many
acquaintance, and thereby beheld the conduct and behavior of some in their
families, my way would not have been so open as it now was.

In many meetings the Love and Power of Truth was felt by the humble dependant
children, whose eyes were fixed on their Heavenly Helper, and at some of the
last in London, I had with an innocent boldness to appeal to friends to bear
witness of the manner in which I had spent my time in that city; that I had not
fought to be popular, nor endeavored to gain the praise of any, or the
friendship of those who were not the real friends of truth, keeping in a good
degree under the innocence and simplicity thereof; yet with a near affection I
felt my spirit united to the children of the heavenly family amongst them; but
had never fought to steal their love from the great parent to whom they did
belong; my prayer and heart's desire having been, that there abode might be in
the truth, and their affections placed on God, and the whole delight of their
hearts to meditate in his holy law; that if through me as an instrument they
had received any benefit, the praise belonged to the Lord the only supreme
good; and if in future they did but love, fear and serve him, it was little to
me whether they ever remembered that I had been amongst them. Nevertheless a
participation of the love of God by the members of the true church, has taught
them to know the communion of saints, and the deeply engraven unity of the one
spirit, which makes them as Epistles written in one another's hearts, which
time or distance can never erase.

Having spent first and last in London about twenty three weeks, on the ninth
day of the eighth month and sixth of the week, after a solid meeting at Grace
Church-street, I felt myself at liberty to set my face homewards; the same ship
in which I came over, and the same captain Setphen Mesnard, being now ready to
go for Philadelphia, I went that night to Gravesend accompanied by about twelve
friends, the next morning we went on board the ship, where we had a precious
uniting time, and then returned on shore to dine; after which my friend Samuel
Fothergill and myself taking leave of our friends went on board again, and
passed down the Thames to Margaret Bay, near the Isle of Thanet; on first day
the eleventh we went to the Downs by Deal, though very much indisposed in body, I
enjoyed such quietude of mind, that I was borne up, ard preserved from
repining: Samuel Fothergill before mentioned, came over with me on a religious
visit to friends in America; and during our passage, great nearness was between
us; we held meetings constantly on the first and fifth days of the week, and
landed near Wilmington in New Castle County on Delaware on the twenty-fourth of
the ninth month (1754) in the forenoon.

My brother William Brown with our friend Joshua Dixon from the county of
Durham in Great Britain, who was coming over also on a religious visit to
friends in these colonies, having embarked in another ship, which sailed some
time before us, arrived likewise the same day, and quite unexpected to each
other we met in this town to our mutual joy and satisfaction; from whence after
dining, they with Samuel Fothergill proceeded up to Philadelphia, and I went
home that evening, where I found a kind reception.

In this visit I was absent from home four years and twelve days, having
traveled by land about nine thousand one hundred miles, and attended about one
thousand meetings, besides those in London and Dublin, (in which cities I spent
near half a year,) and visited all the families of Friends in North and South
Holland.

CHAP. V.
His attending the Quarterly-meetings at Philadelphia and Concord, -- The
Yearly Meeting at Philadelphia, and Quarterly Meeting at Shrewsbury in
New Jersey. -- An Account of an Exercise attending his mind relating to War and
the Public Commotions. -- A Conference of several Friends thereon, with their
Address to the Assembly of Pennsylvania on the Subject, and an Epistle to
Friends in that Province in the Year 1755. His attendance of the general
Spring-meeting in Philadelphia in 1756, and some Account of the Calamities of
the Indian War in Pennslvania. -- An Account of the Yearly Meeting in
Philadelphia the same Year. -- A Relation of a Visit of Peter Gardner to
Friends in Scotland. -- A brief Account of an Indian Treaty at Easton in 1757.
-- Some Sentences expressed in two of his Public Testimonies.

OUR Yearly Meeting for worship at Nottingham was held in the week after I
landed, and I was greatly rejoiced to see many of my friends and acquaintance
there.

In the eleventh month following I went up to the quarterly meeting in
Philadelphia, and returned to ours at Concord, where also was Samuel
Fothergill; it was a very large meeting, in which he was divinely opened in
speaking to the state of friends in his public ministry, and serviceable in the
discipline; he also attended our general-meeting in the same month at
London-Grove, which was also large and profitable, then went toward Lancaster
on his way to the Southern Provinces.

I spent this winter mostly at and near home, at times attending some
neighboring meetings, until toward the spring I took a small journey to seven
or eight others.

During my late travels in Europe, beholding the declension of many of the
professors of truth from the ancient simplicity in habit and deportment, I
sometimes was ready to cry out and say, O Pennsylvania! may thine inhabitants
be for ever strangers to the vanities of the world, and the professors of truth
keep their garments clean from the spots thereof, pride and superfluity of
every kind; but now with sorrow of heart, I thought I beheld many of the youth
in our society taking their flight as into the air, where the snares of the
prince of the power thereof are laid to catch them, some of whom being already
so much ensnared to their unspeakable hurt, I knew them not otherwise than by
their natural features and a family resemblance, their demeanor and habit
being so exceedingly altered in a little more than four years; yet to my
comfort I saw a few, who by walking in the Light, had escaped the wiles of
satan and were growing in the Truth.

In the fourth month (1755) I attended the general annual-meeting at
Duck-Creek, also meetings at Little-Creek and George's-Creek, the last of which
was more open than I expected, several of other societies being there, who
behaved orderly; after which I spent most of the summer at home, diligently
attending our meetings for worship and discipline, and had to observe that the
general part of the members of our meeting, were for sometime remarkable in
their care to come together near the hour appointed, and we had some precious
opportunities, many of which were held in silence, wherein I often saw it to be
a time of renewed visitation to many, which if not carefully improved, would
not be continued very long; but that a more trying season would overtake us,
(of which I was sometimes led to speak as truth opened) wherein the door of
outward ministry would be more closed up, which would prove the religion of the
professors of truth, and manifest what they attended meetings for, whether to
wait upon God for the Spiritual Bread, or on man for outward ministry.

In the ninth month I attended our yearly meeting in Philadelphia, which was
large and solid, wherein many weighty matters coming under consideration were
concluded to satisfaction, that many friends parted in a feeling sense of the
overshadowing of the Heavenly wing, with reverent thankfulness of heart.

In the tenth month I attended Shrewsbury quarterly meeting in East-Jersey, at
which also were our friends John Evans and Joseph White, it was large the
sittings thereof being favored with a degree of the Divine presence; we also
attended the monthly meeting there and had some service; friends were
encouraged to deal with such who were disorderly in conduct, there having been
some slackness among them in that respect.

As the sound of war and public commotions, had now entered the borders of
these heretofore peaceful provinces, some solid thoughts attended my mind at
Shrewsbury, respecting the nature of giving money for the King's use, knowing
the same to be intended for the carrying on of war. John Evans accompanying me
homewards, we took three meetings in our way, the last being at Evesham, at
which place I told him that I felt an engagement of mind to go to Philadelphia,
and he consented to go with me; when we came to the city the Assembly of
Pennsylvania being sitting, we understood that a Committee of the House was
appointed to prepare a bill, for granting a sum of money for the King's use to
be issued in paper bills of credit, to be called in and sunk at a stated time
by a tax on the inhabitants, on which account several friends were under a
close exercise of mind, some of whom being providentially together, and
conferring on the subject, concluded it was expedient to request a conference
with those members of the House who were of our religious profession; on
applying to the Speaker, who was one himself, we obtained an opportunity of
conversing with them, after which, we believed that an Address to the Assembly
would be necessary; but we then being only few in number, consulted with
several weighty friends thereon, at length upwards of twenty met together, who
after solidly considering the matter before us, were all of opinion that an
Address to the Assembly would be proper and necessary; whereupon one was drawn
up, which being considered, agreed to and signed by all of us, we went together
to the House, and presenting it to the Speaker, it was read while we were
present; a copy whereof here follows, viz.

To the Representatives of the Freemen of the Province of Pennsylvania, in
General Assembly met.
The Address of some of the People called Quakers in the said Province, on
behalf of themselves and others.
THE Consideration of the measures which I have lately been pursued, and are
now proposed, having been weightily impressed on our minds, we apprehend that
we should fall short of our duty to you, to ourselves, and to our brethren in
religious fellowship, if we did not in this manner inform you, that although we
shall at all times heartily and freely contribute, according to our
circumstances, either by the payment of Taxes, or in such other manner as may
be judged necessary, toward the exigencies of Government, and sincerely desire
that due care may be taken, and proper funds provided, for raising money to
cultivate our friendship with our Indian neighbors, and to support such of our
fellow subjects, who are or may be in distress, and for such other like
benevolent purposes: Yet as the raising sums of money, and putting them into
the hands of committees, who may apply them to purposes inconsistent with the
peaceable Testimony we profess, and have born to the world, appears to us in
its consequences, to be destructive of our religious liberties; we apprehend
many among us, will be under the necessity of suffering, rather than consenting
thereto, by the payment of a tax for such purposes; and thus the fundamental
part of our constitution may be essentially affected; and that free enjoyment
of liberty of conscience, for the sake of which our forefathers left their
native country, and settled this then a wilderness, by degrees be violated.

We sincerely assure you, we have no temporal motives for thus addressing you;
and could we have preserved peace in our own minds, and with each other, we
should have declined it; being unwilling to give you any unnecessary trouble,
and deeply sensible of your difficulty in discharging the trust committed to
you, irreproachable in these perilous times; which has engaged our servent
desires, that the immediate instructions of Supreme wisdom, may influence your
minds; and that being preserved in a steady attention thereto, you may be
enabled to secure peace and tranquillity to yourselves, and those you
represent, by pursuing measures consistent with our peaceable principles; and
then we trust we may continue humbly to confide in the protection of that
Almighty Power, whose providence has heretofore been as walls and bulwarks
round about us.

Philadelphia, 11 th Month 7 th, 1755.

A Bill was however brought in by the Committee of the Assembly, and a Law
enacted for granting a large sum of money proposed to be sunk, or called in by
a general tax.

When this service before related was over, which I apprehended it my duty to
be concerned in, I returned home; but a close exercise remained on me as well
as on the minds of diverse other friends, on account of the law now passed; and
as care had been taken to apprize the Assemby of the solid sentiments of
friends thereon, that we apprehended our charter respecting liberty of
conscience would thereby be affected, therefore a large committee of the
yearly meeting, which had been appointed to visit the quarterly, and
monthly-meetings, met at Philadelphia in the twelfth month, had a conference
thereon, together with another committee nominated to correspond with the
meeting for sufferings in London; and after several solid opportunities of
waiting on the Lord to be rightly instructed, in which being favored with a
renewed sense of the ownings of truth, many friends thought they could not be
clear as faithful watchmen, without communicating to their brethren, their mind
and judgment concerning the payment of such a tax; for which purpose an Epistle
was prepared, considered, agreed to, and signed by twenty one friends, copies
thereof were concluded to be communicated to the monthly-meetings, being as
follows, viz.

An EPISTLE of tender Love and Caution to Friends in Pennsylvania.
Dear and well beloved Friends,
WE salute you in a fresh and renewed sense of our Heavenly Father's Love,
which has graciously overshadowed us in several weighty and solid conferences
we have had together, with many other friends, upon the present situation of
the affairs of the society in this Province; and in that love, we find our
spirits engaged to acquaint you, that under a solid exercise of mind to seek
for council and direction, from the High Priest of our profession, who is the
Prince of Peace: We believe he has renewedly favored us with strong and
lively evidences, that in his due and appointed time, the day which has dawned
in these latter ages, foretold by the Prophet, wherein swords should be beaten
into plough-shares, and spears into pruning hooks, shall gloriously rise higher
and higher; and the Spirit of the Gospel, which teaches to love enemies,
prevail to that degree, that the art of war shall be no more learned. And that
it is his detemination to exalt this blessed day, in this our age, if in the
depth of humility we receive his instructions, and obey his voice: And being
painfully apprehensive, that the large sum granted by the late Act of Assembly
for the King's use, is principally intended for purposes inconsistent with our
peaceable testimony; we therefore think, that as we cannot be concerned in wars
and fightings, so neither ought we to contribute thereto, by paying the tax
directed by the said act, though suffering be the consequence of our refusal,
which we hope to be enabled to bear with patience. And though some part of the
money to be raised by the said act, is said to be for such benevolent purposes*
as supporting our friendship with our Indian neighbors, and relieving the
distresses of our fellow subjects, who have suffered in the present calamities,
for whom our hearts are deeply pained, and we affectionately, and with bowels
of tenderness* sympathize with them therein; and we could most cheerfully
contribute to those purposes, if they were not so mixed, that we cannot in the
manner proposed, show our hearty concurrence therewith, without at the same
time assenting to, or allowing ourselves in practices, which we apprehend
contrary to the testimony which the Lord has given us to bear, for his name
and truth's sake.

And having the health and prospecity of the society at heart, we earnestly
exhort friends to wait for the appearing of the true Light, and stand in the
council of God, that we may know him to be the Rock of Salvation, and place of
our Refuge forever. And beware of the spirit of the world, that is unstable,
and often draws into dark and timorous reasonings; left the god thereof should
be suffered to blind the eye of the mind: And such, not knowing the sure
Foundation, the Rock of Ages, may partake of the terrors and fears, that are
not known to the inhabitants of that place, where the sheep and lambs of Christ
ever had a quiet habitation, which a remnant have to say, to the praise of his
name, they have been blessed with a measure of, in this day of distress.

And as our fidelity to the present government, and our willingly paying all
taxes for purposes which do not interfere with our consciences, may justly
exempt us from the imputation of disloyalty: So we earnestly desire that all
who by a deep and quiet seeking for direction from the Holy Spirit, are or
shall be convinced that he calls us as a people to this testimony, may dwell
under the guidance of the same Divine Spirit, and manifest by the meekness and
humility of their conversation, that they are really under that influence; and
therein may know true fortitude and patience to bear that, and every other
testimony committed to them, faithfully and uniformly: And that all friends may
know their spirits clothed and covered with true charity, the bond of
Christian fellowship, wherein we again tenderly salute you, and remain your
Friends and Brethren."

Philadelphia, 12 th Month 16 th, 1755.

In the Year 1756 I attended our general spring-meeting in Philadelphia, at
which we had the company of our dear friends Samuel Fothergill and Catharine
Payton from Great Britain, and her companion Mary Peasley from Ireland, and it
was a solemn edifying meeting.

The Indians having burnt several houses on the frontiers of this Province,
also at Gnadenhutten in Northampton County, and murdered and scalped some of
the inhabitants; at the time of this meeting two or three of the dead bodies
were brought to Philadelphia in a wagon, with an intent as was supposed to
animate the people to unite in preparations of war to take vengeance on the
Indians, and destroy them: They were carried along several of the streets, many
people following, cursing the Indians, also the Quakers because they would not
join in war for destruction of the Indians. The sight of the dead bodies and
the outcry of the people, were very afflicting and shocking to me: Standing at
the door of a friend's house as they passed along, my mind was humbled and
turned much inward when I was made secretly to cry; What will become of
Pennsylvania? for it felt to me that many did not consider, that the sins of
the inhabitants, pride, profane swearing, drunkenness with other wickedness
were the cause, that the Lord had suffered this calamity and scourge to come
upon them; the weight of my exercise increasing as I walked along the street;
at length it was said in my soul, This Land is polluted with blood, and in the
day of inquisition for blood, it will not only be required at the frontiers and
borders, but even in this place where these bodies are now seen. I said within
myself, "How can this be? since this has been a land of peace, and as yet not
much concerned in war;" but as it were in a moment mine eyes turned to the case
of the poor enslaved Negroes: And however light a matter they who have been
concerned with them may look upon the purchasing, selling, or keeping those
oppressed people in slavery, it then appeared plain to me, that such were
partakers in iniquity, encouragers of war and the shedding of innocent blood,
which is often the case, where those unhappy people are or have been captivated
and brought away for slaves: The same day I went to Pine-street meeting under
an exercising mournful state of mind, and thought I could be willing to sit
among the people undiscovered.

I attended our Quarterly Meeting at Concord in the fifth month, and in a few
days after went to the yearlv-meeting at West-River in Maryland, which was
large and in a good degree satisfactory, then going to meetings at
Herring-Creek, and the Clifts, returned the following first day to West-River,
where I had a good opportunity to clear myself toward friends of that place;
being concerned on account of several of the elders, who did not conduct so
examplary as they ought before the youth, and left them relieved in my mind;
from thence I returned home, taking several meetings in my way.

In the ninth month I was at our yearly meeting for Pennsylvania and
New Jersey, held this year at Burlington, which was large and edifying; many
weighty matters being in much brotherly love resulted to satisfaction, our
friend Thomas Gawthrop from Great Britain was there, in the time thereof our
worthy friend and brother John Evans of Gwynnedd departing this life, Thomas
and I went to attend the burial, on which solemn occasion, he had a seasonable
opportunity to remind a large gathering of people of their latter end, and I
thought it was a solid time.

Being one of the committee appointed by the yearly meeting to visit the
quarterly and monthly-meetings, I was careful in attending on that service, as
way was opened in company with other friends, as likewise our meeting for
sufferings this year established, which is held monthly in Philadelphia,
frequently taking meetings in my way going and returning.

In the Spring of the year 1757, I also attended our general-meeting for
ministers and elders held at Philadelphia.

Having often remembered a remarkable account given me when in England by our
ancient worthy friend John Richardson, which as it made some impression on my
mind I committed to writing, and now reviving think it is worthy to be
preserved, being nearly as follows, though I was not particular in regard to the
time of the occurrence, viz.

"Peter Gardner, a Friend who lived in Essex, had a concern to visit friends in
Scotland; but being low in circumstances, and having a wife and several
children, was under discouragement about it: The Lord in mercy condescended to
remove his doubts, by letting him know he would be with him, and though he had
no horse to ride, and was but a weakly man, yet he would give him strength to
perform the journey, and sustain him so that he should not want for what was
sufficient. And having faith, he laid his concern before the monthly meeting he
belonged to, with innocent weight; and friends concurring with him therein, he
took his journey along the East Side of the Nation, through Norfolk,
Lincolnshire, and Yorkshire, and coming to a weekday meeting at Bridlington
where John Richardson then dwelt, he lodged at his house. In the evening the
doors being shut, Peter asked him if any friend lived that way, (pointing with
his finger) John told him he pointed toward the sea, which was not far from
thence: he said he believed he must go and see somebody that way in the
morning, John asked him if he should go with him? he said he believed it would
not be best, and so went to bed."

"In the morning when John's wife had prepared breakfast, he thought he would
go and see if the friend was well, but found the bed empty, and that he was
gone, at which John Richardson wondered; but soon after Peter came in, to whom
John said, Thou have taken a morning walk, come to breakfast: And before they
had done eating, a friend from the Quay or harbor (the way that Peter Gardner
pointed to over night) came in, and said, "I wonder at thee John, to send this
man with such a message to my house," and related as follows, viz. That he came
to him as he was standing at the Fish-market-Place, looking on the sea, to
observe the wind, That he asked him if he would walk into his house? to which
Peter answered that he came for that purpose; (this was in the twilight of the
morning,) that when he went into the house, he enquired whether his wife was
well, to which the man answered, that she was sick in bed, and invited him to
go in and see her; he said he came so to do: Then being conducted into the
chamber where the sick woman was, he sat down by her; and after a short time
told her, the will and resignation of her mind was accepted instead of the
deed, and that she was excused from the journey which had been before her, and
should die in peace with God and men: Then turning to the man (her husband) he
said, Thy wife had a concern to visit the churches in another country beyond
the sea, but thou would not give her leave, so she shall be taken from thee;
and behold, the Lord's hand is against thee, and thou shall be blasted in
whatsoever thou do, and reduced to want thy bread. So the man seemed angry
with John Richardson, who said to him, "be still, and weigh the matter, for I
knew not of the friend's going to thy house; but thought he was in bed, and did
not inform him about thee nor thy wife," at which he went away. so Peter
pursued his journey toward Scotland, John Richardson and another friend going
with him to Scarborough on horse back, (for he would not let them go on foot
with him,) he kept before them full as fast as they chose to ride; and when
they had gone about half way, he gained ground of them, and John said he was
filled with admiration for he seemed to go with more flight and ease, he
thought than ever he had seen any man before: And riding fast to overtake him,
he thought he beheld a small white cloud as it were encompassing his head; when
he overtook him John said to him, Thou do travel very fast; Peter replied,
my master told me before I left home, that he would give me hinds feet, and he
has performed his promise to me."

"When they came in sight of Scarborough, Peter said, take me to a friend's
house if there is any there; John replied, I will take thee to the place where
I lodge, and if thou art not easy there, I will go until we find a place, if it
may be: so John Richardson took him to his lodgings, and just as they entered
the door, they heard some one go up stairs, and anon the woman friend of the
house coming down with a neighbor of hers invited them to sit down; and in a
short time, Peter says, Here is light and darkness, good and bad in this
house. The woman, after she had got them some refreshment, came and asked John,
"who have thou brought here?" A man of God, he replied. Having a meeting at
Scarborough the next day, John Richardson staid with him, and said he had good
service; he also went with him to several friends houses there, and he
frequently spoke his sense of the state of the families; but as they were near
entering one house, Peter stopped, and said, my Master is not there, I will not
go in, so they turned away."

"Next morning at parting, John Richardson asked him how he was prepared for
money, telling him the journey was long; to whom Peter answered, I have enough,
my Master told me I should not want, and now, a bit of bread, and some water
from a brook, refreshes me as much as a set meal at a table: But John insisted
to see how much money he had, which was but two half-crowns; upon which John
took a handful of small pieces out of his pocket, and forced Peter to take
them, telling him it was as free to him as his own, for so the Lord had put it
into his heart; thus they parted, John and the other friend returning home."

"In about two weeks afterward the man's wife (before mentioned) died, as
Peter had foretold; at that time, the same man had three ships at sea, his son
was master of one, a second son was on board another, and in their voyages they
were all wrecked or foundered and their cargoes chiefly lost; his two sons and
several of the hands being drowned: The man soon after broke and could not pay
his debts, but came to want bread before he died, though he had been in good
circumstances, if not very rich."

"John Richardson further said, That after some time he heard Peter Gardner was
dead in Cumberland, on his return from Scotland, and being attached to him in
near affection, he went to enquire how he ended."

"John Bowstead a noted friend near Carlisle gave him an account that Peter had
been through Scotland, and came to Carlisle, and the small pox being there, he
took the infection very suddenly and lay ill with it: So J. Bowstead went just
as the pock was coming out on him, and took him to his house, they never came
out kindly, but swelled him very much, so that he was blind, and died about the
seventh day, was quite sensible to the last, and knew the states of those who
came to see him: He had enough to pay his funeral charges."

On the twelfth of the seventh month this year I left home, in order to attend
a treaty to be held between the Indians and our Government at Easton in
Northampton County; and proceeded to Philadelphia, where I was present at
several conferences with friends, the Governor having declared his dislike to
their attendance at that treaty, or their distinguishing themselves by giving
the Indians any presents; the result was, that as mutual tokens of the revival
of ancient friendship had passed between them and the Indians, with a veiw to
promote a general peace; it would be of bad consequence now to neglect or
decline attending on this important occasion; though it was judged necessary for
friends to act with great caution. We therefore set forward, and taking a
meeting at Gwynnedd in the way, reached Easton on fourth day the twenty-first
of the month, the Governor being got there about two hours before us; but did
not enter on business that day.

Many friends from Philadelphia and other parts being here collected, we held a
meeting on fifth day which was low and dull, things appearing very dark; in the
afternoon the Indians with Teedyuscung their King, or chief man, went to the
Governor and signified the sincerity of their intentions to promote the good
work of peace, when he delivered several strings and belts of wampum, in order
to certify the full power and authority given to Teedyuscung for that purpose,
who also desired that as things had heretofore been misunderstood or forgotten,
he might have the liberty to choose a clerk to take the minutes of the
transactions at this treaty on behalf of the Indians, which was put off by the
Governor at that time.

Next morning Teedyuscung renewed the same request, but was again put by: Then
the Indians began to be very uneasy, from an apprehension that some people from
the Jersey side of the river were likely to rise, with a design to destroy
them; but on going to converse with them, and giving them some pipes and
tobacco, which they were told was a present from friends, they became more
quiet, and seemingly pacified; this day and the next there was little business
done.

On first day the twenty-fourth of the month, friends held a public meeting, in
the Treaty-booth to pretty good satisfaction, to which a great number of people
came, two friends having acceptable service therein; in the afternoon friends
met again; but there seemed so great a cloud over the meeting, by reason of a
raw careless spirit prevailing over the minds of the people, as though there
was no God, notwithstanding his judgments are so conspicuous. especially in
these parts of the country, that life did not arise in this meeting, about
sunset this evening we heard that the Mohawk Indians had requested to have a
fire made to dance round, which the governor allowed, as he had the evening
before to the Delawares, with both which we were very uneasy, as the tendency
thereof was to make the Indians drunk; but no endeavors of ours could prevent
it.

On second day morning the Governor agreed to allow the Indian King to choose
himself a clerk, which he did, and about one o'clock that day the treaty was
first opened in public, when Teedyuscung was desired fully to inform with an
open heart, wherein he apprehended the Indians had been defrauded by the
Proprietaries, to which he answered that he would tomorrow; but they must
first clean up the blood, (as he expressed it) and bury the dead bodies: Next
day being again met, the King said, "that according to his word, he had now met
some of the several nations to do what they could for settling peace; but now
in the first place he had seen, and considered the black cloud that hung over
the land, the blood and bodies of the people who had suffered," and then said,
"I have gathered up the stained leaves, the blood and dead bodies, and looked
round about, when all seemed terrible, that I could find no place to hide them;
but looking up, I saw the great and good Spirit above; let us heartily join in
prayer to him, that he may give us power to bury all these things out of our
sight, that neither the evil spirit, nor any wicked person may ever be able to
raise them; that we may love like brethren, and the sun may shine clear upon
us, that we, our wives, our young men and children may rejoice in a lasting
peace, that we may eat the fruits of the earth, and they may do us good, so
that we may enjoy peace in the day time, and at night lay down and sleep in
it." Gave a belt of seventeen rows of wampum.

By another belt he told the Governor, that he took him by one hand, and the
five nations of Indians and their allies took him by the other, therefore said
he, let us all stand as one man, with one heart and one mind, and join in this
good work of peace. When we intend to lift or remove a great weight, we must be
strong, if all do not exert themselves we can never do it; but if all heartily
join, it is easy to remove it, our forefathers did not proceed right when they
met together, they looked at the earth and things present, which will soon pass
out of our sight; but did not look forward to the good of posterity. Let us set
out right, and do better than they did, that a peace may be settled which may
last to our children.

He next acquainted the Governor, that one of the messengers who had gone on a
late message to the Indians a far off, (meaning Moses Tatamy's son) was shot on
his return by one of our young men, and lay in a dangerous condition; and by a
string of wampum insisted, that if he died, the other should be tried by our
law, and suffer death also; and that some of their people should be present, to
be able to inform the other nations of Indians of the justice done. He also
revived the ancient agreement, that if any of them should commit the like
offense, the criminal should be delivered up to be tried according to our laws,
and suffer death in the same manner.

On fourth day there was no public treaty, things seemed in much confusion and
very dull; but friends kept quiet; the next day I found myself much indisposed,
and therefore thought it best to leave Easton before the treaty ended; but
before I left it friends had a solemn opportunity together, at which time I
thought I saw, that the working of the dark revengeful spirit, which opposed
the measures of peace, was one reason why friends were so baptized into
distress and suffering, of which I made some mention to friends, and that if
they kept quiet, the clouds as to them would somewhat break away; Daniel
Stanton had a solemn time in supplication. After this meeting taking leave of
friends, I rode to Richland, and though my distemper increased and I was very
ill, I pursued my journey the next day, and the day following reached
Philadelphia, where I was carefully attended through a time of tedious and
close affliction, my dear wife coming to me in my illness was also taken with
the same disorder, that we were not able to move homewards until the
twenty-third of the eighth month, but through the goodness of kind providence
in supporting us, got to our own habitation the next day in the evening, where
after about a week's stay I set out again to attend the meeting for sufferings
in Philadelphia, and though very weak, got there, after tarrying part of three
days in town, went forward in order to attend the monthly-meetings in Bucks
County, of which I had a view while I lay sick, when it appeared to me the way
to recover my strength was to be faithful to every discovery of duty;
accordingly in company with several other friends appointed by the
yearly meeting, I visited the several monthly meetings in that county, in some
of which a good degree of the Divine presence being felt, was cause of
thankfulness; though at one of them we had some remarkable close work, both in
the time of worship and discipline.

Returning to Philadelphia I perceived myself much recovered, spent five days
there attending meetings as they came in course; and then went to Newtown
meeting in Chester County, which was small, there being an evident slackness of
attending week day meetings; from thence I went to Uwchlan, to the marriage of
William Trimble and Phebe Thomas, which was a good meeting, where I met my dear
wife on her way to the yearly meeting at Philadelphia; and after attending a
meeting at Merrion, we went into the city the next evening; our friends Thomas
Gawthrop, Samuel Spavold, William Reckitt and others from Great Britain, also
Thomas Nicholson from North Carolina, were at this yearly meeting, which was
large and satisfactory, holding from the seventeenth to the twenty-fourth of
the ninth month, 1757.

Here I may note, that before I left home to attend the late Indian treaty at
Easton: In my sleep I thought I was riding Eastward in the twilight, and saw a
light before me toward fun-rising, which did not appear to be a common light,
but soon observed the appearance of something therein, whereat the beast that I
rode was much affrighted and would have ran from it, which I knew would be in
vain; for I took it to be an Angel, whose motion was as swift as thought, so
rather stopped and reined in my beast toward it; it was encompassed with a
brightness like a rainbow, with a large loose garment of the same color down
to the feet; it rather seemed to move even along than to walk, and then stood
still in the midst of many curious stacks of corn; it was of a human form about
seven feet high (as I thought,) and smiling on me, asked where I was going; I
said toward yonder building, which I thought was an elegant one directly
before me; it seemed to approve my way and vanished upwards. Then I awakened
and had particularly to remember the complexion of this angelic apparition,
which was not much different from one of the Indians clean washed from his
grease and filth; remembering my dream very fresh, when I had seen the Indians
at the treaty, and had heard some matters remarkably spoken by some particulars
of them, I was made to believe it was not unreasonable to conclude, that the
Lord was in them by his good Spirit, and that all colors were equal to him,
who gave life and being to all mankind; we should therefore be careful to
examine deeper than the outward appearance, with a tender regard to station and
education, if we desire to be preserved from error in judgment.

The following Sentences being delivered in two of his public testimonies, were
soon after committed to writing by a friend who was present, and appearing
worthy to be further preserved are now communicated, -- viz.

In a first day meeting at East Nottingham the nineteenth of the twelfth month
1756, he expressed nearly as follows.

I felt my mind in this meeting remarkably drawn from outward observation, and
was commanded to center in deep and awful silence, wherein there was such a
flowing of good will to mankind, as is scarcely to be uttered by tongue; but
thus centering with diligent attention, I thought I felt a strong power of
darkness and stupid ignorance, seemingly combined to make war against this
solemn attention of mind; yet after patiently waiting some time, to my comfort
I felt a secret victory, and the darkness vanished: Then, a voice was uttered
in me attended (I thought) with Divine authority thus, I will bow the
inhabitants of the earth, and particularly of this land, and I will make them
fear and reverence me, either in mercy or in judgment; hereupon a prospect
immediately opened to my view of a day of calamity and sore distress which was
approaching, and in which the careless and stupid professors, who are easy, and
not concerned to properly worship and adore the almighty, and have not labored
to witness their foundation to be laid on him the immovable Rock, will be
greatly surprised with fearfulness; and on the behalf of such, a piercing cry
and lamentation ran through me, thus, Alas for the day! Alas for the day! Woe
is me! (several times repeated) and a voice which seemed to be connected with
the foregoing, said further, yet once more faith the Lord, I shake not the
earth only but also heaven: Not only the situation of those that know not any
place of safety or refuge, that which is outward and earthly; but also those
who assume a higher place and in their specious appearances and false pretenses
amongst men, do value themselves on their assumed goodness, and would fain be
accounted of the highest rank, and even place themselves among the saints, and
are by some accounted as stars in the firmament; yet in the day of my power
wherein I will shake the heavens, and the earth, those stars shall fall to the
ground.

In the opening, something within me was ready to say, amen so be it, O Lord
Almighty, cut short thy work in the earth, in order that thou may put an end
to sin, and finish transgression, that thy fear, and the knowledge of thee, may
cover the earth, as the waters cover the sea. Wherefore, my friends, the
fervent desire of my soul is, that all present may with diligence labor to
have your minds truly centred and humbled before God, to know a being fixed on
that foundation which only stands sure, that in a time of outward distress,
which perhaps may come in your day, ye may find a place of safety and refuge.
All which with more to the like effect, was delivered in great humility and
brokenness.

At a week day meeting at the same place, the seventeenth of the second month
1757, several persons by unseasonable coming in had interrupted the quiet of
the meeting, he gave a suitable caution in that respect, in gentle winning
terms, reminding those met of the awfulness and solemnity which should attend
us when we approach the presence of him who is most Holy; and in what
reverence, fear and care, we ought to come together, not forgetting the hour
appointed; and then expressed nearly as follows.

A certain sentence has been presented to the view of my mind, which seemed to
contain a gentle engaging caution, and matter of instruction to me, attended
with sweetness; which was, Work while it is day. Friends, this is our day,
wherein we ought to be diligent and industrious, in the light of the day we may
see, and understand how to work, and what to do, that at the conclusion we may
obtain from the Master of the day, who dwells in Light, the answer of well
done; for the night will come, wherein no man can work: We are now favored
with liberty in this our day, to assemble together for worship unmolested; and
my hearty desire is, that we may properly improve this mercy; for the time to
some of us may come, before our day in this life is closed, wherein this
privilege, may in some measure be taken from us; something in me would be
ready to say, The Lord forbid that should be the case; but by reason of the
great declension which has overspread the church, I hardly dare to expect any
other: Oh may we therefore be careful to prize the mercy of God, and endeavor
to gain an inheritance in the light, that when night overtakes, and darkness as
to the outward may hang over us, we may be favored to withdraw into the sure
hiding place, and know a quiet habitation!

CHAP. VI.
Sundry Visits to Meetings in Pennsylvania and New Jersey. -- Also in Maryland
and Virginia. -- His Apprehensions of Duty to proceed on a Visit to Barbados,
and Resignation thereto, but at length became most easy to decline it. -- The
Settlement of Uwchlan Monthly Meeting with his Epistle to Friends there. --
Also some weighty Expressions uttered in the time of his Sickness in the Year
1761.

HAVING some drawings in my mind to visit the meetings of friends in the
Counties of Philadelphia and Bucks, being also under an appointment of the
yearly meeting to join with some others in a visit to the monthly-meetings; in
order to proceed on my service, I acquainted our monthly meeting at Nottingham,
with whose concurrence I left home on the third of the twelfth month 1757,
accompanied by a near relation, and attended Darby meeting on first day,
wherein though life and the power of Truth seemed to be low, I thought the humble
waiters were encouraged; we went to the evening meeting in Philadelphia, next
morning attended the meeting of ministers and elders, and the day following a
meeting at the Bank, also a meeting for sufferings, and on fourth day returned
to Darby to their monthly meeting, where we found friends under a strait about
disowning one among them, who denied the Divinity of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ; on whom they had bellowed much labor to convince him of his error, the
meeting ended well; the company of the friends who attended it being acceptable
and of service: We were next day at Haverford monthly meeting held at Radnor,
where the lively exercise of the discipline appeared to be very low, yet I was
glad I was there; during the time of the business, feeling a concern on my mind
to appoint a meeting at Haverford to be held the next day, I proposed it for
concurrence, which being readily agreed to, we attended there accordingly, and
had a large meeting much to satisfaction, having great peace in observing the
motion of truth respecting this appointment; on the following day accompanied
by my friend Hugh Evans, I visited some ancient friends, who by reason of old
age and indisposition could not get out to meetings, wherein I was favored
with that peace, which I have often experienced to attend the acceptable work
of visiting the afflicted: On first day after a satisfactory meeting at
Merrion, I went to the evening meeting in Philadelphia, in which truth favored
with a degree of openness, to the instruction and comfort of many: On third day
afternoon, accompanied by my brother Wm. Brown, went forward to Richland
monthly meeting held on the fifth day, where we had some close hard work, which
generally happens when a lifeless formal spirit has the prevalence in managing
the affairs of the church, for want of feeling after and waiting for the true
authority, even the power of God, yet we were glad tnat we were there; from
thence my brother returned home, the rest of us going to an appointed meeting
at Plumstead, which though the weather was severely cold, was large and
comfortable, in the sense whereof we were thankful to the author of all good;
the meeting next day at Buckingham was small but satisfactory; I have often
observed, that the severity of the weather is not a sufficient excuse for the
Lord's panting children to neglect public worship, which is a duty incumbent on
us and due to his glorious name; at Wrightstown meeting the next day the master
of our Assemblies was pleased to appear in an eminent manner, to the comfort of
the poor, instruction of the enquirers, rebuke of the backsliders, and
edification of many; for which the sacrifice of thanksgiving and praise was
offered to him, who alone is worthy for ever; after this meeting I felt the
value of that peace, which by the humble is better felt than expressed: We had
next a good meeting at Makefield, at which were many seeking tender young
people; then attended the Falls preparative meeting, which was satisfactory, a
comfortable degree of unity subsisting among friends; our next meeting was at
Bristol, in which after a dark distressing time in silence, what I had to
communicate was introduced by a question thus, Are you found in faith and
practice? and I was led to set forth, "that to profess and acknowledge even
sacred Truths, without a life of self-denial with an answerable honest conduct,
was no way sufficient; that being a dead faith, which produces not good works
in him who faith he believes; showing what stumbling blocks, the nominal
professors are, who by their example plainly manifest, that they are not
possessors of what they profess to have, and are the greatest enemies the truth
has, which I was doubtful was the case with some among them;" I had peace in
this plain dealing; our next was a laborious meeting at Byberry, yet yielded a
degree of the same peace; a friend afterward told me that the Hate of the
meeting was clearly spoken to, which I relate not for any praise to man; but
that it was an additional confirmation of the Lord's sufficiency to his own
work, and when we are weak, foolish or contemptible in our own esteem, his
strength appears, and his wisdom inspires with true knowledge, whereby he
magnifieth himself; we went home with our friend James Thornton and next day to
Horsham, where was a large and good meeting, after which we had a comfortable
time in the family of John Cadwalader; next day we attended the monthly meeting
at Abington in company with Samuel Eastburn and Joseph White; we found things
low here, because of a want of that strength in which stands the authority of
the church; it is only the pure wisdom from above, that preserves friends in
peace, meekness, gentleness, and unanimity in the distribution of right justice
and judgment in the church of Christ.

We were next day at Gwynedd monthly meeting, which was a precious time through
the power of that sacred name, which is as ointment poured forth, the favor
whereof continued through both worship and discipline, in which the faithful were
mutually comforted; we from thence went to Ellen Evans's, and had an
evening-meeting, some of the neighbors coming in, several friends were much
enlarged in counsel, and the opportunity ended in solemn prayer and
thanksgiving.

We went from thence to Exeter monthly meeting, which ended to satisfaction in
the main; then home with our friend Ellis Hugh, where Joseph White and Saml.
Eastburn left us to return homewards; my companion and I proceeding to Reading,
had a public meeting in the Courthouse, which I thought was pretty well
considering the company, many loose people attending; but Truth seemed to come
into dominion and quieted them, that the meeting ended in a degree of awful
sweetness; On first day, being also the first of the new-year 1758, we were at
Maiden Creek meeting, which although a low time, afforded peace and comfort, from
a prospect that there were among the youth in particular, some true branches of
the vine of Life, who therefore could not be satisfied without the living sap
from the Holy root, and in the Lord's time would be favored therewith, if
there was a patient waiting for that springing season; we returned to Reading
that evening, to a meeting held by appointment at a friend's house for the
members of our society in that town, in the attendance of which I found peace;
crossing the river Schuylkill we were next day at Robinson or the Forest
meeting, after which I was much humbled in a sense of the great condescension
and mercy of the Lord our God, who was pleased to renew the reaches of his
power to several, who had many years made profession of the pure Truth, and yet
dwelt in that which is impure, as drinking to excess and other evils, some of
whom I knew, but did not know that they were there till the meeting was over;
the weak were strengthened and the humble seekers encouraged, and great love
flowed toward the youth: Returning again over Schuylkill we went to that
called Evans's meeting, which was very open for doctrine, several not of our
society being present: The first sentences that appeared in my view were, many
are called, but few are chosen, attended with such weakness, and such a sense
of my own foolishness and inability for handling that subject, that I was
afraid, because I had a secret apprehension that some would incline to make an
advantage of those words, but few are chosen, in applying them to strengthen
themselves in the corrupt manner in which they hold election; but it appeared
that the words, all have not obeyed, was the reason why so few are chosen: My
mouth was opened in fear, even to trembling, yet with a secret hope and
confidence that the Lord would, be mouth and wisdom, with desires that he would
bind my attention to his own immediate instruction, that the language of his
Spirit might be only uttered by me, and he was pleased to magnify his own Truth
in the opening of these passages: I give this hint, that they who are concerned
in the ministry may humbly trust in God, and not lean to their fears,
knowledge, experience or wisdom, in opening the mysteries of the Gospel, but
confide in the key of David, which when it opens none can shut. Next day we
were at Providence or Perkiomin meeting, which though poor, and truth low, peace
was afterward measurably enjoyed, from an evidence of having been honest
according to the ability given; and the day following at Plymouth, faithful
friends were comforted in the gracious condescension of our holy head, who was
pleased to favor with the aboundings of the life and love of Truth; we then
returned to Philadelphia with thankful hearts for the evidence of peace.

My companion returning home, I went in company with my brother on first day
morning to Frankfort, having felt an engagement for a considerable time to
visit that meeting; a sense of the declension of friends in this place, both in
respect to numbers and the life of religion, was cause of heaviness of heart,
but having performed my visit in faithfulness according to ability, returned
with a degree of peace to the evening meeting in the city, which was
comfortable, staying there until the fifth day of the week, in which time I
attended the usual meetings, one with the Negroes much to satisfaction, and
also the meeting for sufferings I got safe home on seventh day the fourteenth
of the first month, having traveled in this journey about four hundred and ten
miles.

On the twenty-second of the second month, I again left home in order to attend
the quarterly meeting at Burlington, and some particular meetings in
New Jersey, as well on account of the yearly-meeting's appointment, as my own
sense of duty, of which I had the approbation of our monthly meeting signified
by a minute; in my way I attended the monthly meeting in Philadelphia with some
degree of satisfaction; then taking Chester or Adam's meeting in New Jersey,
reached Burlington on first day evening, the next day being the
quarterly meeting, at which with William Horn and my brother Wm. Brown I had
some service; after staying the youth's meeting, they left me and I went to a
meeting on fourth day at a School-house, where several friends met, also diverse
others who perhaps had not been at any place of worship for sometime, and were
easy about religion, to whom it became my concern to show how disagreeable and
loathsome that state was, from Rev. iii. 15. I know thy works, that thou art
neither cold nor hot; so then, because thou art lukewarm, and neither cold nor
hot, I will spue thee out of my mouth." It opened to me that a lukewarm
condition, to hold a profession of religion so as to take it ill not to be
thought a christian, but at the same time to remain easy and not in earnest to
experience the life, virtue, and power of christianity; not so cold as to
forget the name, nor so hot or zealous as to witness the life of true religion,
was very displeasing to the Almighty. A good degree of power attended the
opening, and in treating on that passage, with much love to such lukewarm
professors, which reached and tendered several beyond expectation; but no
praise to man, though he may will or run, but to God who shows mercy.

At Chesterfield monthly meeting my friend John Woolman met me the next day; a
raw company attending on account of a proposal or two for marriage, which I
suppose they expected to be there presented; it was a time somewhat low and
distressing: The advice of the yearly meeting not being here enough observed,
which is against allowing such who are not members of our society to sit in our
meetings for discipline, unless they are nearly related to the parties
concerned, of which that meeting was modestly reminded; I was also grieved that
matters were introduced too much at the judgment or pleasure of individuals, by
reason that they are not in the practice of holding preparative meetings, the
service of which, was particularly recommended to their consideration; I had
some reward of peace in having attended this meeting: We were next at a meeting
in Trenton with a few friends whom the spirit of the world (I thought) had much
laid waste; there seemed more oppenness toward a few of other societies
present, some of whom were tendered by Truth's testimony, which seemed to reach
the witness in them; at Bordentown meeting next day, many were made thankful,
the Divine presence being felt among us; from hence J. Woolman returned home,
and John Sykes accompanied me to Upper-Springfield, where the meeting was
large, and through the Lord's mercy, open and satisfactory, the testimony of
Truth flowing in his love toward the youth, many were tendered thereby, the
faithful were encouraged and the negligent warned; after which I went to
Burlington to attend that monthly meeting, then to the burial of Margaret
Butcher at Mansfield, which was a laborious painful meeting composed of a mixed
multitude, yet something of an evidence attended truth's testimony, so that the
meeting ended with solidity; from thence I went to Peter Harvey's and was
thankful for the enjoyment of a peaceful quiet mind, though poor; next day was at
Old-Springfield meeting, which was slow and late in gathering, dull and heavy
in sitting, as will be the case, when and wheresoever the life and power of
religion is wanting, or not carefully sought after and waited for, by those who
profess it, which was observed to them in the love of truth, and in the
simplicity and plainness thereof, so that I left this meeting with a heavy
heart, not from a sense of any omission of duty on my part; but lest they
should too soon forget what manner of persons they saw themselves to be in the
Light, that discovers and answers the witness, as face answers face in a glass.
Then taking meetings at Mountholly, Rancocus, and visiting the widow of Peter
Andrews, I was at a large meeting at Evesham on first day following; but the
expectations of the people being much outward, occasioned a painful deep
waiting a considerable time, or at least I thought so, when at length I felt
some pressure on my mind to stand up, which as I followed carefully, Truth
opened into the state of the meeting to my admiration, that I was enabled
therein with an innocent boldness to attend thereto in speaking, which yielded
me great peace after the meeting, and I was thankful for that opportunity. Next
day I attended Haddonfield monthly meeting, at which were Samuel Nottingham and
William Horn, whose company was comfortable and of advantage to the meeting. I
then visited the meetings at Pilesgrove, Alloways Creek, Greenwich, lower
Alloways Creek, Salem, and one at Raccoon Creek, to which many sober people
came not professing with us, also a large, and I believe to some a satisfactory
meeting at Woodberry, the state whereof opened pretty clearly, the humble being
instructed, but I was sensible of an opposition here to some part of what I had
to deliver to a self-righteous state, yet through the mercy of our gracious
Lord, I left this meeting with an evidence of peace, and an affectionate heart
yearning toward them, then went to Haddonfield to attend the quarterly meeting
for Gloucester and Salem Counties, and from thence to the General
Spring-meeting at Philadelphia, after which I returned home, having been out
five weeks and three days.

After this journey I did not go much abroad for more than a year, except to
attend our quarterly meeting, and the yearly and general Spring-meeting at
Philadelphia.

In the year 1759, I had some drawings in my mind to visit a few meetings in
Maryland and Virginia, also the yearly meeting at West-River; in which having
the concurrence of our monthly meeting, I left home on the twenty-eighth of the
fifth month and next day was at Gunpowder meet-meeting; then at Elkridge with a
few friends and diverse not professing with us, amongst whom there was an
openness to hear the testimony of Truth declared; but for want of a steady
walking in the professors thereof, it seems in a great measure laid waste; that
night I lodged at the house of a kind man, but have to remark that natural
affability in any one, unless it is sweetened by the baptism of the Spirit of
Truth, is of little value; on fifth day I was at a new-meeting house at Indian
Spring with a few friends, some of whom I fear, scarcely know what they
profess, the next had a meeting at Samuel Plummer's house at Patuxent to
satisfaction, and on seventh day the yearly meeting at West-River began, which
held until fourth day following, which was in the main the most open and
satisfactory meeting I was ever at in that place; I thought a disposition
rather prevailed among the younger sort, to attend to the discipline more
closely than in times past. Then taking a meeting at Sandy Spring, I proceeded
to Fairfax, being about forty miles, where I had a comfortable meeting on first
day, for which the hearts of many were made thankful to the author of all good,
the same day we had also a satisfactory opportunity in Mahlon Janney's family,
his mother being indisposed, and the next day attended Monaquasy meeting in
Maryland, where truth is at a low ebb, through the conduct of some unfaithful
professors; our next was a precious meeting with a few sincere friends at Bush
Creek, that evening I went to William Farquar's, having a meeting at Pipe Creek
next day, which was pretty open, and satisfactory and one the day following at
Petapsco Forest amongst a withered people. Alas! to profess the truth and not
possess it in sanctification of spirit, makes little meetings feel desolate;
from thence I returned home to our monthly meeting, being absent nineteen days
and rode near three hundred and fifty miles, Samuel England being my companion.

In this year I was also engaged with my friend John Woolman in visiting some
active members of our society, who held slaves, first in the city of
Philadelphia, and in other places; also in New Jersey, in which service we were
enabled to go through some heavy labors, and were favored with peace; Divine
Love in a tender sympathy prevailing at times, with a hope that these
endeavors would not be in vain.

In the second month 1760, I acquainted our monthly meeting, that in order to
proceed in performing the appointment of the yearly meeting, having also a
draught in my own mind, I had an inclination to visit some meetings up the
river Delaware, particularly the monthly meeting of Kingwood in New Jersey,
with which having the approbation of friends, I set out from home on the
twenty-sixth of the fifth month following, and reached the Bank meeting in
Philadelphia the next day; from thence proceeded to the quarterly meeting for
Bucks County held at Buckingham, where though things were low, the affairs of the
church were transacted in a good degree of amity and peace; it was a large
meeting, there being a great appearance of young people, some very hopeful, who
in the love of truth were exhorted to come up in their places, by learning
discipline of the author thereof, viz. the Spirit of Truth, and they were
cautioned against that very unbecoming and hurtful practice, though too common,
of going out after worship, and standing without in companies talking when they
should keep their places in the meeting, which should quietly and solidly
proceed on the business coming before it; heavenly love was felt by the tender
in spirit, which I hope will be remembered by many; the next day the general or
youth's-meeting was large, open and satisfactory in the main; for which the
name of the Lord was praised. Next day I spent in visiting a widow, also other
aged and infirm friends, in the performance of which duty I had some
satisfaction, and on first day was at Plumstead meeting, which was large and
very comfortable, the divine presence being felt, the power of Truth prevailed
to the tendering of many; but such favor being not of him that wills or
runs, but of God that shows mercy, to him belongs the praise of all, who
is worthly for ever. In the evening I attended a meeting at a School-house near
Samuel Eastburn's, in which I had some particular service, the states of many
present being very clearly opened before them in the love of the Gospel, which
made deep impression on some who were much broken, and I believe it would be as
dew on their hearts, if they would remain enough in the valley of humility.

I was the next day at Buckingham monthly meeting, which in the time of
business suffered much by the prevalence of a talkative noisy spirit, which
mightily darkens counsel in those who give way to it, and leads into doubtful
and trifling disputations; so that I left that meeting with pain of heart, in a
sense that the time had been so lost that several weighty matters could not be
brought under consideration to advantage, which were therefore continued until
the next month.

Wrightstown monthly meeting on third day was more satisfactory, the spirit for
discipline rather reviving, and I hope a desire among the youth at least for an
improvement; it too frequently is the case, that some of the elderly sort are
so bigoted to their old forms and customs, that they will scarcely trouble
themselves to examine whether these customs are agreeable to the testimony of
Truth, or whether through inattention they have not swerved and fallen short in
various matters that now occasion a difficulty in the churches, which
difficulties must be labored under for a season by the baptized members, who
nevertheless, as they keep their places will grow stronger.

Accompanied by my friend Thomas Ross I attended the Falls monthly meeting,
wherein I was comforted from a sense that a tender people were among them, though
they felt a time of dearth, whom the Lord would in his own time water as his
peculiar heritage; but this comfort was heavily ballasted from a secret fear
attending me, that there were among them some, who like the heath in the
desert, know not when good comes, such who were easy in a dead form, and
contented with a name, neglecting to wait for that transforming power, which
would renew into the image and life of the Son of God; to whom in the love, and
plainness of the Gospel, I was constrained to clear myself; the meeting for
discipline was pretty open and ended in a good degree of sweetness; we went
home with the wife of Joseph White, who was then on a religious visit to
friends in Europe, and had a comfortable season in the family with the
children, she appearing to be resigned in the absence of her husband, her
spirit being sweetened with the truth in innocent quietude.

At Middletown monthly meeting the next day truth seemed to be low, but we had
some service in the discipline, that I came away with peace, and the day
following in company with Joshua Ely went to Jacob Birdshal's in Amwell
township New Jersey, and had a meeting in his barn, which being a wet time) was
small; there are few here who profess with us, some of whom seem to have
nothing more than the name. Next morning we called at the house of an old
professor, he and his wife were both ancient but full of talk; I felt a desire
to visit them, and had a full time to clear myself in a close and plain manner,
though in love to them. After which going to Kingwood or Bethlehem attended two
meetings there on first day, when truth favored in opening the states of the
people in mercy to many, which may be of advantage if rightly remembered; then
proceeding to the Drowned-lands so called, had there a meeting with a few
professors who seemed too much withered, then taking another at Paulin's Kiln
to pretty good satisfaction, returned to Kingwood monthly meeting than held at
Hardwick; several hopeful young people belong thereto, the meeting was
comfortable, friends rejoicing in the company one of another, and in the Lord
for his merciful regard; next day I returned to Bethlehem, and from thence to
Gwynedd meeting on first day, after which I rode to Uwchlan, about twenty-eight
miles, from thence home, where I found all well, having been absent three weeks
and rode about four hundred and sixteen miles in this journey.

Having a draught of love and a motion therein to visit the monthly and
particular meetings within our own quarter, on the West side of Susquehanna
river, with the concurrence of our monthly meeting on that occasion, I set out
from home on the seventeenth of the tenth month in company with my
brother-in-law James Brown, who likewise had the approbation of Goshen
monthly meeting for this purpose; we visited the meetings at Pipe Creek, Bush
Creek and Monaquasy in Maryland, in the first of which the Lord was pleased to
favor in opening the state of friends to the tendering the hearts of many; the
other was satisfactory, and the last seemed to be a renewed visitation to a raw
declining people, several of whom were tendered through the gracious
long-suffering of Infinite Goodness; we were next at the preparative meeting at
Fairfax in Virginia; then at Goose Creek, wherein truth owned our service to
the comfort of the faithful; we then attended the meeting of ministers and
elders, also the monthly meeting at Fairfax, likewise the first day meeting
there, and one that evening in Francis Hague's house, whose wife was
indisposed; several disorderly walkers being present, the Lord was pleased to
open, and give ability to speak to their states in a measure of his heart
tendering love, to the reaching the witness in some; after this returning to
the widow Janney's, we had a precious opportunity with her and children to our
mutual satisfaction.

Our next meeting was at Potts's near the South-mountain, which was open for
doctrine, several of other religious professions attending, who appeared loving
and well satisfied; then at Crooked-run, near the North-branch of
Shanandoa-river, in company with several other friends from Pennsylvania, some
of us being a committee appointed by our quarterly meeting, the friends living
here having requested to have a meeting settled among them; the opportunity was
to some satisfaction, there being some young people who I hope will grow in the
truth, though some of those who are elderly appear too superficial. From hence we
went to Hopewell preparative meeting, also to a small meeting over the mountain
near Jesse Pugh's, then we attended a select meeting at Hopewell, and at the
same place on first day, which was large and solid, many therein being much
tendered, to the praise of the Lord whose mercy endures for ever; in the
evening we had also a satisfactory meeting at the widow Lupton's near
Winchester. Next day we were at Hopewell monthly meeting, where we found
considerable weakness, as to the practice of the discipline, on which account
we had some labor to the comfort of the well-minded; on our return we had
meetings at Monallan, Huntington, Warrington, and Newberry in York County
Pennsylvania, and a seasonable opportunity with friends in Yorktown, from
whence I proceeded home with a thankful mind, having traveled about four
hundred miles in this journey.

In the spring of the year 1761, having an engagement on my mind to visit
Barbados and some of the adjacent Islands, I proposed the same to my brethren
at home for their weighty consideration before I asked for their certificate,
who after a time expressed their unity therewith, and gave me a certificate, to
which the quarterly meeting signified their approbation; at our next
yearly meeting I laid my concern before the ministers and elders when for any
thing that appeared, I had their unity and prayers; I came home intending to
proceed before the winter sat in, and attended our general meeting at
Nottingham in the tenth month, but in a few days after was taken ill with a
fever, which with bodily pain and exercise of mind reduced me to a very low and
weak state; See page 208.
but the Lord was pleased to give me inward strength, influencing my mind with
love to all men, and great love to the members of our religious society, the
state whereof I saw in a clear manner, and I so far recovered as to attend our
quarterly meeting at London Grove in the eleventh month, at which I had an
opportunity to clear myself to my humble admiration, and was inwardly
comforted: Soon after which (my concern for going to Barbados continuing,) I
went to Philadelphia to inquire for a passage, when my friends informed me of
five vessels, three of which were near ready to sail; but understanding that
all of them were prepared with guns for defense, I felt a secret exercise on
my mind, so that I could not go to see any of them; but kept quiet from sixth
day evening until second day morning, when I went to the meeting of ministers
and elders, where I had a singular freedom to let friends know, "That I came to
town in order to take my passage for Barbados, but found myself not at liberty
to go in any of those vessels, because they carried arms for defense; for as my
motive in going, was to publish the Glad-tidings of the Gospel, which teaches
love to all men, I could not go with those who were prepared to destroy men,
whom Christ Jesus our Lord and Master laid down his life to save and deliver
from that spirit in which wars and fightings stand." I further added, "If I had
a concern to visit in gospel love, those now living at Pittsburgh or Fort
Duquesne, do you think it would become me to go along with a band of soldiers,
as if I wanted the arm of flesh to guard me; would it not be more becoming to
go with a few simple unarmed men? I now tenderly desire your sympathy and
advice." One honest friend said, "Keep to the tender scruple in thy own mind,
for it rejoices me to hear it; and several said, they believed it would be best
for me to mind my own freedom." I then begged that friends would consider
weightily, whether it was right for any professing with us, to be owners or
part owners, charterers, freighters, or insurers of such vessels that a friend
could not be free to go passenger in on a gospel message: And as I returned to
my lodgings, I felt so much peace of mind in thus bearing my testimony, that I
thought if all my concern ended therein, it was worth all my trouble, though at
that time I did not think it would, yet was quite easy to return home and wait
until my way appeared more open; and as my concern went off in this manner, I
have been since led to consider, that I could not have borne that testimony so
fully and feelingly, if I had not been thus restrained. The wisdom and
judgments of the Lord are unsearchable, and his ways past finding out, and
happy are they who move at his command and stand steadfast in his counsel.

Our worthy friends John Stephenson, Robert Proud, Hannah Harris and Elizabeth
Wilkinson of Great Britain being in this country on a religious visit, attended
our yearly meeting in Philadelphia this year, which was large and favored with
humbling goodness, and in a sense of the Divine presence that meeting ended
very solidly; the services of these friends, I think, have been great among us
in this Land, both in their public ministry, also in the discipline of the
church, and the remembrance thereof is precious I believe to many whom the Lord
is preparing for his work.

After this I spent a considerable time at and near home, except attending the
quarterly, yearly-meettings, and the general spring-meetings as they came in
course, in the mean time being careful to frequent the meeting I belonged to.

A new monthly meeting being allowed to be established at Uwchlan in Chester
County, it arose in my mind to salute friends there with an Epistle, a copy
whereof I sent to their first meeting in the first month 1763, being as follows.

Dear Friends,
IN the gentle springing up of Gospel love and fellowship I salute you my dear
brethren and sisters, and hereby let you know, that it is my fervent desire and
prayer that you may individually attend to the gift of God in your own hearts,
and therein wait for the arising of his pure life and power, that therein and
thereby only, the affairs of the church may be transacted to the honor of
Truth and your own peace and safety; for to speak in the church to the business
and affairs of truth, by the will, wisdom, and power of man, (however knowing
he thinks himself) will lead into it is own nature, and in the end minister
strife and contention, and break the unity of the one spirit wherein the peace
of the church stands. Wherefore I beseech you beware thereof, and as I know
there are among you such whom the Lord by his spirit and the gentle operation
of his power, is preparing for his own work; mind your calling in deep humility
and holy attention of soul; for in your obedience only, will you be elected and
chosen to the work whereunto he has called you: So shall you be made skilful
watchmen and watchwomen, placed on the walls of Zion to discover the approach
of an enemy, in whatsoever subtle appearance, and enabled to give warning
thereof to others. May each of you stand upright in your own lots in the
regeneration, waiting for the pouring forth of the spirit and anointing of of
the Holy Ghost, by the renewing whereof, a true qualification is given in the
influence of the love of the Father, rightly to oversee the flock and family of
our God, amongst whom there are some plants with you worthy of your care.

I should have been glad to have sat with you, in your monthly meeting, from
the sense of that love which I now renewedly feel to spring and flow toward
you, but cannot well leave home, I therefore at this time, in the pure
refreshing stream thereof again salute you, and remain your friend and brother,

JOHN CHURCHMAN.
East Nottingham, 1 st Month 4 th, 1763.

In the time of his illness in the year 1761, as mentioned in page 205, he
uttered diverse weighty expressions, some of which were committed to writing by
a friend who was present, and being well worthy to be further preferred are
here inserted, viz.

In this sickness he was reduced very low, and sometimes said it looked
unlikely that he should recover, in the forepart thereof he often mentioned his
being in great poverty of spirit saying, that before he was taken ill, he felt
such deep distress of mind, that he thought he was a cumber to the ground, and
scarcely worthy to partake of the meanest necessaries of life, that even bread
and water seemed too good for him.

On the fourth of the eleventh month, four friends being present, he spoke in a
very awful frame of mind nearly as follows, Such build on a sandy foundation
who refuse paying that which is called the Provincial or King's Tax, only
because some others scruple paying it, whom they esteem, yet I have now clearly
seen, as well as heretofore that the testimony of Truth if deeply attended to,
will not be found to unite with warlike measures: And that it will in the
Lord's time be exalted above all opposition, and come to possess even the gates
of it is enemies; though it may appear mean and contemptible in the eyes of some
now a days, as the conduct of our primitive friends did, in diverse respects in
the world's view: And whosoever continues to trample upon, or despise the
tender scruples of their brethren in relation to their clearness concerning
war, will certainly find it a weight too heavy for them to bear.

My testimony on this account so far as I have borne it, yields me satisfaction
at this time; and the painful steps I have taken on sundry occasions, both in
public and private to discharge my conscience in the sight of God, in giving
faithful warnings to my brethren and countrymen, both in a civil and religious
capacity, afford me comfort in this distressing season. I have clearly seen,
and the prospect at this time adds Divine strength to my soul, That the God of
Truth is determined in due time to exalt the mountain of his Holiness above all
the hills of an empty profession; and all such who shall be admitted as clean
inhabitants thereon, he wills them to be quite clean handed; and that they
should become subject to the Lamb's Nature in every respect, and not shake
hands with that nature which would tear and devour, nor in any shape contribute
to the price of blood.

At another time he said, I have been led in the present dispensation allotted
me, to behold the situation of diverse particular friends, to whom I feel ardent
affection, who seem to have given, or sold away for this worlds friendship, the
testimony they should have born for the Prince of Peace, who is the High Priest
of our profession; and for fear of breaking an outside unity, which will surely
come to be broken, that the true unity in the bond of peace may be exalted,
have acted contrary to the former sight of their duty, and are thereby become
halt, and dimsighted in several respects; such, though they still seem to
desire it, cannot attain to the spotless beauty of Truth, nor approach to the
top of the mountain; on whose account I am afraid, that some of them will never
recover their former strength, nor attain to that dignity the truth would have
placed upon them, if they had been faithful; the situation of whom I have
bewailed with anxiety of mind: I have been from my youth up accustomed to
sorrow, and am a man acquainted with grief, and now remarkably; the lives of my
brethren, and of all men appear exceeding precious in my sight. It looks
doubtful whether I shall ever see my friends met in a quarterly meeting again,
yet if it be the will of Divine Providence I much desire it; having heretofore
through a timorous disposition, lest I should offend some, and for fear of the
frowns of elder brethren, concealed some things I should have declared: And if
I should now never more have a public opportunity, I speak thus in your
hearing, to let it be known that I am still a well-wisher to all men, and that
my integrity to the testimony of Truth, against all connections with wars and
fighting, is now full as strong, or stronger than ever.

On second day morning the ninth of the eleventh month, he said to his effect,
viz. I have been led to see the necessity there is for friends to beware of the
custom of drinking drams, or strong spirits mixed; I have for many years rarely
taken any, except on particular occasions, and then but a very small quantity:
It is my judgment, that the less any of us accustom ourselves to the use of
those spirits, the better it would be for our constitutions in general; I
believe it is not consistent with the will of Divine Providence, that the
course of nature should be obstructed and changed, and our animal spirits
corrupted through the unnatural warmth of spirituous liquors.

From my present sense and feeling of that regular temperance which is truly
pleasing in the Eyes of Heaven, I have mourned that the use of strong drink
should become so prevalent amongst us who make so high a profession; whose
bodies should be temples of the Holy Ghost, and should not be defiled, or
tainted with any degree of intemperance: In harvest there is generally plenty
of other refreshment, which would keep the bodies of men as strong, and as
capable to perform hard labor: Witness the health and strength of our
forefathers in the first settlement of this country, when strong liquors were
very little used amongst them.

Alas! how dimness has overtaken us, when we compare ourselves, and our
practices with the temperance and moderation of our forefathers, and the early
settlers of this Province! How sumptuous now are the tables, how rich and
costly the apparel, the diet, and the furniture, of many of our friends even in
the country; but more especially in the city! How is the simplicity and
plainness of Truth departed from, and pomp and splendid appearances taken their
place! And how much cost and time might be spared from needless things, and
applied to better uses, to the bettering of our country, and helping to turn
away the judgment which hangs over us, in part occasioned by these things.

I desire that my grand children may be brought up in a plain simple way,
accustomed to industry, and some useful business in the creation; not aiming at
great estates, nor following others in that way; but give them useful learning,
and rather choose husbandry, and a plain calling for them in the country, than
endeavor to promote them to ways of merchandise; for according to my
observation from my youth up, the former is less dangerous, and less
corrupting: I observed when I was in England, that some of the greatest and
wisest men in a religious sense, were brought up at the plough tail, or in some
laborious occupation; where the mind is less liable to be diverted from an
awful sense of the creator, than in an easy idle education: How many great men
there are, whom I could name, whose way of living is mean and homely, in this
world's account, so that they have little more than real necessity requires;
and yet they are rich in the best sense.

The next day, being asked how he was, he said nearly as follows, I have slept
sweetly, and seem much refreshed, and though I feel myself very weak in body, I
am full of Divine consolation, having never before had such prospects of
Heavenly things: It seems even as though my soul was united in chorus with
glorified Saints and Angels both sleeping and waking. I now believe I shall
recover, and that this sickness did not happen to me altogether on my own
account; my way to recover is to be industrious and diligent in what I believe
is required of me; I have many messages to deliver, both in public, and
privately to diverse friends, whom I have seen to have missed their way, and
have in a great measure deprived themselves of the beauty wherewith an humble
abiding in the truth would have dignifyed them; and some of my elder brethren,
for whom I feel an uncommon nearness of affection, their lives never appeared
to be more near to me, and I dare not conceal counsel from them, whether they
will hear or forbear: Yea, I thought last night, I had a clear prospect of the
situations of many within the verge of our quarterly meeting; it seemed as
though the inward states of particulars were opened to me in full view; the
pure Life in the brightness of Religion never appeared to be more precious; an
uncommon earnestness attends my mind, for the recovery of the rebellious,
hypocritical, and backsliding professors of all ranks amongst us: And if I get
to our quarterly meeting (which I believe I shall) and can have time allowed me
when there, I have tidings, important tidings, as from a dying man, to many
particulars: I have seen the mystery of the three days, or the Prophets laying
three days and three nights in the belly of the fish: A wicked and adulterous
generation are now as well as formerly, seeking for a sign to things spoken
closely, but no sign shall be given them, save the sign of the Prophet Jonah:
Our Savior's sufferings for mankind, and afterward descending into the bowels
of the earth prefigured that this followers must, after his pattern, descend
into Spiritual Baptism; that they may rise again, freed from the dregs of
nature, and from the corruptions of the creaturely passions, before they can be
qualified to see, and suitably to administer to the states of others. I have
likewise seen the mystery of Ezekiel's sufferings, and bearing the sins of the
house of Israel for the space of 390 days, which being accomplished, he was
commanded to turn on the other side, and to bear the sins of Judah forty days,
for the corruptions of that princely tribe, who should have been as way-marks
to others. My state has been for several years past, my deep Baptisms, and
painful sittings in our meetings, like bearing the rod of the wicked, in which
dispensation I have been sometimes ready to conclude with Elijah, that the
altars were thrown down, and the Lord's Prophets slain, and I, a mean worthless
servant left alone, and that my life was sought also; I have now seen the use
of those dispensations to me, with the use of my late sickness, whereby I am
reduced to great weakness of body; that I might be as a sign to this
generation, and as with the mouth of a dying man, utter tidings without fear of
giving offense; tidings which I have heretofore concealed, through a timorous
disposition. I have seen at this season that the Lord has preserved a living
number in Israel, who have not bowed the knee to Baal, or the god of this
world, I have also seen the conditions of many who have worshipped strange
gods; and the corruption even of some who have assumed the station of ministers
in our society, how they are deceived so far as to believe a lie; have seen
lying visions, and have caused the weak to stumble; they have been speaking
peace to the people as in the Lord's Name, when it was only a flash, or
divination of their own brain, which has tended to corruption and putrefaction
in the churches: And I have seen how that many little ones have laid groaning
as under the burden and oppression of these things, whose day of redemption
draws near, when they shall be made by the Almighty, as bright stars in the
firmament of his power; and those who are corrupt, and settled on their lees,
shall be punished. In this dispensation I have abundantly witnessed the incomes
of that Peace and Love which passes all understanding; neither my tongue nor
capacity are able to set forth the bowels of compassion which I livingly feel
to flow toward the whole bulk of mankind; and especially to my brethren in
profession: Yea, it seems as though no affliction would be too great to endure
for their sakes, if it might be a means to have some of them (whose situtation
I have now been led to behold as particulars) restored to their former
greenness and spiritual health, from whence they have fallen, and dimness has
overtaken them. And though my outward man seems almost wasted, my spirit is
strong in the Lord, and in the inexpressible strength of affection, I have
found my spirit led from place to place over the country, to visit the souls in
prison: Yea, I have beheld the dawning of that precious morning, wherein
corruption shall be swept away from the church, and Righteousness and Truth
begin to flourish greatly: The day seems to me to be at hand; and what if I
say, I have a degree of faith that some of the children now born may live to
see it: Through innocent boldness, my face now seems to be as brass, and in the
openings of the vision of life, I think I could utter Gospel Truths, and
discover the mystery of iniquity which I have seen, without fearing any mortal
man: I may be raised to live a while longer, though to die now, would be a
welcome release to me: Yea, I could not desire to live, but for the longings of
soul, and pantings of heart which I feel toward the precious seed in many whom
I have now been led in spirit to visit. I have beheld their situation to be as
lumps, taken or cut-out from the bowels of their mother the earth, though much
hidden from the view of mortals; and are tempering and fashioning by the Divine
Power, in different shapes, for diverse uses; and I have seen that the Potter's
Power is sufficient to pick out, and take away every gravel and little pebble
of nature; many I have beheld in this situation, set by (as it were) out of
sight to dry, until all the dampness and natural moisture is removed from them:
Not being yet fitted to undergo the operation of burning; but when properly
prepared, and thoroughly dried, many will be brought to the fire, burned, and
glazed, so that they may retain the liquor or wine of the kingdom with a sweet
taste, without any degree of taint, or nauseous smell.

On the twelfth of the eleventh month early in the morning, he spoke to this
purpose; I believe I must endeavor to go to our quarterly meeting, (which
began the fourteenth) although as to bodily strength I am very weak: There my
mind is remarkably, sleeping and waking; there I hope to be relieved of some
things which seem to remain like a fire in my bones; I dare not forbear, I know
it is the way for me to recover my strength outwardly, and to be eased of that
which is a heavy burden inwardly; I see I must go, and believe I shall recruit,
and gain strength every day, (which was the case accordingly.) He further said,
My mind has for several days been attended with an uncommon sweetness, the like
I never knew for so long together, with a succession of soul-melting prospects:
I have freedom to relate what I had a sight of this morning before day, as I
lay in a sweet slumber, (which was nearly in these words,) viz. I thought I saw
Noah's Ark floating on the deluge, or flood, with Noah and his Family in it,
and looking earnestly at it, I beheld the window of the Ark, and saw Noah put
out the dove; and I beheld her flying to and fro, for some time; but finding no
rest for the soal of her foot, I thought she returned, and I saw Noah's hand
put forth to take her in again. After some time I thought I beheld her put
forth a second time, and a raven with her, the dove fled as before for some
time, and then I saw her return with a green olive leaf in her mouth, as a
welcome token of the flood's being abated; I thought I saw also the raven fly,
cawking, to and fro, but he did not return; and it came into my mind, this is a
ravenous bird, and seeks only for prey to satisfy his own stomach, otherwise he
might have returned to the Ark with good tidings, or some pleasant token, as
well as the dove: Again, after a short space, I thought I beheld the mountain
tops, and some of the tree tops, beginning to appear above the waters, and that
I could perceive the flood abate very fast; and as the waters fell away I saw
the trees began to bud and a gradual greenness of new leaves came upon them,
and I heard the voice of the turtle, and saw many symptoms of a pleasant and
happy season approaching, more than I can now relate; and the prospect thereof
ravished my soul; I beheld the trees blossoming, the fragrant valleys adorned
with grass, herbs, and pretty flowers, and the pleasant streams gushing down
toward the ocean; indeed, all nature appeared to have a new dress; the birds
were hopping on the boughs of the trees, and chirping; each in their own notes,
warbled forth the praise of their creator. And whilst I beheld these things, a
saying of the Prophet was brought fresh in my memory, and applicable as I
thought to the view before me, viz. The mountains and the hills shall break
forth before you into singing, and all the trees of the field shall clap their
hands; instead of the thorn shall come up the fir tree, and instead of the
brier shall come up the myrtle tree, and it shall be to the Lord for a name,
for an everlasting sign that shall not be cut off, see Isaiah, lv. 12-13.

When I awoke, the prospect remained clear in my mind, and had a sweet relish,
which now continues with me; and the application of the Vision seems to me in
this manner: The flood which appeared to cover the face of the earth, is the
corruption and darkness which is so prevalent over the hearts of mankind; the
Ark represents a place of safe (though solitary) refuge, wherein the Almighty
preserves his humble attentive people, who, like Noah, are aiming at perfection
in their generation. The dove sets forth the innocent, harmless, and loving
disposition, which attends the followers of the lamb who are always willing to
bring good tidings, when such are to be had: The raven represents a contrary
disposition which reigns in the hearts of the children of disobedience, who
chiefly aim at gratifying their own sensual appetites; the waters gradually
abating, the trees appearing, and afterward budding, the voice of the turtle,
and the pleasant notes of the birds, all seem clear to me, to presage the
approach of that glorious morning, wherein curruption and iniquity shall begin
to abate, and be swept away; and then every thing shall appear to have a new
dress: I am fully confirmed in the belief, that that season will approach,
which was foretold by the prophet, wherein the glory of the Lord shall cover
the earth, as the waters cover the sea; and in a sense of these things my soul
is overcome. I feel the loving kindness of the Lord Almighty, yet waiting for
the return of backsliders with unspeakable mercy; and my soul in a sense of it,
seems bound stronger than ever, in the bonds of a gospel travail; which travail
I hope will increase, and spread amongst the faithful, for the enlargement of
the church; that the nations may flock unto Sion; which shall become an eternal
excellency, even the joy of the whole earth.

Again he expressed his having a prospect of the morning; and said, The day
star is risen, which presages the approach of the morning; I have seen it in
its luster, and have a lively sense of that saying being again fulfilled in the
New Creation, (see Job, xxxviii. 7.) The morning stars sang together, and the
sons of God shouted for joy. I have heard their sound intelligibly, and my
heart is comforted therein. The potsherds of the earth may clash together for a
season; but the Lord in due time will bring about the reformation: The
predictions of Archbishop Usher, (mentioned in the preface to Sewell's History)
have come fresh in my memory, and nearly correspond with the sense I have, that
a sharp and trying dispensation is to come upon the professors of christianity;
wherein the honest and upright hearted shall be hid as under the hollow of the
Lord's hand; when rents, divisions and commotions shall increase amongst the
earthly-minded, and one branch of a family be at strife with another, like the
daughter-in-law against the mother-in-law, etc. and happy will it be for those
who endeavor to stand ready for the approach of such a dispensation.

CHAP. VII.
His Visit to the Quarterly Meeting at Salem, and the General-meetings at
Uwchlan and Goshen, in 1764. His attendance of the Yearly Meeting in
Philadelphia, 1767 -- And the General-meeting at Caecil in Maryland. -- The
Death of his Wife. -- His Visit to, diverse Meetings in Chester and Bucks
Counties -- to the Yearly Meeting in Maryland. -- Also to several Meetings in
New Jersey. -- And some others in York County Pennsylvania. -- Also to Fairfax,
etc. in Virginia.

IN the spring of the year 1764, I acquainted my friends that I had a desire to
attend the quarterly meeting at Salem in New Jersey, wherewith having their
concurrence, on the seventeenth of the fifth month I left home and went to
Wilmington, and next day in company with several friends from thence by water
to our friend Joshua Thompson's at the mouth of Salem Creek; at the meeting of
ministers and elders we were comfortted together through the goodness of the
Lord; on first day there was a large gathering of a mixed multitude, and quiet,
the Divine power being felt and Gospel Truths preached, by the influence of the
love whereof many hearts were tendered; though I thought the beauty and solemnity
of the meeting was a little marred by an appearance that was continued too
long; to begin in the life and conclude in the power and life, is becoming a
minister of the Gospel.

On second day morning the meeting of ministers and elders was again held, it
was a precious instructive season in the love of Christ our holy head, by which
the humble were united; afterward we had a large meeting for public worship,
wherein the testimony of Truth flowed freely; the call to the ministry and
qualification necessary to preach the Gospel being clearly set forth; in humble
admiration I could renewedly acknowledge, Thou art, Oh Lord! Strength in our
weakness, mouth and wisdom, yea all things to thy humble depending servants
whose trust is on thee, waiting for thy putting forth in the way, and gently
going before them, blessed be thy holy name for ever. In transacting the
affairs or the discipline a spirit of brotherly love prevailed; the
youth's-meeting at Pilesgrove was also large and edifying, the great Shepherd
of Israel being pleased to stretch forth the crook of his Love, for gathering
of the straying youth from pursuing after lying vanities and worldly pleasures;
ministering reproof to hypocrites and formal professors, yet comforting his
children and humble dependant followers, to the praise of his own eternal name;
the meeting of ministers and elders sat again by adjournment, when we had an
uniting parting season; I returned to my friend Joshua Thompson's, next day to
a meeting at Wilmington, and in the evening home, being thankful that I had
been enabled to perform this small journey.

After which having a strong desire to attend the general-meetings at Goshen
and Uwchlan, on the eighth of the sixth month my dear wife and I left home,
though I was very unwell with a cold taken in my return from Salem, and a fever
attending me every day; we attended Uwchlan meeting on first day, also one in
the evening at the house of our brother Daniel Brown, which was dull and
exercising, from a sense of the prevalence of a spirit which leads many into
forgetfulness of God, after the vanities, love and pleasures of this perishing
world. Next day the general meeting at Goshen was very large, and much
disturbed by the going out and coming in of many, but through Divine goodness it
came to a better settlement before it concluded, when solid friends in a degree
of the renewing of the Lord's comforting love, were refreshed in him and one
another; a visitation being continued to the youth, the praise whereof belongs
to the great Author of all good!

The general-meeting at Uwchlan on the day following was also large, and
measurably attended with the ownings of truth, under the influence of which,
admonition and counsel flowed freely to the youth, the Divine witness in
several of whom was reached, and the name of the Lord praised, who is for ever
worthy!

In these large meetings, as on all other such occasions, it is necessary in
order for a proper qualification to minister to the people, humbly to wait to
know the inward life, and baptizing virtue of the spirit and power of Jesus
Christ, our all in all, without whose help we can never do his work to his
praise, but instead of gathering the flock, we shall minister to their
scattering from the true place of feeding. After being at the preparative
meeting at East-Caln and a meeting at Uwchlan, we returned home thankful to the
Lord, who had mercifully supported us in this small journey, both of us being
weakly and indisposed in health.

In the ninth month 1767, I attended our yearly meeting in Philadelphia, which
held a week, all the sittings whereof both for worship and discipline, were
through the overshadowing of Divine favor, instructive to the humble waiters;
and the testimony of Truth, particularly against the unjust and unrighteous
practice of slave-keeping, greatly prevailed; and friends were fully cautioned
against bequeathing by will, as slaves to their posterity, the poor Negroes,
their fellow creatures, it being an unlawful act in the sight of the great and
righteous parent of all mankind. This meeting concluded with a degree of awe
and reverence, under the sweetening influence of the Father's Love: I returned
home to our general-meeting at Nottingham, which was held on the fourth and
fifth days of the tenth month.

After which having a strong desire to attend the general-meeting at Caecil in
Maryland, I sat out in company with several other friends, and reached the
first sitting of the meeting, which was small and dull; the public meeting next
day was very large and attended with some satisfaction, those of other
societies who were there were mostly pretty quiet; at the meeting of ministers
and elders the want of solid elders being evident, the consideration thereof
was proposed to the quarterly meeting, which was held in the afternoon of the
same day, when it was recommended to the monthly-meetings to observe the
directions of the yearly meeting, to choose well qualified solid friends for
that weighty station.

The meeting for public worship was again large, being attended by many of
other societies, and my brother Wm. Brown was largely opened in doctrine to the
edification of the auditory; after which I had a short testimony tending to
close the foregoing: In the meeting for discipline I had occasion to lament
that there were too few who feelingly understood the weight of such meetings,
or were clean handed to move therein, either to their own profit or the help of
their brethren; yet there are a few who seem to be under a preparation for the
work, and I hope will grow in their gifts. On third day morning business began
again, and ended full as well as I expected. I thought the Lord was mercifully
pleased to open considerable instruction to such among them, who had ears to
hear and hearts disposed to receive it. The meeting for worship held that
afternoon, was not so large as on the other two days, the service thereof lay
weightily on me, and I had a full opportunity to relieve my mind toward the
people, in opening to them the nature and ground of spiritual worship and true
prayer, also the true call and qualification for gospel ministry, declaring
what it was to live of the Gospel, in opposition to a forced maintenance; Truth
favored and the people were solid, several being much reached; the meeting
ending to satisfaction, with a sense of humble thanksgiving in many hearts to
the Lord, whose mercies through Christ Jesus are to his people yea and amen for
ever.

His wife being under many years affliction with a Cancer on her head, which
was now so greatly increased as to require his daily affectionate attendance,
confined him mostly at home until after her decease, which was in the seventh
month 1770; she was a steady examplary friend: Concerning whom the
monthly meeting of Nottingham give the following testimony.

Our friend Margaret Churchman was born (of believing parents William and
Either Brown, who lived at Chichester in the county of Chester in
Pennsylvania,) the thirteenth of the first month 1706-7, her father removing
with his family into Maryland near Susquehanna, died before she was ten years
old. In the twenty-third year of her age, she entered into a marriage state
with John Churchman of Nottingham, and being religiously inclined from her
childhood, became a diligent seeker after that bread which nourishes the inward
man, and thereby grew in religion, and about the thirty-fourth year of her age,
it pleased the Lord to put her forth in the ministry, in which she was
frequently exercised to the comfort and edification of the churches where she
visited, in this and the Southern Provinces, being delivered in a degree of
life, and gospel sweetness in pertinent expressions, free from unbecoming
gestures; she was an example in plainness, a diligent attender of meetings, and
an humble waiter therein, serviceable in meetings of business, having a good
sense of discipline, with a becoming zeal to support the testimony of Truth in
its various branches, and useful in the weighty service of visiting families.

In the latter part of her life she was for many years afflicted with a cancer
on her head, which she bore with remarkable patience, resignation and innocent
cheerfulness, attending meetings to the admiration of many who knew her
disease, which notwithstanding various applications so increased that she
became too weak to attend meetings sometime before her decease, yet she
retained her love to truth and friends to the last, and in the sixty-fourth
year of her age, being a minister about thirty years, she departed this life,
on the twenty-eighth of the seventh month 1770, and was buried on the thirtieth
in friends burying ground at East-Nottingham, attended by many friends and
neighbors, at which time we had a solid satisfactory meeting.

Given forth by our monthly meeting held at East-Nottingham, the twenty-seventh
of the seventh month 1771, and signed on behalf thereof, by Clerks.
Samuel England, Rebecca Trimble,



Having an inclination to attend Chester quarterly meeting, also some meetings
within the verge thereof; with the concurrence of friends I sat out on the
first of the second month 1771, attended New-Garden monthly meeting next day,
in which the love of our merciful Father was measurably felt, to the comfort of
the humble in heart, and on first day at Birmingham, on the next had a meeting
in the house of Richard Downing at Milltown, with people of various sorts; the
Lord was pleased to assist with wisdom and ability, in measure, to divide his
word in reproof, counsel, admonition and caution, to the praise of his own
name; on third day at Pikeland was a pretty full meeting though a very cold day,
Truth was felt to be near us; a profitable opportunity was had also in the
family of the widow Meredith, the being weakly did not get out to their
meeting; next day had a cold ride to Nantmell, where was a large full meeting
and I believe beneficial to many present, by the tendering goodness of the
blessed Shepherd of spiritual Israel, the crook of whose heavenly love is still
stretched forth to his sheep, who are not yet acquainted with the true fold of
rest and safe feeding place; his own works praise him: Uwchlan monthly meeting
on the day following was a laborious season, yet through Divine favor made
comfortable to the weary travelers, who had to rejoice together in a
participation of the consolation of Israel, and therein to worship his name who
is worthy for ever. Goshen monthly meeting was also laborious; when former
experience is fed upon, or the love or honor of the world and fleshly ease
takes place, a spirit grows up in the church, which cannot judge for God and
his Truth; for the judgment is his, in whose fear his children are made to
rejoice, when his presence is known, and his humbling goodness manifested to
his people. On first day I was at Middletown meeting, in which there seemed to
be a tender visitation and call to the youth, to acquaint themselves with the
God of their Fathers, his love being measurably witnessed among us. The
quarterly meeting for Chester held at Concord, was solid and edifying, through
the extending of the Heavenly father's love to the children of his family; from
thence I went to Wilmington, visited some of my aquaintance, and had a
comfortable sitting in the family of David Ferriss, his son Benjamin being ill
in a consumption: I also attended the monthly meeting, which though a searching
time, was I believe to the comfort and edification of many, the uniting love of
truth being experienced, rested on friends in the time of the business; after
which I went to the monthly-meetings at Center and Bradford, and from thence to
our quarterly meeting at London-Grove; then returned home, having great peace
in performing this journey, and being favored with ability, felt a degree of
reverent thankfulness to the Lord, who is all things to his servants, who truly
abide in nothingness of self, he is therefore worthy of all obedience and
honor for ever.

On the twenty-first of the third month, I left my habitation in order to
attend our general spring-meeting at Philadelphia, in my way called at
Wilmington, and was at the burial of Benjamin Ferriss before mentioned: Our
spring-meeting was to me very comfortable in a sense of the living presence of
the Holy Head of the church, in which his true children were edified, and
strengthened and mutually comforted one in another; blessed be his name for
ever!

At this meeting the brethren both ministers and elders, apprehend it their
duty in the love of Christ, to appoint such who are willing to give up their
names to attend the several large or general meettings, which come in course in
the ensuing summer before our yearly meeting, to which they are expected to
give some account of the meetings so attended by them, and feeling a small
draught in my mind to be at that at Duck Creek, I gave in my name to attend it.

On my return from Philadelphia I sat with friends at their week day meeting in
Wilmington, which through the continued goodness of the Lord, was in some
measure a profitable season, I hope to many: Here I felt a strong desire to see
the friends together, who are owners of the grist-mills lately built at and
near Brandiwyne, and upon notice thereof, they met the same afternoon at the
house of Daniel Byrnes, when I had an opportunity to discharge my mind in an
affectionate manner, of what had impressed it toward them, which they appeared
to receive in a degree of the same love, and as I believe it came from the
author of all good, who is alone worthy of praise, a blessing may attend that
opportunity if rightly remembered.

On the twenty-sixth of the fourth month being accompanied by a friend and
neighbor, I went to Duck Creek, and was at the monthly meeting there the next
day, which was heavy, occasioned by the prevalence of a formal, lukewarm
worldly spirit over many of the professors belonging thereto, but through the
long suffering and continued mercy of God, there seemed to be a renewed
awakening visitation to some. The meeting on first day was very large, the Lord
being mercifully pleased to open the states and conditions of many, in a
particular instrumental manner, and in a measure of his holy heart tendering
power, which reached the witness, diverse were humbled, and the meeting ended
with thanksgiving, prayer and praises to the Lord who is worthy for ever.

On second day the meeting was not so large, occasioned by a fair being near,
nevertheless it was a season in which the doctrine and mysteries of the kingdom
of Christ were largely set forth to the people, by the influence of the spirit,
and in the love and wisdom of the holy high Priest, who is all in all to his
people.

We had also three select opportunities with the ministers and elders, among
whom there was great apparent weakness, the reasons whereof were plainly made
known to them, from the sense given in the love and fear of him, who will not
own and unite with such as are defiled, which plainness we had a hope would be
profitable.

Next day several of us were at George's Creek, which meeting is much declined;
where the love of the world and its alluring vanities prevail on the professors
of truth, their affections are drawn from God, they grow slack in attending
meetings, and are a bad example one to another; it was a hard meeting, but
through the love of Christ, a measure of gospel anointing enabled to open to
them their states in great love and plainness, which seemed to affect some
particulars, may it be remembered with reverence before him who is the author of
all good, and praise worthy for ever!

Soon after my return home, feeling my mind engaged to attend the
quarterly meeting in Bucks County, with a few other meetings in Philadelphia
quarter, I set out on the twenty-sixth of the fifth month, accompanied by
Samuel England, and on the third day of the week following was at the Bank
meeting in Philadelphia, which was comfortable; on fifth day at the
quarterly meeting at Buckingham, and next day at the general youth's meeting,
which was large and divinely favored, then visiting several indisposed
friends, on first day I attended Plumstead meeting, and in that week the
several monthly-meetings of Buckingham, Wrightstown, the Falls and Middletown,
also a public meeting at Makefield; was on first day at Bristol, from whence I
went with my friend James Thornton to their afternoon meeting at Byberry, had
an appointed one at the same place next day; and in that week visited the
several neigbouring meetings, one of which was a general youth's meeting at
Horsham, large and instructive, wherein the love of our Heavenly Father was
felt by his truly depending children; then taking meetings at Gwynedd,
Providence, Richland, Oley, Exeter, Maiden Creek, Reading, and on first day at
the Forest, I from thence rode to Uwchlan, and on second day had a meeting at
Milltown in the house of Robert Valentine, then proceeded home, having rode
about 370 miles in this journey, in which I was favored with my health, and
held traveling beyond my expectation. At the gentle drawings of Truth I left
my habitation, having little prospect of much before me, but was preserved in a
quiet resignation to the Divine will to do whatsoever should appear my duty,
beseeching the Lord to enable me to watch against every appearance of self in
the great and pure work of declaring the gospel to the people, and have great
cause to be humbly thankful, that the Lord was pleased to own my service beyond
expectation, to the exaltation of his own truth; blessed be his name for ever!

In the tenth month following I went to the yearly meeting at Third-haven in
Maryland, the meetings for worship held three days, and each of them were very
large, and many Gospel Truths were delivered in the love and power thereof, by
which the witness of God was reached in the hearts of many of the people, and
friends comforted and made thankful to the Lord, that he was pleased to own us
with the overshadowing of his heavenly love; on fourth day morning the affairs
of the discipline were finished, when we had a parting meeting, which through
Divine favor was a precious time to many. I had never been at the
yearly meeting when held at this place before, and now witnessed my heart
enlarged in the love of the Gospel to declare the same among the multitude of
people who professed the Christian name, and to remind them of their conduct
and dress, how different it was from that of those who formerly suffered
martyrdom for their religion as now professed by the members of the Church of
England so called, who own the reformers as their predecessors.

Feeling a draught of love in my mind toward some meetings in New Jersey,
particulartly at Egg-harbour, having the concurrence of my friends at home, I
set out on second day the first of the sixth month 1772, and taking in my way a
meeting at Haddonfield, and another at the house of my friend Thomas Evans,
which through the presence and power of the searcher of hearts was made
profitable to some there present, reached Little Egg-harbour on seventh day,
and the next attended the yearly meeting, in which the love of the gospel was
felt to flow toward a loose, raw, uncivilized people, who appeared to attend
there more out of curiosity, than a reverent thoughtfulness of worshipping
almighty God; in the afternoon of the same day the conti^^^ce of Divine favor
was remarkably evident toward the inhabitants, for which the Lord made the
hearts of his sensible children thankful to himself who is the author of all
good; the meeting on second day was also very large, in which the true children
of the family were comforted in Christ Jesus the Lord and holy head of the
church, by the anointing virtue of whose precious name and power, they were
made to rejoice in the company one of another; here parting with many valuable
beloved friends, I went over the bay, to the upper meeting on Great Egg-harbour
shore, which was large considering the notice, here I was comforted in knowing
for whose name sake I was made willing to leave my company, and turn that way,
the Lord being pleased to own my service by the inspiration of a degree of his
heavenly wisdom and love, to speak to the states of those that were present,
blessed be his name who is worthy for ever. I went home with my friend Joseph
Mapes, next day attended the lower meeting, which through Divine favor was a
precious season, then passed over to the Cape, and next morning was at a
meeting at the upper house, where many not of our society attended, to whom the
doctrine of the Gospel flowed in describing the nature of pure and undefiled
religion, and wherein it consisted; the people were still and quiet. In the
afternoon of the same day I had a meeting at the lower house, which is called
eight miles down the Cape, this was an heart tendering time, for which friends
were made truly thankful; I thought it seemed like to be my last visit to these
parts. From thence I went to Cohansy, 45 miles, to Mark Reeve's where I rested
the next day, being very weary and almost overcome with hard traveling; on
first day I was at Greenwich meeting, and in the afternoon at Alloways Creek,
which was very large, many of other societies attending, the doctrine of Truth
flowed to them in a measure of the love thereof; next day the meeting at Salem
was held in the Courthouse, the meeting house being taken down, and a new one
building; on third day I was at the upper meeting near Alloways Creek, which
through Divine Goodness was an instructive time to some seekers; the passage
treated upon was our Lord's description of the pharisee and publican who went
up to the temple to pray, the great difference in the form of their addresses
was opened in a clear manner, by the spirit of him who gave forth that parable,
to my humble admiration, which was cause of reverent thankfulness, they who
were sensible being encouraged, and the conceited formalists rebuked.

From hence I went to John Davis's, had a comfortable opportunity with some
indisposed friends in his family; then taking meetings at Pilesgrove, Upper
Greenwich, and Woodberry, was on first day morning at Haddonfield, and in the
afternoon at Newtown, which last was laborious, though I believe being blessed to
several present, was thereby made profitable; that evening I went over to
Philadelphia weary in body, but cheerful in mind, being sensible of a degree of
thankfulness for the continued favor of my Lord and Master, who had been to me
a quiet habitation and secret support in this journey. After staying two days,
and on each attending meetings in the city, I took Wilmington meeting in my way
home, having traveled about three hundred and fifty miles, attended about
twenty meetings, besides having several comfortable opportunities in families.

Being under an appointment with other friends of our quarterly meeting, to
visit friends of the monthly-meetings of Warrington and Fairfax, I set out on
the seventh of the tenth month, and taking a meeting with friends in Yorktown,
we were at Warrington on first day, then visited the several meetings of
Newberry, Huntington, and Monallen, in which Truth owned our service in a good
degree; our labor of love appearing to be kindly received, I hope may be
useful; on the first day following five of us were at Pipe Creek meeting, then
at Bush Creek, Monaquesy, Fairfax, Goose Creek, and Southfork, wherein the Lord
was pleased in his wonted goodness and mercy to magnify his own name who is
praise worthy for ever.

After a seasonable opportunity with friends held in the house of Abel Janny at
parting with them, we returned to Fairfax meeting on first day, where under the
influence of the Divine presence, the testimony and doctrine of Truth flowed
freely to the people, in a humble sense whereof, praises ascended to his holy
name who is over all worthy for ever.

Several of our company now returning homewards, three of us not being easy yet
to return, two of us went to visit a friend who lay in a languishing condition,
which I believe was serviceable, the love of our Heavenly Father being in some
degree felt among us; on third day we had a meeting at the Gap (so called)
among a raw people, where Divine Goodness measurably favored the opportunity;
on the day following we attended Fairfax preparative meeting, the two next days
we visited some sick friends, and on seventh day were at the monthly meeting,
which was in the main satisfactory; on first day the meeting was thought to be
the largest ever held at this place, and the Gospel being preached in the love
of it to the tendering the hearts of many, the meeting ended in humble
thanksgiving to the holy Author of all good; next day in company with several
friends of Fairfax, I attended a meeting at Monaquesy, where some came who did
not make religious profession with us, which was an instructive tendering
season through the Lord's goodness; after a meeting at Bush Creek, and another
at Pipe Creek, I traveled to Gunpowder, and attended the quarterly meeting for
the Western shore of Maryland, likewise the general-meeting for worship on
first day, at which were several not of our society whose hearts were reached
by the love of truth; next day I had a meeting at the little Falls, and from
thence returned home, where after staying three days, I went to our
quarterly meeting at London Grove, the two last days of which afforded some
comfort and satisfaction. On the fourteenth of the twelfth month I went to
Wilmington, on which day Margaret the wife of John Perry was buried after a
short illness, I spent part of the evening in his afflicted family to
satisfaction, staying in the town two days I attended their monthly meeting,
and thought there was a want of more members deeply baptized for the work which
appears necessary in the church at that place; at this time Deborah the
daughter of David Ferriss being in a declining consumptive state, and wasting
fast, I visited her to my satisfaction, she appearing to be in a resigned
humble frame of spirit, was an examplary young woman whom I esteemed; then
going to Center and Hockesson meetings, I was at New-Garden on first day, which
I thought through Divine favor an instructive profitable meeting to myself, and
perhaps to some others; the subject which opened was the necessity of not
leaning to, or following any man, but of attending to the pure motion, and
secret influence of the Spirit of Truth manifested in the heart, in the
meekness, and purity of the wisdom from above, it was that by which the
churches were gathered, and the members, preserved in the unity of the one
blessed Spirit, and perfect bond of peace and good order.

I next attended our preparative and monthly-meetings, after which was confined
mostly at home for about a month by a fever, during which time my mind was
often much humbled under a sense of the prevalence of a dull, lukewarm spirit,
as to the life and power of Truth; earthly mindedness, and the cares and
cumbers concerning the things of this present life having drawn the minds of
many into death; I never more clearly saw the necessity there was for us who
profess the truth, singly to attend to the gentle instructions of the Holy
Spirit thereof, which only does, and ever will, lead and guide into all Truth,
and preserves from those errors and failings which are so abundantly evident
among us, whereby our hands are weakened in respect to a careful exercise of
the discipline of the church.

CHAP. VIII.
His Attendance of the Western Quarterly Meeting in the second Month 1773 --
The Spring-meeting in Philadelphia -- And the General-meeting at Duck Creek --
The Quarterly Meeting at Shrewsbury -- With several other meetings in
New Jersey -- The Spring-meeting in Philadelphia in 1774. -- His last Visit to
New York -- And Long Island. -- His last attendance of the Yearly Meeting in
Philadelphia. -- His being at the Spring-meeting there in 1775. -- And his last
Journey to sunary Meetings on the Eastern-shore of Maryland. -- His last
illness with some weighty Expressions in that time. -- His Death and Burial.

BEING somewhat recovered of my indisposition of body, I sat in our select
meeting of ministers and elders on the first of the second month 1773, in which
I was comforted under a sense of our being owned in some degree by the
visitation of Divine love, and afterward attended our quarterly meeting at
London-Grove, each sitting whereof was favored with the continuance of
heavenly help, to the encouragement of the humble waiters. I returned home with
thankfulness in my mind to the Lord, who had furnished me with strength in my
weak state to sit with my friends, in which we ought to be good examples; I
attended our own meeting on the fifth and first days following, and in the same
week went to Wilmington to the burial of Deborah Ferriss before mentioned,
after which, a solid and profitable meeting was held.

On the twenty-sixth of the third month I set out from home in order to attend
our general spring meeting at Philadelphia, but did not get there in time for
the first sitting thereof, such of them as I did attend, I thought were in the
main, times of Divine favor; on my return homeward I was at a small meeting at
Chester, also the general meeting at Wilmington, and soon after the general
meeting at Duck. Creek, and their monthly meeting preceding it; the meeting
there on first day was large, and though a mixed multitude attended, it was solid
through the overshadowing of heavenly power, the Lord was pleased to open the
mysteries of the kingdom, influencing my heart to preach the Gospel in the love
thereof to my humble admiration, and many were tendered, for which renewed
visitation and favor, a sacrifice of thanksgiving ascended from the hearts of
his children, to the all powerful and merciful God who is worthy for ever; the
meeting on second day was a time of consolation to the heavy hearted,
instruction to the humble seekers, and a season of strengthening to the weak,
blessed be the name of the Lord for his mercies endure for ever: I was next at
George's Creek meeting, in which friends were encouraged, and in some degree
refreshed diverse not of our society attending; the doctrine of personal
election and reprobation as held by some, was refuted, and it was clearly
pointed out wherein the election stood, viz. In Christ the seed, which cleaved
unto, and chosen by man, for his true instructor and leader by his light and
witness in the heart as a reprover for sin, and so followed and obeyed, man
comes to know himself elected in him. I went home with George Ford at Back
Creek, and had an opportunity in his family I hope to some profit.

Toward the fall of the year I had a draught in my mind to attend some
meetings in the Jerseys, particularly the quarterly meeting at Shrewsbury, of
which having acquainted my brethren at home, and had there concurrence, after
attending our yearly meeting in Philadelphia and returning from thence, I set
out in company with my friend Samuel England on the twelfth of the tenth month,
but was detained at Philadelphia by a fever which held me several days, yet I
so far recovered as to proceed on our journey, taking on our way meetings at
Mountholly, at a School-house near Shreve's mount in upper Springfield, in
which I had a concern to warn the youth to beware of Deism, and to show the
ground and cause of falling into that error, also at upper Freehold, and in a
friend's house near that called Robbins's meeting; there seems to be a
visitation to the youth in that place, to which if they are faithful that
meeting may again increase; we reached the meeting of ministers and elders at
Shrewsbury, in which truth owned the lovers thereof; the public meetings on the
three following days were large, and thought to be the most quiet and
satisfactory which had been known of late years there; the affairs of the
discipline were, as I thought, pretty well conducted; finding myself not clear
of the members of our society at this place, I therefore proposed to several
friends that they would favor me so much as to meet on their week day meeting
day, which I understood they usually had omitted in this week, requesting that
they would acquaint their members with my desire of seeing them, their
children, and families together; I therefore waited until fifth day, when they
generally met, which gave me an opportunity comfortably to clear myself toward
friends here, to the encouragment of the sincere, being led to show the active
members the cause of dwarfishness, the love of the world, and its friendships,
choking the good seed, which should grow and bear rule: I was thankful for
this opportunity, and left them with the enjoyment of a quiet mind; from hence
we passed to Rahway, had a meeting at Woodbridge, and another at Plainfield, in
both which truth owned my service; I thought there was a tender visitation
renewed to friends in those parts, in the sense whereof I was thankful, and
that I had been favored with strength to pay them a visit in the love of my
great and good master, may I ever walk answerable to his manifold favors, who
is praise worthy for ever! We were next at Stonybrook meeting, which was made
precious in the renewing of Divine favor, and then at Trenton with a people
who have much lost the life and savor of truth; from thence going to Byberry
and Philadelphia, I reached the quarterly meeting, at Concord which began on
the sixth of the eleventh month, the next day I went to Chichester, where I was
enabled to speak to the states of the people in the love of truth, which may be
useful if remembered in a right manner, and returned to the quarterly meeting on
second day, which was comfortable, the Divine presence being felt, our friend
Elizabeth Robinson was there, and had good service; on third day I attended the
general meeting at Chester, which was poor and dull; the expectations of the
people being too much outward, they were disappointed; then attending the
monthly meeting at Wilmington, tarried their meeting the next day, and
proceeded to our quarterly meeting at London Grove, at which we had the company
of our friends Robert Walker, Elizabeth Robinson, and Mary Leaver from
Great Britain; it was a season of refreshment and comfort to many friends; then
went home, having traveled in this journey about 360 miles.

In the third month 1774, I attended our general spring-meeting in
Philadelphia, the diverse sitttings whereof were divinely favored; and after
it, the general meeting at Wilmington, which was held chiefly in silence, and
on that account remarkable.

Having an engagement on my mind for some time to visit friends on Long Island,
with some adjacent meetings, I laid it before my brethren, who gave me their
certificate for that purpose; and on the third of the fifth month I set out on
the journey, having the company of a friend from Wilmington, taking a meeting
at Philadelphia, we reached New York, attended their morning and afternoon
meetings on first day, and had an opportunity with diverse friends in the
evening, which was to me (at least) instructive, and I believe through Divine
goodness profitable to some others. We then had meetings at West-Chester,
Mamaroneck, and the Purchase, the last being a monthly meeting; these
opportunities were close and searching, the testimony of Truth was encouraging
to the well-minded, but very sharp to the formalists, and my mind was made
thankful for the blessing of peace in the discharge of my duty. We next
attended meetings at Flushing on Long Island, Cowneck, Westbury, Matinicock,
Sequitogue and Bethpage, then at Newtown, the monthly meeting at Westbury, and
the quarterly meeting at Flushing, where the yearly meeting began the next day,
which held four days, and on the whole I believe it may be said, that the
authority of Truth was in some good degree felt to keep down forward spirits
both in the ministry and discipline, which was cause of thankfulness to the
Lord who rules among his children, and is worthy of all praise for ever; here I
had the company of our dear friends Robert Walker, Eliza. Robinson, and Susanna
Lightfoot, who intending for Rhode Island, I parted with them, and went to the
monthly meeting at New York, which through merciful regard was comfortable;
from thence going to Rahway, had a meeting at Plainfield which was satisfactory
through the extendings of Divine favor; then at Kingwood on first day, from
whence crossing Delaware we were at Buckingham monthly meeting, where I thought
the true Spirit of discipline appeared to be much wanting in many; here my
companion returned homewards; the next day I was at Wright's-town
monthly meeting, which through the Lord's blessing was edifying to many, and we
parted in peace and sweetness of Spirit, the day following I attended the
meeting at Pine-street in Philadelphia, also that at High Street on fifth day,
which was a precious opportunity to such who loved to live near the Spirit of
Truth, from thence I went to visit my brother-in-law Daniel Brown near Chester,
was at Newtown meeting on first day, and at an afternoon meeting near Amos
Yarnal's, then went to the general meetings at Goshen, and Uwchlan, after which
taking London-Grove meeting, I came home, having rode in this journey about 600
miles, and feeling a degree of thankfulness that the Lord was pleased to give
me ability to perform it.

I tarried much at home the remaining part of this summer; on the twenty-first
of the ninth month, I set out in order to attend the yearly meeting at
Philadelphia, which was very large in the several sittings, continued a full
week, and I thought it the most solid and weighty in transacting the affairs of
truth that I ever knew: The testimony thereof against slave keeping was
wonderfully exalted, through the power and love of God who is worthy of all
praise for ever. In my way home I was at Providence meeting, in which the
testimony of truth went forth by way of warning to the lukewarm and declining
professors, and of encouragment to the youth.

Our general meeting at Nottingham next day was large, and I hope profitable to
some; after which having a desire to be at the general meeting at Caecil in
Maryland, I left home on the seventh of the tenth month, was at the
quarterly meeting of ministers and elders there on first day morning, which was
profitably instructive through Divine Goodness; two public meetings for worship
were held on first and second days, both large and solid, several other friends
from Pennsylvania were there, the business of the quarterly meeting ended on
third day morning, on the same day we had a comfortable public meeting, from
which we parted with friends in much love and nearness. On the following day
was their monthly meeting, to attend which several of us staid; then having a
desire to see friends at Chester-River, I went to their week day meeting,
Nicholas Waln bearing me company; the meeting was large, and through the Lord's
Goodness, it was, I believe, made profitable to many; then taking meetings at
Sassafrass, Duck-Creek, Motherkill, and Little-Creek, the two last being their
preparative meeting at each place, the next day was their select meeting of
ministers and elders, and their monthly meeting the day following, which, with
diverse other friends from Pennsylvania, we attended, and on the first and
second days of the next week the general meeting at Little-Creek: I believe
there is a renewed visitation to friends, and some others hereaway; but formal
professors at present appear to be as stumbling blocks by joining with the
spirit of the world; I returned home with an easy mind.

Weakness and infirmity of body gradually increasing upon our beloved friend,
he frequently mentioned, that many years part, it was unexpected to him to live
to his seventieth year, and to be favored with health and strength sufficient
to travel so much as he lately had, saying, that now he scarcely thought much
more would be required of him; he however attended the western
quarterly meeting in the eleventh month this year, and in the second month
1775, in both which he was favored with strength and clearness to speak to the
state of the church, as well in some of the select, as the more public
meetings, tending to the edification and comfort of many.

In the third month 1775, he also attended the general spring-meeting at
Philadelphia, and in some of the sittings thereof was much favored, on his
return home from thence, he was at Wilmington general meeting, in company with
our friends Robert Walker and Elizabeth Robinson from Great Britain.

His last journey was on a visit to most of the meetings on the Eastern-shore
of Maryland, and to attend the yearly meeting at Thirdhaven in Talbot County,
for which purpose he set out from his own habitation on the twenty-second of
the fifth month, having, according to his usual care, obtained the concurrence
of his brethren, and was accompanied by a young man (William Jackson) a member
of New-Garden monthly meeting, who has given the following account of this
journey.

"Our first days ride was to George Ford's near Back-Creek, the next morning
being damp and foggy, was very trying to his weak constitution, yet we rode
forty five miles that day to Hannah Turner's in Queen Ann's County, which was
thought to be a means of bringing on him a disorder which proved painful and
afflicting, and increased till near his end, being advanced in age, his bodily
infirmities appeared great, but the fervency of his mind for the promotion of
truth and righteousness, and his care as a Father in Israel, was truly as
prevalent as ever. On the twenty-fourth of the month he went to the preparative
meeting at Tuckahoa, wherein he was concerned to exhort some to faithfulness in
times of temptation and trial, that they might experience an overcoming, and be
enabled to strengthen their brethren. Next, day we attended Thirdhaven
monthly meeting, in which he was I qualified to speak instructively to the
members thereof, particularly to such who were incumbered with much care about
the things of this life, things, which although lawful in themselves, yet when
suffered to engross the minds and affections of people, obstruct a progress in
religion. On the twenty-sixth a meeting at Choptank was a time of heavy
exercise on account of a lifeless, lukewarm, indifferent situation of mind,
which seemed to attend diverse there assembled; the next day we attended a
burial at Thirdhaven, on which occasion a meeting was held, and he labored
honestly to arouse those that lived in the neglect of making timely preparation
for their last awful and solemn change: On the twenty-eighth we were at
Tuckahoa meeting, and on second day at the Bay-side, where were but few of our
society, but several others attended who behaved soberly, and some of the
younger sort were reached and tendered by Truth's Testimony, to whom he was led
instructively to show, That they need not give their money for that which is
not bread, nor their labor for that which satisfies not, and opened to them
the way of life and salvation which is attained through the Spirit, or free
gift of Grace that is come upon all men for justification, so that if they
attended to the dictates thereof in their own hearts, it was sufficient to
instruct them in the way of Godliness, but when people go from, and neglect
this inward teacher, seeking to, or depending on learned men, they err."

"Next day we had a religious opportunity in the family of John Bartlett, and
on fourth day went to Tuckahoa meeting again, where he had to speak of the
sufficiency of the grace of God, and the inconsistency of people's living in a
profession thereof without being found in the faith, or fully believing in this
principle as sufficient for salvation. We next attended the meetings at
Thirdhaven, and Marshy-Creek; the yearly meeting began on seventh day, and
continued until the fourth of the following week, which although he was feeble
and unwell, he attended the several sittings thereof, being nine in the five
days, and the last held seven hours; he was enabled to appear for the cause and
testimony of truth, both in the meetings for worship and discipline, and like
the good scribe well instructed in the things of the kingdom, had to bring
forth out of the treasury, things new and old, profitable and instructive,
being seasoned with the love and virtue of truth: After the meeting on fourth
day, we went to the house of Joseph Berry, where next morning had a religious
opportunity in the family, and the day following a meeting in Queen Ann's
Forest, from whence we went to Joshua Vansant's; here he was very poorly,
having taken some fresh cold; the next day being very warm, he was much spent
with riding, and said, as he had at several times before on this journey, "that
he believed it would be his last, if he lived to reach home, which at times he
thought seemed unlikely." On first day the eleventh of the sixth month he had a
meeting in a School-house at Back-Creek, among a people who behaved with much
sobriety, which was a satisfactory time, very instructive and open for
doctrine, and that evening reached home, having traveled in this journey about
290 miles."

On the fourteenth of the sixth month he went to the week day meeting at
London-Grove, to meet with a committee of our quarterly meeting on particular
business, and returned to our meeting at Nottingham the next day, on the first
day of the week following, was there also, in the same week he attended our
preparative and monthly-meetings, but a fever daily increasing upon him, he was
afterward chiefly confined at home.

On the fourth of the seventh month he expressed himself thus, "I am glad that
I am at home, I have ever found it best when my service abroad was over, to get
home as quick as might be, and though I have felt great inward poverty, and
weakness since my last journey, so that I can neither see my beginning, nor
ending, but seem as if all were hidden, yet I hope if Providence shall see meet
to remove me at this time, some light will appear again, and that it will be
otherwise before I go."

At another time he spoke to this purpose, I have found myself much stripped as
to a sense of good, and tried with poverty many days. I suppose I have been
accounted by some, as one of the better sort of people, but have seen great
occasion to beware of a disposition that would seek to feed upon the praise or
commendations of others; a carnal selfish spirit is very apt to present, and
creep in here if possible, and I have seen it hurt many who have had right
beginnings, it always introduces dimness, and oppression, to the pure,
precious, innocent life of truth, which only grows up into dominion, through
deep abasement of soul, and the entire death of self.

At several other times he signified to this effect, My present baptism of
affliction has tended to the further refinement of my nature, and to the
bringing me more perfectly into the image of my master.

He frequently expressed his full submission to the Divine Will either
respecting life or death, several times saying, "I now experience my life and
my will to be slain, and I have no will lest."

In the two last weeks of his time it appeared that his desire and hope,
mentioned in the forepart of his illness, for light again to appear was fully
answered by the fresh influence thereof, so that although his pain was often
great he would many times in a day break forth into a kind of melody with his
voice, without uttering words, which as he sometimes intimated was an
involuntary aspiration of his soul in praise to the Lord who had again been
pleased to shine forth in brightness after many days of poverty and deep
baptism, which though painful had proved beneficial to him, being a means of
further purifying from the dregs of nature, saying he was at times afraid to
discover that melody in the hearing of some that visited him, lest they could
not comprehend its meaning, and might therefore misconstrue it.

On second day morning the seventeenth of the seventh month being asked by a
friend how he was, he replied, " I am here in the body yet, and when I go out
of it I hope there is nothing but peace," and soon after further said, " I have
seen that all the bustles, and noises that are now in the world will end in
confusion, and our young men that know not an establishment in the Truth and
the Lord's fear for a ballast will be caught in a trying moment," at another
time he said, " I feel nothing but peace, having endeavored honestly to
discharge myself in public, and privately to individuals as I apprehended was
required, and if it be the Lord's will that I should go now, I shall be
released from a great deal of trouble and exercise, which I believe friends who
are left behind will have to pass through."

On the twentieth of the same month he thus expressed himself, " I love friends
who abide in the truth as much as ever I did, and I feel earnest breathings to
the Lord, that there may be such raised up in the church who may go forth in
humility, sweetness, and life, clear of all superfluity in expressions and
otherwise, standing for the testimony, that they may be useful to the church in
these difficult times."

About three days before his death several friends being in his room he spoke
as follows, "Friends in the beginning, if they had health and liberty, were not
easily diverted from paying their tribute of worship to the Almighty on week
days as well as first days, but after a while when outward sufferings ceased,
life and zeal decaying, ease and the spirit of the world took place with many,
and thus it became customary for one or two out of a family to attend meetings,
and to leave their children much at home; parents also it worldly concerns were
in the way could neglect their week day meetings sometimes; yet be willing to
hold the name, and plead excuse because of a busy time, or the like, but I
believe that such a departure from primitive integrity ever did, and ever will,
occasion a withering from the life of true religion."

To a friend who came to visit him on the twenty-first of the seventh month he
said, " I feel that which lives beyond death and the grave, which is now an
inexpressible comfort to me after a time of deep baptism that I have passed
through, I believe my being continued here is in the will of Providence, and I
am fully resigned."

His illness increasing he said but little on seventh day the twenty-second; in
the afternoon he was very low, and speechless about twelve hours; early on
first day morning he recruited a little, and gave directions about his coffin
to a friend who sat up with him being a joiner; continuing rather easier the
forepart of that day and appearing cheerful, he expressed diverse weighty
sentences like farewell exhortations to some who came to see him; on second day
morning he sat up a considerable time, in the afternoon he appeared lively and
sensible, though very weak, thus expressing himself, " I am much refreshed with
my Master's sweet air, I feel more life, more light, more love, and sweetness
than ever before," and often mentioned the Divine refreshment and comfort he
felt flowing like a pure stream to his inward man, saying to those who were
with him, " I may tell you of it, but you cannot feel it as I do."

In the evening a young person coming into the room, looking at her earnestly
and affectionately, he said, " Deborah arose a mother in Israel," and shortly
after, " The sweetness that I feel," then his difficulty of breathing
increased, and being turned once or twice he requested to be helped up, and was
placed in his chair, in which he expired about the ninth hour on second day
night the twenty-fourth of the seventh month 1775, being aged near seventy, and
minister about forty-two years, and was buried on the twenty-sixth in friend's
Graveyard at East-Nottingham, a large concourse of people attending, after
which a solemn meeting was held.

THE END.
The following Memorial of our beloved Friend Joseph White, who was endued with
an eminent Gift in the Ministry, and uniformly concerned for the welfare of
the Churches, is here subjoined at the desire of diverse Friends, which as no
account of his Labors and Visits in the service of the Gospel appears to be
preserved by himself, may in some measure supply that Deficiency, and we
apprehend will be an instructive and acceptable Appendage to the foregoing
Journal, tending to revive and keep in Remembrance his pious Life, and the near
Fellowship of his Brethren with him, and further animate survivors to
Faithfulness in the discharge of their several Religious duties, in order that
they also may be favored with a well grounded Hope of attaining the like Happy
End.

A TESTIMONY from the Falls Monthly Meeting in Bucks County, concerning our
Friend JOSEPH WHITE.
AS the Memory of the just is pronounced blessed, we think it expedient to give
forth a testimony concerning this our esteemed friend.

He was born at the Falls the twenty-eighth of the eleventh month 1712-13;
being young when his father died, he was brought up under the care of his
relations and friends: And through the early extendings of Heavenly regard
whilst young, and attending to the teachings of Divine Grace he was lead and
preserved from many of the follies and extravagances incident to unthinking
youth. About the twentieth year of his age he appeared in public testimony in
our religious meetings, and continuing in a good degree faithful to the measure
of Light and Grace communicated, he grew in his gift, and became a lively and
able minister.

He was naturally of an open cheerful disposition, and honestly concerned for
the promotion of piety and virtue, and for the support and maintenance of good
order in the church; for which service he was eminently gifted, and truly
serviceable amongst us, being often concerned that the authority of Truth might
be kept up in all our meetings of discipline, and that true judgment might be
placed upon the disorderly and irreclaimable. He was examplary in his life and
conversation, a diligent and timely attender of our religious meetings when
health of body permitted; and was often favored therein in public testimony
and supplication, much to the comfort and edification of the truly humble
waiters. And although he had a large gift in the ministry, he many times sat
meetings in silence, waiting upon the Lord, not being hasty or forward in the
exercise of his gift; but careful not to minister without the Heavenly Life and
Power that first raised him up in the ministry, whereby his public service was
greatly to the consolation and refreshment of many.

He several times had a concern to visit the churches abroad, and with the
concurrence of this meeting, visited many of the meetings of friends in this
and several of the adjacent provinces, and once through some parts of Maryland,
Virginia and North Carolina: And having for some considerable time been under a
weighty concern to pay a religious visit to friends in several parts of Europe,
he with the concurrence and unity of his friends took shipping for that purpose
in the year 1758, and after a short passage landed in England, and having
pretty generally visited friends meetings in England and Ireland, and some
parts of Wales, he returned to his family and friends, having been from home in
truth's service near three years: And at his return from these visits produced
certificates of friends unity and good satisfaction with him, and his public
service amongst them.

He was diverse times appointed and engaged in the service of visiting families,
being well qualified for that weighty service.

He much loved the company and conversation of his friends; was a loving and
affectionate husband, a tender parent and a good neighbor, generally beloved
by his friends and others that knew him, being in several respects useful and
serviceable in the neighborhood where he lived.

He was attended from his youth at times, with a pain at his breast, with
intermissions of health, sometimes for years, and at other times but short; but
as he advanced further in age, intermissions of health grew short and pain
increased, which brought on other bodily infirmities, which he bore with
patience and resignation, often craving he might not be off his watch when his
pains were exquisite, nor his faith fail in the time of trial, believing it to
be the goodness of God, through his thus dealing with him, more and more to
wean him from all outward connections and nearest ties of nature, that being as
the pure gold, refined through the furnace, he might with triumph join the
redeemed that were gone before, which he at times had a foretaste and evidence
of; but the time when, as he himself sometimes expressed, he did not then see,
believing it to be consistent with Divine Wisdom to keep it hid from him.

The latter part of his time for several months, he slept but little in the
night season, being at times engaged in reverent intercessions and Divine
contemplation, and appeared to be waiting for the solemn moment.

He lived in the compass of the Falls particular meeting until a few years
before his death, and then removed to Makefield, (a branch of the same
monthly meeting,) and having for some months felt strong desires (if favored
with health) to go to the Falls meeting, and on a monthly meeting day set out
to go there; but the weather being cold and he in a weak state of health, soon
found himself unable to perform the journey, and returned home. But some time
after feeling his bodily strength somewhat restored, and love renewed, he set
out, in company with his wife, one first day morning, and got to the meeting
where he was favored with an open time in public testimony, much to the
satisfaction of those present. After the meeting was over and friends gone out,
a friend being desirous of speaking to him, not seeing him out of doors,
returned into the house, and found him sitting on a seat, unable to move
without help; the friend assisted him, and took him to his house, where he was
taken care of: The fit being of the paralytick kind, was much more favorable
than at some other times, though it continued ebbing and flowing for several
hours; in which time he expressed several things, some of which being then
taken down, are nearly as follows.

Being asked by his son Samuel how it was with him; he answered, " I don't know
but that I am near my end. My desire at this time for thee is, that thou seek
unto the Lord for assistance, to govern thee in thy conduct in this fluctuating
life, for I have found him to be a sure help and counselor to me; and if thou
follow after him in truth and sincerity, as I have endeavored to do, he will
be unto thee a sufficient director, a Teacher that cannot be removed into a
corner: I have not been anxious to gather a portion of this world, nor make to
myself mammon of unrighteousness, for I think I have seen a snare that has
attended many young people on these accounts. I have ever from my youth had a
desire to be more in substance than in show: Let me appear as I might in the
sight of men, their praise I sought not for; but I have sought the honor of
God, therefore there is a place where no trouble shall annoy, prepared for me
as a reward for obedience: You that stay, be more humble, and when trouble
awaits you, look not upon nor trust to the arm of flesh for assistance, but
stay yourselves upon him who suffered for you, for me, and for all mankind; for
I have for some time believed, and lived in the hopes thereof, and am now in
measure confirmed, of more glorious things yet to be revealed to the church of
Christ, and that further and greater discoveries will yet be made, with respect
to the Christian Religion than ever yet has been since the apostasy."

And after a short pause he broke forth in these expressions, " The door is
open, I see an innumerable company of saints, of Angels, and of the Spirits of
just men, which I long to be unbodied to be with, but not my will, but thy will
be done O Lord! I cannot utter nor my tongue express, what I feel of that
Light, Life and Love that attends me, which the world cannot give, neither can
it take away from me. My sins are washed away by the blood of the Lamb that was
slain from the foundation of the world: All rags and filthiness are taken away,
and in room thereof love and good will for all mankind: O that we may become
more united in the church militant, and nearer resemble the church triumphant!
O that we all might make such an end as I have in prospect, for its all Light,
all Life, all Love and all Peace, the light that I see is more glorious than
the Sun in the Firmament; come Lord Jesus Christ, come when thou pleases, thy
servant is ready and willing; into thy hands I commit my spirit, not my will,
but thy will be done O Lord! Let this mortal body be committed to the dust, be
with me, with my children and my grandchildren; be with all them that love
thee, that love thy appearance. O the pains that I feel, that attend this
mortal body, they are more comely to me than jewels! I rejoice in my sighs and
groans, for to me they are most melodious; I am near to enter that harmony with
Moses and the Lamb, where they cry Holy, Holy, Holy, I cannot express the joy I
feel. My heart (if it were possible) would break for joy: If any enquire after
me, after my end, let them know all is well with me."

Many more weighty expressions he spoke, which not being taken down, cannot be
recollected.

The next day his pain abating, and finding himself somewhat relieved from his
disorder, he was taken to his own house, where he remained in a weak state of
health for sometime, being unable to go much abroad. And one night some short
time before his death, his pain had been sharp the forepart of the night, but
the latter part it abating, his wife lay down by him, and fell asleep, but he
as usual slept not, but after sometime called to his wife in these words: " My
dear, I believe I must take my leave of thee, I have never seen my end till
now, and now I see its near, and the Holy Angels enclose me around, waiting to
receive me;" his wife asked him if she should call up the children, he said, he
did not see any thing further he had to say to them, except to his son Joseph
who being called, and he having expressed what he had on his mind, was much
spent, and appeared as though he was near his desired port; but after some time
he revived, with these words, " Life is yet strong in me and will not yield;"
thus he continued the few concluding days, waiting in resignation and
retiredness of mind, until the repeated returns of the paralytick complaint
reduced his faculties and senses so, that he knew not what was done for some
days, and departed in much stillness as in a sleep, the tenth day of the third
month 1777, and was decently interred in friend's burying ground at the Falls
meeting house, the twelfth of the same; his body being attended to the grave by
a number of friends and neighbors.

May we under the consideration of our great loss of him, and many other
faithful laborers in the Lord's Vineyard, now removed from us, be excited so
to follow their footsteps, that with them, we may be partakers of that
incorruptible inheritance, which is reserved for the righteous, when time here
shall be no more.

Aged sixty-four, and a minister about forty-four years.

Signed on behalf of said Monthly Meeting held by Adjournment the 12 th of the
8 th Month, 1778. JOSEPH GILLINGHAM, Clerk.

Blessed are those Servants whom the LORD when He comes, shall find watching.
LUKE 12.37.

