NEHEMIAH, Or the Struggle for Liberty never in vain, when managed with Virtue
and Perseverance. A DISCOURSE DELIVERED AT THE PRESBYTERIAN CHURCH IN
NEWBURY-PORT, Nov. 4TH, 1779. Being the day appointed by Government to be
observed as a day of solemn Fasting and Prayer throughout the State of
MASSACHUSETTS BAY.

Published in compliance with the request of some Hearers.

By J. Murray, A. M. V. D. M.

THE HAND OF OUR GOD IS UPON ALL THEM FOR GOOD THAT SEEK HIM: BUT HIS POWER AND
HIS WRATH IS AGAINST ALL THEM THAT FORSAKE HIM. EZRA. NEWBURY: Printed by JOHN
MYCALL. 1779.

A SERMON, etc
NEHEMIAH VI. 16 And it came to pass that when all our Enemies heard thereof,
and all the Heathen that were round about us saw these things, that they were
much cast down in their own eyes; for they perceived that this Work was wrought
of our God.


AT a time when the trial of the community seems brought to the CRISIS, when
hopes and fears alternately swell every bosom which can feel for the greatest
interests of mankind, it gives me pleasure to see the Rulers of this State the
first to step forth and invite their constituents, by the solemnities of this
day, to repeat their appeal to the all-gracious Being who has ever patronized
the cause of virtue; who still continues the just Arbiter of all events, and
holds the balance of universal empire in his hands.

IT is a mournful evidence of gross depravity of heart, when religious services
of this nature lose their solemnity by becoming ordinary and familiar: and it
is a fact which no words or tears can sufficiently lament, nor any man
acquainted with the public manners can deny, that our public fasts, so
frequently repeated since our present calamities began, are followed with so
little which has the show of reformation, that it is no superstition to indulge
a fear that they are not the fasts that the Lord has chosen; but through
frequency degenerated into an unmeaning formality: this I consider as one of
the most gloomy symptoms of the times; and should it be found continuing
without abatement after this day, there is reason to dread that, however pious
the design of the appointment, our pretense of observing it, without meaning
any reformation in those things that have drawn down and still continue the
strokes of heaven upon us, will be charged against us as a repetition of a
deliberate mockery of the Searcher of all hearts.

I have ever thought it expedient, on occasions of this kind, to accommodate
the services of the day to the special intent of its appointment; but the
Proclamation which now calls us together has not held up to view any particular
purpose as more especially intended; it seems rather designed to invite us to
turn aside, and seriously reflect on the situation of our public affairs,
considered in a complex and extensive light; and it is in compliance with this
design that choice has been made of the words how read as the motto for a few
observations, in which all attention to method shall be studiously waved, and
the thoughts which the present hurry of my circumstances have allowed shall be
freely laid before you, in a series of Propositions; requesting only that they
may be received with the same friendly disposition for the public weal with
which they are now offered as a mite, to the abundance which others are
contributing to the saving this distressed country from impending ruin.

THE struggles of an oppressed people for recovering the civil and religious
privileges by which God had distinguished them from all the rest of the world
-- the manner in which their efforts were conducted the oppositions they met --
and the success which crowned their virtuous labors are the subject matter of
the whole of that book from whence the text is taken -- the scope of the
inspired author appears to be the setting up a lasting monument of one of the
most remarkable deeds of Providence in favor of the church of old, which should
be to the praise of the God of Israel in all succeeding ages.

THIS, like all other parts of sacred scripture, was written for (...); and, if
not perverted by our own fault, will be profitable for doctrine, for reproof,
for correction, for instruction in righteousness -- glancing an eye over it
with a (...) to the (...) of this day, I was struck with the similarity between
the case of the Jewish church, as it relates it, and that of confederated
America at this time, and could not forbear the mention of it to you on the
present occasion.

YET, as the story of the grand emancipation of the church of God cannot be
fully learnt without joining the accounts of this author to those of the other
sacred writers that have treated on the subject, and especially to the
transactions related by Ezra, I shall therefore, in the sequel, take the
liberty of referring you to the author last mentioned, and to the writer of
this book promiscuously, and consider the text as the conclusion to which we
are pointed in the whole.

PROPOSITION I. All men are by nature alike -- the faculties, powers, and
passions or each substantially the same: to the full exercise of these, and to
the enjoyments thence resulting they are equally entitled.

SOCIALITY is essential to the human frame -- absolute solitude is abhorred by
every principle in it. Felicity is improved by communication -- and hence from
a desire of imparting the pleasure he feels, as well as of sharing in the
happiness of others, man is prompted to seek society with man. To this he is
urged also by a sense of the dangers to which his dearest enjoyments are
exposed from the lusts of his fellows -- equally with himself sunk into a
depravity that regards no difference between right and wrong: against the
encroachments of their appetites his single arm he finds to be too feeble a
defense: and hence from a new necessity he is stimulated to seek the protection
of others:

THESE principles in like manner operating on the human race in common, easily
introduce a social compact among them; and thus God cements mankind into
society for their greater good; while each, consenting to submit his exercise
of the several powers with which he is vested to the cognizance of the whole
body, agrees to deny himself such gratifications as are deemed incompatible
with the felicity of the rest, though conscious that his personal ability is
sufficient separately to obtain them:

THIS may be considered as a resignation of certain rights possessed by each in
their state of nature, yet as it is equally the act of every member, their
entrance into society is on the footing of perfect equality -- and the
surrender being freely made for the security of rights esteemed more valuable,
no member can be a loser by the compact -- the personal privileges resigned
being held by the society in trust, may still be said to be virtually enjoyed
by the original possessor.

BESIDES these no other rights may be wrested from men by society -- the powers
vested in its officers are delegated to them as servants of the body, and meant
only to secure, to exercise, and improve these to the benefit of the owners.

NO man in a state of nature has a right to do wrong -- therefore he can lodge
no such right in the hands of society -- nor can the body protect any member in
a claim of this sort: no man in either state may usurp the rights of another
which that other has not freely conceded, nor any for which, upon concession,
he has not received full compensation: no man can concede the rights necessary
to his being -- or being a moral agent -- a subject of moral government; of
reward and punishment -- the rights of private judgment and of conscience are
therefore as unalienable as the faculty of intelligence, and the right of
acquiring and enjoying property can no more be bartered away than the natural
strength or genius that acquires it, or the natural life which is maintained by
the acquisition; partly because the transfer cannot take place, though both
parties should consent; as no man can add to the life or faculties of another
by resigning to him his own; and partly because, if it could, no equivalent
could be repaid in lieu of the concession.

INDEED, when any individual goes on to abuse the rights he enjoys to the
destruction of those of others, he thereby threatens and endangers all; it is
the plain dictate of the original compact, that the whole power of the
community should then be employed to confine and disable him -- and this may be
continued until he has given full compensation for the injury done, and
sufficient security against his future attempts: in no other way may men be
reduced to a state of servitude, or retained in it; because no power beyond
this was lodged by society in the hands of its officers -- nor could there be,
since there was none in the society itself; and this is evident, because none
such could be resigned by individuals: all exertions of power then which exceed
this line are usurpation, not authority: are rebellion and treason against
society, reason, nature and God: and as such, whenever they appear, ought to be
resisted, defeated and punished.

THE nations therefore that support or connive at the practice of enslaving the
human species, as an article of commerce, ought to be considered in a state of
war against all mankind; since none can be thought willing to wear that public
brand of the antichristian beast -- a traffic consisting of the souls of men,
unless they had previously conspired the extirpation of every remain of virtue
and humanity from the face of the earth:

TO this consideration due attention will, I trust, be paid by all these rising
States: for should a toleration of the slave trade be now mingled with our new
Constitutions, that leaven will soon corrupt the whole lump: should connivance
at the practice of making or retaining slaves amongst ourselves betray a secret
envy of the liberties of our fellow men, would it not entail the curse of
heaven on all our struggles for the defense of our own?

PROP. II. Societies to each other, stand related no otherwise than individuals
in a state of nature: all possess the same natural rights -- within the same
limitations -- and on the same conditions; and there is nothing in the law of
nature or the relation between them to warrant one to invade the enjoyments of
another, any entire than if they were private persons, utterly unconnected with
society and each with other: what though it be granted that when two societies
go on in wickedness the one is often found to be let loose for the punishment
of the other, and sometimes even to the enslaving it? This will never weaken
the conclusion now drawn until it can be proved that the divine permission
excuses the sin of the injurious party.

PROP. III. God has set up the Jewish church as a sample of his government. By
it he has put a glass into the hands of the world: the conduct of his
providence toward that people (...) ^^serve at once to guide and bound the
prospe^^^ of other communities in every age. In this light it would be
profitable to view their history from first to last: but the business now
before us would direct our eye more especially to their freedom in Canaan --
their wanton abuse of their distinguishing privileges -- the just punishments
of this ingratitude, particularly their captivity in Babylon -- and wondrous
manumission from that state of bondage: and could we now attend to these
particulars as they deserve, we might find them fruitful of instruction not
unworthy the regard of all America at this juncture. E. g.

PROP. IV. While the manners of a nation professing religion continue pleasing
to God, he secures their liberties against all invaders: the paternal care of
his providence is as a wall of fire around them: numerous were the proofs of
this in the condition of the people of Israel in the days of Joshua and the
Judges; how often do we there behold a weak and inconsiderable handful suffice
to chastise the insolence of powerful hosts -- one chasing a thousand and two
putting ten thousands to flight! Benefits of all sorts are talents entrusted to
men for improvement: the enjoyment of temporal good gives new force to the
virtues of the virtuous man -- as crystal looks brighter in the beams of the
sun. But through the wickedness of men the smiles of Providence are often
perverted into provision for lust, as the showers that are sweet when distilled
from the clouds are turned into salt when they sink in the ocean. Hence
prosperity frequently becomes a poison in disguise -- the sweeter in taste, the
more fatal in effect: nations, as well as individuals, are generally
intoxicated by it -- the unthankfulness of some proclaims them barren as the
sands of Africa -- others, like Je^hurun, have waxed fat and kicked at the hand
by which they were nourished.

PROP. V. The honor of divine Government is concerned that national sins meet
national punishments: the being of God's law requires that every transgression
and disobedience receive a just recompense of reward; the justice of his
administration necessitates that the penalty be inflicted in the same measures
in which it was threatened -- less will not be looked for in reason from the
hand of the supreme Guardian of the interests of virtue, who by a different
conduct would, more effectually than all other beings, encourage the wicked and
deter the obedient. This expectation is answered by the fact: no instance of
transgression ever did or will pass unpunished -- the sinner himself shall pay
the debt, or his surety must discharge the uttermost farthing.

THERE is a fitness in adapting the punishment to the crime, that so the latter
might be pointed out by the former: hence it appears congruous to wisdom that
they who have sinned together should suffer in like manner -- and that the
fellow-sinner who has been the occasion -- the means or incitement to the
crime, should also serve as the engine for the punishment of the criminal. Thus
nations combined in a course of transgression must be dealt with collectively
when it is punished. Hence we conclude that national sins must be punished in
this life; because nations, as such, exist not in the next; and so, if not
here, cannot at all be made to feel, in their national capacity, the desert of
their crimes.

THE goodness of God is clearly illustrated in the patience with which he
forbears the stroke: the slow gradations with which his people are corrected
discover all the father in the corrector's heart; whilst the rod of correction
is in his hand, what bowels! what meltings may be seen in the stripes! every
touch seems interrupted with those tender interrogatives 'how can I give thee
up O Ephraim! how can I deliver thee O Israel! my bowels are turned within me,
my relentings are gathered together.'

THE lenity of divine government, when long abuse as an argument for insult, at
last is roused to indignation, and though judgments on earth are inflicted
piecemeal, yet in the issue the incorrigible must be given up to the scourge.

THE higher the rise of national guilt, the greater is the necessity that the
punishment be eminent, public, and speedy. The people highest in professions
and privileges should therefore be foremost under the rod. The holiness of the
Sovereign is publicly displayed when judgments begin at the house of God. In
the execution of these, he often employs his worst foes, as men use the meanest
slave for the vilest drudgery.

THE end of all, is to humble the sinning people, to bring them to repentance,
and reformation, to these the means used will be proportioned by wisdom: not a
drop of bitter will be mingled in their cup but what is necessary: not a stripe
laid on which their case could dispense with: nor shall their heaviness endure
one night longer than their need of it lasts:

THAT the afflictions of a professing people should not fail of accomplishing
this end, the most important interests of virtue and godliness require: partly
because the sins which brought them on are more highly aggravated than the sins
of others: and partly because the honor of God is most concerned that things be
kept right amongst such, lest they totally go off, and religion thus be extinct
in the world, lest the ignorant and wicked should hence take occasion to call
evil good, and religion itself be charged as patronizing the crimes of its
professors.

WHEN the proper effect is not produced by such judgments, but the people prove
hardened in their vicious ways, they have reason to expect their continuance
with additional severities: because there is the same reason for continuing as
for commencing them, and similar causes produce similar effects: and over and
above the causes past the new degrees of hardness which have withstood the
remedy already applied, make perseverance in correcting necessary to vindicate
the honor of God's unchangeableness, omnipotence, and infallible wisdom in the
choice of means effectual to the end. Thus we see the people of Israel,
gradually threatened, and gradually punished; but discovering an obduracy which
was proof against all, they were at last led captives to Babylon, and rivetted
on themselves the chain of slavery.

A people thus ripened for the judgments of heaven in vain seek protection from
their rulers: the magistrate who has led on the general revolt from the ways of
God, seldom fails to prove as active a tool in aggravating the woes that ensue
thereon: so Jehoiakin consents to curry favor for himself, by abetting the
tyranny of the Chaldean monarch and confirming the slavery of his own
captivated subjects: miserable reward indeed for the unlimited obedience they
had formerly paid him! -- Poor wages truly for loyalty to a king maintained by
a course of rebellion against God! Thus tyrants falling like falling angels,
never choose to suffer alone, their disappointed pride, impatient of any
comforts surpassing their own, makes them resolved enemies of all mankind; and
will strain every nerve to pull all down into the same ruin with themselves.

PROP. VI. When the end of the correction has once been obtained, the
deliverance of the afflicted shall suffer no delay. Neither the depth of their
distress, nor the desperateness of the case, nor the want of resources, nor the
defection of friends shall retard or prevent the needed release, any more than
the multitude of clouds that darken the night can defer the morning dawn, or
postpone the rising of the sun: the time to visit his distressed ones, the set
time, shall come: and then the Lord need but speak the word, and it is done:
when Israel does evil in the fight of the Lord we commonly see an adversary
commissioned to devour his strength, but no sooner is he humbled and cries to
the Author of all his help, than lo! to his own astonishment, and often to the
amazement of all around, some instrument is instantly raised up for his rescue,
and by a sudden transition from the depth of woe we behold him emerging into
honor and power. Sometimes the great Deliverer chooses a pebble from their own
brook to prostrate their most gigantic oppressors, and sometimes he moves the
heart of an alien to restore them the liberty which their own kings overthrew.
Thus CYRUS a pagan prince, unconnected by nation, and by religion an enemy,
monarch of the empire that had persecuted their fathers, that had razed their
cities, abolished their ordinances and levelled their temple to the ground. --
CYRUS, stirred up by the Lord alone, unsolicited by men, and incapable of
detriment from any plot of his prisoners, proclaims the remains of oppressed
Israel, free and independent in their greatest privileges, those of the
religion of the God of their fathers, he rouses every dormant principle of
patriotism among them to exert itself on the occasion for the re-establishment
of their invaluable liberties, and freely furnishes the undertakers of the work
with treasures and all things necessary for the full accomplishment of the
purpose. See Ezra i. throughout.

HAD a Jew refused the benefit from educational prejudice against the hand that
offered it, or superstitious scruple about the lawfulness of accepting the
friendship of a power that disowned his religion, who could have avoided
charging him with atheism who would not acknowledge the hand of God in
producing this happy event by means so unlikely, so contrary to the policy of
nations, and so far without the line of probability? May God punish by what
hand he will? And may he not deliver by an instrument that none but himself
would have thought of? The conduct of the man who would not embrace the joyful
opportunity with humble adoration of the sovereign wisdom that brought it to
pass, and cordial gratitude to the generous instrument, is a complication of
iniquity: -- it is hard to say whether the impiety or stupidity, the pride or
ingratitude of such a demeanor has the ascendant.

PROP. VII. When a public restoration of God's people from the calamities of
oppression is to be effected, he usually inspires them with zeal proportioned
to the work -- the edict for enlarging the captive tribes no sooner issues from
the court at Babylon, than the joyful news is rung through all the stations of
their confinement -- the drooping spirits of that forlorn people, enervated by
a servitude of seventy years, are animated at once, the languishing spark of
patriotism is instantly rekindled in every breast, and our eyes are immediately
saluted with the sight of forty two thousand and upwards determined at all
hazards, at the risque of life and fortune, to regain the enjoyment of their
country and liberties against whatever opposition may stand in the way: this
was the work of the finger of God, Ezra i. 5. by which he prepared his way, for
the still more mavelous one that followed.

THE cause of liberty is the cause of God: reason, truth, justice, religion
mutually support and are supported by it: of this cause heaven has been the
patron in every age: he is incapable of changing his mind; the cause he has
been wont to plead he will never desert, he will work for it, and who shall
let him? when this stone is at the foundation, nothing shall hinder the
building to rise.

BUT the works of providence are done by means: they are ordinarily fitted
before they are used -- in a work of this kind every man is concerned, and it
is the duty of each to do what he can: no class or station is uninterested in
the matter -- and none is exempted from the strongest ties to exert his utmost
to have it accomplished -- resolution and fortitude are necessary to the task,
and unanimity strengthens the hands that perform it: therefore when God means
to bring about so great an event, he usually stirs up those principles among
the people for whose behoof it is designed: the contest among them is not who
shall endure the least difficulties -- face the fewest dangers -- or sustain
the smallest loss in the public cause; not who shall perform the least services
for the community, and reap the greatest emoluments from it -- not who shall
realize the greatest fortune, or secure the chief honors to himself and his
friends. No! detested be the principles of conduct like this! shall the company
be respected as virtuous or wise, who all embarked in the same bottom, and
perceiving themselves on the point of foundering at sea, cease every endeavor
for saving the ship, and get by the ears about sharing the cargo? then, and
then only, will reason and virtue agree to espouse the narrow pursuits of a
private spirit in seasons of public distress and danger.

WHAT a contrast to this was the spirit of the Jews in the struggle described
in this sacred book! their only emulation appears to be who shall display the
greatest exertions in the public cause -- who shall contribute the most
effectual aids -- who shall offer the richest sacrifice to the security of the
common weal.

SEE! with what unanimity they pursue their plan! how cordially each works to
the hand of the other! nor watching -- nor building -- nor fighting is shunned
when the common cause requires it. Every man exerting his utmost for the good
of the whole -- and influencing all within his reach to join their endeavors
for effecting the purpose. Let the coward in America's quarrel -- let the
backward and lukewarm in the cause of the day -- let the willing subject of
tyranny, and the servant of self, read over this history until the conscious
blush redden his cheek, and the line of his conduct be abandoned with shame.

MAGISTRATES, and persons of rank and trust, ought to go foremost in asserting
the people's freedom -- these are appointed as fathers of the State, and
guardians of the rights and privileges of all its members: and should such men
as they flee? Should they wink at the attempts of the evil doer, who invades
any right of the people for whom they rule, and neglect or refuse to pluck from
their bosom the folded and lazy hand of their power to strike due terror on the
impious aggressor -- then do they renounce the chief part of their trust:
whenever they decline to put forth all their powers to encourage and assist the
exertions of their people in repelling the attacks of those who would injure
them, the very office they sustain is the censure of their conduct, and the
honors heaped on them are become the reproach of the men who wear them: no
longer should they be re-regarded as the ordinance of God, than they endeavor
to be terrors to such evil doers, and a praise and encouragement to them who,
by defeating their wicked intent, deserve the character of having done well.

NOR should the ministers of religion imagine themselves excused by their
office from bearing their part of the burden of the people in struggles of such
importance as these: as watchmen set on the walls of Zion, it is incumbent on
them to give the alarm on the approach of every danger: as heralds from God we
justly expect that, in times of public trial, they will not fail to blow his
trumpet and proclaim his mandates -- that they will cry aloud and not spare to
show to their people and to the world, yea to all ranks of men therein, where
lies duty on the one hand and sin on the other. Should magistrates withold
from their people protection against the injuries of lawless persons or States,
and ministers delay bearing testimony against them -- or should the people
refuse obedience to the just calls of their rulers in matters indispensible to
their own defense, and their public teachers by silence appear to connive at,
or countenance their crime, do they not then make the transgressions of the
rest their own? and may not the consequences be charged to their account?

PROP. VIII. Between civil liberties and those of religion there is a near and
necessary connection; when the one expires, the other cannot long survive. When
earth and hell conspire against the former, their ultimate purpose is to stab
the latter through that side: as religious reformations must generally open the
door for the removal of civil distresses, so every step in the struggle for
liberty should be measured and governed by the rules of piety: success in
measures which virtue abhors must not be counted a blessing -- we cannot
conclude the Lord on our side when we have avowedly joined his enemies.

WHEN restoration of liberty has been obtained, the first thing to be
attempted, is a total reform of every practice contrary to the laws of
religion: this is the end of the people's deliverance -- and when it is
neglected, their foundation totters: to this the Jewish adventurers were
immediately led on their return home by the same inspiration that stirred them
up to engage in the journey: no sooner have they regained their city than we
find them unanimously employed in rebuilding the altars and temple of God --
clearing away rubbish -- laying foundations -- restoring the worship, and
reinstalling the officers of religion: See Ezra iii. throughout.

WORKS of this sort therefore go heavily on unless magistrates and ministers go
hand in hand in it: when restoration is to be completed, God ordinarily
spirits up both these classes with fervent zeal for the cause of religion, thus
Moses and Aaron acted in concert -- Zerubbabel and Joshua strengthened each
other: thus Ezra and Nehemiah co-operated in the work when the Lord was about
to render it perfect. See Neh. iii. 3, 28. and chap. iv. 16.

SOMETIMES indeed there are found amongst the first ranks men of the same turn
with the nobles of Tekoa Neh. iii. 5. who decline to put their necks to the
work of the Lord. They cannot resolve to risque the frowns of the great --
endanger their posts of honor -- their riches and possibly their persons too
for the sake of liberty which they never prized -- or to defend religion whose
sweets they never tasted: their honors and profits they can better secure by
the ruin than the recovery of the one, and their pleasures might meet with
disturbance from the other. Such men become a heavy clog to the wheels of
society in perilous times: what damps will be cast on the spirits of the people
within the sphere of their influence? but the example recorded in the text last
cited, has pointed out from heaven a way to get rid of this dead-weight; the
people with whom the original of all civil powers does still reside should not
scruple to recurr to the original principles of their constitution -- and by
virtue thereof discard the unworthy incumbents from office -- proceed in the
work of the Lord without them -- and record their crimes to the lasting infamy
they have deserved.

PROP. IX. The struggles for liberty seldom succeed unless under the direction
of some patriot-head: in a multitude of coordinate leaders -- a multitude of
opinions often distract, sometimes divide, but ever retard and weaken the
operations necessary for the defense of the whole. To the energy and effect of
the wisest plans the grand requisites are dispatch and secrecy: and of both of
these popular councils are for the most part destitute: happy is that people
for whom Heaven has reserved at such a crisis the services of a NEHEMIAH
indeed. Rarely indeed has our depraved world beheld the rising of so glorious a
star in the midst of a storm: seldom can the annals of history record the
appearance of an hero of this class -- who with wisdom to plan and courage to
execute, joins an assemblage of virtues equal to the task of vindicating the
rights of oppressed Israel, against the force and policy of invading powers:
the man who like him has patriotism enough to forego the sweets of a palace and
the presence of a king, with the certain prospect of every honor and profit he
wishes -- for the fatigues of a camp, and the dangers of the field -- to take
by the hand a people oppressed by one power and despised by the rest -- without
prospect of emolument to himself or his family -- and renouncing all claim to
fee or reward: See Neh. iv. 23. chap. v. 14, 19.

THE people that are blessed with a helper like this deserve to sink into the
abyss of contempt, if their conduct shall ever give ground to conclude that
they have forgotten that, as his duties are great and his dangers many, he has
a right to their compliance in every lawful demand -- and ought to be supported
with their lives and fortunes.

PROP. X. Restorations of this sort ever find opposition proportioned to their
extent and importance: they all look favorably on the cause of religion, and
since the day of the commencement of the enmity between the seed of the woman
and that of the serpent, no great event tending to advance the interest of the
Church has ever been accomplished without opposition: of this we may find
abundant proof in the history of every age: was Israel to be delivered from the
house of bondage, and put in possession of the land of promise? behold the fury
of Egypt is to be faced on the one hand, and all the powers of Canaan opposed
on the other! were the Jews to be released from Chaldea, to rebuild their
ruined city and temple, and receive the ancient worship of God? see the
multitudes of adversaries assembling from all quarters, like swarms of locusts
rising from the pit, Ezra iv. 9, 10. Was the world to be illuminated by the
Sunbeams of the gospel? to defeat this purpose the whole world combines -- the
enmity of mankind against this cause collects (...) ascends as smoke -- is
condensed into clouds, which darken the whole horizon, and pour down the
hurricane of ten general persecutions over all the Roman empire. When the long
night of antichristian darkness is come to an end, and the sun of righteousness
is to arise with salvation in its rays, in the dawn of the reformation from
popery; what tempests of war and destruction are spread in every land where the
light shines out?

WAS there ever a general revival of the power of godliness in any land that
did not find its mocking Ishmaels -- its murdering Cains -- its blaspheming
Rabshakehs -- or persecuting Herod's?

THIS arises not from any perplexity in divine counsels -- nor absurdity of the
plans of infinite wisdom -- nor evil in his designs -- nor error in his means
-- nor weakness in the execution: every objection against this procedure will
vanish when we consider this life as a state of probation -- and remember that
by the superintendence of heaven it has ever been effected that religion, like
the palm tree, grows by being pressed. Opposition has helped, but never hurt
the truth; persecutions have spread the knowledge of religion -- the blood of
the martyrs has been the seed of the Church -- errors have occasioned the truth
to be confirmed by arguments which otherwise might have been concealed -- in
each public calamity that has befallen the church we have a fresh confirmation
of the truth of religion* as the prophecies that had predicted the storm could
not without it have had their accomplishment -- and all these convulsions have
been subservient to the purpose of purging God's temple, as thunder-storms tend
to purify air.

CONTRARIES always illustrate each other -- this opposition is a foil to let
off the glory of the divine power that defeats it; the justice of destroying
God's enemies at last is magnified through the patience whereby he bore with
them till then -- hence the distresses of the people of God are often permitted
to come to extremity before he appears for their relief -- Isaac is bound to
the engine of death, the knife is taken, and the stroke drawn, before the angel
arrests the descending fate -- the bricks are doubled ever Moses is sent -- and
the disciples are sinking when the Sovereign of the elements enters the ship:
this enhances the mercy that helped at such a time, and the goodness that
supported through so great distress.

OPPOSITION cannot then be said to prove the badness of a cause nor the
certainty of its failing: the want of opposition demonstrates both: great
oppositions bespeak some great event in the birth -- and in the cause of God
the encouragement rises as the violence that obstructs it: since himself has
assured us that all shall be overthrown at last -- all made subservient to the
good of his Church -- and turn out to be means of obtaining it too: and in the
confidence of this, the friends of America need not be discouraged at the
numbers, the power, the rage, or the deeds of the enemies of the great cause
they plead -- since they all preach the deliverance, the security and future
glory of the land.

THIS cause has ever been the great eye sore of hell -- the malice and power of
internal legions have ever been bent against it: Satan's party are ever ready
at his beck -- hence wicked men of all classes naturally seek its overthrow:
and when any such are accidentally employed in favor of it, we need never be
at a loss to discover by their conduct, that they are pressed into the service
by other motives than love to the cause itself -- or any honest zeal to have it
promoted.

THE more effectually to obstruct the work of restoration, it is usual for
Satan to collect his tools from different ranks -- and different lands see Ezra
iv. 4, 9, 10. The returning Jews soon found themselves called to conflict with
a colluvies of emigrants from various countries planted by the Babylonish
tyrant as colonies of his vassals to support his prerogative in every part of
the land around them: the inferior herd of conspirators against liberty are
generally found to move on as they are spirited by the dependents on the throne
-- thus the (...), Elamites, and the rest of the nations transported by
Asnapper into the Samaritan territories acted against Israel according to the
instigation of the officers of the king: thus in all the plots for crushing
that people we find the Sanballats, the Tatnais, the Tobiahs whom the tyrant
had made Governors in the land of Canaan, ever bearing a leading part. This may
generally be expected when Governors are dependent for their office and support
on the mere will of a monarch; for then it is not unnatural to suppose the
appointments will, of course, take place among such as are known to have less
zeal for the freedom and welfare of the people, than for the smiles of their
master and the security of their place:

UNDERSTRAPPERS never fail to ape the manners of their superiors in office;
when the Governors of the Provinces conspire the ruin of the people under them,
the Rehum's and Shimshai's -- the Commissioners of Customs, and Secretaries of
the Province, think they can never be too forward in their efforts for
executing the project. Ezra iv. 7 8.

ENEMIES without, receive their chief advantage from the secret manaeuvres of
foes within, as a traitor in the city will open the gates with twice the
facility that the besieger can force them: hence it is the policy of those who
attempt the destruction of the liberties of a people, if possible, to secure a
party among themselves who, under the mask of friendship, will forward their
measures, and embarrass every step taken in order to protract them: these,
Proteus like, will put on various shapes according to times: they will work
themselves into churches and councils -- into armies and courts, and pretend to
enter with spirit into all the measures of the people, while they mean to
frustrate the design of the whole, or to spy out and divulge what they cannot
suppress; thus, Judas like, they still dip in the dish, and pretend to embrace
whom they mean to betray: Such was the policy of Israel's foes, Ezra iv. 2.
'let us build with you (say they) for we seek your God as ye do' But a little
acquaintance with mankind will lead us to discover, that they enter into
councils with Hushai's intent: and the people of God, if guided by prudence,
will boldly remove them from all share in the matter, and will not scruple to
tell them, even to the face, as the fathers of Israel have set the example,
Ezra iv. 3. 'Ye have nothing to do with us to build an house unto our God.'

WHETHER this precaution is taken or not, the conspirators will leave no stone
unturned to obviate every scheme for the public safety, and will alter their
measures as the matter requires, as quickly as the Polypus changes its color
for that of the substance to which it adheres.

IT will not be unprofitable to trace the windings of this serpentine brood as
we see them practiced in the case of the Jews. At first they set out with evil
surmisings and advices to court, these are backed with bribes to the
Counselors and other officers in power, see Ezra iv. 4, 5. Then follow letter
upon letter replete with their venom -- false informations multiply apace,
accusations to the king stuff every packet, see ver. 6 -- 16. They forget not
to trumpet their own loyalty to their master, and set up their zeal for his
honor as their motive in all, see ver. 14. 'because we have maintenance from
the king's palace, and it was not meet for us to see the king's dishonor,
therefore have we sent and certified the king'. They plead that his interest
and revenue is at stake, and all must be lost if their tales be slighted, see
verse 13.16. 'if thou suffer the scheme of this people to succeed, then they
will not pay toll, tribute, nor custom, and by this means thou shall have no
portion on this side the river.

REPRESENTATIONS like this obtain easy credit in the ears of monarchs -- seldom
do they fail to stand as sufficient proof of the charge -- and the accused,
without trial or hearing, are easily sentenced; and ancient acts and obsolete
statutes are lugged into the cause to condemn the guiltless and dictate their
doom. See verse 15, 19. The stories of such men are generally deemed sufficient
to produce new edicts from the reigning power, to cut off the people from every
remaining privilege at once, ver. 21.22. -- eagerly will the arbitrary mandates
be put in execution by such officers as procured them, so Rehum and Shimshai
posted to Jerusalem and stopped the work by force and power ver. 23. And what
pity is it, that it must be confessed that the bulk of men are aptest to shrink
in the noblest cause, are easily prevailed on to drop their exertions and quit
the work with which all is at stake. See ver. 24.

THE prophets of God ought not then to be silent -- faithfulness to their trust
will oblige them to engage with the openest boldness against such tame
submissions, as idolatrous worship of arbitrary power: and these are the men
whom God often has chosen to rouse and keep up among mankind the spirit of
liberty and just defense. See Ezra v, 1, 2. chap. vi. 14.

WHEN the people are thus animated to proper exertions, it is usual with
enemies of their cause to raise the cry of rebellion -- breach of law --
oppugnation of authority; and sometimes they will proceed to take black lists
of names obnoxious and unpardonable who must be reserved for proscriptions,
imprisonments, gibbets and racks: thus the ministers of slavery dealt with the
Jews Ezra v. 3, 4.

BUT the friends of restoration will not thus be daunted; they can vindicate
themselves by law and argument and are ready to meet all their opposers on that
ground, see verse 11 -- 17, and chap. vi. and vii.

AT the entrance on a work so new and untried, the first efforts of the people
appear feeble and vain -- the want of resources, of experience and skill, the
deficiency of forces for their defense, the difficulties of raising and
maintaining their armies, and the impatience of subordination, of fatigues and
dangers natural to levies when first collected -- these, and a thousand other
incidents that, at first setting out, the most wary community could not foresee
nor prevent, will necessarily occasion many blunders, delays, discouragements,
and disappointments in their most capital efforts:

DISASTERS owing to any of these causes the enemy is no less eagle-eyed to
discover, than cunning to paint in most fearful colors, -- then shall we see
them diffusing their poison in every corner -- ever buzzing in the ears of the
timid -- their manifest weakness -- the number of difficulties -- and greatness
of dangers before them -- their want of virtue and ability to persevere -- the
length of time the contest must last -- the power -- numbers -- and allies of
the foe, etc. etc. -- the minions of power will call them rebels -- the
parasites of the tyrant will affect to ridicule their measures and look on
their efforts as childish and contemptible: in this strain proceeded the
oratory of Sanballat, Neh. iv. 3. 'What do these feeble Jews? will they fortify
themselves? will they sacrifice? will they make an end in a day? etc. Thus
Tobiah and Geshem keep each other in countenance, and raise the laugh at the
pitiful efforts of the sons of liberty, Neh. ii. 19. and please themselves with
the conceit that with an army of foxes they can storm their fort, Neh. iv. 3.

FEEBLE minds, with whom ridicule stands for a test of truth, may perhaps be
dismayed by the haughty tone in which court-sycophants commonly talk, and some
by indulging their gloomy fits may be led to give out, and sit down in despair;
even among the children of Judah could be found some little souls whom the loud
laugh of their foes thunderstruck: hark the moan of those weakling creatures,
Neh. iv. 10.

NOT so the truly patriotic mind; every sneer will be a mean to whet his zeal
to a keener edge -- these spurs will stimulate him to greater diligence and
unwearied perseverance that the cause may rise into a light too respectable to
be overset by a puff of gasconade; so did the Jewish patriots make advantage of
the mirth of their foes, Neh. iv. 6.

WHEN experience has convinced them that the wise are not to be bantered out of
their wits, nor the virtuous brow-beaten into vicious compliance with the lust
of power, more serious measures will be taken by the enemies of their liberty:
the works of darkness are the most kindred means for their dark designs, adepts
in the school of wiley deceit are the tools best fitted for a tyrant's purpose
-- practices of this complexion will soon be attempted: secret plots will be
laid to surprise and kidnap honest abettors of the cause of God. Treacherous
conspiracies will be formed to deprive the people of the means of defense, see
Neh. iv. 7, 8 -- 11. But prayer and caution, religion and industry, will
effectually counterplot them and frustrate their schemes, see verse 9 -- 13 --
16.

THE influence of religion being the greatest weight in the scale of
restoration, the enemy's gall will overflow on every occasion they find of
touching that subject -- preachers will be railed at as having deserted their
post, when they meddle with politics -- as having abandoned the gospel of peace
when they justify defensive war, as ceasing to preach Christ, and preaching up
NEHEMIAH: and through the powerful persuasives in the hands of the great, some
pulpits may be prostituted to the venal drudgery of abetting a tyrant and
promoting his cause. Neh. vi. 7, 10 -- 14.

BRIBES will be tried to buy off the nobles, and it is not every one that has
nobility enough to be proof against gold -- showers of that metal have found
their way through the strongest roofs -- soaked in this, the honor of some,
even of Judah's chiefs, dissolved and evaporated. The intelligence conveyed by
their traitorous correspondences would have proved fatal to all plans of
defense, had not the eye of Omniscience detected their plot in the fittest
season for saving his people, Neh. vi. 17, -- 19.

THE leaders who disdain fetters of gold as much as of iron, must not expect to
escape the arrows of slander -- all arts will be used to weaken their influence
-- sly suspicions will be instilled into the minds of the people, that their
leaders are driving some evil design -- that they only mean to raise themselves
into a degree of importance, and then mount the saddle and grasp the reins, or
sell the country and join the foe, Neh. vi. 6. To sift these calumnies to the
bottom would employ much time which cannot be spared from the great work in
hand: to turn the people aside to this, and divert the main business, was
doubtless one of the enemy's ends -- therefore if the wisdom of heaven is the
guide of our steps, we shall not stay to parley with the serpent, but answer
his hints with a 'get thee behind me:' and, stopping our ears, we shall go on
with our work. Neh. vi. 8.

WHEN underhand measures will no longer avail, the gentleness of the lamb will
soon be exchanged for the rage of the lion -- the ruddy flag is hoisted, and
every sentence breathes nothing but carnage and blood. The horrors of war are
thundered in the ears of the people who are found too determined to barter
their invaluable rights away. See Neh. iv. 7, 8 -- 11. But, if the genius of
virtue inspire the contest, though far from thirsting for enemies blood, -- and
deeply deploring the necessity that drives them to have recourse to arms, yet
the people will remember that such rights as man cannot resign he is bound to
defend at every hazard -- that not to resist is to join issue with the
aggressor -- is to partake in his guilt -- and deserve to share in the doom
that follows it: -- that if the cause is God's, so also is the sword that he
puts in their hands for its defense, and so is the battle that decides its
fate: and remembering these things, they will be convinced that in such a case,
to shun the dangers of the field is to desert the banner of Christ -- and that
the duties of the camp, at such a season, are as truly religious as those of
the Church, -- therefore undaunted by numbers, unmoved by threats, the
christian patriot girds on the buckler, and with his life in one hand, grasps
the sword in the other, and thus calm and determined he enters the field and
makes the last appeal to heaven.

THOUGH the cause is the Lord's he will have it asserted by ordinary means --
walls and towers -- gates and bars -- forts and armies are not less
indispensible than temple and sacrifice, and when this work is begun it should
go on without pause -- whilst one breach in the rampart remains unrepaired --
or one mean of defense is yet left untried Neh iv. 6.

NOT one, however, nor all these means are to be considered as objects of trust
The name of Jacob's God defends
Better than shields and brazen walls
In that name alone must be reposed all the confidence of those that fight: as
well as of those that called them to the field, the advantages reaped by the
best instruments are to be considered only as helps from the fountain of might
-- conveyed down to us in the channel of means that were appointed by himself:
-- therefore to the vigorous use of these must be joined constant prayer and
trust in God Neh iv. 9, 16 -- 23.

IF the efforts of the foe are baffled in war -- their hopes disappointed --
their plots frustrate -- and their fears confirmed that the business of
restoration will at last be perfect, they will then make proposals of
negotiation -- flattering will take place of threats -- complaisance will try
to recover what force could not atchieve: but if God is with them, the people
will see the design of all to be their ensnaring -- and that the kisses of Joab
have daggers concealed -- when with arms in their hands they call for a treaty,
who can doubt that they mean to dictate the terms: so the fisherman curiously
dresses his bait, whilst a hook is concealed that ever proves fatal to the
heedless fish that is pleased with it, the practice of Israel in a case like
this, should guide the conduct of ages to come: Nehemiah was repeatedly tried
on this score -- and Nehemiah answered as patriots ought. See Neh. vi. 1 -- 4.

PROP. XI. When the struggle for liberty is on the point of a happy conclusion,
it sometimes happens that the selfish conduct of pretended friends has gone
near to effect that ruin of the cause which the open violence of avowed enemies
never was able to accomplish. When all are embarked in one bottom -- for some
to oppress and ruin the rest is the shortest way to undo the whole: to defeat
the community in every effort for its defense no means are so powerful as the
practice of monopoly and extortion: as nothing else so certainly sinks the
public credit, depreciates the medium of trade and commerce, and cuts the only
sinews of war, so nothing more readily destroys mutual confidence in society
and turns the edge of every sword against the brother of him who wields it:
when this Pandora's box is opened -- the pestilence spreads far and wide -- it
becomes epidemic -- the whole community is threatened with instant destruction,
-- there is no going forward until the evil is removed -- every wheel is
invincibly clogged -- every movement is brought to a stand.

THUS Israel's efforts were almost defeated by selfish engrossers that called
themselves friends; the poor reduced to the hard dilemma of starving or
mortgaging their all for bread, cried aloud in the ears of God and man -- our
children are many and we take up corn that they may live -- our houses and
lands we pawn for it -- and the dearth will quickly consume them all, our sons
and our daughters are gone into bondage -- nor is it in the power of our hands
to redeem them -- are we viewed by the public as bone of their bone -- are our
children considered as flesh of their flesh? Neh. v. 1 -- 5.

AGAINST this baneful spirit the rulers of the people should be the first to
make head by all their influence power and example -- it is truly discouraging
when these are found first in the crime: but whoever is foremost among the
infected -- the distemper is fatal -- delays are dangerous -- without speedy
remedy death stands at the door!

BUT when men of this cast are no longer awed by public interest -- or public
danger -- when they will not be influenced by personal honor -- or personal
shame -- corrosive remedies must be applied -- For shall the public smile to
see wretches flourish who owe their greatness to their country's ruin? There is
a power in the public which no individual is able to withstand -- to that power
recourse must be had when all other fails. But in what manner shall we use it?
-- this -- this is the Gordian knot! He merits the wreath who unties it right.

NEHEMIAH was led by the Spirit of God. And what were his measures in so great
a trial? They are kindly recorded for our example -- you may hear them related
in words of his own, Neh. v. 6 -- 13. The patriot's anger was kindled against
them -- their crimes were censured by public rebuke, but his authority failing
to influence them to their duty, the assembly of the people was called on the
case -- modern language would say Nehemiah headed a Mob! See ver. 7. -- this
remedy was a desperate one it is true, but it was reserved as it ought for a
desperate case.

MERE promises coming from unprincipled tongues could not appease the popular
fury: they were bound by an oath to surcease the crime, ver. 12. yea, compelled
to restore their ill-gotten gains, ver. 11, 12. and the men who refused
compliance with this, were disfranchised and held up as inveterate foes, ver.
13. This measure, though seeming harsh and severe, is not less the dictate of
nature than one which the reason of all men ever approved -- where amputation
separates from the endangered body the mortified member which cannot be cured.
Cuncta prius tentanda;
Sed immedicabile vulnus
Ense recidendum, ne pars sincera trahatur.
OVID.


PROP. XII. What virtue begins, perseverance must crown. Not more justly
applied to the private conflicts of every soldier in Emmanuel's camp, than to
the public struggles of christian societies, is that restrictive promise of our
blessed Captain 'he that endures to the end shall be saved.' Backsliding is
equally fatal in both cases. Remember Lot's wife, is a motto fitted for the
christian's colors in his efforts in the public cause, as well as in his
personal war with hell: So long as the church is in a militant state, he who
puts his hand to the plough and looks back, is unfit for any service in it: and
we are assured by the mouth of its Head, that his Soul shall never take
pleasure in such. A cause thus important is not to be deserted on account of a
few repulses in our way of supporting it: to inhance our esteem of established
liberty, the raging billows of some red sea of danger, or the swelling waves of
some Jordan of difficulty must commonly be passed in our way to it: thus Israel
must march forty years in the desert before they obtain the promised
inheritance -- and the Jews must encounter the arduous conflict for twelve
years under Ezra's guidance, and as many more under the administration of
Nehemiah before the work of defense was finished: but when the people of God
are refined as silver, he will bring them from the furnace without losing any
thing but their dross: when their virtue is proved and their patience tried,
and their long tribulations have answered their end, the Lord in mercy will
finish the conflict; and in such ways as wisdom appoints, and often by means we
least regard, the common enemy will be repelled, the efforts of his people will
be crowned with success, and then LIBERTY AND INDEPENDENCE FIRMLY ESTABLISHED.
Neh. vi. 51.

PROP. XIII. When the great object is at last secured, even the enemies of it
will be constrained to acknowledge the whole to be the work of God: even
heathens would own a superior power in compassing an end which no opposition
could frustrate, by means most unlikely in reason's eye, and from great part of
which human prudence would presage a contrary effect.

THIS will highly glorify the irresistible power that supported the weak and
vanquished the mighty -- the wisdom which discovered the plots of the foe, and
by men less versed in politics than they, did timously turn their counsels into
foolishness -- the goodness and mercy which freed his church from a Pharaoh's
power; and the justice that brought pride and wickedness to the ground -- that
let tyrants fall into their own pit -- shows Haman's gibbet to be the tool of
his fate, and beheads Goliath with his boasted sword.

PROP. XIV, When a work like this is brought to an end, the effect described in
the words of the text, unavoidably ensues to the enemies of it. How must they
be confounded at the conviction that all their exertions were fighting against
God? How must their countenances fall and their hearts throb with vexation and
disappointment, when all their utopian schemes have failed and themselves,
abandoned even by the partners of their guilt -- despised by all, and unpitied
by most, are exposed as the objects of universal detestation -- and while the
living vulture gnaweth within them, they outwardly furnish the most
contemptible instance of fallen pride, the most instructive spectacle of
defeated ambition that can be beheld on this side of the pit.

PROP. XV. Of a people delivered by the arm of the Lord the first care should
be to establish government. Where this is wanting there can be no stability in
the peace and liberty thus dearly bought. No right, no privilege is enjoyed
secure: like a ship without rudder the community floats at the caprice of every
wind that blows: the contending passions of individuals, like jarring elements
without a balance, will soon reduce all to a state of anarchy, and instead of
a system we behold a chaos. Tyranny itself is better than this: and whatever
dangers they have escaped in avoiding that Scylla -- the Charybdis of confusion
into which they are falling will not be less fatal to all that is dear: Israel
groaned loudly under Pharaoh's sway -- yet they had not gone far in their
journey from Egypt, till by the persuasions of a murmuring party they were on
the point of electing a leader to pilot them back to that house of bondage.

IF religion and virtue being on their side engaged divine Providence to effect
a people's deliverance from the jaws of slavery -- virtue and religion should
not be forgotten when the power of the enemy can hurt them no more: yet the
interests of both, without a miracle, will languish and die in any nation where
government sets no guard upon them:

TO set up the judgment of the magistrate as a test of truth in matters of
conscience and religion -- this is an event we heartily deprecate -- the very
idea we consider with horror: from this fruitful womb have sprung all
persecutions -- the most monstrous births that have astonished mankind -- and
this principle admitted will justify them all. Truth has legs of her own on
which she travels, without any crutches of human establishments. Religion has
never been in more danger of degenerating into a raree-shew than when it
submitted to be modelled to the taste of the state.

WHETHER civil government may be permitted to intermeddle in the affairs of the
Church at all -- and if so how far it may go -- and where it must stop -- are
questions which fall not within my present province -- and if they did, would
be better referred to the more judicious decision of the honorable Convention
who have it in charge to determine the matter.

IT seems not unreasonable however to expect that some line of distinction
should appear to be drawn between the duties of a body considered merely as a
civil society -- and those of a civil society of christians: if men are
christians while in a state of nature, they will not cease to be such when they
enter into the connexions of members of society -- their religion is a portable
thing -- they must carry it with them into every relation they sustain in the
world -- religious men will therefore be found, religious magistrates and
religious subjects, religious legislators, and religious executors of laws: the
cords of love to God and man will equally bind them in every condition: the
suppression of vice and impiety, and the encouragement and support of religion
and virtue will be their grand aim in every character: if a number of
individuals of this temper were to associate into one community, and form a
constitution for the government of it in the present and all succeeding ages --
and in that platform should discover no symptom of difference between them and
a society of pagans or infidels -- not a mark of distinction between them and
atheists, generations to come would be led to suspect that on entering society
they had laid down their profession.

NOR can such a measure be reconciled to the principles of sound policy more
easily than to the genius of the christian religion: virtue and piety are
nearly connected -- married by heaven, no man can divide them -- where impiety
reigns virtue is banished, and when she takes her departure the community has
lost the surest guardian of public safety* the security of the body is the
government's charge -- that can never be had where the reins are laid on the
neck of men's lusts, and immoralities are under no public restraint -- the
system of laws that affixes no penalty to theft, adultery, murder, and the like
enormities, is justly regarded as designedly opening the widest door for
undoing the State: nor is it easy to say why these should be punished whilst
blasphemy and profaning the name of God -- whilst public mockery of his word,
his day and his worship, enjoy the sanction of a public license; and for ought
that appears, may plead the shelter of legal establishment. It is hard to
investigate any ingredient in the acts restrained more truly pernicious, than
is the whole nature of those that go free, unless we conclude that the first
table of God's law is not as binding and authoritative as the second -- or that
obedience to the one exculpates the breaches of the other, or that killing the
body is a greater crime than destroying the soul; or in a word, that every
member may be ruined and the community safe.

HOW far the conduct of Jews should pass for a precedent in civil concerns, I
presume not now to enquire or determine: I am not insensible that the coming of
the substance has freed us from obligation to observe the shadow -- things that
were typical of Christ and his work must needs expire when that work was
finished, but whether the civil and judicial departments were, no less than the
religious, filled up with matters purely typical may perhaps admit of some
debate: if the inspired examples recorded among them are, not only the language
of revelation, but the plain dictate of the law of nature too, I see not why in
similar cases they should not be adopted in every age; and if they may in the
case before us they will enforce the establishing of a government whose aim
shall be to guard the public safety Neh. chap. xi. by securing the observance
of the law of God -- and maintaining the worship and ordinances of religion in
all the purity of their first appointment see chap. i. 7, 8, 9 -- by breaking
off for ever all connection with secret and open enemies alike chap, xiii. ver
23 -- 28 and bringing all traitors to condign punishment Neh xiii. 4 -- 9. and
the execution of the plan shall begin with a public thanksgiving for the good
obtained -- a solemn dedication of our all to God -- and the erection of
monuments of our deliverance which shall remain undefaced in ages to come. See
chap xii.

APPLICATION.
THE length to which this subject has drawn itself out, makes it unseasonable
now to pursue one half the improvement which it might afford. He that is versed
in the history of the State we live in, will not need to be told that the
privileges mentioned in prop. 4. were enjoyed by its inhabitants from their
first settlement, under fifteen Governors, down to the memorable days of
Andross -- -- that, intoxicated by prosperity, we sadly declined in every
attainment of religion and virtue; and that, though this declension received a
check by a remarkable effusion of the Spirit of Grace, and was frequently
threatened with partial strokes, yet the defection begun made alarming progress
until general calamity burst on our heads in that entering wedge of tyranny --
the American Stamp Act. From that day to this we have clearly seen that the
design of the Court was to crush and enslave: for even the Act which prohibits
the exercise -- is succeeded by another which asserts the right of the British
legislature to bind the Colonies in all cases whatsoever: -- to get this claim
recognized by ourselves, some trifling duties were at first demanded: and it
was the astonishment of all the world -- to see a people so divided in interest
and prejudice so generally united in a firm resolution to mar, at all hazards,
the chain in the forge. -- We were challanged to dispute on the merits of the
cause -- we found a champion in the respectable FARMER who routed our foes on
their own ground: and when the Sanballat of the time renewed the onset -- the
General Court took up the gauntlet and out shot that Rabshakeh in his own bow.

IT cannot be denied that many of the chief characters in every State have
followed the example of the Nobles of Tekoa -- and hence the people, deprived
of the counsel of their former guides, were compelled, in many places, to throw
themselves into the arms of leaders equally unexperienced in the arts of policy
as in the science of war: hence it will not be wondered if our first efforts
were weak and fumbling; and if some low minds fainted at knowledge thereof: --
the means of defense seemed far out of reach -- till the dust of the earth
supplied ammunition -- the sinews of war appeared totally wanting, till worn
out rags became silver and gold -- when our fisheries were cut off we anxiously
saw our staple demolished, but to our surprise the same power that brought
shoals to Peter's net conducted the fish to our harbors and wharves, and
turned the waves that lashed our shores into salt when we needed it, to
preserve them -- the statutes which menaced a general famine by stopping the
access of foreign supplies were unable to bottle the clouds of heaven -- or
divert the kind influence of the beams of the sun.

BLIND to the interposals of heaven in our favor, our enemies made shift to
buoy up their hopes from every imagined mistake in our measures; while the name
of Hutchinson is remembered it will not be doubted that we have had our
Sanballat -- our Tobiah was furnished in a boasting Burgoyne -- insidious
Tatnai's were never wanting whilst Carlton's and Tryon's possessed the chair --
Geshem confesses himself outdone in the hostile maneuvers of Clinton and How:
and secretaries and commissioners from amongst ourselves can show letters and
plots -- that in nothing need yield to the Rehum and Shimshai of the Jewish
day; whilst the scum of the nations, whom the British As^apper transported
hither for reasons of state, joined the foul-mouthed pack in a general yell for
hunting American liberty down.

BY these have the arts already described (prop. x) been tried with like spirit
and like effects -- they have cried out rebellion -- they have taken black
lists -- have proscribed and executed in idea the men they imagined to stand
most in their way.

THE ministers of religion have been generally hearty in the public cause: our
enemies were not insensible that their faithful testimony put life in the
measures used in its support -- and therefore their persons -- their names --
and religion -- and the sacred places where God's worship was fixed -- became
the principal butt of the keenest malice of America's foes:

WHILST a Eugene and Marlborough -- a Gustavus and Frederic -- an Alexander and
Caesar as a constellation of heroes, have conspired to join their brightness
together to illuminate the hemisphere of the eastern continent -- the singular
care of Israel's God has reserved it for the glory of this western world to
give rise and motion to a star of her own whose luster eclipses the beams of
them all. Commanders that need not fear comparison with the heroes of
antiquity, we see to be the produce of every State. But the American NEHEMIAH
is an illustrious work of creating skill destined to grace the most glorious
cause -- on the last stage where it can be pleaded: what dangers he has faced
-- what fatigues endured -- how much he had to forego, and how little to gain
the future historian will honestly tell, and therefore I willingly pass in
silence what it might now seem flattery justly to celebrate.

WHEN the enemy's hopes were in their renith -- that the cause of freedom was
crushed in embryo -- that our spirits were sunk, and our nerves unstrung -- and
all our resistance was come to a period: He who sits in heaven did laugh and
by one touch of his finger, at Saratoga, did dash the presumptuous joy to the
ground.

THE chief wonder of all is yet to be told -- In the magnanimity of the
generous MONARCH OF FRANCE Heaven has brought on the stage the CYRUS of the
church in gospel times -- alike his rise -- his inspiration alike -- the same
his conduct and the same its effect: whilst the rest of the world stood aloof
and looked on -- and Protestant powers, once in the same case, like the priest
and Levite shunned our cries -- behold the Samaritan hastes to our help -- our
wounds are softened by his wine and his oil, whilst his treasure is lavished to
finish our cure: does the bigot give credit to the tory's tale -- and dream it
unlawful to accept such aid? so might Israel have spurned the Persian's offer
and the temple of God still remained in rubbish! gratitude and piety will not
stand and gaze -- both will unite to improve the favor -- while the example of
each prompts the other to cry 'this is the Lord's doing and wondrous in our
eyes.'

STRUCK and astonished at this unusual phoenomenon our foes thought it best to
shift their flag and hoist friendly colors -- negociations have been feigned
-- and the imagined omnipotence of English gold has in vain been tried to its
ne plus ultra -- proposals of accommodation were pompously made -- but the
Rubicon was passed -- their terms were inadmissible now -- the hostile and
barbarous doings of their hands, at the very time when the olive branch was
painted on their lips, were sufficient to rend the thin veil that disguised
their intent. America's feelings soon testified largely that if they spoke with
Jacob's voice their hands were truly the hands of Esau.

THE spirit of Sanballat breathed in all their overtures -- to amuse the world
and gain time for their preparations -- and thereby to draw us into a snare, at
a time when no earthly friend should be near enough to stretch forth a hand to
pull us out: that these were the insidious designs of their parliamentary
concessions -- ministerial motions -- phantastic commissions -- and 'flying
rolls' we may easily see, if with them we compare the other maneuvers
practiced, at the same time, to give them success: -- the bribing the Savages
of the wood to butcher the naked inhabitants of our frontiers -- and hiring the
negroes of our families to embrue their hands in the blood of the households
that gave them their food -- that the gold, designed to be freely lavished in
seducing our patriots from their duty, might not return like the men who
brought it, despised and rejected by all sorts of mankind here: -- the
counterfeiting our medium, and dispersing in every part of the country,
emissaries according to their own heart, employed in debasing and destroying
its credit: -- these, conjoined with the deeds of heroism whereby the British
arms were signalized in the various parts of the land through which they
passed, and by which too their brave commanders reaped laurels immortal -- in
the sack of defenseless villages -- the reducing to ashes every building they
could find that was dedicated to the worship of Israel's God -- in the
plundering of houses -- stealing of live-stock, and in abusing and frighting
the child and the mother who could not escape -- -- all -- all conspire to
assist us in spelling out the meaning of their language of love.

THROUGH the merciful hand of our God upon us the arms and the arts of our open
foes have been hitherto baffled and defeated -- the little checks we have
sometimes met with in a sanguine hour -- were but just enough to keep us awake
-- as cautions from heaven of the same kind which Israel of old had from the
Amorite, that, for that very purpose, were continued in the land -- lest the
people should forget, or be exalted above measure -- every one of them has been
seasonable and serviceable too -- and whenever they threatened to proceed too
far, the finger of God has turned the scale:

THUS have we been carried by unthought of steps, through difficulties which
would never have been faced if they had been foreseen, in near sight of the
prize for which we have run -- to rise to a rank among the nations on earth --
and the bough that bears the golden apple seems, at this crisis, to bend gently
down, and its fruit to be dropping into our hand -- but -- tell it not in Gath!
-- what triumph and joy will it afford to our foes! and what tears of our own
can lament it enough! my tongue faulters, and my heart aches whilst I give it
vent, -- the grand enemy of mankind has put off the skin of the roaring lion --
and in the tamer habit of selfishness and extortion now stalks about
undisturbed through town and country seeking whom he may devour! he has taken
the keys of our stores and garners -- the fruits of our fields are locked up in
his keeping -- and by forbidding the due use of the blessing of one year, is
preparing to inflict the old curse on the ground in another, for sake of the
sinful hand that tills it: -- the proceeds of our voyages are laid down at his
feet -- our warehouses given in charge to his agents -- whilst their needful
contents are rendered useless by ungrateful denial of the kindness of heaven
that has preserved and defended from foes and storms their interests when
floating on the face of the deep -- and has wafted to our shores the riches of
other climes in greater abundance than has been seen in any other year since
the sword was drawn: and thus the scourge is a plaiting that, by the means of
arms or elements, shall correct the owners in a future attempt:

AND shall America be left to fall on her own sword when that of her enemy is
broken to pieces? shall we fight the battles of Britain with our own hands
which all the mercenaries of Europe could not fight for her? yes! it must be so
if this spirit continues: Our country is betrayed! her liberty -- the price of
the blood of a long list of patriot heroes, must be at last thrown down in the
common highway, to be seized by the first who passes by! Should each member of
a human body refuse its labor in supplying the whole with food, merely because
its fellow members share in the profit, and this one cannot monopolize all to
itself, full dearly they must pay for the extravagant wish, when too late they
repent the unnatural practice by which each finds itself sinking in the ruin of
all* Equally unnatural is the spirit of oppression that is become the epidemic
disease of the times -- and equally pernicious are its effects: The cries of
the orphan and the widow's moan, the just complaints of the soldier and his
house (which if not timely removed, do seriously threaten to leave our lines
unmanned and our GENERAL deserted) -- the groans of the poor who, in the midst
of plenty, are left to perish -- the blood of our brethren spilt in our fields,
all, all cry aloud for the vengeance of heaven -- all preach remediless ruin to
the ungrateful people who refuse the relief they have in their power.

YES, Sirs, thank heaven, it is yet in the power of the people to remove this
alarming disease, if town and country will at last awake to the exercise of
their senses and reason, no longer envy each other's advantages, but join hand
in hand in exerting their utmost to retrieve the credit of our expiring
currency, to strengthen the hands of government, support its just laws, and
vigorously pursue the work begun -- if they continue to build whilst any breach
remains in the wall; and whilst with one hand they use the tool, with the other
keep hold of the weapon of war: -- cheerfully contribute what is just to the
support of the Soldier, and to the discharge of the expense of the war, and if
they turn out with spirit when the public safety needs the help of their own
arms; if, to unanimity in the use of such means, this people will join
reformation of manners, especially in the extortions of the present day; if,
humbled before the Lord, they repent of their sins which have drawn down and
prolonged their public distress; if the prayer of faith is perseveringly
offered, and the eye of this Continent is to God for help -- RESTORATION is not
far off; LIBERTY is near to be established -- INDEPENDENCE is fixed on a basis
immovable -- heaven has pronounced the firm decree, not all the powers of
earth and hell combined can hinder it to be executed.

New England thus shall see once more her halcyon days; her Judges as at the
first, her Counselors as at the beginning; even tyrants shall own the
REVOLUTION to be of the Lord -- and ashamed of their feeble oppositions to it,
shall give over kicking against the pricks -- the shade of our fig tree shall
give us repose -- we shall worship when none shall make us afraid -- the work
being finished in the manner already marked out -- and the improvement made
which (as in Prop. XV.) even Christians might learn of a Jewish School --
America will be IMMANUEL's land -- the seat of his kingdom till the sun shall
fade.

IF you my brethren, or your dear posterity expect to share in this blissful
prospect, remember it must be on the same terms on which it is offered to the
land in general -- equally active in the guilt that brought down the Judgments
of heaven -- you must be equally active too in the repentance and reformation
that must pave the way for the removal of them -- family religion, and personal
piety, must lead on the efforts in the public cause, by which you have
heretofore at least kept pace, and I hope will from henceforth set the example
of patriotism and public virtue to Town and Country in your vicinity. -- But
Newbury-bar must not be set up as Newbury's God, -- nor must it be trusted as
her grand defense; the protection it gives is faint and precarious -- by how
many methods can slighted heaven blast the creature-confidence, and convince
the most stupid of the sons of men of the folly and madness of the
common-practice of forsaking the fountain of living waters -- and hewing out
cisterns that can hold none.

FINIS,

