A DECLARATION of RIGHTS, and PLAN of Government for the State of New Hampshire.
WHEREAS by the tyrannical Administration of the Government of the King and
Parliament of Great Britain, this State of New Hampshire, with the other
United-States of AMERICA, have been necessitated ^o reject the British
Government, and declare themselves INDEPENDENT STATES; all which is more
largely set forth by the CONTINENTAL CONGRESS, in their Resolution or
Declaration of the fourth of July A. D. 1776.

AND WHEREAS, it is recommended by the said CONTINENTAL CONGRESS to each and
every of the said United-States to establish a FORM OF GOVERNMENT most
conducive to the Welfare thereof. We the DELEGATES of the said State of NEW
HAMPSHIRE chosen for the Purpose of forming a permanent PLAN of G^VERNMENT
subject to the Revisal of our CONSTITUENTS, have compo^ed the following
DECLARATION of RIGHTS, and PLAN of GOVERNMENT; and recommend the same to our
CONSTITUENTS for their Approbation.

A DECLARATION of the RIGHTS of the PEOPLE of the STATE of NEW HAMPSHIRE.
First, WE declare, that we the People of the State of New Hampshire, are Free
and Independent of the Crown of Great Britain.

Secondly. We the People of this State, are entitled to Life, Liberty, and
Property; and all other Immunities and Privileges which we heretofore enjoyed.

Thirdly. The Common and Statute Laws of England, adopted and used here, and
the Laws of this State (not inconsistent with said Declaration of INDEPENDENCE)
now are, and shall be in force here, for the Welfare and good Government of the
Sta^e, unless the same shall be repealed or altered b^ the future Legislature
thereof.

Fourthly. The whole and entire Power of Government of this State, is vested
in, and must be derived from the People thereof, and from no other Source
whatsoever.

Fifthly. The future Legislature of this State, shall make no Laws to infringe
the Rights of Conscience, or any other of the natural, unalienab^e Rights of
Men, or contrary to the Laws of GOD, or against the Protestant Religion.

Sixthly. The Extent of Territory of this State, is, and shall be the same
which was under the Government of the late Governor John Wentworth, Esquire
Governor of New Hampshire. Reserving nevertheless, our Claim to the
New Hampshire Grants, so called, situate to the West of Connecticut River.

Seventhly. The Right of Trial by Jury in all Cases as heretofore used in this
State, shall be preserved inviolate forever.

A PLAN of Government for the State of New Hampshire.
First, THE State of New Hampshire shall be governed by a COUNCIL, and House of
REPRESENTATIVES, to be chosen as herein after mentioned, and to be styled the
GENERAL-COURT of the State of New Hampshire.

Second. The COUNCIL shall consist for the present of twelve Members to be
elected out of the several Counties in the State, in Proportion to their
respective Number of Inhabitants.

Third. The Numbers belonging to each County for the present, according to said
Proportion being as follows, viz. -- To the County of Rockingham, five -- to
the County of Strafford, two -- to the County of Hillsborough, two -- to the
County of Cheshire, two -- to the County of Grafton, one

Fourth. The number for the County of Rockingham, shall not be increased or
diminished hereafter, but remain the same; and the Numbers for the other
Counties shall be increased or deminished as their aforesaid Proportion to the
County of Rockingham may chance to vary.

Fifth. The House of REPRESENTATIVES shall be chosen as follows. Every Town or
Parsh, choosing Town Officers, amounting to one hundred Families, and ^pward^,
shall send one Representative for each hundred Families they consist of, (or
such lesser Number as they please) or class themselves with some other Towns or
Parishes that will join in sending a Representative.

Sixth. All other Towns and P^^ishes under the number of one hundred Families,
shall have Liberty to class themselves together to make the number of one
hundred Families or upwards, and being so classed, each Class shall send one
Representative.

Seventh. The number of COUNCILLORS belonging to each County shall be
ascertained and done by the General-Court every Time there is a new Proporti^n
made of the State Tax which shall be once in seven Years at the least, and
oftener if need b^.

Eighth. All the Male Inhabita^^s of the State of lawful Age, paying Taxes, and
professing the Protestant Religion, shall be deemed legal Voters in choosing
COU^^ILLORS and REPRESENTATIVES, (...) having an Estate (...) Three Hundred
Pounds equal to Si^^er at six Shillings and eight Pence per Ounce, one half at
least whereof to be real Estate, and lying within this State, with the
Qualifications aforesaid, shall be capable of being elected.

Ninth. The Selectmen of each respective Town and Parish, choosing Town
Officers containing one hundred Families or upwards, and also of each
respective Class of Towns classed together as aforesaid, shall notify the legal
Voters of their respective Towns, Parishes, or Classes, qualified as aforesaid,
in the usual Way of notifying Town-Meetings, giving fifteen Days notice at
least, to meet at some convenient Place on the last Wednesday of November
annually, to choose COUNCILLORS and REPRESENTATIVES.

Tenth. And the Vo^ers being met, and the Moderator chosen, shall proceed to
choose their Representative or Repepresentatives, required by this Constitution
by a Majority of the Voters present, who shall be notified accordingly, and a
Return thereof made into the S^cretary's Office, by the first Wednesday of
January then next.

Eleventh. And such Representatives shall be paid their Wages by their
Constituents, and for their Travel by the State.

Twelvth. And in the Choice of COUNCILLORS each Voter shall deliver his Vote to
the Moderator for the number of COUNCILLORS respectively required, with the
Word COUNCILLORS writ^n thereon, and the Voters Name endorsed to prevent
Duplicity.

Thirteenth. These Votes shall be sealed up by the Moderator, and transmitted
by the Constable to one of the Justices of the Inferior Court of Common Pleas
for the County, before the second Wednesday in December next following.

Fourteenth. And the said Justices of the Inferior Court shall meet together on
the said second Wednesday of December annually, to count the Votes, and the
Persons that have most Votes to the Number of COUNSELORS required, shall be
declared duly elected, and shall be notified by the said Justices accordingly,
and a Return thereof shall be made by them into the Secretary's Office by the
first Wednesday in January annually.

Fifthteenth. And in Case any two Persons shall have a like Number of Votes,
the said Justices may determine the Choice in Favor of which they please.

Sixteenth. The COUNCIL and House of REPRESENTATIVES so chosen and returned as
aforesaid, shall meet on the first Wednesday in January next after their being
chosen* at such Place as the present, or future General-Court may from Time to
Time appoint; and being duly sworn, shall hold their respective Places until
the first Wednesday in January then next.

Seventeenth. The COUNCIL shall choose their President, vice President, and
Secretary; and the House of REPRESENTATIVES shall choose their Speaker and
Clerk.

Eighteenth. The COUNCIL and House of Representatives respectively, shall
determine all disputed Elections of their own Membe^s, regulate their own
Proceedings; and on any Vacancy, order a new Election to fill up such Vacancy.

Nineteenth. The said General-Court elected and constituted as aforesaid, shall
be invested with the Supreme Power of the State. And all Acts, Resolves, or
Votes, except Grants of Money, Lands, or other Things, may originate in either
House; but such Grants shall originate in the House of Representatives only.

Twentieth. The said COUNCIL and House of Representatives respectively, shall
have Power to adjourn themselves from Day to D^y, but not longer then two Days
at any one Time, without C^ncurrence of the other.

Twenty first. The PRESIDENT of the COUNCIL shall hold public Correspondence
with other States* or Persons; call the Council together when Occasion shall
require; and with Advice of three or more of the Council shall from Time to
Time call the General-Court together if need be, before the Time they were
adj^urned to: And also point out the principal Business of their Session.

Twenty second. The Military and Naval Power of the State shall be regulated,
and all proper Officers thereof appointed, as the Legisla^ure by Law shall
direct from Time to Time.

Twenty-third. The Judges of the Superior and Inferior Courts, Judges of
Probate, Judge of Admiralty, Judge of the Maritime Court, Justices of the
Peace, Sheriffs, Coroners, Attorney General, Treasurer of the State, and
Delegates to the CONTINENTAL CONGRESS, shall be appointed by the said General
Court, and commissionated by the President of the Council.

Twenty-fourth. The Appointment of Registers of Deeds, County Treasurer's,
Clerks of Courts, Registers of Probate, and all other Civil Officers
whatsoever, not before mentioned, shall be regulated by the Laws that now are,
or that hereafter may be enacted.

Twenty-fifth. All Ci^il Officers of the State, shall be suitably compensated
by Fees or Salaries for their Services.

Twenty-sixth. No Member of the General-Court shall be Judge of the Superior
Court or Inferior Court, Judge or Register of Probate, or Sheriff of any
County, or Treasure^ of the S^ate, or Attorney General, or Delegate at the
CONTINENTAL CONGRESS.

Twenty-seventh. And no Member of the Council, judge of the Superior Court, or
Sheriff, shall hold a Commission in the Militia, Army, or Navy of this State.

Twenty-eighth. No Member of the House of Representatives shall hold any Salary
under the Government.

Twenty-ninth. The President of the Council, with Advice of Council, may grant
Reprieves not longer than six Months, but the General-Court only shall have
Power to pardon Offenses against the State.

Thirtieth. A Quorum of the Council, and a Quorum of the House of
Representatives, shall consi^t of a Majority of each House.

Thirty-first. This DECLARATION of RIGHTS, and PLAN of GOVERNMENT, shall have
the Force of Law, and be este^med the fundamental Law o(...)te.

Thirty-Second. The General-Court shall have no Power to alter any Part of this
Constitution but in case they should concur in any proposed Alteration,
Amendment, or Addition, the same being agreed to by a Majority of the People,
shall become valid.

STATE OF NEW HAMPSHIRE. IN CONVENTION, June 5th, 1779.
Voted, THAT the foregoing BILL of RIGHTS, and PLAN of GOVERNMENT, be printed,
and dispersed throughout this State, for the People thereof, to give their
Opinion thereon.

Voted, That Colonel Thornton, and Colonel Bartlett, be a Committee to get this
Plan of Government printed, and transmit two or more Copies of the same to each
and every Town, Parish and Place in this State, to which Precep^^ for this
Convention were sent, and publish the same in the New Hampshire Newspapers.

Voted. That the Selectmen of the several Towns, Parishes, and Districts in
this State, upon the receipt of the same, are desired to notify and warn the
legal Inhabitan^s paying Taxes in such Town, Parish, or Place, to meet at some
suitable Place therein, giving them at least fifteen Days notice, for the (...)
of taking said Pl^n under Consideration: and make ret^rn of the Number of
Voters present at such Meeting, and how many vo^ed for receiving said Plan, and
how many for rejecting (...), unto this Convention at Concord in this State, on
the third Tuesday 16 September next.

By order of the Convention, JOHN LANGDON, President, P. T. E. Thompson,
Secretary.


EXETER; Printed by Zechariah Foul, 1779.


