PROCEEDINGS OF SEVERAL GENERAL COURTS-MARTIAL, HELD, By order of
Brigadier-general SMALLWOOD, ON THE TRIALS OF Col. J. CARVIL HALL, AND Capt.
EDWARD NORWOOD.

ANNAPOLIS. Printed by FREDERICK GREEN. M.DCC.LXXIX.

To the PUBLIC.
HAVING the strongest assurances that my conduct, relative to colonel J. C.
Hall's prosecution and trial, is March, 1778, has been grossly misrepresented
in Maryland -- to set the matter in a clear light, and do myself justice, I
have been induced to publish the trial, from which the impartial will judge of
the expediency of the measure, and the propriety of my conduct.

The public will also judge of the propriety of the Colonel's conduct, and how
far he was justifiable in quitting his regiment, and whilst he was drawing the
public pay, neglecting his duty or rendering little or no service for near six
months, because he did not choose to act under my command, notwithstanding his
conduct was censured and mine approved in every point, not only by the
commander in chief, but also by a very full board of general officers, whose
sense was taken on that occasion.

Sept. 10, 1779. W. SMALLWOOD.

Wilmington, March 23, 1778. DEAR SIR,
EARLY on Tuesday morning, the 17th instant, I received intelligence of eleven
men deserting to the enemy, three of whom were intercepted by parties disposed
for that purpose, and between two and three o'clock P. M. that day, I was
informed that the remaining eight were concealed by a quaker, about seven miles
from this place, up the Brandywine, before which, I had detached seven horse
and two parties of foot on each side the Brandywine to intercept them, and a
party of nine horse, detached with a party of foot, to remove, and if necessary
to destroy the forage below Newcastle and Port-Penn, left me destitute of a
single light horse fit for duty, the townsmen having removed their horses into
the country upon our arriving here; it was therefore out of the power of the
quartermaster to procure horses for this purpose, which reduced me to the
disagreeable necessity of ordering one horse from each officer in the division
who kept two or more, which I judged supernumerary, and that the public had a
right to their service upon such an emergency, though I first sent captain
Brown to apply to the colonels for a horse a piece, and informed, there was no
other probable method of mounting a party and effecting the purpose, which
required the greatest dispatch; through mistake captain Brown informed colonel
Hall, he had my orders to take one of his horses for this purpose, which I at
first did not direct or intend, only in case of refusal, otherways should have
(in the first instance) issued an order to that purport; colonel Hall refused
his horse, which induced me to issue the enclosed order Wilmington, March 17,
1778.
ORDERED, That colonel Sheriff immediately impress one horse from each officer
in this division who keeps two or more.

W. SMALLWOOD.



to the quartermaster, which colonel Hall refused to let him comply with,
unless he did it at the r^sk of his life. Viewing myself as a party, I cannot
with propriety approve or disapprove the sentence, therefore have transmitted
it, with the proceedings of the court, to your Excellency for that purpose, and
have the honor to remain, with sincere regard,

Your very obedient humble servant, W. SMALLWOOD.

His Excellency General Washington.
PROCEEDINGS OF A GENERAL COURT MARTIAL,
Held at Wilmington, the 20th day of March, 1778, by order of Brigadier-general
SMALLWOOD, on the TRIAL of Colonel J. CARVIL HALL; whereof Colonel RICHARDSON
was president, and Col. DAVID HALL, Lieut, col. RAMSEY, Lieut, col. WOOLFORD,
Lieut, col. FORD, Major HOWARD, Major STEWARD, Capt. PATTEN, Capt. WINDER,
Capt. ANDERSON, Capt. ROXBURGH, Capt. BEALE, and Capt. GHISELIN,
Were members, who were all duly sworn.
COLONEL J. CARVIL HALL, charged with refusing to comply with a general order,
issued on an emergency, and calculated to aid the service, which at that
juncture could not otherwise be remedied, and for un-officer-like behavior in
threatening to blow out the brains of any officer who should head a party to
execute the same.

To which charge colonel Hall being called to answer, pleads not guilty. In
support of the change Dr. Montgomery was produced as an evidence, and being
sworn declar^ it as follows, viz. That a few days ago, upon his ^^ing to the
(...) where general Smallwood and some other officers were, there appeared a
considerable agitation, occasioned, as he then learned, by some person having
given information, that several deserters, who had left the garrison the night
before, were concealed in a countryman's house, about seven miles from town;
whereupon the general gave orders, that they should go and seize horses
wherever they could find them, his, or any other officers they could get, to
mount a party to endeavor to apprehend the deserters; soon after some person
came back and reported to the general, that colonel Hall refused to let his
horse go, the general then gave peremptory orders that they should go and take
a horse from any officer who had more than one; after a while a person returned
to the general, and told him, that colonel Hall absolutely refused, and
threatened to blow out the brains of any person who would come to take a horse
from him; the general then sent an officer, lieutenant M'Pherson, at the head
of a party under arms, and ordered him to bring a horse from colonel Hall at
all events.

Doctor Montgomery being questioned by colonel Hall, whether the general's
order, with regard to his own horses, were confined to one, or extended to them
all, answers, he thinks it was confined to one. The doctor being farther asked,
how many horses the general had in his stables or pasture, answers, he thinks
three, exclusive of the brigade major's and the doctor's own, which was then
lame with the scratches. Colonel Hall further asked the doctor, whether Mrs
Marshall, at whose house the general lodges, had any horses, who answers, she
kept one all winter, but whether he was then in town or not he could not tell.

Captain Brown, of the artillery, was next produced at an evidence, who upon
oath declares, That a few days ago, upon his informing general Smallwood that
seven of his company, and one of the second regiment, who had deserted the
night before, were concealed about seven miles out of town, he directed him to
collect a number of officers to go after the deserters, and also to get horses,
to take one of his first, and then go to the other officers, beginning with the
colonels commandant, for others; that he thereupon went to colonel J. Carvil
Hall, and told him that the general had sent him there to take one of his
horses to go after some deserters he had heard of, that the general had given
one of his own, and had ordered him to go to the other officers, beginning with
the colonels commandant, for others.

Colonel Hall then answered, he did not know any right the general had to order
or take his horses, he might dispose of his own as he pleased, but that he
should not have his, and he would not let them go. Colonel Hall then asked
captain Brown, if he did not tell him at the same time, that the general had a
right to command him and his services, but he had no authority over his horses,
they were his private property; he answered yes, he spoke words to that effect.

Lieutenant Brown, of the light horse, upon oath says, that he was with
captain Brown when he told the general about his deserters, upon which the
general asked him (lieutenant Brown) if he had any horse to spare to go after
them, that he answered he had not, that they were all upon duty who were fit to
do duty.

Colonel Sheriff, quartermaster to the division, was next sworn, who says,
That general Smallwood, on Tuesday last, sent him the following order, viz.
Ordered, that colonel Sheriff impress one horse from each officer in the
division who keeps two or more. That upon his receiving the order, he
immediately endorsed it as follows, viz. Sir, it is the general's express orders
to begin with the colonels of the regiments, and act as within ordered; which
endorsement he directed to Mr. Edmondson, a waggon-master belonging to the
division.

Colonel Sheriff was then asked, whether he thinks horses could not have been
got sufficient for the party, without taking the officers horses; answers, he
thinks they could not have been got in less than two hours.

Mr. Edmondson, brigade waggon-master, was next sworn, who says, That colonel
Sheriff delivered him the orders above recited, which he showed to colonel
Hall, that colonel Hall told him he should have none of his, upon which he
returned to colonel Sheriff, and colonel Sheriff directed him to inform the
general of what had passed; the general then ordered him to return to colonel
Hall, and tell him, if he did not let his horse come, that he, this deponent,
should take a party and bring one down; he informed colonel Hall of this order,
to which colonel Hall replied, that he or any other person who should head the
party, he would put a bullet through; that he then returned to the general, and
informed him what colonel Hall had said.

Lieutenant M'Pherson being duly sworn, declares, That on Tuesday last general
Smallwood sent for him, and upon his coming to his quarters, the general met
him in the passage, and ordered him to go and fetch his guard, upon which he
went to the back yard, where he found the guard parading, and brought them to
the front door, and then went in to the general and told him the guard was
ready, whereupon he sat down and wrote the following orders, viz. Sir, You are
ordered with the guard immediately to proceed and impress one of colonel Hall's
horses, and bring him here without delay, as there are some deserters, if
dispatch is used, may be taken. Herein fail not, and this shall be your
justification.

After receiving the order, he went at the head of the guard to colonel Hall's
quarters, where upon enquiry, he found the colonel was rode out, upon which he
went to the colonel's stables, and looking in at the window he saw a horse
saddled, which the forage-master (who was also sent by the general) said was
the colonel's horse; this deponent then ordered the guard to break open the
door, which was locked, but upon their entering they found it was not colonel
Hall's horse, though immediately afterward colonel Hall's horse came running
up to the stable door, having a saddle on but no bridle, the deponent then
caused the soldiers to catch the horse, and they returned with the horse under
guard to the general.

The following evidences were then called upon by colonel Carvil Hall, viz.

Captain Steward, of the artillery, being sworn, declares, That he was at
colonel Hall's quarters when captain Brown came for his horse, and that he
understood his application to be founded upon an absolute order to take the
colonel's horse; that the colonel refused to let him have his horse, saying,
that the general might command his services, but his horse he had no right to,
he was his private property, and some time afterward, (this deponent thinks
after captain Brown went away) colonel Hall told him, and some others that were
present, that he had already lent his horse.

Lieutenant Hoops was next called upon, who upon oath declares, That a few
days ago, upon hearing that some deserters were concealed a little way out of
town, and that the general wanted a party of officers to go after them, he went
to colonel Hall's quarters with an intention of borrowing a horse from his
paymaster, and finding the paymaster not at home, he mentioned his business to
the colonel, who told him to send to the stable and get his horse for that
purpose; he sent accordingly and got the horse and carried him off, and having
hitched him to a post until the party would be ready, sometime afterward he
understood the horse was at the general's, where he went and requested he might
ride him, which the general, after some hesitation, agreed to. Lieut. Hoops was
asked by the court, whether or no he had borrowed the horse before the general
had sent for him? Answered, he did not know.

The court adjourns to 9 o'clock tomorrow morning.

March 21. The court met according to adjournment. D^ctor Montgomery was called
upon a second time at the desire of general Smallwood, who ^sked him the
following questions, viz. Whether or no he did not apprehend from the
representation made by captain Brown, there was not a necessity offending off
immediately? Answered, that from the representation he had of the matter he
thought it of the utmost importance that a party should be sent off immediately.

Quest. 2d. Does Mr. Montgomery recollect that I expressed my doubts that
horses could not be got unless the officers horses were taken, and therefore
ordered captain Brown to take one of mine, and apply to the other officers for
theirs, as the only probable method of mounting the party? Answers yes.

Quest. 3d. Does Mr. Montgomery recollect the state which my horses were in,
and his, and whether any of them were fit for the expedition, but the one I
ordered? Answers, he thinks none were fit but the one.

Captain Brown was next called upon and questioned by the general. Does captain
Brown recollect that I expressed my doubts of obtaining horses so speedily as
might be necessary, unless the officers horses were taken, and that I directed
him to take one of mine, and apply to the colonels for one a piece, and to the
other officers for their horses, which must be pressed, as there was no
probable way of getting horses otherways so speedily as it was necessary?
Answers, yes, I remember it well.

Quest. How long does captain Brown think colonel Hall's refusing his horse
delayed the party, and at what o'clock does he think he made the application?
Answers, he thinks he made the application between two and three o'clock, and
that his refusal delayed the party better than an hour.

Colonel Hall then asked captain Brown, whether he thinks his horse was
indispensably necessary for the forming that party? Answers, he thinks he was.

Quest. 2d. How many did the party consist of? Answers, twelve, exclusive of
the guide.

Quest. 3d. Colonel Hall then asked captain Brown, whether he viewed his horse
as a talis-man. or whether there was any particular virtue in the number
twelve? Answers, he did not think there was any particular virtue in the number
twelve, but thinks three or four more would have been necessary.

The general then asked captain Brown, whether or no several officers were not
waiting who could not go for want of horses? Answers, there were three or four
who did not go for want of horses

Colonel Sheriff was then asked by the general, does colonel Sheriff apprehend
he could have got fifteen or sixteen horses in the town in the course of that
afternoon, without taking the officers horses agreeable to the order given him
by the general? Answers, he thinks they could not have been got.

Colonel HALL'S DEFENSE.
THE first part of the charge is disobeying a general order, I deny that any
general order was ever delivered me; it is true captain Brown came to me and
told me the general had sent him to take one of my horses. I viewed his calling
upon me before he went to my stable and took my horse, which from his orders,
if legal, he had a right to do, a piece of politeness. I confess so
extraordinary a mandate hurt my feelings, and I forbid him. The second order,
which was in writing, was brought by a waggon-master, and was by no means
addressed to me, and which he also might have executed without ever calling
upon me. The third and last order was similar to the other two, and which the
officer put in execution by breaking open my stable door, without ever seeing
me, as the others might have done theirs. If the court are of opinion that any
of these were orders, for the breach of which an officer can be punished, I
must confess hitherto I have been ignorant what an order means. But suppose the
order was to me, I was not bound to obey it, it was unmilitary, and a precedent
of the most dangerous consequence. Military authors of the first reputation
agree, that the most ready and implicit obedience is due to every military
order or command respecting duty, but at the same time positively deny the
right, and strictly forbid the exertion of power to interfere in private
property. The general might have prohibited me from drawing forage for my
horse, he might have forbid my keeping a horse in the garrison, I mean as
commander of the post, but so long as I was permitted to keep a horse, he was
my own private property to every intent and meaning, as fully as my coat, my
shirt, or any thing else in my trunk, and as I have two coats, he might by the
same rule of right, i. e. power, have ordered my trunk to be broke open, and
one of them delivered to some naked soldier who could not do duty for the want
of one. If I am not very much mistaken, I remember to have seen an order of his
Excellency's, expressly confining the power of impressing horses to the
quarter-master-general, or his deputy, who may descend deputising till it comes
to the deputy waggon-master's deputy's servant, who shall have a right, if this
precedent is established, to dismount any general, except the commander in
chief, who may be so unlucky as to give him offense; for if the quartermaster
had an authority to impress an officer's horse at all, he had it independent of
general Smallwood, who by the above order appears to be excluded that right --
if then the quarter-master's right to impress officers horses cannot be
admitted with any degree of consistency, and the general never was invested
with that right. I know not on what military principle he can justify his
ordering the quartermaster to impress my horse, and much less his aiding him
with an armed force to break open my door. The very idea of military force in
such cases is a denial of the right, it supposes an urgent necessity, requiring
the immediate exertion of power to deprive an individual of his right for the
greater good of the who^e, because, if every one is obliged by law to furnish
the general with a horse on demand, he has no need of an armed force, as they
are punishable by the civil law for a refusal. The distinction in a civil and
miliary view will not hold here, for when I entered the service of my country,
by no act of mine did I subject my private property to the disposal of my
commanding officer. It follows then, if the general had no right to take my
horse, I had a right to refuse him, so that admitting that the order was to me,
I was not obliged to obey it, and consequently am unjustly arrested; but as the
last charge, however illy grounded, may carry a small degree of criminality in
the opinion of some of the members, I must beg their indulgence a little
longer, while I make a few observations on that head. I acknowledged above I
opposed the execution of the general's pointed orders to take my horse, but I
could not disobey them, they were not directed to me, and roused by the
arbitrary and illegal stretch of power, I did, upon the same principles that
induced me first to take up arms in defense of the rights of mankind, threaten
to defend it at the expense of the invader's life, but on the first moment's
cool reflection gave up the resolution, because the illegality of the
proceedings might be determined at much less expense than the life of a man,
who, perhaps, thought he was in the execution of his duty. I had lent one horse
to lieutenant Hoops to go upon the expedition far which he was demanded, and
purposely to avoid the execution of my threat, mounted the other somewhat
earlier than necessary, to train the regiment. Upon the whole, if the court
finds me not guilty of a breach of order, or that those orders were illegal, I
shall readily rest the justification of my conduct in the third charge, on an
appeal to their own breasts, and to every one whose feeling renders him worthy
a commission in defense of a cause the most virtuous that ever men were engaged
in.

What inducement can any here present have to sacrificing the ease and
indulgence of retirement to the dangers and hardships of war? What but the
generous love of freedom and the happiness of their country; and what mighty
reward do they expect for all their toils? They ask nothing but an applauding
conscience and an approving country, and however small in the opinion of those
whose views never extend beyond the narrow circle of self, it is enough. Shall
this my reward then be arbitrarily and wantonly taken from me, and shall I not
complain? What merit have I where I have no will? He took that by force which I
had voluntarily offered; I know there are none of you but in my circumstances
would feel it a cruel and unprovoked injury; however, I will take up no more of
your time, but leave to your impartial consideration, and cheerfully submit it
to your determination, only requesting that you would not consider it merely as
a matter of dispute between general Smallwood and myself, but as a precedent
replete with despotism, and in its consequences materially affecting every
officer in the army.

JOSIAS CARVIL HALL.

The court with respect to the first charge exhibited against colonel Hall, are
of opinion, that the order issued in that instance was not military, nor
conveyed through a military channel; that the general, by conveying it through
the hands of the quartermaster, in the nature of an impressment, not even
addressed to colonel Hall, was an actual confession that he had not a right to
expect or exact a compliance with the order by virtue of his superior command.
And with respect to the second charge, although the court does by no means
approve of colonel Hall's intentions or threats of resisting by force the
officer sent to execute the order, yet as they can easily account for it, from
the keen and sensible feelings of a person in his situation, and as a few
moments cool reflection determined him to act otherwise, we acquit him of
un-officer-like behavior: and are upon the whole unanimously of opinion, that
he is not guilty of the charge exhibited against him, and therefore acquit him
with honor.

W. RICHARDSON, President.

AS I was not privy to, or favored with a copy of colonel Hall's defense to
the court, till after the sentence was handed in to me, in justice therefore to
myself I am bound to make the following remarks, as I think several parts of
his defense exceptionable and unjust.

Colonel Hall has taken great pains to justify his conduct to the
court martial, and has made use of a number of specious arguments for that
purpose, wherein it may be observed, that all his reasonings are more properly
addressed to the passions than to the justice and judgment of those gentlemen
who composed the court: truth and rectitude need no gloss to recommend
themselves to the candid mind, and notwithstanding such splendid argumentation,
the case in hand illustrates itself, and rests entirely upon its own merits, as
set forth in the evidence produced.

That colonel Hall disobeyed my orders, is a fact that the colonel himself does
not controvert; that his compliance with them would have aided the service, is
as notorious; but whether those orders were in themselves unmilitary, or issued
in an unmilitary way, it certainly was not the business of a good officer to
oppose their operation. As colonel Hall seems to be conversant with military
authors, he will find several who pronounce, that officers have not even a
right to declare a general order, which has a tendency to promote the service,
though issued out of the common line, illegal or oppressive, till such order
has been carried into execution, and its effects make it appear to be so. If
general orders of this nature are to be opposed in one instance, they may in a
thousand, and from such a precedent the consequence might be, that an officer
in time of action might refuse to obey the orders of his commanding officer at
the head of a line of battle, because the orders were not consonant with his
opinion, and that they were unmilitary, or issued in an unmilitary manner. Such
a disposition for cavilling might be admissible at the bar of a county court,
but can have no tendency to promote the service, or create a good officer. If
the commander in chief had issued orders upon a similar emergency, directing
the quarter-master-general to impress one horse from each officer in the line,
who had from two to six, agreeable to their respective rank and limitation, not
to mention supernumeraries, and any officer had refused to let the
quarter-master-general put that order in execution, I should judge and
pronounce him guilty of a breach of a general order, though the order was not
particularly addressed to him.

Every order given out by a commanding officer, which in its operation is
general, and calculated to aid the service, is and ought to be obeyed as a
general order, and will be respected as such by every good officer, who would
make a point of sacrificing his private views to the good of his country.

Horses were to be impressed from such officers, who had more than one, as they
could no otherways be had; no officer was pointed out by name, and consequently
the order could not be particularly directed to any one; they who were
p^ssessed of more than one, came within the intent and description of this
order; colonel Hall among others was affected by it; but he tells us he will
not obey the order; it is unmilitary, it is a bad precedent, it is tyranny, it is
despotism. But if colonel Hall will again peruse his military authors of the
first reputation, he will there find (I flatter myself) no law, rule or custom,
authorizing officers to dispute or disobey the commands of their superior
officer, though they should appear inconsistent. Most authors tell us, orders
are first to be obeyed, and then the validity of them are to be canvassed, and
a remedy can easily be obtained after service done.

The import of the word duty is great, and the idea indefinite; and the way to
circumscribe its extent is for an officer to do every thing, and obey every
order, that appears calculated to promote the good of that service which he is
engaged in. The circumstances that appear in the proceedings of the
court martial in consequence of the order, will show whether it was calculated
to promote the aforesaid purposes, and whether colonel Hall was justifiable in
refusing to obey them.

I view the horse in question as a supernumerary, fed upon sufferance, and an
expense to the public which was not allowed; certainly the public had a right
to his services, at least for a few hours. Was colonel Hall's supernumerary
coat to eat and drink at the public expense, its services might be required
with as much propriety as its master's; however, the allegory is as foreign to
the subject, as the colonel's behavior has been un-officer-like.

The colonel thinks he has seen an order of his excellency's, confining the
power of impressing to the quarter-master-general or his deputy; this directly
proves that power is lodged somewhere, and also presupposes a right to exist in
the commander in chief to carry such powers into execution through the proper
channels. Abstracted from my instructions, which in this and other lights are
pretty extensive, as commander of this garrison, I am most certainly invested
with a similar right in the circle of my command, and therefore should judge an
order directed to my division quartermaster of equal validity.

I should apprehend the quarter-master-general, or his deputies, are the only
persons to receive and carry into execution orders for impressing horses, etc.
and had I ordered that duty to have passed through any other line, then the
colonel himself might with great propriety have pronounced it unmilitary. To
impress horses or any other species of private property always implies an
urgent necessity for such a measure, and the necessity implies something of
importance to be effected, which otherways could not be brought about. In such
case no true friend to his country ought to oppose or throw the least
impediment in the way, and the persons and property of officers, in my opinion,
are not more sacred than those o^ the farmers, who, though they do not fight,
yet feed those who do, and are as necessary members of society as the former. I
agree that some men are actuated by interested and mercenary views, others by a
spirit of contradiction and impatience of control, and in such cases will not
lend their property with their own consent; then force becomes necessary and
indispensable. Had colonel Hall like a good officer obeyed those orders, which
were neither new or unprecedented, I should not have been under the necessity
of using a military force; therefore when the colonel, in the high flood of his
wisdom, makes use of this circumstance to disprove the right of impressing
officers horses, his arguments only tend to convince the judicious of the
necessity of taking such measures, to reduce turbulent and refractory spirits
to a sense of their duty.

When an officer once deviates from the line of his profession, by disputing
and controverting orders, it is neither strange or uncommon to find him
justifying one breach by the commission of another. I am sorry to include the
colonel in this description; but after violating the order and putting on the
cavalier with his commanding officer, he attempts to move the passions of the
court by all the quibbling casuistry of an attorney, mistating facts, drawing
unfair inferences, tending to mislead the judgment; this certainly is no
evidence of candor, whatever it may be of ingenuity. As I have been honored
with the command of this garrison by his excellency general Washington, he
certainly has invested me with every power for the good government thereof;
therefore I apprehend, among many other powers received for that purpose, the
power of impressing horses, etc. was one: this power enables me upon an
emergency to impress colonel Hall's supernumerary horse, and would perhaps have
justified my going farther. If that power be arbitrary and illegal, the remedy
must be sought for and obtained at the fountain head. If then the power of
ordering horses to be impressed is vested in me, colonel Hall, according to his
own argument, had no right to refuse, and consequently the arrest is just and
legal. The path^tic display of arbitrary power, invasion of (...) property,
breach of privilege, and a number of other eloquent allusions, may divert the
fancy, but should never biass the judgment of men of sense; nor do I believe
this kind of rhapsody has had any undue influence on the minds of the court,
and notwithstanding they are interested in the event of the trial, my
partiality for them induces me to think they made up their determination from
an impression of an impropriety in the address of the order, which I still
apprehend has gone through the proper channel; however, this will be determined
by his excellency general Washington, in his approbation or disapprobation of
the sentence. As the order was not addressed to colonel Hall, it is supposed he
was not bound to obey it. I would ask, was I to order the whole garrison under
arms at such an hour, whether colonel Hall, not being particularly mentioned in
the order, would think himself bound to obey such an order, and form his
regiment? According to the colonel's private opinion and the determination he
would certainly not be obliged to pay any attention to it.

Doubtless there are many officers who have as just a sense of the merits of
this present contest as colonel Hall, and are as honest men, who have suffered
in their persons, and sacrificed as much, nay I will venture to say more, to
the shrine of freedom, without all that display of integrity and
supererrogation that the colonel sets forth.

That colonel Hall refused to obey my orders is a fact that is allowed; that he
threatened to take the life of the person authorized to execute these orders is
also allowed; which conduct is certainly unlike an officer: wherefore I
conclude, that colonel Hall is guilty of all the charges laid against ^im in
the full meaning and intent of the words.

March 23, 1778. W. SMALLWOOD.

IT is with much concern the commander in chief thinks himself obliged in
propriety to disapprove the determination He is clearly of opinion, that the
order issued through colonel Sheriff, division quartermaster, was regular and
obligatory; regular, because general Smallwood, as commanding officer of a
detached post, must be supposed to be officially vested with every power
necessary for the good of it, and consequently that of impressing (...) on an
emergency, and because the division quartermaster was the proper channel
through which it should operate, agreeable to the practice of armies and to the
true spirit and design of general orders; obligatory, because it was the order
of a superior and commanding officer, and from the face of the evidence appears
to have term founded in the necessity of the case, and calculated to promote
the service.

Colonel Hall's refusal to comply with the order was a blameable opposition to
the command of his superior officer acting in the line of his duty, and the
violent threats thrown out against any person that should head a party to
execute it, were at least highly indelinate and improper.

Colonel Hall is released from his arrest.

True copy from general orders, issued at head quarters, Valley-Forge, April 2,
1778. ALEX. SCAMMELL, Adj. Genesis

AS I pledged myself some time ago to publish the following trial, the
difficulty of obtaining just and proper credentials, (such as the certificates
inserted in the remarks, and copies from some of the original papers) may, I
hope, apologize to the public for suspending the publication until they could
be obtained.

Sept. 10, 1779. W. SMALLWOOD.

Pennsborough Township, May 31, 1778. SIR,
I AM sorry my duty obliges me to order you under an arrest, and also to take
no farther charge of that pique^ guard stationed at Gibson's Ford; you will
therefore return immediately to your tent or quarters, where you will confine
and consider yourself under an arrest, and conduct yourself accordingly.

I am, SIR, Your obedient humble servant, W. SMALLWOOD.

Capt. Norwood.
Pennsborough Township, May 31, 1778. SIR,
YOU will march down your guard to Gibson's Ford, hand captain Norwood the
letter which you carry down, then order his guard to return to the encampment,
and take post with your own guard at the Ford, tnd dispose of the centries in
the best manner for the security of the Ford and post.

I am, Your humble servant, W. SMALLWOOD.

Ensign Colegate.
Pennsborough Township, May 31, 1778. SIR,
I AM sorry my duty obliges me to order you under an arrest, and also to take
no farther charge of that piquet guard stationed at Brenton's Ford; you will
therefore return immediately to your tent or quarters, where you will confine
and consider yourself under an arrest, and conduct yourself accordingly.

I am, SIR, Your obedient humble servant, W. SMALLWOOD.

Capt. Eccleston.
Pennsborough Township, May 31, 1778. SIR,
YOU are to go down to Brenton's Ford, hand captain Eccleston the letter which
you carry down directed to him, after which you are to take charge of your
guard which you marched down this morning, agreeable to the general order
issued expressly for the purpose of relieving captain Eccleston and the other
captains on piquet, which was founded unavoidably from the scarcity of officers
not admitting of any other relief, and dispose of the centries in the best
manner for the security of the Ford and post.

I am, SIR, Your humble servant, W. SMALLWOOD.

Lieut. Ewing.
Return for liquor for guard at Gibson's Ford. May 30, 1778. 1 sergeant, 1
corporal, 12 privates.

(Signed) EDW. NORWOOD, capt. of a serg. guard. Brought by one of the guard to
general Smallwood.

Liberty-Hall, May 31, 1778.
Mr. NORWOOD, late a captain in the fourth Maryland regiment, would be glad
general Smallwood would send him the charge on which he was arrested, as he
does not know any conduct of his for which he ought to be confined or put under
an arrest.

Pennsborough, June 1, 1778. SIR,
THE charge under which you were arrested, is, refusing to comply with a
general order, issued expressly for the relief of the troops on piquet, founded
in the necessity o^ the case, and which at that period could not have been
otherwise remedied.

I was engaged in forwarding dispatches to colonels Hollingsworth, Rumsey, and
Pope, which prevented my sending you the charge last night.

Was I disposed to enter upon a replication to your billet it might with great
propriety be observed, that liberty often degenerates into licentiousness, and
manly spirit into petulancy, but my time might be better employed by a proper
attention to my public duty.

I am, SIR, Your very obedient humble servant, W. SMALLWOOD.

Capt. Norwood.
AT A COURT MARTIAL, Held at PENNSBOROUGH, by order of GENERAL SMALLWOOD, June
2, 1778.
Lieutenant Colonel PETER ADAMS, President, Members
Lieut. col. WOOLFORD, Major HOWARD, Major STEWARD, Capt. SMITH, Capt.
DAVIDSON, Capt. LANSDALE, Capt. BURGESS, Capt. BEALL, Capt. OLDHAM, Lieut.
SMITH, Lieut. SCOTT, Lieut. SOMERVILLE.

THE court proceeded to the trial of captain Norwood, charged with refusing to
comply with a general order, issued expressly for the relief of the troops on
piquet, founded on the necessity of the case, and which at that period could
not otherwise be remedied.

Orders of the 31st ultimo being read, captain Norwood confessed he refused to
comply with the tenor of that order: captain Norwood confessed likewise, that
he believed that to be a general order, a copy of which he was served with by
major Hitchcock, and is as follows, viz.

The number of prisoners now under guard, the scarcity of officers, and the
difficulty of making up a court martial for the trial of the prisoners, owing
to the disputes subsisting about the rank of officers not being settled,
combine to oblige the general to order captains to relieve subs, and subs to
relieve captains, on the piquet guard, as there are not sufficient captains for
that purpose, exclusive of those who compose the court martial; the general is
therefore sorry to find himself compelled to order subs to relieve the captains
on piquet, which measure must be adopted or public business be stopped, and the
number of prisoners remain an encumbrance, not only to the public, but to the
troops and the present measures now to be adopted; the captains therefore are
ordered to march off their guard upon the subs taking post with their relief.

Captain Norwood says in his defense, that the necessity asserted in the orders
did not exist at that time, as there were then a sufficient number of subs off
duty to have relieved the piquets, and insisted on having the general order to
major Hitchcock inserted, it being material to his defense; the subs to whom he
alluded were, he says, lieutenants Ewing, Colegate and Ireland, who were
competent to relief of the piquets. The general's order to major Hitchcock is
as follows, viz.

SIR, You are directed to relieve the subalterns on piquet by captains Long,
Eccleston and Norwood, that members may be got to set on the court martial
whereof colonel Ford is president, in order that the public business may be
carried on, and that it may be relieved from the burden of so many tories and
prisoners. Captain Norwood says, that the reason for his not sitting on
court martial was, that the rank between himself, Eccleston and Long, was not
settled, and that it was his tour to have gone on command instead of captain
Selman, and that the court could have been formed without relieving the
subalterns then on piquet, by ordering the field officers, or artillery
officers, to sit in the room of those captains whose rank was in dispute, and
says farther, that he would cheerfully have obeyed that order if he had thought
there had been a necessity for it, but that he thought himself pointed at
particularly by the order from which he relieved the subs then on duty.

Court adjourned till three o'clock.

Court met according to adjournment. Colonel Ford being duly sworn, deposes
and says, on being asked by the court at the desire of the general, Whether
general Smallwood did not observe as follows:

Question by general Smallwood. Did I not observe to you, that the scarcity of
officers and their scruples about rank would render it difficult to make up a
court martial, unless the officers would wave their scruples? And did I not
desire you to give my compliments to them, and to beg that they would wave them
in the present instance, as there were so many prisoners who were an
encumbrance?

Answer by colonel Ford. The general did make the foregoing observations, and
that he informed the court that the general hoped they would on that occasion
wave their scruples.

Question. Did you not acquaint the general, that all were willing to serve,
except Long, Eccleston and Norwood.

Answer. I informed the general, that captains Long, Eccleston and Norwood,
would not wave their scruples.

Question by the court. Did you inform the general, that captain Norwood was
willing to sit agreeable to the general order?

Answer. I heard no such thing, nor did I inform the general of such a thing.

Question by the general. Did I not observe that I should be under the
necessity of sending those three gentlemen to relieve the subs on piquet, and
place them that were on piquet on the court martial; as the scarcity of
officers rendered this measure necessary? and did not I observe, that I hoped
the officers who scrupled to sit on court martial on account of rank, would not
think I pointed at them, as I had no other alternative?

Answer. I think you made observations to that purpose.

Question. How many field officers are there in camp for duty?

Answer. Four; viz. colonel Woolford, major Howard, major Steward, and myself.

Question. Has not their duty been extremely hard since at this post?

Answer. I think it has.

Question. From the duty they have done, would it not from your knowledge have
been partial in me to have put them on the court martial, and exempted the
captains, who have done much less duty, from mounting on piquet?

Answer. I do not know that captains have mounted piquet since we came to this
post, until the time when captains Long, Eccleston and Norwood were ordered to
relieve the piquets.

Questions asked by captain Norwood of colonel Ford. How long had the subs done
duty at this place before they were ordered to be relieved by captains?

Answer. I think it was the second day.

Question. Could not that court to your knowledge have been composed, without
relieving the subalterns by captains, by putting field officers on that court,
as well as the present?

Answer. I think not, as colonel Woolford being a senior officer to me, the
court must have been dissolved, had he sat.

Question. Could not that court have been composed except one member?

Answer. I think it could, by putting major Howard and major Steward on.

Question. Did not colonel Ford hear me say, I was willing to sit on that
court martial agreeable to the Maryland roster?

Answer. I think I did.

Question by the general. Was not major Howard relieved by colonel Woolford the
morning the court was ordered?

Answer. I think he was.

Question asked by captain Norwood. How long had the field officers done duty
before the captains were ordered to relieve subalterns?

Answer. From the time the guards were first mounted at this place.

Question by the general. When was the court martial ordered of which you was
president?

Answer. I believe on the 30th of May.

Questions by the general to major Howard. Who relieved you on the 30th of May,
1778?

Answer. Colonel Woolford.

Question. Did you know that there was a court martial ordered that day, and
colonel Ford president?

Answer. Not until I was relieved.

Questions by the court. Did you know it after you was relieved?

Answer. Yes.

Question. Did you know that major Steward was appointed to relieve colonel
Woolford on the 31st ult.?

Answer. Major Steward was appointed, but I did the duty in his room.

Question by captain Norwood to major Howard. Could not a court martial have
been composed on the 30th ult. by putting on three field officers, and leaving
an officer to do the field duty?

Answer. I believe it might have been done, by comprehending the field officers
who came off duty that morning.

Colonel Woolford being sworn, was asked by the general --

Question. Do you know, from the scarcity of officers and the hard duty of
field and subaltern officers, that I could have relieved the piquets otherwise,
without injuring the field and subaltern officers much more than the captains?

Answer. I think they must have been injured more than the captains, from the
returns that I have seen.

Question. Did you not see or hear the captains enter into a combination, not
to be relieved but by captains? and did not you know that this could not be
effected without dissolving the court martial, or distressing the subs who had
lately come off duty?

Answer. I heard some of them say they would not be relieved but by captains,
and I think they could not be relieved by captains without dissolving the
court martial.

Question. Did you not dissuade them from entering into such a resolution?

Answer. I told them they had better not enter into such a resolution, for they
would bring themselves into trouble.

Question asked colonel Woolford by captain Norwood How long did the field
officers and subalterns do duty by the 30th of May?

Answer. I do not know, as I went to quarters the night we encamped; by
information I can inform the court it was from the 29th to the 30th.

Brigade-major Hitchcock being duly sworn, was asked by the general with leave
from the court -- Had you any other way of relieving the piquet, establishing
the court martial, furnishing officers for the main guard, and the party of
observation, than the mode I directed on the 30th ult. without injuring the few
field officers and subalterns much more than the captains?

Answer. I think it could not be done in any other manner.

Question. Had not the duty of the field and subaltern officers been harder
latterly than the captains?

Major Hitchcock, in answer to the above question, represents, that on the 26th
of May, when the first brigade marched, and agreeable to the weekly returns
(there then being four field officers returned fit for duty, ten captains and
eleven subalterns) one field officer, one captain, and seven subalterns, were
put on duty from the second brigade; and one field officer, one captain, and
six subalterns, on duty the 27th of May, and continued, with the addition of
one subaltern, to the 28th of May, as a reinforcement to the main and rear
guards, and arrived that evening at our present encampment; and that on the
29th, three subalterns mounted on the piquets, and that they were relieved by
three other subalterns on the 30th in the morning, who were ordered to be
relieved by the three captains, Long, Eccleston, and Norwood, and after being
relieved went immediately on court martial.

THE court, after considering the evidence delivered on both sides, are of
opinion, that captain Norwood is guilty of disobedience to a general order, and
sentence him to be privately reprimanded by the officer commanding the regiment
to which he belongs.

PETER ADAMS, President.

THE commander in chief utterly disapproves the sentence, as altogether
inadequate to the offense; the mutinous and dangerous spirit which actuated
captain Norwood, merited in his opinion the most exemplary punishment. He is to
be released from his arrest.

A true copy from general orders. Attest. ALEX. SCAMMELL, Adj. Genesis

Orderly office, July 6, 1778. SIR,
IN consequence of a complaint lodged in this office, you are hereby ordered in
arrest.

1st. For publicly declaring and implying, that you did not regard the censure
of the commander in chief, because the facts set forth to him on your trial
were mistated.

2dly. For conduct unbecoming an officer and a gentleman, in suggesting
publicly, that the facts were misrepresented; which has an implied tendency
either to reflect on his excellency, the court martial, or general Smallwood,
or on the whole.

3dly. For declaring, that general Smallwood has been guilty of partiality in
your case, and that he is no gentleman, and that you would make it your
business to declare publicly, that general Smallwood was a partial man and no
gentleman, every opportunity.

ALEX. SCAMMELL, Adj. Genesis

Captain Edward Norwood, 4th Maryland regiment o^ the Maryland troops.
August 19, 1778.
AT a general court martial of the line, of which colonel Hazen was president,
captain Norwood, of the fourth Maryland regiment, appeared before the court,
charged with

1st. Publicly declaring and implying, that he did not regard the censure of
the commander in chief, because the facts set forth on his trial to him were
mistated.

2dly. With conduct unbecoming an officer and a gentleman, in suggesting
publicly, that the facts were misrepresented, which has an implied tendency to
reflect on his Excellency, on the court martial, on general Smallwood, or on
the whole.

3dly. With declaring that general Smallwood has been guilty of partiality in
his case, that the general was no gentleman, and that he would make it his
business to declare publicly, that general Smallwood was a partial man and no
gentleman.

Pleads not guilty of the first and second charges.

Captain Norwood requested the court not to proceed on an examination of the 3d
charge exhibited against him, unless he was permitted to lay before them those
facts which had occasioned the expressions he had used relative to the
character of general Smallwood; in this case he said he could justify them.

As such an enquiry would lead to the trial of general Smallwood, which the
court do not think themselves authorized to enter on, and as passing sentence
on captain Norwood, for expressions he has made use of, without hearing his
reasons for those expressions, might do injustice to that gentleman, the court
are unanimously of opinion, that they cannot with propriety enter into an
enquiry on the third charge exhibited against captain Norwood.

At the particular request of general Smallwood, the court deferred hearing the
witnesses on the first and second charges exhibited against captain Norwood,
till they should be empowered to try him for the third charge likewise.

The court adjourns till tomorrow 9 o'clock.

MOSES HAZEN, colonel, President.

Head quarters, White-Plains, August 22, 1778. SIR,
I HAVE read and considered the proceedings of the court martial in the case of
captain Norwood. If our military constitution does not authorize the court to
investigate the third charge exhibited against him, and to determine upon the
same, and on the defense he offers, no powers can be derived from me for the
purpose. However I am of opinion that they have a jurisdiction in the case, and
that though a trial before such a court may in its consequences and operation
bring in question the character of a general officer, yet that this
circumstance will not supersede their power of enquiry, as to the matters in
charge, as they are not to pass sentence against the general officer. This I
deliver as mere matter of opinion, and without the least design or wish to
influence the court to proceed in the case of captain Norwood, if their
sentiments are still the same respecting the incompetency of their power.

I am, Sir, Your most obedient servant, G. WASHINGTON.

Colonel Moses Hazen, President of the court martial now sitting.
After intermediate adjournments. Saturday, August 22, 1778.
The court, of which colonel Hazen was president, me^ according to adjournment.

A letter from his excellency general Washington to the president, respecting a
former determination of the court martial, that they could not with propriety
enter into an investigation of the third article of the charge exhibited by
general Smallwood against captain Norwood, was laid before the court.

They reconsidered their former decision, and still remained of opinion, that
it was founded on military principles, and that they could not depart from it.

Captain Norwood observed to the court, that he had been arraigned before them,
that he had plead to that part of his charge which they thought themselves
competent to proceed on, and that he now insisted on being tried on those
articles of the charge exhibited against him to which he had already plead.

The court were of opinion, that, as captain Norwood had plead to his charge,
he had a right to insist on his trial, and determined that they would proceed
to an investigation of the two first articles of the charge exhibited against
captain Norwood.

The court adjourns till Monday next 9 o'clock.

The court having met on Monday the 24th, adjourned till the day following, and
then proceeded to an investigation of the two first charges exhibited against
captain Norwood, as below recited.

Tuesday* August 25, 1778.
Captain Norwood, of the fourth Maryland regiment, appeared before the court,
and they proceeded to an investigation of the two first charges exhibited
against him, to which he had before plead Not Guilty.

The charges were, 1st. Publicly declaring and implying that he did not regard
the censure of the commander in chief, because the facts set forth to him on
his (captain Norwood's) trial, were mistated.

2dly. Conduct unbecoming the character of an officer and a gentleman, in
suggesting publicly that the facts were misrepresented, which had an implied
tendency either to reflect on his Excellency, or the court martial, or general
Smallwood, or on the whole.

General Smallwood made an objection to the court's proceeding on the two first
articles of the charge exhibited against captain Norwood, unless they would
include the whole of the charge, in which case he was willing to give captain
Norwood the fullest power of justifying his expressions with which he was
charged.

The court, after considering the objection made by general Smallwood to their
proceeding further in the case of captain Norwood, were of opinion, that it was
inadmissible, since stopping their proceeding in consequence of this objection,
would be supposing that they had no right to continue them, and consequently,
that an officer who has arrested another possesses the power of preventing the
supreme military court in the American army from examining into the merits of
the charge.

The court then proceeded to hear the witnesses in the case of captain Norwood.

Captain Brice deposes and says, That while the army lay at Valley-Fo^ge, in a
conversation which passed between captain Norwood and himself on the reprimand
which captain Norwood had received in general orders, that gentleman said, that
he did wot " mind, or that he did not regard," the reprimand, as he was pretty
certain that the facts, on which he had been tried, were misrepresented to his
Excellency by general Smallwood.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Had you any further
conversation with captain Norwood concerning his trial, or on that subject at
that or any other time?

Answer. None that I recollect respecting the charges now before the court.

Question by the prisoner. Did you infer from the tenor of my conversation that
I could mean a reflection on his Excellency or on the court martial in any
respect whatever?

Answer. I thought you meant no reflection on the court, but I conceive that
your expressions must have had a tendency to reflect on his Excellency, as it
was supposing that his Excellency attended more to the representation made by
general Smallwood than to the proceedings of the court martial, though I did
not think you meant to convey this idea.

Lieutenant Baily deposes and says, That while the army lay at Valley-Forge, he
heard captain Norwood say, in a public company, that he did not much mind the
reprimand given him in general orders, because he suspected that the facts on
which he was tried had been misrepresented to his Excellency by general
Smallwood.

Question by the court. Did you hear any thing farther?

Answer. Nothing.

Question by the prisoner. Did you conceive that I said any thing disrespectful
of his Excellency, or of the court martial?

Answer. I conceived you meant a reflection on general Smallwood, and no other
person.

Captain Norwood urges in his defense, That he never did, and never intended,
to insinuate any thing injurious to his Excellency, or to the court martial,
that it was general Smallwood only on whom he reflected.

The court having considered the charges and the evidence, are of opinion, that
captain Norwood did say, that he did not regard, or did not mind, the censure
of the commander in chief, because the facts stated to him on his (captain
Norwood's) trial were misrepresented; and are farther of opinion, that his
expression had a tendency (though captain Norwood could not mean it) to reflect
on his Excellency, as well as on general Smallwood. The court find captain
Norwood guilty of breaches of the 5th article of the 18th section, and of the
2d article of the 2d section of the articles of war, and do sentence him to be
reprimanded in general orders. The court acquit captain Norwood of un-officer
and un-gentleman-like behavior, and of reflecting on the court martial.

MOSES HAZEN, President.
Camp, White-Plains, August 25, 1778.
We, the subscribers, being present on the 19th instant at a court martial,
whereof colonel Hazen was president, then on the trial of captain Norwood,
charged for publicly declaring and implying that he did not regard the censure
of the commander in chief, because the facts set forth to him on his trial were
mistated; secondly, for conduct unbecoming an officer and a gentleman, in
suggesting publicly that the facts were misrepresented, which has an implied
tendency either to reflect on his Excellency, the court martial, or general
Smallwood, or on the whole; thirdly, for declaring that general Smallwood had
been guilty of partiality in his case, and that he is no gentleman, and that he
would make it his business to declare publicly that general Smallwood was a
partial man and no gentleman, every opportunity -- When captain Norwood plead
not guilty to the two first articles, but informed the court he would justify
the last article of the charge, if he was allowed the liberty of going into a
full justification of his allegations, by adducing evidence, and recurring to
and proving facts which happened in course of his late trial; the president and
some other members then observed and doubted their competency to try the last
article of the charge, urging, if he supported his assertions, that it must
bring general Smallwood's conduct in question, which they had no right to
determine on. General Smallwood then urged the propriety of their going into an
investigation of the charge at large, and insisted on their proceeding to the
trial, and requested them to give captain Norwood every latitude he would ask
of justifying his assertions, by adducing evidence and recurring to the
proceedings on his late trial, or proving any facts which happened thereon,
urging their competency, and observing, that if captain Norwood justified the
last article of the charge, they must acquit him, which would impliedly censure
and subject general Smallwood's conduct to an enquiry, but if he could not
support his allegations, their powers derived under the articles of war,
enabled them to pass sentence as the nature of his offense might require. The
parties then withdrew at the instance of the court till their opinion could be
taken, who determined they could not go into a consideration of the latter part
of the charge: general Smallwood then objected to a partial examination,
without the charge was considered at large; the court being embarrassed, it was
agreed by them and the parties to enter up the proceedings thus far, and prefer
them to the commander in chief, to take his opinion respecting the proceedings
of the court, or the appointment of a special court for that purpose.

Given under our hands the date above. THOMAS WOOLFORD, Lieut. col. JACOB
BRICE, Captain, JOHN BAILY, Lieutenant.


Camp, White-Plains, August 25, 1778.
It is stated to the court by general Smallwood, that it was not at his
particular request that the court (as recited in their proceedings) deferred
hearing witnesses on the first and second charges exhibited against captain
Norwood, till he might be prosecuted for the third article of the charge
likewise, but on the contrary, general Smallwood requested the court to proceed
on an investigation of the articles of the charge at large, and to give captain
Norwood every latitude he would ask of justifying his assertions, by adducing
evidence in support of them, and recurring to the proceedings of his trial on a
late court martial, wherein he was charged with a breach of general orders, on
which he was found guilty, sentenced to be reprimanded, and was farther
censured by the commander in chief, which censure gave rise to the expressions
from which the last article of the charge originated -- But on the court
determining that they were incompetent to proceed on the third article of the
charge, for reasons exhibited also in their proceedings, general Smallwood then
objected to their proceeding on the two first articles, without they would
comprehend and make up their determination on the charge at large.

W. SMALLWOOD.

We, the subscribers, being present at a court martial on the 25th of August,
1778, whereof colonel Hazen was president, then on the trial of captain
Norwood, saw general Smallwood present the above stated facts, signed as above,
which general Smallwood then insisted should be entered in the proceedings of
the trial, as they would justify his conduct, by making it appear he was ready
to give captain Norwood every latitude of justifying his assertions, and urged
the propriety and insisted on the court going into a full investigation of the
charge at large, which the court refused, judging their power incompetent, but
determined to proceed to an investigation of the two first articles only, which
general Smallwood objected to, unless they would include and make up their
determination on the charge at large; and on general Smallwood's insisting on
the above recited facts to be entered in the proceedings, the opinion of the
court was taken, and they refused to admit of their entry, though no member of
the court objected to the truth of the state, but on the contrary, the
president and judge-advocate acknowledged them to be properly stated, and
general Smallwood then observed, as the court would not admit of their entry,
he should be under the necessity of obtaining certificates of those facts
having occurred before the court, and his demanding an ^^^y thereof; the
president then replied, that matter would be more proper to comply with out of
court, and said he would have no objection. Given tender our hands the date
above.

J. BRICE. Captain, JOHN BAILY, Lieut.


NOTE. Though the court admitted the truth of the facts above stated, yet they
objected to their entry at this time on their proceedings, but afterward I
observe they have done me the justice to admit that I desired that captain
Norwood might have every latitude given him of justifying his assertions, upon
a full investigation of the charges.

September 4, 1778. W. SMALLWOOD.

THE commander in chief finds himself under the disagreeable necessity of
disapproving the proceedings of the court, because they have not tried all the
charges exhibited before them on each fact; agreeable to precedent and common
usage, they ought to have given either a sentence of acquittal or condemnation.
To this end their power and jurisdiction seem to have been fully competent; the
third charge, from its very nature, implied a right of justification in the
prisoner could not be discriminated in point of reason from either of the
preceding ones, or any other, the matter in question between the parties in
this instance was the character and conduct of one of them. The prisoner, by
the strongest implication, acknowledged he had made the charge as stated, and
if permitted would justify it; general Smallwood, on the other hand, consented
and declared himself willing, that the should have the fullest power of doing
it; this circumstance, supposing there had been room for doubt before
respecting the court's authority to try the matter, was sufficient to remove
every objection. Captain Norwood still remains in arrest, and is to be tried on
the several charges exhibited against him.

Sunday, September 13, 1778.
THE court, of which colonel Humpton is president met according to the orders
of yesterday.

Colonel Regnier took the place of colonel Millen, and was sworn agreeable to
the articles of war. Captain Barnes, Davis, Hinds, Woodson, Garner, and
Nicholas, took the places of captains Watson, Redding, Livermore, Bell, Rice,
and Ewell, and were sworn as is directed by the articles of war.

The court then were as follows: Colonel HUMPTON, President.

Members
Lieut. col. REGNIER, Major THOMPSON, Captain BARNES, Captain BUTLER, Captain
DAVIS, Captain PELL, Captain HINDS, Captain MARBURY, Captain TATUM, Captain
WOODSONS, Captain GARNER, Captain NICHOLAS,
IN obedience to general orders, issued the fourt^ of this instant, the court
proceeded to the tri^ of captain Norwood, of the fourth Maryland regiment,
charged with,

1st. Publicly declaring and implying, tha^ he did not regard the censure of
the commander in chief because the facts set forth to him on his trial were
mistated.

2dly. Conduct unbecoming an officer and a gentleman in suggesting publicly,
that the facts were misrepresented which has an implied tendency either to
reflect ^n his excellency, or the court martial, or general Smallwood, ^ the
whole.

3dly. Declaring that general Smallwood has been guilty ^f partiality in his
case, that the general is no gentleman, and that he would make it his business
to declare publicly, every opportunity, that general Smallwood was a partial
man and no gentleman.

Captain Norwood refused to plead to the two first articles of the charge
exhibited against him, he urged that he had already been tried on them by a
former court martial, and that he could not be tried twice for the same facts.

The court having considered the objection made by captain Norwood, are of
opinion, that our military constitution undoubtedly vests the commander in
chief with the power of disapproving the proceedings of a court martial, and of
ordering an officer to be tried again by the same or another court. The court
were farther of opinion, that as general orders of the fourth instant
positively directed them to proceed on the whole of the charge, they would
investigate the two first articles of the charge exhibited against captain
Norwood, in the same manner as if he had plead to them.

Captain Norwood pleads guilty of the third charge, and urges in justification
that his expressions were true.

Captain Norwood objected to general Smallwood's asking any questions of the
several witnesses who should be examined in the course of his trial; he
contends, that the general can have no right to ask any questions, as the
judge-advocate alone is empowered to prosecute.

The court were of opinion, that, as the principal end proposed by a
court martial must be to discover the truth, and as general Smallwood might ask
many questions which had a tendency to illucidate the different charges, he
should be permitted to propose any questions, which, if thought proper by the
court, should be asked by the judge-advocate.

Captain Brice deposes and says, That, while the army lay at Valley-Forge, in a
conversation which passed between captain Norwood, himself, and others, on the
reprimand which captain Norwood had received in general orders, that gentleman
said he did not much mind the reprimand, as he was pretty certain that the
facts on which he had been tried were misrepresented to his Excellency by
general Smallwood. Conversing on his form^r arrest and trial, captain Norwood
said, that captain Ec^leston and himself had been arrested on the same change;
that general Smallwood had discharged captain Eccl^ston from his arrest and had
prosecuted him, for doing which he was a partial man and no gentleman. Captain
Norwood said farther, that he would make it his business to declare publicly in
every company, that general Smallwood was a partial man and no gentleman.

Lieutenant Bailey deposes and says, That while the army lay at Valley-Forge,
he heard captain Norwood say in a public company, that he did not much mind the
reprimand he had received in general orders, because he imagined, that the
facts on which he was tried had been misrepresented to his Excellency by
general Smallwood. He said farther, that general Smallwood was a partial man
and no gentleman, and that he would assert this in every public company into
which he should go.

Question by the court. Do you know what gave occasion to these expressions
used by captain Norwood?

Answer. No, I was not present at the whole of the conversation.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Did you know or
understand, that captain Norwood used these expressions in consequence of the
censure passed on him by general Washington, on his late trial at Chad's Ford?

Answer. I understood, but was not certain that he did.

Major Hitchcock depose^ and says, That he does not recollect hearing any
expressions from captain Norwood relative to the character of general
Smallwood, till that gentleman was arrested, but is particularly acquainted
with the former arrests of captain Norwood and of captain Eccleston, with the
oftensible reasons which induced general Smallwood ^o discharge captain
Eccleston from his arrest, though he prosecuted captain Norwood. B^^h these
gentlemen were arrested for refusing, when on guard, to be relieved by
subalterns. Some little time before their trial, the deponent met colonel
Woolford, was asked whether it was possible to release an officer from his
arrest before his trial? Major Hi^chcock re^^i^^, that it might be done.
Colonel Woolford then said, that he would apply to the general for the
releasemen^ of captain Eccleston, who was now sorry for what he had done. Major
Hitchcock said, that he did not doub^ but the general would release that
gentleman on pr^pe^ acknowledgments being made. They then parted, and major
Hitchcock was soon informed by general Smallwood, that captain Eccleston was
not to be tried. While the court was sitting captain Norwood observed, that he
was treated partially, as captain Eccleston, who was arrested on the same
charge with himself, was released from his arrest, while he was prosecuted;
general Smallwood then declared, that had such applications been made to him
for the discharge of captain Norwood as were made for the discharge of captain
Eccleston, he too should have been released from his arrest.

Question by the court. Was there any general order directing that subalterns
should relieve captains?

Answer. An express order was issued for that purpose.

Question by the court. Did any private pique subsist between general Smallwood
and captain Norwood previous to this arrest?

Answer. Not to my knowledge.

Question by the prisoner. Did you ever hear me say any thing comprehended in
the charges exhibited against me before this court?

Answer. I heard you, in the court martial at Chad's-Ford, tell general
Smallwood, that you thought he was partial in trying you when he had released
captain Eccleston, though arrested for the same fact.

Captain Norwood objects to the testimony of major Hitchcock, as containing
nothing which respects the charges exhibited against him before this court. He
enters now a general objection against any witnesses who may be adduced, whose
testimonies do not immediately tend to illucidate those charges on which he is
to be tried.

The court having considered the objection of captain Norwood and the testimony
of major Hitchcock, are of opinion, that, as it appears from the testimony of
captain Brice that the releasement of captain Eccleston from his arrest
constitutes a part of that partiality with which captain Norwood accuses
general Smallwood, an enquiry into that fact comes with propriety from this
court, and they do determine that the testimony of major Hitchcock shall remain
on their proceedings.

Colonel Woolford deposes and says, That in the evening of the day on which
captains Norwood and Eccleston were arrested, he met the latter gentleman, and
was informed by him that he was in arrest; that this distressed him much, as he
was apprehensive he should be cashiered, and he was now sensible he had been in
an error. Colonel Woolford told him, that if he would make such acknowledgments
to general Smallwood, he did not doubt but the general might be induced to
release him from his arrest. At captain Eccleston's request, colonel Woolford
spoke to general Smallwood on this subject, and stated to him the conversation
which had passed between captain Eccleston and himself. General Smallwood said
this was all he requested from either gentleman, and captain Eccleston was soon
after released from his arrest.

Question by the prisoner. Did you ever hear me say anything comprehended in
the charges exhibited against me before this court?

Answer. I have heard you use some expressions relative to the character of
general Smallwood, I am not certain what they were, but I think you said he was
no gentleman, or did not act like a gentleman.

The court adjourns till tomorrow 9 o'clock*

Monday, September 14, 1778.
Captain Ghiselin and captain Baytop took the places of captain Hinds and
captain Davis, and were sworn agreeable to the articles of war. The proceedings
of yesterday were read to them. Colonel Woolford was again adduced to the court
as a witness, and was asked the following questions:

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Do you remember the
day that you, at the request of captain Eccleston, applied to general Smallwood
to have him released from his arrest?

Answer. It was the day preceding that on which the general released him.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. What did general
Smallwood say to you on your application in favor of captain Eccleston, with
respect to that gentleman's releasement?

Answer. He said that he had no other motive for arresting captains Norwood and
Eccleston but to convince them of their error, and to prevent the service from
being injured in future by a similar conduct; that since captain Eccleston was
sensible he had been wrong, if he would acknowledge it in writing, he (general
Smallwood) would release him, the general wished the acknowledgment to be made
in writing, that it might justify him in discharging Captain Eccleston from his
arrest.

The following witnesses appeared at the request of captain Norwood.

Captain Oldham deposes and says, That captains Norwood and Eccleston were
arrested at Chad's-Ford for the same crime, they were each brought before a
court martial, and each plead guilty to their charge. After captain Norwood had
made his defense, the court asked captain Eccleston if it was sufficient for
him, he replied that it was. Almost immediately a note was given to the
president, which released captain Eccleston from his arrest. The court then
proceeded on the trial of captain Norwood; in some little time general
Smallwood came into the room some of the court observed to him, that they were
determining on captain Norwood's case, the general signified a desire to hear
the proceedings of the court, with captain Norwood's defense, read, this was
done, he conceived that some part of captain Norwood's defense reflected on his
conduct, and insisting upon having a defense against those reflections entered;
the propriety of entering such a defense on the proceedings of the court, as
captain Norwood had been already tried so far as to be found guilty of the
charge, was objected to by several members; at this general Smallwood grew
exceedingly warm, signified that some of the court were partial, and farther
said, that if his defense was not entered with the proceedings, and opinion
given on the whole, he would dissolve the court and take Norwood to head
quarters for trial; he farther insisted that the president should inform him by
a note in the next room, where he would stay, whether his defense should be
entered or not; the court were of opinion that the general's defense, with his
evidences, should be entered, and opinion given conjointly on the whole.

Question by the court. Who was to prosecute captains Eccleston and Norwood?

Answer. I conceived that the judge-advocate, or person officiating as such,
was to prosecute them.

Question by the court. Did any witnesses appear in behalf of the United States?

Answer. No.

Question by the court. Was general Smallwood informed that the court had met
before they proceeded on the trials of captains Norwood and Eccleston?

Answer. I cannot tell.

Question by the court. What induced the court to proceed on those trials
without giving general Smallwood notice of their intentions?

Answer. I conceived and believe the court thought, that as those gentlemen
plead guilty to their charges, testimony against them was unnecessary.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Was there any
judge-advocate?

Answer. A member took down the proceedings, and, I conceived, acted as
judge-advocate.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Was he properly
sworn to execute that duty?

Answer. I believe not.

Question by the prisoner. Was it customary in that division for a member to
act as judge-advocate?

Answer. Yes, but they were not sworn as judge-advocates.

Question by the prisoner. Was any person appointed by general Smallwood a
judge-advocate?

Answer. Not to my knowledge.

Question by the prisoner. Was it customary for an officer who arrested another
to act as prosecutor?

Answer. I cannot determine; I have not conceived them to be prosecutors.

Question by the court. Who swore the members of the court?

Answer. The president.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Did general
Smallwood make application to the court for evidence to be taken in behalf of
the United States?

Answer. I think the general requested that his witnesses should be examined,
but I believed those witnesses were only to exculpate himself from those
reflections which captain Norwood, in his defense, had cast on him, as I did
not conceive evidences in behalf of the United States necessary, when captain
Norwood plead guilty to his charge.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. When general
Smallwood came into court, were the proceedings and sentence in the case of
captain Norwood fully made up?

Answer. No, I believe the court had sentenced him to be reprimanded, but had
not determined in what manner.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Was it on the first
or second day or the trial that general Smallwood insisted that the
determination of the court should be made on the evidence on both sides, and
not partially?

Answer. I cannot recollect certainly, but I think on both.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Did captain Norwood
object, the second day, to the court's determining on the proceedings at large?

Answer. Captain Norwood signified to the court, that he had been tried the day
before, and said, he hoped that the proceedings of that day would not be
entered with those of the preceding day.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Did captain Norwood
accuse general Smallwood in court of acting partially in discharging captain
Eccleston from his arrest?

Answer. I think he did.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. What answer did the
general make?

Answer. He denied being partial, and declared on his honor that he would have
released captain Norwood had he made such concessions as were made by captain
Eccleston.

Question by the prisoner. Did I accuse the court of being guilty of partiality?

Answer. Not to my knowledge.

Question by the prisoner. Did general Smallwood offer any evidence in behalf
of the United States before the proceedings were read to him?

Answer. I do not recollect that he did.

Question by the prisoner. Did general Smallwood object to the court's having
proceeded on my trial till their proceedings were read to him?

Answer. I think he did not.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. How long was
general Smallwood in the court before he asked to hear their proceedings?

Answer. He asked as soon as he came in.

The court adjourns till tomorrow 9 o'clock.

Tuesday, September 15, 1778.
Captain Bell deposes and says, That, at Chad's Ford, when captains Norwood and
Eccleston were arrested by general Smallwood, a court was called for the
purpose of trying them; the court met at the time appointed, and, after being
properly prepared, asked captains Norwood and Eccleston, Whether they plead
guilty to their charges. They replied in the affirmative. Captain Norwood's
witnesses were examined, after which he gave in a defense. Captain Eccleston's
defense was the same as captain Norwood's. Just then captain Eccleston received
a note, which he read and presented to the president: he was by that note
released from his arrest; the deponent thinks be then left the room. The court
had found captain Norwood guilty of disobedience of orders, and were proceeding
to determine on his punishment, when general Smallwood came into the room, and
desired that the proceedings of the court should be read; after hearing them,
the general conceived, that what captain Norwood had said reflected on him, and
begged leave to offer something in justification of himself; this the court
granted; general Smallwood's evidence and defense were taken down; some words
passed between him and captain Norwood, the deponent does not recollect them.
After this captain Norwood spoke to the court, and indicated his hopes, that
they would not consider general Smallwood's evidence and defense conjointly
with his. General Smallwood was then going out of the room; on hearing what
captain Norwood said, he returned, was very angry, and told the court that he
would not be baffled by them; that it was in his power to dissolve the court
and, since he found that they were inclined to baffle him, he would dissolved
it and have captain Norwood tried at head quarters. The general added, That he
perceived some of the court were inclined to act partially, and desired the
president to signify, by a note to him in the next room, whether they would
give their opinion on his evidence conjointly with captain Norwood's or not;
the court informed him that they would, and thus put an end to the dispute.

Question by the court. Were captains Norwood and Eccleston tried together or
separately?

Answer. I think they were tried together.

Question by the court. Did the court ask whether they chose to be tried
together or separately?

Answer. I do not recollect that they did.

Question by the court. Did the gentlemen request to be tried together?

Answer. I do not recollect that they did.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Did general
Smallwood give in a defense to the court?

Answer. He gave the court his reasons for arresting captain Norwood, and for
ordering captains to be relieved by subalterns.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. When captain
Norwood indicated his hopes that the court would not consider the evidences
produced by general Smallwood, did any members object to a consideration of the
testimony offered by the general?

Answer. A dispute arose in court about the propriety of admitting the
witnesses offered by the general.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Was there a great
heat in the court publicly, on that matter?

Answer. There were high disputes.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Had general
Smallwood any intimation of the court's proceeding on the trials of captains
Norwood and Eccleston before they did proceed?

Answer. I do not recollect that he had.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Was there any
difference between general Smallwood and captain Norwood previous to this trial?

Answer. I think there was.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. What was it?

Answer. While the division lay at Wilmington, one of the officers had touched
on the general's character; this occasioned him to call the officers together
at his quarters, where he began to clear up the charges which had been said
against him; in clearing them up, high disputes arose, particularly between the
general and captain Norwood, concerning the usage of soldiers, and other
matters. Captain Norwood said, that be would always make a point of striking
any soldier who gave him ill language; the general replied, then he would
always make a point of arresting him.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Did the dispute
between general Smallwood and captain Norwood amount to a quarrel, or was it
only a difference in sentiment?

Answer. It was a difference in sentiment.

Question by the court. Was this difference of sentiment carried on with warmth
on each side?

Answer. They were not very warm, but there was a degree of warmth.

Question by the court. Did you ever hear captain Norwood, previous to his
arrest at Chad's-Ford, say that general Smallwood was a partial man and no
gentleman?

Answer. No.

Question by the prisoner. Did the general give in his defense the day that I
plead to the charge, or was it the day after?

Answer. I do not recollect.

Question by the prisoner. Did the court meet one or two days?

Answer. Two days.

Lieutenant Smith deposes and says, That, when Captains Norwood and Eccleston
were arrested at Chad's-Ford, they each appeared at a court of which he was a
member. Captain Norwood gave in a defense, which captain Eccleston said was
sufficient for him. At this time captain Eccleston gave a note to the
president, which the court thought sufficient to release him from his arrest.
They then cleared the room, and proceeded to passing sentence on captain
Norwood; they had found him guilty and ordered him to be reprimanded, but had
not entered their determination on their proceedings, when general Smallwood
came into the room. The deponent informed the general, that the court were then
determining on captain Norwood's case; he requested to hear the proceedings of
the court, with captain Norwood's defense; after hearing them, he informed the
court, that he had some evidences to bring in against some reflections thrown
out in captain Norwood's defense. Some of the court objected to the propriety
of his bringing in witnesses after they had begun to determine on the case.
Without coming to any resolution, the court adjourned till next day. Then
general Smallwood insisted on introducing his witnesses, and the court granted
his request. After his witnesses were heard, he harangued the court himself,
and gave them his reasons for releasing captain Eccleston and not captain
Norwood. After this captain Norwood observed, that he thought it would be
improper to give their opinion on the proceedings of the two days together, and
left the room. The general immediately fell in a passion, and insisted on its
being done, as he had not been present the day before, and had it not in his
power to bring in his witnesses. This occasioned much confusion in the court,
in the course of which general Smallwood said he did not doubt but some of the
court were not partial. He likewise insisted, that the president should
signify, by a note to him in tne next room, whether they would consider the
proceedings of the two days conjointly. The court gratified him. General
Smallwood had called this court, and appointed the hour at which they were to
meet; they were to have met about two hours and a half before the general came;
it was observed by some of the court, that it was unnecessary to send for the
general, as he knew the time the court was to meet, which time was elapsed, and
as the gentlemen would plead guilty to the charges against them, for which
reasons it was imagined that there was no occasion for witnesses.

Question by the court. When the court knew that captain Norwood had a defense
to give in, did they inform general Smallwood of it?

Answer. Not to my knowledge.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Did captain
Eccleston receive the note which released him from his arrest in court?

Answer. He received a note which I supposed to be his releasement in court, in
the midst of captain Norwood's defense; from the manner of bringing it, the
note appeared to have been sent in a hurry?

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Was that note read
to the court?

Answer. Yes.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Had any evidence
been offered by captain Norwood when the court proceeded to determine in his
case?

Answer. Not that I recollect.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. How long had the
court sat before general Smallwood came?

Answer. I do not remember, but from the proceedings I imagine they must have
set an hour or an hour and a half.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Did general
Smallwood assign any reason for his not attending sooner?

Answer. I believe he did after the proceedings of the court were read to him.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. What were those
reasons?

Answer. I think he said there were some prisoners in the main guard whom he
had to send to Lancaster.

Question by the prisoner. Were captain Eccleston and myself both arrested for
the same crime?

Answer. As well as I can recollect you were.

Question by the prisoner. Did captain Eccleston and myself both plead guilty
to the same charge?

Answer. You did.

Question by the prisoner. Did I give in a justification or defense?

Answer. You acknowledged the fact, and gave your reasons for acting in the
manner you had.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Do you remember the
reasons general Smallwood gave the court for releasing captain Eccleston and
not captain Norwood?

Answer. He said that captain Eccleston had acknowledged his fault; he added,
that if captain Eccleston had not done this, and captain Norwood had, he would
have released captain Norwood and would have prosecuted captain Eccleston.

The court adjourns till the day after tomorrow 9 o'clock.

The movements of the army prevented the court from meeting till Saturday,
September 19, 1778, when the court met at Salem, and proceeded to a farther
investigation of the charges exhibited against captain Norwood.

The deposition of captain Eccleston, taken by the judge advocate in presence
of general Smallwood and captain Norwood, was read to the court, and admitted
as evidence.

The deposition was as follows: Captain Eccleston deposes and says, That he has
never heard captain Norwood say any thing comprehended in the charges for which
he is now in arrest.

The following questions were asked by general Smallwood and captain Norwood.

Question by general Smallwood. Was you arrested by me for a breach of orders
at Chad's-Ford at the same time that captain Norwood was?

Answer. Yes.

Question by general Smallwood. Did you refuse to march your guard into camp
agreeable to the general order?

Answer. Yes.

Question by general Smallwood. When the subaltern who went to take charge of
your post came, did you suffer your guard to march into camp?

Answer. I did.

Question by general Smallwood. Did you write major Steward a letter on that
subject?

Answer. I wrote to major Steward requesting his advice.

Question by general Smallwood. What conversation had you with colonel Woolford
on the subject of your arrest?

Answer. I told colonel Woolford that I was sorry for what had happened, as it
was the first time I had ever been arrested, and as I thought, after taking the
advice of several officers, that I ought to have obeyed the order.

Question by general Smallwood. Did you request colonel Woolford to speak to me
in your favor?

Answer. To the best of my knowledge I did not.

Question by general Smallwood. Did you receive a letter from me on that
subject?

Answer. I did.

Question by general Smallwood. Was the conversation between you and colonel
Woolford previous to the receipt of that letter?

Answer. It was.

Question by general Smallwood. Did that letter require an acknowledgment of
your error in writing before you could be released?

Answer. It did.

Question by general Smallwood. Did you make that acknowledgment.

Answer. Yes.

Question by general Smallwood. Were you relieved immediately on that
acknowledgment?

Answer. I was.

Question by general Smallwood. Was you tried by the court when you received
the discharge from your arrest?

Answer. No.

Question by general Smallwood. Did you insist on being tried?

Answer. No.

Question by general Smallwood. Did captain Norwood persuade you to stand trial?

Answer. I believe he said that he would not have had the arrest withdrawn.

Question by general Smallwood. Did he say be could justify his conduct?

Answer. I do not remember.

Question by general Smallwood. Had you any conversation with colonel Adams on
the subject of your arrest?

Answer. I had.

Question by general Smallwood. What was that conversation?

Answer. I do not recollect.

Question by general Smallwood. Was it similar to the conversation you had with
colonel Woolford?

Answer. I believe it was, but am not certain.

Question by general Smallwood. Was this conversation with colonel Adams
previous to the letter I wrote you?

Answer. I believe it was not, but am not certain; I think the conversation
between colonel Adams and myself passed on his way to court martial, I believe
I had received the letter earlier.

Question by general Smallwood. Did you receive the letter the same day that
the court sat?

Answer. I think it was on the morning of that day.

Question by general Smallwood. What time did the court sit?

Answer. I do not remember certainly, I think it was in the forenoon.

Question by the prisoner. Did you ever make any concessions to general
Smallwood previous to your receiving the letter from him, or did you ever
request any person to make concessions to him in your behalf?

Answer. Not that I remember.

Question by the prisoner. Did you in court plead guilty to the same charge
that I did?

Answer. I believe I did, as I had not then been released from my arrest?

Question by the prisoner. Did you say that my justification was sufficient for
you?

Answer. Not as I remember.

Question by general Smallwood. Were concessions ever asked from you?

Answer. Never, unless your letter requested them.

Question by general Smallwood. Was an acknowledgement of your error in writing
asked as a necessary preliminary to your being released from your arrest?

Answer. Not unless your letter requested it.

Question by general Smallwood. Did captain Norwood dissuade you from
acknowledging your error?

Answer. I do not recollect that he did.

The following was delivered by captain Eccleston, on oath, as an exact copy of
the letter he received from general Smallwood.

Pennsborough, June 1, 1778. SIR,
YOU have been under my command almost ever since you commenced the soldier --
Your uniform and consistent conduct, as an officer, hitherto has strongly
recommended you to officers of all ranks, as an active, brave officer, and I
might add, had excited my esteem for you; I was not less surprised at your
deviation from that line of conduct, than I was embarrassed when I found myself
constrained, in point of duty, to order an officer, who I entertained so high
an opinion of, under an arrest, and I am persuaded, had you exercised your own
judgment, you would not have fallen into the error. Combinations in an army
have a dangerous tendency, even when they are concerted on just principles, but
an officer should be extremely cautious how he enters into them when not justly
grounded, and a commanding officer must be lost to all sense of honor and duty
who does not check and discountenance such measures in every instance, and more
particularly in the first. I had no other motive than this and to fix the
precedent, and to discourage officers in future from being actuated by such a
spirit of petulancy, and, I might justly add, licentiousness. If your judgment
is convinced, I am satisfied, it will have as good a tendency as subjecting you
to a trial. This you will signify to me in writing. and I shall mention in
today's orders that you are convinced you was in an error, which will be a
sufficient apology and justification to me to discharge you from your arrest,
which shall be immediately done. And I remain, respectfully, Sir,

Your obedient humble servant, Signed, W. SMALLWOOD.


The following witnesses appeared in behalf of the United States, and were
admitted by the court.

Captain Davidson deposes and says, That in the court martial called at
Chad's-Ford, for the trials of captains Norwood and Eccleston, captain Norwood
accused general Smallwood with acting partially, in releasing captain Eccleston
from his arrest and prosecuting him on the same charge; the general replied,
that he released captain Eccleston on the application made to him by that
gentleman's friends, and that he was ever willing to discharge from his arrest,
an officer who was convinced of his having been in an error. The court had
determined on the case of captain Norwood without hearing the witnesses to be
adduced by general Smallwood, and had adjourned till next day; then the general
attended with his witnesses, insisted on their being heard, and said, that if
their testimonies were not admitted, he should be obliged to dissolve the court
and continue captain Norwood in arrest.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. How long had the
court began their proceedings on the first day before general Smallwood
appeared?

Answer. I think about two hours.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Did general
Smallwood assign any reason for not attending sooner?

Answer. He did, but I do not recollect what those reasons were.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Did general
Smallwood then inform the court that he had evidences to offer in behalf of the
United States?

Answer. Yes.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Did they agree to
hear those evidences?

Answer. The next day they did.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Did they the next
day hear and insert them on their proceedings?

Answer. They did.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. After the witnesses
in behalf of the United States were adduced, did captain Norwood object to the
court's determining on their testimonies?

Answer. He said he hoped they might, or would, determine on the proceedings of
the day before.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Had any other
testimony been taken the day before but at the request of captain Norwood?

Answer. I believe not; he had plead guilty to his charge.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood Did several members
publicly object to considering the testimony in behalf of the United States?

Answer. There were objections made to it; I do not recollect whether they were
made publicly or not.

Question by the prisoner. Did you ever hear me say any thing comprehended in
the charges exhibited against me before this court?

Answer. I have heard you say that general Smallwood was partial in your case.

Question by the prisoner. Was captain Eccleston released before or after his
trial?

Answer. Captain Eccleston had plead to his charge, but was not tried when he
received a releasement, from his arrest.

Question by the prisoner. Had the court proceeded a^ far in his trial as in
mine?

Answer They had.

Question by the prisoner. Did I give in any other defense that day after
captain Eccleston said that his defense was the same as mine?

Answer. Witnesses were afterward examined, but I ^^ not recollect whether you
gave in a farther defense or no^

Question by the court. How long had the trial commenced when captain Eccleston
received, a release from hi^ arrest?

Answer. About half an hour.

Question by the court. Who was to prosecute these two captains?

Answer. General Smallwood, as I conceived.

Question by the court. Did the court inform genera^ Smallwood they had met
before they proceeded to business?

Answer. I do not remember that they did.

Question by the prisoner. Who arrested captain Eccleston and myself?

Answer. General Smallwood.

Question by the prisoner. Who was the commanding officer at that post?

Answer. General Smallwood.

Colonel Adams deposes and says, That he was president of the court by which
captain Norwood was tried at Chad's-Ford; he plead guilty to his charge. Soon
after the court sat, captain Eccleston, who was charged with the same facts,
received a release from his arrest. The court then proceeded on the trial of
captain Norwood. He was sentenced to be privately reprimanded by the commanding
officer of the regiment to which he belonged. Previous to this, several
gentlemen, one of whom was the deponent, had applied to general Smallwood in
favor of captain Eccleston; the deponent had requested captain Eccleston to
make some acknowledgment of his fault, and the captain replied that he would.
Colonel Adams asked the captain, on the first day that the court proceeded to
business, whether he should speak to general Smallwood in his favor; the
captain requested him to do so; before the court sat, he applied to general
Smallwood, who replied, he could do nothing in captain Eccleston's affair till
he should receive an acknowledgment in writing; the deponent went to the court;
after it had been sitting about an hour, captain Eccleston was called out, and
immediately returned with a discharge from his arrest.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. How long had the
trial commenced when general Smallwood came?

Answer. Between two and three hours.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Did he assign any
reason for not attending sooner?

Answer. He said he had some dispatches to make up before he could attend the
court.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Did the court
inform general Smallwood that they had tried captain Norwood?

Answer. No; they had not determined what his punishment should be.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Did general
Smallwood insist on offering evidence in behalf of the United States?

Answer. Yes.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Did some of the
court, at first, object to hear such evidence?

Answer. Some of the court did.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Did the court
afterward agree to adjourn and hear such evidence as general Smallwood had to
offer.

Answer. Yes.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. After the court
convened, did they give general Smallwood notice of their proceeding on the
trial?

Answer. In the morning I think I told the general I was going to court; I sent
no messenger to him after the court was formed.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. On refusal of
several members to hear e^^dence for the United States, what did general
Smallwood ^ay?

Answer. He said that he appeared as an evidence in behalf of the United
States; that if he could not he hear he would dissolve the court, as he hoped
to have justice done him as well as to any other man.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Did general
Smallwood at any time in the course o^ the trial accuse the court of partiality?

Answer. I did not hear him. He said he hoped there would not be a partial
hearing.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. After general
Smallwood's witnesses were heard, di^ captain Norwood object to their being
considered by the court?

Answer. As captain Norwood was about to go out o^ court, I think he said that
he hoped the evidences adduce^ by general Smallwood would not be considered
with the for going proceedings of the court.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Did general
Smallwood say a syllable about suspending or dissolving the court, till captain
Norwood objected, and several members refused, in a boisterous, angry manner,
to consider the evidence offered by general Smallwood in behalf of the United
States?

Answer. No.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Did captain Norwood
persist to the last in contending that he could justify his conduct?

Answer. I think he did; he said too that he thought himself particularly
pointed at.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Did general
Smallwood ask to give in a defense, or mention a syllable about one?

Answer. Not to my knowledge, he only requested to give in his evidence in
behalf of the States.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Did captain
Eccleston acknowledge his error and request you to intercede with general
Smallwood to relieve him from his arrest?

Answer. He acknowledged it to me, and said he was about to write to the
general; I did not see what he wrote.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Were applications
made to general Smallwood in favor of captain Eccleston the day before his
releasement?

Answer. I believe there were.

Question by the court at the request of general Smallwood. Were concessions
ever requested from captain Eccleston or captain Norwood?

Answer. Not to my knowledge, only an acknowledgement of their error was
requested.

Question by the prisoner. Did captain Eccleston plead guilty to the same
charge that I did?

Answer. Yes.

Question by the prisoner. Did he say my defense was sufficient for him?

Answer. I do not remember.

Question by the prisoner. Did captain Eccleston request you to speak to the
general in his favor, previous to his receiving a letter from the general?

Answer. I cannot tell.

Question by the prisoner. Were the proceedings of the court read to general
Smallwood at his request when he first came into the room?

Answer. Yes.

Question by the prisoner. Did general Smallwood say he had any evidence to
offer in behalf of the United States before the proceedings were read to him?

Answer. I cannat recollect.

Question by the prisoner. Did he say, I had reflected on his character, and
did he offer any defense by way of justification against those reflections?

Answer. I did not hear him.

Major Muir deposes and says, That on the day preceding that on which the court
sat for the trials of captains Norwood and Eccleston, colonel Woolford rode up
to general Smallwood's quarters, the general was not at home, colonel Woolford
told major Muir that he wished to see the general about captain Eccleston, who
had desired him to apply to the general in his favor, colonel Woolford added,
that captain Eccleston appeared to be much distressed, that he was now sensible
he had been in an error, and was apprehensive he should be cashiered; major
Muir desired colonel Woolford to ride to the general, and said he did not doubt
but on such an acknowledgment captain Eccleston would be released; the colonel
rode away, and in a short time after returned with the general, while they were
conversing on that subject, major Muir heard general Smallwood say, that he
could do nothing in the matter till he should receive an acknowledgment in
writing. On the morning of captain Norwood's trial general Smallwood wrote to
captain Eccleston, the captain returned a note to the general, in which, as
well as the deponent can recollect, he acknowledged himself convinced that he
had been in an error.

Question by the court. Did colonel Adams and colonel Ford also make
application to general Smallwood in favor of captain Eccleston before the
general wrote to him?

Answer. I believe they did.

Colonel Ford deposes and says, That the day preceding the trial of captain
Eccleston, he was in conversation with that gentleman, and was asked by him,
what he thought of his affair; colonel Ford replied, that he thought he was
wrong, that in his opinion, he (captain Eccleston) ought to have obeyed those
orders, captain Eccleston said he thought so too, that he had been informed so
by others, and that he wished he had obeyed the order; the deponent informed
general Smallwood what had passed, and requested the releasement of captain
Eccleston; the general said that all he required was to convince the gentleman
of his error, that the service might not be obstructed by similar conduct in
future, he at the same time expressed his good opinion of captain Eccleston as
an officer; the general likewise expressed a high opinion of captain Norwood as
an officer, and wished that he too had made such applications, as he did not
desire to proceed farther than to convince them that they were wrong.

Question by the court. Did captain Eccleston request you to apply to general
Smallwood in his favor?

Answer. No.

Question by the court. Did general Smallwood know that this application was
not requested by captain Eccleston?

Answer. I did not tell general Smallwood 'twas at the request of captain
Eccleston that I applied, nor do I recollect telling him it was not.

Question by the court. Was your application to general Smallwood previous to
his writing to captain Eccleston?

Answer. I believe it was.

The court adjourns till Thursday next 9 o'clock.

Thursday, September 24, 1778. Captain NORWOOD'S DEFENSE.
Mr President, and gentlemen of the court,
IT is with pleasure I find this very extraordinary trial drawing to a
conclusion -- a trial, which when traced back to its first principles, will be
found more replete with malevolence and persecution than perhaps can be
parellelled in any mi^it^ry process in a free country; and with permission o^
this court, I will endeavor to trace to its foundation, the principles on
which, and investigate the cause why, I have been cruelly kept in arrest, and
dragged from court to court for near four months. Last winter it was my
misfortune, witn very many other officers of the Maryland division, to incur
the displeasure of general Smallwood -- a displeasure which arose, not from any
misconduct or un officer-like behavior of ours, but from a spirit of liberty,
which prompted us to think as we pleased, and to speak as we thought of any
man, however elevated his station might be -- a spirit which I hope, in a free
country, with men struggling for liberty, the strictest exertion and utmost
stretch of military subordination will never be able totally to extinguish;
for, was that to be the case, the very ends might be destroyed by the means,
and to little purpose would you, gentlemen, forego the ease and pleasures of
domestic felicity, to encounter the rugged dangers of war, if you are not
allowed the privilege of arraigning the conduct of an officer, after the
strictness of military discipline had obliged you to obey his commands. To your
own good sense and feelings will I leave the fatal consequences of establishing
such a principle, with a full assurance, that feeling at freemen, you will
never, by your determination, fix a precedent so dangerous to liberty. It has
been my misfortune (but perhaps it may hereafter be my glory) to have been
singled out as an object of vengeance, for daring to arraign the conduct of a
superior officer, for I am convinced, and I trust in the course of my defense I
shall be able to make it appear to your satisfaction, that could I, with a
tameness of spirit unbecoming an officer and gentleman, looked silent on, and
have seen general Smallwood guilty of the most glaring acts of partiality to
particular corpse, and the most arbitr^ry and penurious detainure of a common
property to himself -- facts which he was every day publicly charged with
through the garrison, and which, I have no doubt some of his sycophantic peck
thanks carried ^o his ear, as it was often said in their presence with that
design -- I say had I held my peace at such g^a^ing acts of injustice, I should
not have drawn his pointed vengeance on my head; but, finding it necessary to
quel a sp;rit of enquiry, and to make some sacrifice, in terro^em^^h fixed on
me, and, contrary to his usual caution imprud^ntly threatened to arrest me on
the first occasion -- ^ threat which his rank and determined malice gav^ him
the fullest opportunity to carry into execution. Accordingly, on the first o^
May, I was ordered, for a service which I thought, and should still th^nk, (if
the court had not otherways determined) was not consonant to our military
constitution; I in part disobeyed the order, for which disobedience I was, with
captain Eccleston, who was in the same predicament, arrested. To the charges in
that arrest, from a full conviction we had been guilty of no breach of military
law, we both plead guilty, and gave in our defense in justification; but before
the court had determined on the question, captain Eccleston was released by a
note from general Smallwood The court then proceeded on my trial passed a
sentence, which I would here offer to the court, but could not obtain a copy of
the proceedings of that court, though I perceive general Smallwood has. The
severe execution of thi^ sentence, and my expressing my feelings under it, is
the oftensible cause why I now stand arraigned before you on the three
following charges:

1st. Publicly declaring and implying, that I did not regard the censure of the
commander in chief, because the facts set forth to him on my trial were
mistated.

2dly. Conduct unbecoming an officer and a gentleman in suggesting publicly
that the facts were misrepresented which has an implied tendency either to
reflect on his Excellency, or the court martial, or general Smallwood, ^ the
whole.

3dly. For declaring that general Smallwood has been guilty of partiality in my
case, and that he is no gentleman, and that I would make it my business to
decla^^ publicly, that general Smallwood was a partial man and no gentleman,
every opportunity.

To the first two charges I have already refused to plead and find my objection
entered on your proceedings, though overruled. I shall therefore only, on that
head, remark that I flatter myself his Excellency will do me the justice to
believe, when he sees my objection, that it did not proceed from any disrespect
to his orders, but from a thorough conviction that I could not with propriety
be (...) twice for the same offense. I find myself the more happy under my
situation, as I cannot find one evidence either in this or the former court
adduced in support of the (...) first charges. Into my defense on the third
charge I ca^ with alacrity, from a full conviction that the members o^ this
court will do strict justice to any individual who man ever be brought before
them, however superior the ran^ and abilities of his persecutor may be. The
words charged therein to have been spoken I confess, and with the patient
attention of the court shall attempt to justify; for what man, feeling a weight
of unmerited obloquy, (...) bear it without complaining? if such a man there
be, forbid it Heaven that they should ever disgrace a soldiers name. -- Here
give me leave to lead back the attention of the court to my first arrest on the
30th of May. I have already noticed to the court captain Eccleston's discharge
before his trial -- a discharge which the general insists wa^ made in
consequence of captain Eccleston's acknowledgment of his error, an
acknowledgment which I shall endeavor to prove was extorted by the general's
flattering letter to captain Eccleston -- a letter which pretty plainly proves
the general wished to discriminate between us, though we both stood charged
with the same offense; otherways I am at a loss to know what the general means
by saying, "I am persuaded had you exercised your own judgment, you would not
have fallen into the error; combinations in an army have a dangerous tendency,"
etc. What inference can be drawn from this, but that the general supposed I had
biassed captain Eccleston, or at least that I was in a combination against him.
Charges which he can by no means prove, nor had he a right to infer, without
confessing his partial conduct merited such combinations. However, the general,
passing by the expressive language of his letter, wishes to establish the
grounds of captain Eccleston's discharge on the application of the captain's
friends -- a shallow pretext at best, especially when such application was not
made at the instance of captain Eccleston, though the general has attempted to
prove, by his artful sifting and extorting the matter of evidence, the
application to him on captain Eccleston's behalf was at the captain's special
instance and prior to his, the general's, letter. Colonel Adams, it is true,
swears that captain Eccleston did apply to him to intercede with the general,
but does not say it was prior to the general's letter; and indeed it appears it
was not; for at the time of the conversation, captain Eccleston told colonel
Adams he was going to write to the general, or that he would write, and
accordingly did; but it was at the pressing invitation contained in the
general's own letter. With regard to colonel Woolford's and major Muir's
testimonies, I beg leave to be silent, because, relying as I must do on these
gentlemen's honors, the only construction I shall venture to put on their
testimonies is, that probably they have forgot, or were mistaken, as captain
Eccleston remembers no such application, and it is scarcely probable the
captain would ungratefully forget the mighty boon the colonel had obtained for
him; and in his own testimony, as he would not contradict the colonel, he only
modestly declares, that he ^oes not remember any such application, but very
well remembers he t^l^ me, at the time of his receiving the general's letter,
that he had made no application to the general himself, nor had he got any
person to do it for him; nor indeed does it appear he ever intended it, or it is
highly probable major Steward would have been the person to whom he would have
applied for intercession, as he was the first person he had advised with in his
dilemma Colonel Ford well remembers his conversation with captain Eccleston,
which might have been prior to the captain's receipt of the general's letter.
It is true, in that conversation the captain confesses he thought himself
wrong, but expressed not the least desire to use colonel Ford's interest in his
discharge, neither did he intimate the smallest desire to be released from his
arrest, till he had received the general's letter. Here indeed, were I to make
a comparison between captain Eccleston's conduct and my own, I might, without
partiality, charge him with the highest degree of criminality, as he persisted
in a known error, and I ignorantly persisted, in spite of pride and oppression,
in what I thought was right. -- I shall now take leave of the evidence adduced
in this present trial, and once more turn back to remark on the general's
conduct in course of my three several arrests under his persecution. In the
first, after he had rescued captain Eccleston from his arrest, where he was
equally exposed to the artillery of his (the general's) censure with myself, he
appears so eager to hunt after my ruin, as, contrary to all precedent and form
of good manners, to rush into court, and, in an authoritative style, to order
the proceedings to be read, though he was informed by the court they had gone
through my trial, and just cleared the court to determine the sentence; and
when he had heard them read insisted on being heard in behalf of the United
States, though the issues were made up; neither was there in the least any
evidence necessary, as I had plead guilty to the charge, and the court was
sitting on the nature of my offense, and on the mode of my punishment, and
finding upon the whole it was most probable his malevolent intentions would not
be gratified, threatened to dissolve the court unless they would hear him and
enter his defense among their proceedings. Whether this harangue had any effect
on the court or no, I will not undertake to say, but this I may venture to say,
that general Smallwood is the first commander in chief of any department, who
has taken on himself the peculiar province of deputy judge-advocate, and
commenced prosecutor in a court where he should always be reluctantly drawn
even as an evidence. On my second trial, and on the same charges for which I
now stand, in spite of general Smallwood's wish to criminate me on the two
first articles, the court justly acquitted me of intentional guilt, though, as
the words might carry the implied tendency, they sentenced me to a reprimand in
general orders; and on the third charge they thought themselves incompetent to
judge. Which sentence it pleased his Excellency to disapprove, though I have
the happiness to find, by a letter his Excellency did me the honor to write
me, that he entirely acquitted me of intentionally reflecting on himself.

On the third court, the one before which I now stand, you know yourselves the
eagerness with which the general as endeavored to criminate me, but, conscious
of my truth and integrity, I can rely with the most settled composure on your
unbiassed judgment, from a firm belief, that no gentlemen, convinced as I
flatter myself you are of the prejudice and settled rancour of general
Smallwood, will not condemn me for speaking of that prejudice and rancour with
some degree of asperity.

THE court having consid^red the two fi^^ charges, and the evidence, are of
opinion, that captain Norwood is guilty of saying that he did not regard the
censure of the commander in chief, because the facts set forth to him on his
trial were mistated, and are farther of opinion, that such an expression had a
tendency to reflect on his Excellency, and on general Smallwood.

The court having considered the third charge, and the evidence, are of
opinion, that captain Norwood's justification is not sufficient, and that his
expressions, with respect to the character of general Smallwood, are totally
groundless and without foundation. The court find captain Norwood guilty of
breaches of the 2d article of the 2d section, and of the 5th article of the
18th section of the articles of war, and do sentence him to be discharged from
the service.

RICH. HUMPTON, col. 10th P. reg. President.

Mr. President, and gentlemen of the court martial,
THE unjust and unmerited aspersions cast out in a public manner by captain
Norwood against my conduct and to the prejudice of my character, whilst acting
officially in the discharge of my duty, induces me to rise and claim the
indulgence of the court a few minutes, to recapitulate and set in a more
comprehensive view, and clear point of light, my conduct and character, which I
flatter myself are so fully supported and justified by unquestionable
testimony, adduced so clearly in point on the occasion, that a farther
illustration would seem unnecessary; but as it is the first instance through a
various life, in which I have been employed in a public capacity from my
earliest manhood, that ever my public or private character has been struck at,
hope my anxiety to set my reputation in the clearest light may plead an excuse
for the intrusion.

In the case of captain Norwood's trial at Chad's-Ford, for a most glaring
breach of orders, (the proceedings on which have been exhibited to the present
court martial) it is obvious, from the testimony of colonel Woolford, colonel
Ford, major Howard, and brigade-major Hitchcock, (particularly the latter, who
from his post must have been best acquainted with the detail of that part of
the army) that my orders, issued through the brigade-major, were regular, and
ought to have been obligatory, because the service required it; and these
gentlemen prove to demonstration, that the duty could be complied with in no
other manner than was directed by those orders, without the highest injustice
to both field and subaltern officers at that post; but captain Norwood not only
refused to comply with the order, but plead guilty, and strenuously urged he
could justify his conduct, in that case there could have been no
misrepresentation of his conduct, as he so ungenteelly and unjustly asserts;
the court found him guilty of all he was charged with, and sentenced him to be
privately reprimanded by the commanding officer of his regiment, which, with
the proceedings, were transmitted to general Washington for his consideration,
and from the face of the proceedings, his Excellency disapproved the sentence,
and censured captain Norwood in the following terms: "The commander in chief
utterly disapproves the sentence, as altogether inadequate to the offense, the
mutinous and dangerous spirit which actuated captain Norwood, in his opinion,
merited the most exemplary punishment." Notwithstanding so fragrant a violation
of a general order, calculated to aid the service, and his obstinate
justification of his conduct, captain Norwood is at a loss to account for the
censure passed on him, unless general Smallwood had misrepresented facts, and
therefore publicly declares, without farther enquiry, or even that reserve and
delicacy which should ever mark the conduct and character of an officer and a
gentleman, that he does not regard the censure of the commander in chief,
because general Smallwood had misrepresented facts to him.

Captain Norwood was charged for refusing to comply with a general order,
issued expressly for the purpose of relieving the troops on piquet, founded in
the necessity of the case, and which at that period could not otherwise be
remedied, plead guilty to the charge, but urged in his defense, that the
necessity comprehended in the latter part of the charge did not exist,
notwithstanding the testimony of the above gentlemen proved the fact, and the
propriety of this and every part of the charge, to demonstration, pursuant to
which the court found him guilty, and sentenced him; it must therefore appear
very extraordinary that I could misrepresent facts, when the court found him
guilty of every fact with which he was charged, and proceeded to sentence him
thereon as above, which the commander in chief utterly disapproved, as
altogether inadequate to the offense; then what other inference could be
deduced, but that the fallacy and absurdity of his assertion is too glaring to
require a solid reply, a^ it refutes itself, and clearly points out that it is
utterly void of foundation.

This assertion of the captain's does not only convey an absolute reflection on
my character, but has an implied tendency to reflect on the commander in chief,
as it must be inferred, if the captain's words have any meaning at all, that
his Excellency decided upon my misrepresentation, as he styles it, and not on
the proceedings of the court martial, which would have been a manifest
deviation from that line of conduct, and love of justice, which have ever most
eminently influenced and distinguished his character; but, says captain
Norwood, I had no intention to reflect on his Excellency, I meant only to
reflect on general Smallwood; in public assertions and declarations of this
nature, a man, even of captain Norwood's sense, certainly would not wish to
place himself in the light of an idiot, who has no meaning annexed to his
words; but the captain, if he is capable of rational reflection, must know it
is not his intention, but his expressions, which must affect and wound
characters, therefore it becomes his duty, as an officer and a gentleman, nay,
I might add* as an honest citizen, to be more guarded in his expressions, for
it is those only, in cases of slander (and not his intention) which he is
amenable for, and to be criminated by, unless he could establish his favorite
position, in that instance he might indeed strike at characters at large with
impunity.

A drunken man is punished for saying and doing things which he might perhaps
with more propriety urge (as the captain does) he did not mean to say or do; in
like manner, if captain Norwood's petulancy excites him to revile characters,
he is answerable for his unjust assertions, and not for his intentions: Least
the court should think I dwell too long on this part of the charge, I will
trespass no longer than to observe, that this assertion of the captain's is not
only unjust, but such as he has not pretended to support, nor can he justify it
upon any principle whatever, his conduct therefore has certainly been
unbecoming an officer and a gentleman, by unjustly suggesting in public, that I
had misrepresented facts to general Washington, which is not only a reflection
on my character, but has an implied tendency to reflect on the commander in
chief, and therefore make no doubt that the court, in this instance, will find
him guilty, and sentence him according to his demerit.

Captain Norwood has also publicly asserted, that I have been guilty of
partiality in his case, and that I am not a gentleman, and least these
assertions should not have their full force and weight in that instance, he
farther declares, that he would make it his particular duty to declare publicly
in all companies that he should come into, that I was a partial man and no
gentleman; these assertions have been proved by captain Brice and lieutenant
Baily, but the captain contending publicly before the present and late court,
whereof colonel Hazen was president, that he could justify those charges,
renders the proof of these officers unnecessary; the charges are high and
attrocious, the latter general and indefinite, and of such a nature, if
justified, as must for ever blast and stamp the blackest infamy on the
character of an officer, and the charge, if not supported, must be rendered
still more flagrant, by being levelled at his commanding officer when in the
official discharge of his duty; then how extremely cautious should the captain
have been in thus venturing to ruin for ever the character of (...) superior,
acting in the line of his duty. The latter charge, the most infamous and
injurious, he has adduced no testimony in support of, yet I rest assured the
court will consider its malignancy, and inflict an adequate and exemplary
punishment, at present it requires no other notice from me but contempt, and
the former he endeavors to support by adducing evidence to prove I was partial
in relieving captain Eccleston from his arrest and prosecuting him on the same
charge, but his witnesses only tend more clearly to prove his obstinately
persisting in an error, and attempting to the last to justify his refractory
conduct, and instead of establishing, combine more strongly with other
testimony, to refute and falsify his assertions, which when he finds he cannot
justify, actuated by the same principle of injustice, and a degree of casuistry
peculiar to men of his cast, attempts to extort from his evidences that I
accused the court at Chad's-Ford of partiality, and threatened to dissolve
them, as if this procedure was any way connected with his unjust aspersions,
but colonel Adams, who was president of that court, and whose duty it was upon
so ungenteel an accusation to have reprehended me, and who most probably, from
that consideration, must have remembered the circumstance, proves to
demonstration that no such accusation was made, but on the contrary, that I
insisted on the court to determine on the evidence at large on both sides, and
not partially, which, when captain Norwood objected to, and two members, who
are now his principal evidences, absolutely refused to include and determine
on, then, and not till then, was (...) syllable mentioned about dissolving the
court, as will appear by recurring to colonel Adams's deposition. The captain,
with equal absurdity and quibbling, has endeavored to prove I made a defense,
when it will appear from the proceedings, and colonel Adams's testimony, that
what he would fain call a defense, is the testimony taken on behalf of the
United States. In justification of his assertion, and to fit the charge of
partiality in this instance, he has asserted and to the last insisted on it,
that the letter I wrote captain Eccleston was prior to any application made for
and on his behalf, and was concerted to court him to make concessions, as he
phrases it, though no such were ever required from either, as will appear from
captain Eccleston's testimony and the letter itself, and notwithstanding I have
repeatedly gave him my word of honor I had no such motive, and that I could
prove by the testimony of colonels Woolford, Adams, Ford, majors Steward and
Muir, that such application had been made, previous to my writing that letter,
and that I required and received an acknowledgment in writing from captain
Eccleston before he could be or was relieved from his arrest, yet these
declarations, solemn and sacred as they were, have been disregarded, and I
believe I might justly add, discredited, till the fact was so positively proved
by these gentlemen's testimonies; but the captain now says; I have been
deceived, my evidences have not proved what they informed me they could; I
readily grant that the captain may have been made a a cat's-paw of, perhaps to
serve the secret purposes of more designing men, who may have had too much art
and low cunning to stand forth themselves, but the captain's want of
understanding and discernment to avoid their snares, certainly does not justify
his unjust and illiberal reflections on my conduct and character.

Does not captain Norwood therefore merit the most exemplary punishment, by
obstinately persisting in his errors, and being influenced by the assertions
and persuasions of his supposed friends, after I had repeatedly pledged him my
honor that application had been made on behalf and by the request of captain
Eccleston before I wrote him the terms on which he would be released and that
before I released him from his arrest I received his acknowledgment in writing,
and further, that had he made an acknowledgment of his error, and Eccleston
declined it, I would have released him and prosecuted Eccleston; can the
captain then after this plead an excuse for propagating his slanders? If he is
countenanced I would ask what officer reputation in the army will be secure?
Will they not daily meet with insult and opposition in the discharge of their
duty? And in that instance is not the offense doubly aggravated? And will not
the most diligent and active officers in the service be most exposed to such
illiberal attacks? Then may we not bid adieu to good order and discipline which
is so salutary, and without which no army can long exist?

But the captain, after he finds he can no longer justify his assertions,
surmises I have been right, and he now has nothing to blame me for, but not
calling upon him for an ^claircissment of his assertions before I arrested him;
had I descended, after what is above recited, to make advance toward an
explanation, then indeed the captain himself with propriety might have urged,
that I came within the description of his last assertion.

Captain Norwood, and others, may have judged the space of time he has been
under an arrest tedious, but I a^ not to account for events and public
exigences, I have eve^ been ready to go into a hearing, when the orders of the
commander in chief on public duty have not interfered (...) delay the trial, on
which I have offered him every liberty and latitude of justifying his
assertions, which indulgence I am conscious has been granted him.

I will trespass no longer on the patience of the co^^ than to observe, that
captain Norwood having publicly declared and implied that he did not regard the
censure of the commander in chief, because the facts set forth to his on his
trial were mistated by general Smallwood, in which he has acted unbecoming an
officer and a gentleman in publicly suggesting that the facts were
misrepresented, and having declared that general Smallwood has been guilty of
partiality in his case, and that he is no gentleman, and that he would make it
his business to declare publicly that general Smallwood was a partial man and
no gentleman every opportunity, which assertion he neither can nor ha^
justified or supported, wherefore I conclude he has been guilty of all the
charges exhibited against him, in the full intent and meaning of the words, and
doubt not but that the court will find him guilty, and inflict such punishment
as may be adequate to his offense.

W. SMALLWOOD.
Sept. 24, 1778. N. B. As I have not seen captain Norwood's defense cannot
reply to it, but beg leave to suggest to the court the propriety of its being
confined to the evidence.



The above comments were offered by general Smallwood to the court martial, who
upon captain Norwood's objection, rejected them immediately without a reading,
captain Norwood urging, if the general chose he might send them to
headquarters when the proceedings were given in, but as they were rejected by
the court they were not exhibited there, and are only inserted here to
illucidate the matter.

THE commander in chief, in justice to captain Norwood, declares, that he does
not believe he had any intention to reflect upon him, though his expressions
might have such a tendency, but as captain Norwood's conduct in other respects
has been highly prejudicial to good order and military discipline, and
inconsistent with the respect due his superior officer, he approves the
sentence of the court.

REMARKS UPON CAPTAIN NORWOOD'S DEFENSE AND CONDUCT.
TO THE PUBLIC.
IN the beginning of captain Norwood's defense he says, "It is with pleasure I
find this very extraordinary trial drawing to a conclusion -- a trial which,
when traced back to its first principles, will be found more replete with
malevolence and persecution, than perhaps can be parallelled in any military
process in a free country -- and with permission of this court, I will
endeavor to trace to its foundation the principles on which, and investigate
the cause why, I have been cruelly kept in arrest, and dragged from court to
court for near four months."

Here I would beg leave to remark, that the captain must entertain a high
opinion of his own importance, because I would not suffer him with impunity to
commit a breach of orders, and revile my character, he therefore roundly
asserts, and looks upon my prosecution to obtain justice and set my reputation
in a clear light, to be dictated by malice and a spirit of persecution -- his
strange inconsistency and want of candor must appear in a very striking light,
from the following certificate under the hand of major Muir, the facts recited
in which occurred immediately after the witnesses had all been examined, the
proceedings closed, and a time limited for him to bring in his defense.

After the witnesses had all appeared, and had all been examined before the
court, and a certain time given to captain Norwood to make his defense, in
passing toward the door with myself, he exclaimed, that it was very
surprising! -- that he believed they had been trying to put the general and
himself by the ears, and that had it not been for two or three persons, he
believed they would have been friends now. I observed he (captain Norwood) had
been misinformed; he said he had, and that his witnesses had not supported what
they informed him they could. -- I made answer, the general was not to blame as
to that, for application was made to him by several before captain Eccleston
was released from his arrest -- he replied, he did not blame the general so
much now, but from the representation made to him by captain Eccleston, who
informed him that he ever did make concessions, acknowledge himself in fault,
or make application to be released from his arrest, nor requested of any person
to make application for him, that I, or any judicious or impartial man, would
think the general partial, by releasing Eccleston and prosecuting him on the
same charge, and asked me, if it had been my case, whether I should not have
thought the same? I answered him, relying on captain Eccleston's
representation, it is very probable I should, but I was sorry he did not make
farther enquiry, or come to an explanation, when he mentioned it to the general
at Chad's-Ford, and the general gave him his word of honor that application
was made to him before he released Eccleston from his arrest -- he said he did
not believe the general, as Eccleston had so positively assured him to the
contrary, and that from the intimacy subsisting between them, and the good
opinion he entertained of him, he could not doubt the truth of what he had
asserted, but he said he should ever be of opinion that the general had a
private pique against him; I assured him I did not think so, for I had heard
the general speak of him as an officer, as favorably as ever I did of any in
the line -- Yes, he said, I might as an officer, but -- I told him I never
heard the general say any thing against him, more than that he was of a hasty
fractious disposition; he said he was conscious he had a private pique against
him, and should ever remain of that opinion; upon which our conversation ended.

Given under my hand this 31st day of January, 1779. FRANCIS MUIR, 1st lieut.
and acting aid de camp.

I shall leave the public to judge from his self conviction expressed to major
Muir at the above time, what principles he must have been actuated by, in
dictating his defense, fraught with illiberal abuse and wanton scurrility,
beyond what was contained in his original assertions, on which he was
prosecuted; he also insists I have had a private pique against him -- Has he
through the course of the prosecution made appear such pique ever existed; has
he proved any of his assertions? He certainly has done neither; and does it not
appear, that he had the liberty of justification in the fullest extent? I shall
then let it rest with the impartial public to decide on his ingenuous conduct,
and the justice of his insinuations, which, as his reputation was at stake in
the event, he must have had a very strong desire to justify -- and I submit to
the same tribunal to determine, whether his interest and malice would not have
excited him to establish in the course of his trial, which as he did not, after
every latitude of justification had been given, has he not deservedly suffered
the fate which is the just desert of all such spirits, who wantonly sport with
characters, and without the least foundation dabble in detraction? I shall
therefore treat his defense with the contempt it deserves, by taking no further
notice of it, than to make some observations on the following part, which
contains a very dangerous position, under the establishment of which no man's
character can remain secure.

"Last winter it was my misfortune, with very many other officers of the
Maryland division, to incur the displeasure of general Smallwood -- a
displeasure which arose, not from any misconduct or un-officer-like behavior
of ours, but from a spirit of liberty, which prompted us to think as we
pleased, and to speak as we thought of any man, however elevated his station
might be -- a spirit which I hope, in a free country, with men struggling for
liberty, the strictest exertion and utmost stretch of military subordination
will never be able totally to extinguish."

The captain attempts to compliment himself at the expense of his judgment and
candor, for the principles he lays down here, are as subversive of good order
and discipline, as his conduct has been found to be un-officer-like -- through
the greater part of his defense, the reader will observe, that he and his
accomplices in the composition, content themselves with low insinuations and
humble scurrility, but here, with their aid, he breaks forth into heroics, and
bursting asunder all obligations, moral, civil, and military, advances a new,
but to him favorite position -- that from the principles of liberty, he had a
right to think and speak of men and their characters as he pleased.

This doctrine puts me in mind of the poor ignorant illiterate soldiers, when
first enlisted into the American army, who judged, because they were engaged in
the noble cause of liberty, they had a right to indulge themselves in every act
of licentiousness, and therefore, when military discipline had justly brought
them to the halberds, to suffer for their offenses, used to cry out -- Is this
liberty! is this liberty!

Nor indeed does the sallies of the captain and his accomplices here, make him
and them appear unlike to Solomon's ^ool, who claimed a right to scatter
^irebrands, ar^o^s, and death, and then say am I not in sport? -- Liberty (...)
object, the noble object for which we are contending, which in the pursuit
justifies every extreme.

It has been a prevailing principle and practice with the captain and his
associates, to think of men and their characters as they pleased, and to
insinuate their opinions in a particular circle as matters of fact, though with
such reserve and caution, that the authority could not be come at; but the
captain in this instance having been less circumspect, was caught wandering out
of his tract.

When a commanding officer becomes obnoxious to men of this cast, by faithfully
discharging his duty, and exacting that of others for the public good,
despairing of injuring his reputation by manly and open accusations, this
lurking method is adopted, to remove, or at least lessen the weight of an
object so disgusting. The captain and his associates come truly under this
description -- their self-sufficiency naturally renders them impatient of
control, blind to qualifications in others, and restless under any command, as
they have imbibed so transcendent an opinion of their own importance and
capacity -- perhaps it would not be very difficult to point out geniuses of
this class in our line, who have been restless and dissati^fied under the
command of almost every general officer under whose immediate command they have
served -- nor have the excellent orders of the commander in chief in every
instance been implicitly obeyed, or escaped their nice distinctions and
criticisms -- such restless spirits are often real misfortunes even in civil
society, but become pests in an army.

This secure mode of stabbing my character in the dark, was first essayed,
whilst the Maryland troops under my command garrisoned Wilmington, where I
twice called in a public manner for the authors, and challenged them to point
out a single instance, in which I had acted unbecoming an officer and a
gentleman, as will appear from the following certificates; but not a man has
ever stood forth.

We, the subscribers, were present in the course of colonel Hall's trial at
Wilmington, in March, 1778, in presence of the court and a number of officers,
after the witnesses had nearly been examined, general Smallwood requested to be
heard by the court, and was admitted -- at which time, among other things, he
observed, that he was informed, that many insinuations in private were
suggested and circulated in the garrison to his disadvantage, urging that it
was mean and scandalous to take that low, unjust dirty mode of injuring his
character -- That as no one officer in the division had been manly or genteel
enough to mention the exceptionable parts of his conduct to him, he took that
public method of calling on them to point out their objections to his command,
adding, that if they had weight, and he could not refute them, or if they could
make appear that he had in any one instance acted unbecoming the character of
an officer and a gentleman, he would quit the division and the service,
declaring he did not wish, nor would not remain a day longer to their just
disgust -- but no person at that time, nor since as we have heard, has ever
stood forth.

Given under our hands this 6th of September, 1779. W. RICHARDSON, Col. 5th M.
Reg. THO. WOOLFORD, Lieut. Col. 2d M. Reg. JOHN STEWARD, Major Light Inf. ALEX.
ROXBURGH, Capt. 1st M. Reg.


In the winter of 1778, whilst the Maryland division lay in Wilmington, a libel
was circulated there, tending to revile general Smallwood's character; upon
which the general, calling the officers of the garrison together, at which
meeting we were present with many others, when the general demanding their
attention, acquainted them, as far as had come to his knowledge, with the
circumstances of the libel, urging, that it was not only false and malicious,
but one of the basest modes of stabbing a character in the dark, adding, that
the purport of calling that meeting was, that being very confident the author
must be present, he said he took that public method of calling upon him to
stand forth, and avow it, and of pronouncing him a coward, a liar, and a
scoundrel -- notwithstanding which, if the author would stand forth, he would
take no further advantage, than putting himself upon a level with him, no
person acknowledging or avowing the libel, the general, after waiting some
time, in which there was much conversation, and the company seemed much
agitated -- the general then said, if the author was present, as he believed
him to be, and could pocket the appellations of coward, liar, and scoundrel, he
was not worth his further enquiry; he should only remark, that as he believed
many officers present were no strangers to the person and transactions, he only
had to beg, that they would in future have a proper sense of their own dignity,
by avoiding his company and conversation, as a coward, a liar, and a scoundrel.

Given under our hands this 6th day of September, 1779. J. GUNBY, Col. 7th M.
Reg. ARCH. ANDERSON, Major 3d M. R. ALEX. ROXBURGH, Capt. 1st M. R. JOHN
JORDAN, Capt. 1st M. R. LEVIN HANDY, Capt. 5th M. R. A. GROSH, Capt 7th M. R.
W. BEATTY, Capt. 7th M. R. J. BRICE, Capt. 3d M. R.


It may be observed, that on the 29th day of September last, captain Norwood
was dismissed the service, on the preceding charges, as well appear from the
foregoing proceedings, sentence of the court martial, and his Excellency
general Washington's approbation thereof.

It will also appear, that the testimony adduced, in course of the prosecution,
most clearly refutes his illiberal assertions, and establishes his malignancy
to demonstration, and although his justification was allowed in the fullest
extent, yet he was unable to establish any of his slanders; and notwithstanding
his conviction of the impropriety of his conduct was so strongly manifested in
his conversation with major Muir, he still remained callous, and destitute of
that candor, which always actuates the generous mind to acknowledge an error;
this, by the strict rules of honor, ought to have been the first, and now is
the only method, by which he can expect to regain the favor of his country, or
the character of a gentleman; but previous to this candid and eligible mode, he
vainly endeavored to get reinstated in his rank by the following weak
stratagem, -- the captain, with the aid of his associates, had the art and
address, to prevail on many well disposed officers in the second Maryland
brigade, and some few in the first, to join them in a petition for his
restoration, which, I believe, from pure motives of humanity, they were led
incautiously to sign, without adverting to the impropriety of the measure,
whilst he lay under such a stigma, which his Excellency rejected, referring him
to me, upon a presumption, as it may be supposed, that there was an impropriety
in reinstating, until he had first placed himself in the light of a gentleman,
by renouncing his errors, and acknowledging his faults. -- Previous to this, I
have understood an essay not less absurd was made by brigade petition, for his
release from arrest before he was tried.

Here the captain and his triumvirate must have been greatly chagrined, and
experienced the corroding anxiety of disappointed expectations; not to mention
their wa^ of sense in this instance, it is doubtful whether they have
discovered a greater sha^e of vanity, or want of just sentiments of honor, as
in the first instance they must have been vain and short sighted indeed to
expect either to have betrayed, or through their weight and influence blessed a
man of the commander in chief's discernment and integrity, into such a glaring
impropriety, even before the captain had reinstated himself in his, or their
good opinion, by any act of his, becoming a gentleman -- or in the latter
instance they must have lessened themselves, and los^ sight of that sense of
honor, which should ever actuate the officer, and restrain him from even
countenancing, much l^ss supporting or justifying another, who had forfeited
his name and rank as such by defamation, which when called on, he could not
justify, therefore must have been considered by them justly cashiered.

The commander in chief, and the public, must entertain a high opinion of this
masterly maneuver for the captain's restoration, and he will no doubt ever
retain the strongest impressions of the everlasting obligation he owes on this
occasion to his associates, who made so frank a sacrifice of their sentiments
of honor and good sense to save him, without reducing him to the disagreeable
necessity of acting like a gentleman, by retracting his assertions, and making
suitable acknowledgments, which ought alone to have reinstated him in their
good opinion; and before this, it might have been more consistent with their
reputation and sense of honor, to have withheld their petition, nor could this
have been any diminution to the captain's present character, but rather a mark
of spirit, and candor, two essentials in the composition of a man of honor.

This circumstance of the commander in chief's referring the captain to me, and
indeed -- impliedly requiring him to act like a gentleman, before he could be
restored to his rank, however mortifying, was yet thought eligible to save him
in the last resort, after every other effort and expedient had failed; -- and
it appears from doctor Dorse^, that the captain informed him this measure was
strongly recommended by the officers of the second brigade, except two; whether
those were his guardian angels, and interested in the event, or by what other
motives they were influenced, rests with the public to judge; however
humiliating this step was, the captain at length condescended to request doctor
Dorsey's m^^iation, whose amiable disposition pointed him out as a proper
person to pave the way to his concessions and restoration. The transactions and
occurrences thereon will be illucidated, and fully explained by the
underwritten certificates, attested under the hands of doctor Dorsey, colonels
Richardson, Gunby, captains Winder and Hawkins, who were privy to the
transactions respectively included in their attestations, which I would beg
leave to refer the reader to.

Whilst the Maryland division lay at Fish-Kill, at the request of captain
Norwood, I waited upon general Smallwood with the following note: SIR,
Shall be glad to see you in the morning at my sick quarters. Doctor Dorsey
will wait on you.

Your humble servant, EDW. NORWOOD.
October 12, 1778.
Hon. brig. genesis Smallwood.



At the same time informing the general, that captain Norwood appeared to be
sensible of the impropriety of his conduct, was anxious and desirous of
obtaining an interview, by which he would have an opportunity of making
necessary acknowledgments, and be reinstated; this measure, the captain
observed, was recommended by many officers in the second brigade, though he
believed colonel Hall and lieutenant colonel Smith were averse to it; the
general then told me he was glad the captain was undeceived, and as he was
sensible of his errors, and disposed to retract them, that he ever retained a
disposition to forgive, urging, that he never blamed captain Norwood so much as
others, by whom he believed he had been misled, and made an instrument to serve
their secret but low purposes, that he would have no objections to an
intereiew, and after suitable acknowledgments, he would use his endeavors to
restore him to his rank; upon this we parted -- The next morning I attended
upon the general, at the request of the captain, to solicit an interview that
morning, the troops being about to move to New-H^c^ensack, the general engaged,
desired I would wait till he got them on the march, when he should have leisure
to speak with me; accordingly the troops marching off, the general went into a
private room, calling upon colonels Richardson, Gunby, captains Winder,
Hawkins, and myself, and reading the above note, told me it would not justify
his seeing captain Norwood, as it did not express the intention of the
interview, the captain's motives, or desire of making acknowledgements,
informing me he would wait till I could ride to captain Norwood, and bring a
letter to this purport, if he chose to write; I immediately went, and returned
with the following note from captain Norwood:

SIR,
AS I have asserted things injurious to your character, from informations which
I am now sensible are false, desirous of making such concessions as one
gentleman would to another on similar cases, should esteem it a favor if you
will ride over to my quarters, as I am not in a situation to wait on you.

Your humble servant, EDWARD NORWOOD.

Hon. brig. genesis Smallwood.

Which the general observed would justify his waiting on captain Norwood, and
called on the above officers and myself to be privy to the interview; we all
went with the general to the captain's quarters, after the usual ceremony, the
captain told the general that he was desirous of settling the foolish and
unhappy dispute which had so long subsisted between them, the general replied,
that after proper concessions he was willing to forgive the injuries offered,
the captain said he was sorry for what had passed, and that he had been
deceived by false informations, the general asked him what could induce him to
be so scurrilous in his defense? The captain answered he w^^ influenced by
passion, he likewise asked him what he meant by saying he was an arbitrary
detainer of common property? The captain told him he alluded to a horse, the
general informed him he had accounted with the public for the horse, the
general then asked him if he had not been aided or assisted in writing the
defense? The captain assured him he had not, the general told him he must be
candid with him, that he could not believe it without he pawned his most sacred
honor, the captain hesitated, and I immediately lef^ the room, and was no
farther privy to the interview -- The next morning I waited upon the captain,
who instantly expressed a desire to know what had passed between him and the
general, declaring he had been delirious, and remembered nothing that had
passed, hoping he had said nothing inconsistent; I recapitulated what had
passed between him and the general, he swore he had rather lose five hundred
pounds than to have made the most trifling concession, that it never was his
thought or intention -- jocosely replied, your are certainly delirious now, and
were in your senses then.

Given under my hand, January 31, 1779. JOHN DORSEY.

On the 13th October, 1778, wc were (together with doctor Dorsey) present at an
interview between general Smallwood and captain Norwood, in consequence of a
no^ from the captain to the general, of that date, requesting he would ride to
the captain's quarters, as he was not in a situation to wait on the general; we
found the captain first in bed, and much reduced, but he appeared to be in
perfect possession of his mind and senses; after the usual ceremonies were
over, the captain told the general he had requested that interview in order to
settle the unhappy difference which had taken place between them, that he was
sensible he had, by false informations, been led to assert things injurious to
the general's character, and was desirous of making such concessions as one
gentleman would ^^ another in like cases. The general observed, that the
captain had done him great injury, not only in his first assertions, but also
by expressions in his defense before the court martial, and asked him what
influenced him to exhibit such a scurrilous defense, after his conversation
with major Muir? The captain said he was very angry at being kept so long in
arrest, the general observed it was not him but the operations of the campaign,
which delayed his trial, the captain said he was sensible he had been wrong,
and wished to settle it, that it might be forgot, as he was desirous of being
on friendly terms with all men, the general replied he was very willing to
settle it upon reputable terms, he then asked the captain what he meant by
inserting in his defense that the general was an arbitrary detainer of public
property? The captain answered, that he alluded only to a horse in the
general's possession, which he had understood belonged to the public, the
general observed that this was equally unjust with his other assertions, and as
ill founded, for that he had credited the public for the horse in his general
account, and had sufficiently cleared up that matter in Wilmington; the general
then asked the captain who assisted him in composing his defense? The captain
replied he wrote it himself, the general begged he would excuse him, he did not
mean to distress him, but was certain he must have had assistance, observing
that the language and diction was very different from that used in his other
writings, and told the captain he should, as a preliminary to a reconciliation,
require him, on his most sacred honor, to discover his accomplices, declaring
that he would not suffer him or them, or any set of men whatever, to sport with
his character or reputation; the captain paused -- then said it was scarce
worth while -- he could not say but there were some words not his own, the
general said that was one point he should, insist on, and that the captain
should renounce and retract his assertions, and the exceptionable parts of his
defense; the captain said he was now sensible he had been misinformed, and led
into a deception, and he was willing to retract his assertions, the general
said he would send him the terms in writing on which he would consent to a
reconciliation, and when the captain complied with them, he would use his
influence to have him restored to his command; the general then took leave of
the captain and returned to the troops.

W.RICHARDSON, Col. JOHN GUNBY, Col. LEV. WINDER, Capt. JOHN HAWKINS, Capt.


On my first trial at Chad's-Ford, for a breach of general Smallwood's orders,
in which I was found guilty, and sentenced by the court martial to be privately
reprimanded by the commanding officer of the regiment, which sentence, with the
proceedings of the court, was transmitted to general Washington, who
disapproved the sentence in the following terms; "The commander in chief
utterly disapproves the sentence, as altogether inadequate to the offense, the
mutinous and dangerous spirit which actuated captain Norwood, merited, in his
opinion, the most exemplary punishment." Which having irritated me, in the
warmth of passion I publicly declared, that I did not regard general
Washington's censure, because general Smallwood had misrepresented facts to
him, and being stimulated by the same degree of heat, publicly declared that
general Smallwood was guilty of partiality, and that he was not a gentleman,
and that I should make it my particular business, in all public companies where
I should happen, ^^ declare he was a partial man, and not a gentleman; which
assertions I have not been able to justify, and which, from the evidence
adduced in the course of the trial, I am sensible were utterly groundless and
void of foundation; and toward the close of the trial, after all the evidences
had been examined, I acknowledged to major Muir, that I found the general not
so much to blame as I thought he was, and that I had been deceived and
misinformed, a^^^ which, notwithstanding this candid declaration to the major,
I was led by the same intemperate heat, and the aid of some accomplices, to
exhibit to the court a defense fraught with illiberal reflections and
unjustifiable imputations, not included in the above assertions, particularly
charging him with premeditated rancour, malicious persecution, the most glaring
acts of partiality to particular corpse, and the most arbitrary and penurious
detainure of a common property, and other imputations contained in the said
defense, too tedious to enumerate here, all of which I found, and am now
conscious are equally groundless and void of foundation, and though they have
been maliciously asserted, yet I find I have been misinformed, and that these
imputations can in no one instance be supported or justified; and being now
truly sensible that I was actuated by passion, misled by party and unjust
informations, and strongly impressed with a just sense of the impropriety of my
conduct, and the injustice of such unmerited reflections cast out by me against
general Smallwood's conduct and character, and in justice to both, I now think
it a duty incumbent on me to declare, that the above assertions and reflections
contained in the said defense, are altogether unjust and void of foundation,
and do take this method publicly of acknowledging my error, renouncing and
retracting my assertions above recited, and the unjust, indelicate, and
illiberal aspersions contained in the said defense, tending to revile the
conduct and character of general Smallwood, and do beg his pardon, and to
render further justice to his character, do request that these acknowledgments
and concessions may be published in general orders, to remove any unfavourable
impressions, which the malignancy of such imputations may have excited. Given
under my hand, at the camp at Fish-Kill, this (...) day of (...) 1778.

In presence of (...)

I hereby certify, that the above are verbatim, and expressly the terms of
captain Norwood's recantation, which I saw general Smallwood deliver to captain
Hawkins, to be carried to captain Norwood.

Given under my hand this 31st day of January, 1779. FRANCIS MUIR.

The above certified by major Muir, are verbatim, and expressly the terms of
captain Norwood's recantation, which general Smallwood delivered me to carry to
him to sign, which I immediately went and showed him, and he read them over,
and said he would choose to keep them a day or two to consider on; I told him
the general gave me no instructions to leave them, but I said if he, did not
choose to sign them, I would take them back to the general, and inform him of
it, and if he would consent, I would ride out the next day and leave them with
him, or if not, I would give him an answer; and I then returned to the general
and let him know what had passed; he said he should have no objection to his
having them, was he left to his own judgment, but he imagined he wanted to
consult his associates, who would dissuade him from signing them, as they had
constantly misled him, adding, I might tell him, if he chose to come to camp,
he might peruse and consider them as long as he pleased, and if he found any
just objection, and would point it out, it should be altered, the general
urging he had nothing in view, but the just and necessary reserves to secure
his reputation, and in doing that, would wish to wound captain Norwood's
feelings as little as possible, which the next day I communicated to him, when
he told me, he did not remember any thing in them he could object to, and if
captain Winder and myself would bring them out next morning, he would give them
a reading, and determine whether he would sign them or not; I told him I was
not certain I could come out, but would acquaint captain Winder, and if I could
come I would. I then came to camp and acquainted captain Winder, who did not
determine to (...) whether he could go or not, I observing to him that I could
not go.

At both the above times captain Norwood appeared to be perfectly in his senses
-- before I waited on him the first time, the general told me he should he
believed insist on his giving up his accomplices, which I told the captain, who
said the general, he thought, had nothing to do with that, it was quite out of
the question. The second time I went, the general said nothing on this head:
the division remained after this at Fish-Kill about a fortnight, when it
crossed the North river upon the approach of the convention troops, in which
time I heard that captain Norwood was frequently in camp, but I was not farther
concerned in the transaction.

Given under my hand this 1st day of February, 1779. JOHN HAWKINS.

The captain affected to doctor Dorsey, and still affects to have been out of
his senses at the interview; but notwithstanding his capacity to save
appearances, and the repletion of low cunning and prevarication, which in every
other instance has marked his conduct, yet this barefaced subterfuge deserves
not even that appellation. The candid reader will judge for himself, and must
remark from the captain's letters, and the above certificates, a consistency
which by no means would indicate the delirium he affected -- Did he not rather
discover the effects of secret influence in the interval between the interview
and the doctor's visit? But he leaves us in doubt whether we ought to condemn
his judgment or admire his attachment, as in the first instance he has been
blind to a just sense of honor, and to every act of candor, or in the latter
has voluntarily sacrificed his reputation to screen his lurking coadjutors --
if the latter were his motives, the generous mind must pity his weakness, but
disdain the principles which must have actuated his supposed friends, who could
suffer him to make such a sacrifice, to screen them, after he had perhaps been
made the instrument of their secret purposes.

The captain now quits the army, and, as the de^^ier resort for his reputation,
carries home and publishes the following pompous certificate:

The officers of the 2d Maryland brigade do testify, that captain Norwood, who
is discharged the service by the sentence of a court martial, on a disagreement
with general Smallwood, during the campaigns in which he served with us, has
ever conducted himself in such a manner as to command our warmest friendship
and esteem as an officer of merit and a man of honor; and that notwithstanding
his dismission, is, and ought to be esteemed as a gentleman, and valued as a
warm friend and advocate for the liberties of his country.

Second regiment. Thomas Price, colonel; Lilburn Williams, captain; James
M'Calmont, surgeon; Hezekiah F^rd, ensign; Edward Edgerly, adjutant; John
Gassaway, lieutenant; Edward Dy^r, lieutenant, and B. Q. M Benjamin P^^ce
lieutenant; John Reac, ensign; James Ewing, lieutenant.

Four^h regim^nt. Josi^^ Carvil (...), colonel; Samuel Smit^, lieutenant
colonel; Jo^^ E^^^ward, major; Alexander L. ^mith, captain; Thomas L^nsdale,
captain; Joseph Burges, captain; Edward O^^cham, captain; James Smith,
l^eutenant; ^h^ S. Belt, lieutenant; Edward Spurrier, lieutenant; ^h^mas
Cr^mwell, lieutenant; A^^ ^oops, lieutenant; Stephen Shelmerdine, lieutenant;
John Hamilton, ensig^; Nathaniel Twining, ensign; Jehu Bowen, ensign; Parker H
Lee, ensign; John Hartshorn, adjutant; Richard Pin^ell, surgeon; William Riley,
lieutenant.

Sixth regiment. Otho H. Williams, colonel; Benjamin Ford, lieutenant colonel;
Andrew Hynes, captain; Henry Dobson, captain; James Bruff, lieutenant; Joshua
Miles, captain; Jacob Norris, lieutenant; Richard Donovan, adjutant; George
Jacobs, lieutenant; Benjamin Wright, lieutenant; Charles Beaven, lieutenant;
Thomas Parran, surgeon.

German regiment. Ludwick Weltner, lieutenant colonel; Daniel Buckhoses, major;
George Hubley, captain* Peter Boyer, captain; Charles Baltzell, captain;
Bernard Hubley, captain; Michael Boyer, captain-lieutenant; Martin Shugart,
lieutenant; Christian Myers, captain; James I. Armstrong, chaplain.

This certificate was said to be voluntary -- is might ^e ^o -- but my
partiality for most of the signers, induces one to believe, they did not advert
to the tendency, or use for which it was calculated. Let it suffice to remark,
that the simplicity and arrogance of the measure, equally expose the
subscribers, and strongly indicate their inadvertency, as well as absence, at
that period, in point of understanding, delicacy, and just sentiments of honor
-- Could these gentlemen or the captain himself suppose, that this important
certificate in his favor would supersede and contravene the impartial and
solemn decisions of a court martial and the commander in chief on his conduct
-- might not they, in the omnipotence of their power, and disposition for
securing the blasted reputation of their justly cashiered friend, have better
decreed, that the commander in chief and courts-martial had no exclusive right
of determining a point contrary to their sovereign opinions -- or might not
these gentlemen with equal propriety, in the plenitude of their omniscience,
establish an office to grant certificates or even dispensations, upon the same
exclusive principle, to unfortunate officers, who (notwithstanding their
inclination and opinion to the contrary) might have been deservedly broke for
dishonorable conduct.

How much more noble the conduct, and just the distinction, made pretty
generally by the field, captains and subaltern officers in the regiments of the
first brigade, particularly those present of the third, who, I have understood,
to a man, when the busy advocate presented the certificate, told him, with a
frank^ess becoming the candor and spirit of officers, they wished to sign any
thing in favor of captain Norwood, but could not do it consistent with their
honor, till he had first placed himself in the light of a gentleman, by making
concessions, and retracting his unjust assertions, which he had not been able
to justify when called upon. This distinction I am persuaded would have been
made by most of the signers, had they reflected, that offering such a
certificate to be signed, previous to this step, was an insult to their
understanding, repugnant to a just sense of honor, and at least a mark of
indelicacy, disrespect, and inattention to the opinions of the commander in
chief and court martial -- but in future this may to a lesson to the well
disposed of them, to be more consistent, by being properly guarded against
artifice and low cunning.

On the approach of the convention troops at Fish-Kill his Excellency general
Washington ordered the Maryland troops to cross the North river to Newburgh,
which they did, the first brigade on the 23d, and the second on the 24th of
November last, and upon the arrival of the first division of prisoners there,
on the morning of the 25th, the 2d brigade, under the baron de K^^, was to take
post at Smith's-Tavern at the entrance ^ Smith's-Clove; and the first brigade
under my command at Chester near Goshen, to cover the rout and escort ^ the
prisoners, to guard the passes over the mountains, ^ prevent their desertion,
or guard against a rescue, ordering us to remain for these purposes, until the
rear division ^ convention troops had passed Chester, and then proceed to
Middle-Brook. These orders were pointed, and did not admit the absence of
either of the commandants, particularly myself, who, while at that post, had
not a field officer in my brigade. The rear division of prisoners passed the
post at Chester on the 8th of December, and the first brigade marched on the
ninth in their rear, and arrived at Middle-Brook on the 20th, after crossing
the North river. During this interval I never heard of the captain (he was
supposed to be gone home) until my arrival at Middle-Brook -- here I was
informed he had been lately for some days at Elizabeth-Town (of which he gave
me no intimation) in company with colonel Hall and Mr. Benedict Hall the
colonel's brother.

On the 20th of December, the following note enclosing the captain's sealed
letter was sent to the quarters marked for me, before I had reached them, which
I received on the 21st.

Colonel Williams presents his compliments to general Smallwood, and encloses
him a letter which was directed to his care by captain Norwood at
Elizabeth-Town.

Sunday, 20th December, 1778.
General Smallwood.
Elizabeth-Town, December 3, 1778. SIR,
YOUR propositions as a condition of my being reinstated was adding insult to
injury, my resentment for your ill treatment did not require such a stimulus,
though my delaying it and writing you a letter, dictated in my ill and
enfeebled state by a misjudging friend, might lead you into that erroneous
opinion, both which errors sprung from the same grounds, for had not my illness
prevented, I should have demanded of you satisfaction for the injuries you had
done me as soon as the brigade petition in my favor was rejected by his
Excellency, which I conceived it was when I saw I was referred to your
generosity; which opinion I am persuaded any gentleman would be of, who should
see your conditions for reinstating me, conditions which would heap infamy on
assassins and pickpockets, by breaking that band of faith which men of honor
ought to hold dearer than their lives; it will be in vain for you to hope to
bury the infamy ot your propositions by destroying the paper, the principles of
them lives in my memory, and shall be faithfully reported; I have waited here
these ten days with the hopes of seeing you, but having just learnt that you
will be down in Maryland this winter, and being extremely anxious to get home,
I have delayed my satisfaction till you come to Baltimore when I have no doubt
you will do me that justice your injuries and insults entitles me to demand.

I am, EDW. NORWOOD.

Genesis Smallwood.
Here indeed the captain exhibits a singular degree of modesty, and must have
supposed me inspired with a spirit of divination; his modesty appears in this,
that although he came several days into our encampment at Fish-Kill, and by my
marque, where I resided, yet he never thought proper to give me the least
intimation of his designs, nor did he ever, until he wrote the above letter at
Elizabeth-Town, in which he takes this method of insinuating his faint and
unmeaning challenge, which he must have known I could not receive, nor does it
appear he intended I should, until he got into Maryland.

How he could wait ten days at Elizabeth-Town, in expectation of seeing me
there, without supposing me inspired, seems mysterious, for the plain matter of
fact is thus -- I was posted at Chester (for the purposes above recited) at
least sixty miles from Elizabeth-Town, which lay entirely out of our rout to
Middle-Brook, which post he must know I could not quit without a breach of the
orden of the commander in chief, until the rear division of the prisoners
passed, which he must have been sensible could not have happened in less than
six days after he wrote his letter at Elizabeth-Town.

I would remark, that the captain's effrontery and expectations of seeing me,
are equally absurd -- Why did he not make this demand at a time when I could
with propriety have gratified him, and must have made a point of doing it,
before he had forfeited his rank as an officer, and his character as a
gentleman? The public must judge of his Quixotism, and the propriety of my not
taking any farther notice of him. I am now at a theater, and in the line of my
duty, where opportunities of chivalry and achievement, much more consistent
with my honor, and conducive to the good of my country, frequently occur.

The captain's languid attempt to save appearances, equally exposes his
simplicity and arrogance -- he could not have thought me so far gone in
knight-errantry, to travel all the way to Maryland in quest of an adventure,
and to put myself on a level with a man, who had forfeited all pretensions to
be taken such notice of, by any man of honor, nor is it all the vain efforts
of his coadjutors, in obtaining brigade petitions, certificates, and collected
opinions in his favor, can avail to restore his character, or reinstate him in
the favor of his country -- and I shall hereafter be passive to all the
captain himself may say, upon a presumption his slanders can have no weight,
force, or effect.

Having now traced him through all his windings and doublings, and left him in
a labyrinth, I submit to the impartial public to decide on his conduct, and my
reputation, which I trust has ever been unblemished, and it ever has, and I
hope ever will be my first wish, to conduct myself in such a manner, as to
merit their approbation, therefore I have no apprehension that their good
opinion and confidence will be lessened by any secret machinations of the
captain, or his associates; and as he may still be under the influence of his
evil genius, I shall here leave him, wishing he may be enlightened with just
sentiments of honor, and restored again to his proper senses, which he has
affected to have lost.

W. SMALLWOOD.

FINIS.

