To the CITIZENS of PENNSYLVANIA.
IT is with great reluctance I venture to claim the attention of my fellow
citizens; nothing but necessity could urge me to it at any time; but more
particularly since it appeared probable that our enemies derived hope from
sowing divisions amongst the whigs of America. Under this idea, I have
patiently and silently seen my name held out to my country more than once, as
if I had pursued a line of conduct inconsistent with the general interest,
although I knew the insinuations to be perfectly groundless, and that it was in
my power to refute them. I expected that you, my fellow-citizens, would readily
discover the private reasons which produced these attacks, and, until that
moment should arrive, consoled myself in the consciousness of innocence and
integrity. But as the frequent insertion of my name in an unfavourable light
may at length make strong impressions on those who are not personally
acquainted with me, I mean to give a plain narrative of such facts as relate to
the charges or insinuations made against me, in as concise a manner as I am
capable of. The first that I remember was respecting the state of my accounts
with the continent, in answer to which I promised, in a former publication,
either a settlement, or a report of a committee on that subject. Soon after
this a very serious charge of a criminal nature was brought against me in
Congress. The matter was fully and minutely investigated, and I not only proved
my innocence to the perfect satisfaction of that respectable body, but even my
accuser himself, by examining into the transaction, discovered a most
incontestible proof of it, a proof that had escaped me and the committee who
had been appointed on that occasion: This he heartily introduced before that
honorable body, which, together with their unanimous vote of acquittal,
rendered my intended publication unnecessary. I then called on Congress, by
letter to the President, to appoint a committee for inspecting the state of my
accounts and transactions with the continent. This was readily complied with;
but as I was engaged in the General Assembly of this State, and the attention
of the committee appointed occupied by a variety of other objects, the matter
by mutual consent was deferred. Soon after this I received advice that goods
which had been detained in the West Indies for about two years would be
released, which has accordingly happened, and I am now receiving and delivering
the same to the continent as fast as they arrive. This circumstance gives me
the prospect of being able to make a final settlement of all my accounts, which
I consider as much preferable to any the most favorable report of a committee,
at the same time that it gives them unnecessary trouble. I shall therefore
content myself with wishing that every person connected with public business
had such accounts as mine to produce.

On the 25th of May last a Town Meeting was held in the State-House yard, and
in the printed account of the proceedings of that day I found my name the only
one mentioned as a delinquent, and a committee especially appointed to call on
me for an account of my connection with a cargoe then lately arrived in this
port. I was very unwell at the time, but the committee called on me in a day or
two, when I readily gave them every satisfaction in my power. They treated me
with complaisance, and appeared satisfied; indeed I have been told since, that
one of the gentlemen declared they were so. As they did not call on me again, I
wrote them a letter the 26th of June, when the complaint in my eyes began to
abate a little, intending then to send it: but on being told they still
intended calling, I withheld it until this time, and I here insert a copy, as
containing the state of that transaction.

Philadelphia, June 26, 1779. Gentlemen,
When you did me the honor to call on me about a month ago, agreeable to your
appointment by the Town-Meeting held in the State-House yard the 25th of May,
you found me afflicted with an inflammation in one of my eyes, that had for ten
days preceding rendered me almost incapable of business, and such has been my
situation from that time to this, or you should sooner have heard from me,
although I think it was intimated at parting, by Mr. Smith and Mr. Rittenhouse,
that I was to hear from you again in a few days. It may not be amiss to mention
that, after you had signified the business you came on, I observed that by a
publication in that day a paper of the transactions at the State-House yard, it
appeared I was to give my answers in writing, and therefore requested that your
questions might also be written. Mr. Matlack said, the committee, being
entirely ignorant of the transactions relating to the French polacre's cargoe,
wished me to give a general relation of the matter, to enable them to judge
whether it was necessary to propose any and what questions to me, or whether a
general relation of my knowledge on the subject might not be sufficient. I
replied, that I should cheerfully gratify the committee, having done nothing
that I was either afraid or ashamed to have known. Observing, that I considered
this amongst the number of those unmerited and groundless attacks which I had
been used to of late, and which I expected would, like the rest, end to my
honor, rather than disadvantage.

I then assured the committee, and now repeat it, that I never moved hand, foot
or tongue, to procure the cargoe in question, that I had not sought after it
myself, nor employed any other to do it for me. It was many days in this port
before I had the least idea of a connection with it, and when it did come into
my view, it was upon the application of other people to me. I suppose it is a
well known fact, that many persons wanted to get this cargoe, by purchase or
otherways, into their hands; more than one requested me to join them, being
particularly induced thereto from a knowledge that I could supply the ship with
the cargoe wanted for her return voyage. Amongst the rest a gentleman, settled
in a neighboring State, a countryman of the super-cargoes, happening to be
here at the time, had influence enough to obtain a preference of this much
sought for cargoe. This gentleman came and offered me a share in the purchase,
agreed to put it entirely under my management, and that I should draw a
commission on the sales, provided I would supply an outward cargoe for the
ship. These offers were generous, and fairly within the line of my business,
such as I presume no merchant of ability to perform the engagement would have
refused. But I insisted, that if a purchase was made, and I to be interested,
it should be on such terms as would admit me to sell reasonably, and leave the
concerned a moderate profit.

The gentleman desired the extent of my terms, which I gave, and as I thought
in such clear and explicit terms as did not admit of mistake. After some little
time a bargain was concluded, and reduced to writing the 3d of May. This
writing is in the French language, which I do not understand, but being told it
was nearly conformable to my terms, I consented to receive the cargoe. The
first thing I did was to send for those agents who purchase for the continent,
and offer them whatever was wanted for the army on such terms as they declared
very moderate. I gave them the invoice to pick out what they chose, and they
culled about one fourth the value of the whole, but entirely in articles the
most saleable of any in the ship. Before the whole of these goods were
delivered I had a translation of the agreement, and discovered that the parties
had not understood each other. I therefore stopped all further proceedings, and
got them together for explanation, when it clearly appeared that my intentions
had not been complied with, and that I had not understood the bargain in the
same light the consignees did, for I had sold to the public much cheaper than,
by their idea of the bargain, they had sold to the gentleman that contracted
with them. Upon full conviction of this, and that the misunderstanding was
owing to my want of French, and the other gentleman's bad English, they very
honorably agreed to render the bargain void.

After this Mess. La Caze and Mallet, the supercargoes, asked me to undertake
the sale of their cargoe as a factor, for it was not probable that they, who
were entire strangers in the country, could manage it properly themselves. I
told them, if they would ratify the sales I had made to the public, I would
accept their proposal, which they agreed to, and by this means the continent
had the public supplies out of this cargoe very considerably cheaper than could
have happened in any other way; for had the purchase first made been clearly
understood, the agents must have paid twenty prices higher, or if I had acted
from the first as a factor to the supercargoes, I must have sold, as I
afterward did, under their direction, and to their best advantage. My
agreement to become their factor is dated the 11th May, as you saw, for I
showed you the original of this, and a translation of the other agreement. I
believe the bargain was verbally made a day or two before, and from that time I
proceeded in the sales, in such a manner as I judged most likely to give my
employers that satisfaction they were entitled to. Their cargoe being bought
dear, the advance on the invoice has not been so high as on others, the
saleable articles were soon run off, whilst a great many, unsuited to this
season and this country, remain on hand* This last circumstance not suiting the
plans and hopes of the supercargoes, they made me new proposals, but it is
immaterial to the public whether I accept these or not, as an agreement, after
the bulk of the cargoe was sold, could not affect such sales, and what remains,
besides being unsaleable, will be as subject to regulation as any other
imported goods are. After giving you this just state of my connection with a
cargoe that has made so much noise, I think you will not hesitate to do justice
to my conduct, if it appears to you in the same light it does to every person
with whom I have conversed on the subject. And as Mr. Matlack intimated that it
might not be amiss to give the committee information of the original
proprietors of this cargoe, I shall send herewith Mess. LaCaze and Mallet's
declaration on that point, also their certificate that I have truly related my
connection with their cargoe.

I am, very respectfully, Gentlemen, Your most obedient humble servant, ROBERT
MORRIS.

To Timothy Matlack, David Rittenhouse, Jonathan B. Smith, Thomas Pain,
Charles W. Pe^le, Esquires.

Philadelphia, June 26, 1779.
We, the subscribers, having perused the annexed letter from Robert Morris, Esquire
to the committee, and had the same fully and clearly explained to us, do
certify and declare that he has justly and truly stated his transactions with
us respecting the cargoe of the polacre Victorious, as far as accords to our
knowledge or concern therein.

LACAZE and MALLET.


We, the subscribers, hereby declare and certify, that the polacre Victorious,
her cargoe, and generally all the goods on board of her, were shipped by, and
are the property of, our family and friends in Spain and France, and that no
persons in America have any concern, directly or indirectly, in them.

LACAZE and MALLET.
Philad. June 26, 1779.

This letter contains the state of that transaction, and I submit it to
consideration whether my conduct therein merited censure, or deserved to have
my name held out in the light it was. The next attack I omit to notice here a
piece which classes me with some other gentlemen as having influenced the
resentment of Col. White and Mr. Hooper against Mr. Sergeant, Attorney General
of this State, because I do not think the author of that piece seriously
believes any of us capable of such conduct. Besides that I suppose Col. White
and Mr. Hooper too independent of spirit to be so influenced; and I shall only
say, if that were not the case and I had any pretensions to influence them, I
never had any difference with Mr. Sergeant, nor the least desire to do him an
injury or ill office.
on me was made by republishing in Mr. Dunlap's Packet of the 3d of June, a
piece said to be taken from Rivington's paper, entitled, Memoir in answer to
the observations of M. de la Fere on the bills of Congress, etc. dated Edenton,
N. Carolina, Jan. 18, 1778, and for the satisfaction of my readers I will here
recite the paragraph in which I am mentioned. Few are convinced by the
assurances of Congress that paper is equal in value to gold, assertions that
reason and fact deny, and their own members do every thing in their power to
confute. Mr. Robert Morris in particular has dared to offer to a person of my
acquaintance, bills of exchange upon France at the rate of 13 sols and some
deniers for a Continental dollar. Who the author of this may be I know not;
still less his informant; but either the former has been guilty of gross
misrepresentation, or the latter of direct falsehood. In January 1778 I had no
bills to sell, nor offered any to sale. I paid two bills on France in March
1778 for the balance of an account at the rate of exchange that was current
when the money came into my hands, and rebought these bills in April or May
following at 400 per cent, which was then the highest course of exchange. The
person with whom I had this transaction now resides in Philadelphia, and ready
to prove the fact. Can it then be believed by any body that I should in
January, 1778, ask a dollar for thirteen sols and some deniers of France, which
is equal to an exchange of 1200 or 1300 per cet. If it be said the date is
misprinted, and that it should be January, 1779, I answer that I ceased to be a
Member of Congress in October, 1778. In January, 1779. I sold bills as a
factor, the highest exchange obtained was 900 per cent. and it never was my
practice to ask 300 or 400 per cent. more then the current price, though I
might perhaps produce examples in justification of such practices, from a
quarter not suspected.

If this writer meant to include me in the passage following that I have
quoted, he intended me equal injustice, for I never sold to the public any
goods but what I imported, nor purchased any produce of the country but for
exportation.

On the 17th June I was much surprised at the receipt of the following note:

Sir, You are requested to attend the Committee of Complaints at the Academy,
to morrow at ten o'clock, A. M. to answer a charge concerning flour.

WILLIAM HEYSHAM, Chairman. C. Com.
Philadelphia, June 17, 1779.
Mr. ROBERT MORRIS, present.

To which I returned an immediate answer as follows:

Philadelphia, June 17, 1779. "SIR,
"I HAVE just received your note requesting my attendance on the Committee at
ten o'clock, which I should very readily comply with, but am afflicted with an
inflammation in my eyes which has confined me for a month past; and although it
is mending I cannot yet bear the light of the sun. As I have not for a long
time past had any thing to do with flour on my own account, except in the
purchase of a few barrels for my family use, I suppose the complaint you
mention must have arisen from the purchases of that article made by me for the
use of the French sleet, and I now have a quantity in store for this service,
bought at the request and by order of his Most Christian Majesty's Agent, of
which I am ready to satisfy the Committee if they will be kind enough to
appoint one or more of their Members to call on me, or if that is not agreeable
I will at all events wait on them: But if that is required I would hope that it
might be after sunset.

I am, Sir, your obedient humble servant, ROBERT MORRIS. To Mr. WILLIAM.
HEYSHAM, Chairman of the Committee of Complaints.


The next day a letter from Mr. Alexander Boyd, secretary pro tempore of the
Committee of Complaints, was presented to me, of which the following is a copy:

Committee-Room, June 28th, 1779. SIR,
Your letter to Captain Heysham of yesterday's date was this morning laid
before the committee, who are sorry your indisposition confines you so long,
and will with satisfaction excuse your personal attendance: In consequence have
directed me to write you notice thereof; same time I am ordered to request you
will lay before this committee at ten o'clock tomorrow forenoon, or sooner if
convenient, the original instructions or agreements by virtue whereof you are
purchasing for his Most Christian Majesty's agent, an account of the quantities
so purchased and contracted for, and information by what conveyance and to what
places or stores said flour is collected, and from what places in the country
it has been and is now brought.

The Committee consider it their duty to communicate to you the information
which necessitates them to make this request, and doubt not but you will judge
it a sufficient reason for their conduct, viz. Alexander Wilson, of Earl
township, Lancaster county, reports, that you, through Matthias Slough of
Lancaster, give 22 l. 10 s. per hundred for flour there, and on oath declares
he delivered you ten barrels yesterday, which he received, by order of Matthias
Slough, at Whiteman's mill, Earl township, aforesaid; and further, that he saw
Mr. Slough agree with a man at Lancaster for a quantity of flour at the rate of
sixty dollars per hundred. The Committee perceive how this counteracts the
resolves of the late town meeting, more especially as these purchases are made
so nigh the city, and must enhance the price greatly in consequence of the
wagon hire, exclusive of a suspicion which prevails concerning Continental
teams being employed in that service.

Signed by order of the Committee, ALEXANDER BOYD, Secretary, pro tem.

To ROBERT MORRIS, Esquire, Philadelphia.

I then laid the whole before the Honorable Mr. Holker, who did not permit me
to make the communications required, and therefore I replied as follows:

Philadelphia, June 18th, 1779. GENTLEMEN,
I am honored with a letter from your Secretary pro tempore, Mr. Alexander
Boyd, excusing my personal attendance on the Committee, but requesting me to
lay before you at ten o'clock tomorrow forenoon or sooner if convenient, the
original instructions or agreements by virtue whereof I am purchasing for his
Most Christian Majesty's Agent; an account of the quantity so purchased and
contracted for, and information by what conveyance and to what places or stores
the said flour is collected, and from what places in the country it has been
brought. On the receipt of this letter I thought it my duty to communicate the
same to my employer, which I did immediately, with Captain Heysham's note of
yesterday and my answer. Mr. Holker, his Most Christian Majesty's Agent in this
business, does not think it proper for me to communicate the things you
require, and therefore I am under a necessity of referring you to him for such
further information as you may wish. For my part I am very willing as your
fellow citizen to give you, and through you, the public at large, every
satisfaction in my power, because I am desirous of retaining that good opinion
I know my conduct deserves; and upon this principle I venture to assure you,
the orders to Mr. Slough for purchasing flour were dated the 27th of January,
and confirmed the 17th of February last. He was applied to in preference to any
other person in that county, because he was already a purchaser for the
continent, which prevented any raising of prices by contention, as might have
happened had another agent been employed. He was limited not to exceed the
prices given by the continent, and desired either to hire public or private
teams as he found the transportation might be effected cheapest. All the
letters I have written to him on the subject since those dates, were only to
exhort him to a speedy and full execution of the order. No other purchase has
been made in this state except in this city under my immediate inspection,
conformable to verbal orders from my principal from day to day, and this before
the meeting in the State-house yard. The quantity on hand here is
inconsiderable, and I presume you do not wish to interfere in what is done in
the neighboring states. Before I close this letter I cannot omit mentioning
that four or five poor women with sacks under their arms came to me this
morning demanding supplies of flour, alleging they were directed to me by the
committee for that purpose, and informed by them that I had received two wagon
loads of flour from the country yesterday I confess this surprised me a good
deal at first, but on reflecting a little it seems highly improbable the
committee or any of the members could be capable of giving such directions,
because some of them had before been informed by my clerks that the flour under
my care belonged to his Most Christian Majesty, and my letter to Captain
Heysham yesterday confirmed it; consequently it must be known, I could not
deliver it to any person but by order of my employers; and I have too good an
opinion of your candor to think you would send those people where they must of
necessity meet a refusal, although that very refusal might raise prejudices
against me.

I am, very respectfully, Gentlemen, Your most obedient humble Servant, ROBERT
MORRIS.

To Mr. William Heysham, Chairman of the Committee of Complaints, Philadelphia.

After this I heard nothing more on the subject until the 2d instant, when I
received a letter of that date from Mr. W. Henry, as Chairman of the General
Committee, viz.

Philadelphia, July 2, 1779. SIR,
The enclosed is a resolution of this day, and is founded on evidence which
appears to be incontestible. We consider the interest of his Most Christian
Majesty, whose service you act in, as unnecessarily suffering, by giving
greater prices than there are occasion for, and in his behalf, as well as for
the purpose of appreciating our own currency, we can no longer be silent
spectators of practices which tend to the injury of both.

The Committee, from a point of politeness, have enclosed their resolve to you,
prior to its appearance in the papers, which will be tomorrow, and shall be
glad to confer with you on the subject at any time and place you may please to
appoint. An exact copy of this, with the resolve, is sent to Mr. Holker.

By Order of the Committee, WILLIAM HENRY, Chairman.

Robert Morris, Esquire.

In COMMITTEE, July 2, 1779.
Whereas a quantity of flour has been purchased by Jonathan Rumsord, junior, of
the State of Delaware, under the direction of Mr. Holker, Consul and Agent
General of the marine of France, and Mr. Robert Morris, merchant, of the city
of Philadelphia: And whereas the price given for the said flour exceeds the
regulated market price, and thereby tends to depreciate the currency of this
country, as well as to put our good allies to an unnecessary expense, both of
purchase and increased commissions:

And whereas it is our intention and determination to support the interest of
our allies, as well as the currency of our country, and to preserve the former
from imposition and the latter from depreciation, and in all cases to do as we
would be done by:

Therefore Resolved, That the aforesaid flour be detained under the care of the
committee, and that Mr. Holker and Mr. Morris be properly notified thereof, in
order that such measures may be taken as the case may require.

That the thanks of this Committee be given to the Committee of Wilmington, for
their information and assistance respecting the above, and that we hold
ourselves accountable to them for one hundred and eighty-two barrels received.

Signed, by Order of the Committee, WILLIAM HENRY, Chairman.


This letter and the resolution having positively condemned Mr. Holker and
myself, without hearing us, I could not think it proper to wait on the
Committee after judgment was pronounced, and therefore wrote Mr. Henry a note
in these words:

Philadelphia, July 2, 1779. SIR,
I have received your favor of this day, enclosing a resolution of the
Committee respecting the flour purchased in Wilmington by directions of the
Honorable Mr. Holker, and cannot help regretting that the Committee did not
think proper to propose a conference on the subject, before they went so far in
censuring the conduct of persons by no means opposed to those desirable
objects, "appreciating the continental currency, and lowering the prices of
commodities."

I should most cheerfully have waited on you, and given the information which I
think you ought to have been possessed of before such a resolve was passed. But
the reflections in your letter and that resolution being entirely undeserved, I
have no doubt of being able effectually to justify myself to the public. I
thank you and the Committee for communicating the intended publication, and
remain. Sir,

Your obedient humble Servant, ROBERT MORRIS.

To Mr. William Henry, Chairman of the Committee of Philadelphia.

It may be observed, that I tell the Committee I should most cheerfully have
waited on them, and given that information I thought they ought to have been
possessed of before such a resolve was passed. In this I meant only information
as to myself, and the part I had acted in the business; for Mr. Holker deems it
inconsistent with the dignity of his Royal Master to account for his conduct,
as Agent, to any authority not derived from his Majesty, except in such matters
as are connected with Congress, or the Government of a State. On conversing
with this gentleman on the proceedings of the Committee, he laid before me the
copy of his answer to Mr. Henry's letter to him, and has given me leave to
publish it. As it contains a full exculpation of my conduct, I shall do so. It
is in these words:

Philadelphia, July 2, 1779. SIR,
I only act in any of the United States of North America in my capacity of
Agent-General of the Royal Marine, under the authority and sanction of
Congress, I had therefore this morning the honor of informing them of the
transaction of the Committee of Wilmington, and of the arrival of the flour to
this city. I respect your motives, but as I am not a competent judge of the
means you employ to accomplish your wishes, I must refer you to Congress, to
whom alone his Majesty's Representatives or Agents can give any account of
their actions. Therefore I can only thank you for your politeness and attention
on this occasion. I observe with surprise that you have sent a copy of your
letter to Mr. Robert Morris, with one of the resolves of the Committee. This
must have given you unnecessary trouble, as I am alone accountable for the
purchase of this flour, he having only acted in consequence of my express
orders and directions. I am, Sir,

Your most obedient Servant, HOLKER.

To Mr. William Henry, Chairman, etc.

Had the Commitee thought proper to consult me before they passed those hasty
resolutions, in the preamble to which they not only imply a censure of us, as
depreciators of the continental money, but insinuate that it is done for the
sake of increasing the commission, I should have shown them that I had nothing
more to do in that particular affair than to receive and examine the invoices,
and pay for the flour agreeable to order. This being really the case, Mr.
Holker would have declared it under his hand then as readily as he has done
since, not being afraid to abide the consequences of his own conduct; and
surely under such information, the Committee would not have uttered these
censures against me. I would have gone farther, and informed them, that from
the first moment I agreed to assist Mr. Holker in the business of his agency,
my advice to him was to draw the supplies of provisions wanted for the fleet
from the Continental Commissaries, rather than purchase them himself, alleging
that flour was scarce, the price not only high but likely to rise; that if he,
under these circumstances, employed one set of purchasers, and the continent
another, competition would probably take place between them, the prices rise
rapidly, and the blame most likely be thrown on him or his Agents. This advice
was adopted; Congress were applied to, and orders procured for the Commissaries
to grant the necessary supplies. I would ask whether this advice savours of a
desire to increase commissions, or implies any practices such as the Committee
can be no longer silent spectators of.

Mr. Holker continued to depend on commissarial supplies until repeated
disappointments from almost every quarter made him exceedingly uneasy, and he
judged it absolutely necessary to make purchases himself. My advice was still
either to employ the Continental Purchasing Commissaries, or persons of such
character as might be depended on for prudent good management: This was agreed
to, and pursued in every instance, Congress, or the Committee of Congress for
the Commissary department, being privy to all the measures adopted: and we have
never heard the charge of raising prices until now. Mr. Holker is possessed of
ample materials to support his transactions whenever he should think it
necessary or proper to do so. The Committee seem to have considered their
regulated price of 20 l. per hundred for flour as having extended to
Wilmington, which is in another government; and it appears they must be right,
since the Committee of that place have agreed to act subordinately to them. Mr.
Rumford, who bought the flour, I suppose had not conceived it in that light, or
probably he would not have made the purchase.

In Mr. Henry's letter to me it is said, "We consider the interest of his Most
Christiain Majesty, whose service you act in, as unnecessarily suffering, by
giving greater prices than there are occasion for." Certainly the Committee
will perceive that they gave too hasty an assent to this paragraph, for they
surely will not pretend to determine how speedily the exigencies of public
affairs may have required the supply in question; and they cannot but recollect
that the regulation of the price of flour did in the first instance create a
scarcity, which induced an application from them to the Committee of Congress
for 100 barrels of flour to serve out to the citizens, as they could not get
supplied otherwise at the regulated price.

It seems to me that the insinuation conveyed by the words, increased
commission, ought not to have been hazarded against a merchant of reputation
without the fullest evidence, as coming from a public body, who will always be
more under the restraints of decorum than is perhaps incumbent on every
individual. I shall notice it, but with that decency of language and sentiment
which it is my duty to myself to make use of.

A merchant doubtless has it always in view to increase his commissions, but he
must know very little of business indeed, who thinks to do that by raising the
price of the commodities his employer deals in, for in this he certainly drives
him to employ another Factor or seek a cheaper market, so that he would
inevitably fall the victim of his own rapacity. Several gentlemen of the
Committee must know that I was many years in the receipt of much larger and
more extensive commissions for the purchase of produce than at present, and as
that business increased on my hands until the exports from this country were
stopped, it is evident that my employers were honestly and faithfully served.
Why then should it be supposed I would suddenly depart from my former practice
and principles, and sacrifice the interest of my employer for -- for what? For
the increase of my property by a trifling commission, which, gained on such
terms, would necessarily reduce the value of my whole fortune, a considerable
part of which is in Continental paper, and of consequence, however some men may
circulate for their own purposes that I am a depreciator of it, my own private
interest would of itself lead me, were I deficient in better motives, to exert
myself as I always have done to support and raise its value. I have called the
proceedings of the Committee on this subject hasty, they certainly were so, and
I am confident they will think their censures are undeserved when they have
heartily considered what I have said.

I am really at a loss to conceive why my name should, without sufficient
grounds, be so frequently mentioned in the public papers, and held in such an
odious point of view. It cannot arise from any doubts of my attachment to the
general cause of America, my exertions from the first promulgation of the stamp
act to this day do not leave room for a single suspicion, especially as those
exertions were greatest when our affairs were at the worst. It cannot justly
arise from any part of my conduct as a private citizen; for near twenty years I
was engaged in a very great (...) of business, and extended the commerce of
this port to places little known to you before my time. This increased the
demand for your produce, raised the value of your lands, encouraged your
industry, and rewarded your labors. I imported thousands of good settlers into
Pennsylvania, after that business had ruined almost all that went before me in
it.

With pleasure I can now look round me, and see amongst my fellow citizens some
whose fortunes I have made; many for whom I laid the foundation of their
present importance; hundreds whose circumstances I have bettered, and thousands
to whose maintenance I have contributed. Ask those that deal with me, whether I
am generous, open, and decisive in my dealing; ask the numerous tradesmen I
have employed and do employ, whether I pay them punctually and cheerfully; ask
that useful body of men who follow the sea, whether I have not been their
constant friend and benefactor, whenever it was in my power; and ask the honest
labourer whether I have ever squeezed a pittance from his hard service. It
gives me pain to mention these things. It is not from a disposition to boast my
own praises, but a sincere and honest desire of possessing so much of your
esteem as I know myself to deserve; and certainly the present committee ought
not to consider me as an enemy, for I have not only sold my goods agreeable to
their regulations, but have advised others to comply with them.

My mercantile character cannot have given just cause for the attacks made on
me, for I have constantly sold off my cargoes as they arrived; and to consider
me as a depreciator of the Continental Money, and at the same time as the
holder of very considerable sums of it, is too absurd to deserve refutation. --
However, I must add, that I have always paid too much respect to the credit of
the paper money for my own interest. For by making purchases of bills of
exchange, lands, etc. at prices that now would appear nothing, I might have
amassed no inconsiderable fortune. Instead of doing these things, I have freely
and liberally staked my property in the export and import trade with various
success, frequently meeting with so many and such heavy losses as would have
deterred a less resolute trader from continuing the pursuit. The instances of
my success I need not mention, for these are counted up by lookers on in a
ten-fold proportion.

This I know, that there are people who have made much more without risquing a
shilling, and by the few small land purchases I have made, I have learnt that
in that way alone I might have been a greater gainer, with infinitely less
trouble and without any risque.

My enemies at present seem pretty numerous, and they are such on improper
motives; for I declare that I am not conscious of having given any man just
cause for being so.

If the disgust of any part of my fellow citizens proceeds from my opposition
to the present constitution of Pennsylvania, surely when they come to consider,
that a freedom of opinion on such subjects is essential to a free government,
and that to act in conformity with our opinions where the object is public good
is the duty of a good man, they will pardon endeavors which were well meant,
even if founded in error, and in their own zeal on the one side, find a
reasonable apology for mine on the other. For I will not suppose they have been
actuated by private views, because I feel nothing in my own bosom to justify
the suspicion of others. My conduct in promoting measures for re-considering
the constitution was by those that opposed me acknowledged to be candid, open
and liberal; I never was guilty of personal abuse, nor had I any personalities
in view. I neither wanted or would accept any offer myself, nor had I any
connections to provide for.

My sole object was to obtain such a Constitution as would in my opinion answer
the ends of good government; and it was to me a matter of indifference what men
were in the seats of authority, if sufficient security were provided for the
liberty, life and property of individuals. I am very desirous of being only a
private man, and when I became otherwise, it was in obedience to a sentiment I
had adopted, that in times of distress it was the duty of a good citizen to act
in whatever station his country might call him to, and so far am I from
courting the continuance of public employment, that I shall with the greatest
pleasure resign that which I now hold to such worthier hands as you, my
fellow-citizens may appoint. While I was your servant it was my pride to serve
you faithfully, to serve you cheerfully; I have done so near four years, and
made as great sacrifices of private interest as any man among you. I made them
with alacrity. I had and still retain a proper sense of the honor of
sacrificing my property, my labor and my ease, to the voice of my country. In
your applause I shall at all times feel myself over-paid, and if I miss of that
reward, I shall console myself with an approving conscience; and I shall at all
times be ready to give my tribute of praise to those more fortunate men, who
with greater abilities or better opportunities may have rendered you more
essential or more agreeable services.

ROBERT MORRIS.
Philadelphia, July 7, 1779.
PHILADELPHIA: Printed by HALL and SELLERS.


