Mr. Stillman's ELECTION SERMON MAY 26, 1779.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE HONORABLE COUNCIL, AND THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS BAY, IN NEW ENGLAND, AT BOSTON,
May 26, 1779.

BEING THE ANNIVERSARY FOR THE ELECTION OF THE HONORABLE COUNCIL.

By SAMUEL STILLMAN, A. M.

Pastor of the First Baptist Church in BOSTON.

BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: Printed by T. and J. FLEET, in Cornhill, And J. GILL, in
Court-Street, MDCCLXXIX.

State of MASSACHUSETTS BAY, In the House of REPRESENTATIVES, May 26, 1779.
ON Motion, Ordered, That the Honorable General Warren, Mr. Thaxter and Mr.
Davis of Boston, be a Committee to return the Thanks of this House to the Rev.
Mr. Stillman, for his Sermon delivered this Day before the two Houses, and to
request a Copy of the same for the Press.

Extract from the Minutes, Samuel Freeman, Clerk.

AN ELECTION SERMON.
MATT. xxii. 21. -- Then says he unto them, Render therefore unto Caesar, the
things that are Caesar's: and unto God, the things that are Gods.
THE Pharisees, who, in appearance, were the strictest religious sect among the
Jews, observing the growing reputation of the Son of God, and finding that he
had eclipsed their glory, took counsel how they might entangle him in his talk.
A conduct this that is repugnant to every principle of genuine religion. But
those men who are determined upon their own aggrandizement, are seldom
scrupulous about the means of obtaining it. Hence these ambitious religionists
sent out to him their disciples, with the Herodians, men sit for their purpose,
saying, in the language of hypocrisy and insult, Master, we know that thou art
true, and teach the way of God in truth* neither carest thou for any man:
for thou regardest not the person of men Tell us therefore, what think thou?
Is it lawful to give tribute unto Caesar, or not?

THE Jews entertained an extreme aversion to the Gentiles, and could not be
brought to submit to a heathen magistrate but with great reluctance, and
through absolute necessity.

THESE Pharisees therefore, judging of our blessed Lord by their own sentiments
and feelings supposed that by this question, they should extort something from
him derogatory to Caesar's honor; or that would subject him to an impeachment
as an enemy to the Roman government. But he takes the wise in their own
craftiness -- Show me, said he the tribute money. And they brought him a penny.
And he says unto them, whose is this image and superscription? They say unto
him Caesar's. Then says he unto them. Render therefore unto Caesar, the things
that are Caesar's: and unto God* the things that are Gods. -- Upon their being
thus defeated in their infamous attempt, they marvelled, and went their way to
report to their masters their humiliating disappointment: for Christ had said
nothing in his reply to them, which Caesar himself would not approve.

IT is a matter of very little consequence to us on this occasion, which of the
Caesar's was on the throne at the time referred to in the text; because the
duties here inculcated are not affected by this circumstance. The people were
taught by Christ to render such obedience to Caesar, or to the civil
magistrate, as would be consistent with the natural and the civil rights of
men, and the obligations they were under to the eternal God. It is unreasonable
to suppose that he meant to inculcate any other subjection than this. Besides,
his address is properly guarded "Render therefore to Caesar, the things that
are Caesar's." That is, those things which he may lawfully claim. What these
were our Lord does not ascertain. Nor is it necessary that we should, as they
relate to Caesar and his subjects. I shall therefore proceed to apply this
sacred passage to ourselves in our present situation, by considering, I. WHAT
those duties are which the people owe to the civil magistrate. II. THE duties
of the magistrate to the people. And then, III. ENDEAVOR to draw the line
between the things that belong to Caesar, and those things that belong to God.


I. WE are first to enquire what those duties are which the people owe to the
civil magistrate?

I apprehend that this question implies another, which is previously necessary
to be determined, viz. How came the men whom we call magistrates, with any
power at all over the people? Were they born to govern? Have they an higher
original than other men? Or, do they claim the sovereignty jure divino?

THE time has been when the divine right of kings sounded from the pulpit and
the press; and when the sacred name of religion was brought in, to sanctify the
most horrid systems of despotism and cruelty. -- But blessed be God, we live in
a more happy era, in which the great principles of liberty are better
understood. With us it is a first and a fundamental principle, that God made
all men equal.

"NOTHING is more evident, says a great writer, than that creatures of the same
species and rank, promiscuously born to all the same advantages of nature, and
the use of the same faculties, should also be equal one amongst another without
subordination or subjection, unless the Lord and master of them all should, by
any manifest declaration of his will, set one above another, and confer on him,
by an evident and clear appointment, an undoubted right to dominion and
sovereignty." Lock.


UNTIL such a declaration of the divine will shall be produced, we ought firmly
to maintain the natural equality of all men.

AND as they are equal, so they are likewise in a state of entire freedom.
Whatever they possess is their own; to be disposed of solely agreeable to their
own will. None have a right to claim any part of their property, to disturb
them in their possessions, or to demand subjection in any degree whatever,
while they act consistent with the law of nature. He who attempts to do either,
is an usurper, puts himself into a state of war, and may be opposed as a common
highwayman.

IF we admit the truth of these principles, we come by an easy transition to
the foundation of civil society, viz. The consent of the people. For if all men
are equal by nature, it must depend entirely upon themselves, whether they will
continue in their natural condition, or exchange it for a state of civil
government. Consequently the sovereignty resides originally in the people.

As their leaving a state of nature for a state of civil society, is a matter
of their own choice, so they are equally free to adopt that form of government
which appears to them the most eligible, or the best calculated to promote the
happiness of themselves and of their posterity.

WHICH is the best form of civil government? is a question of the first
magnitude to any people; and particularly to us, who have lately considered
this weighty matter; and who expect, at some future period, finally to
determine it. -- May that God by whom all human events are controled, inspire
my fellow-citizens with that wisdom that shall be profitable to direct!

FROM the premises, the following is a natural conclusion -- That the authority
of the civil magistrate is, under God, derived from the people.

IN order therefore to determine with accuracy, what the powers of the civil
magistrate are, and also the duties that the people owe him, we must have
recourse to the constitution; by which, in all good governments, the authority
of the former, and the rights of the latter are determined with precision.

THAT it should be so, is a dictate of common sense. For upon a supposition of
the contrary, how shall rulers or subjects determine their respective
obligations?

FROM hence arises, in my view, the indispensable necessity of a BILL OF
RIGHTS, drawn up in the most explicit language, previously to the ratification
of a constitution of government; which should contain its fundamental
principles, and which no person in the state, however dignified, should dare to
violate but at his peril.

As we are at present without a fixed form of government, I shall treat the
subject rather according to my wishes, than the present state of things. For
the constitution ought at least to have a general existence in idea, before the
reciprocal duties of magistrates and people can be ascertained.

SOME of those principles which, I apprehend, may be called fundamental, have
been mentioned; to which I beg leave to subjoin,

THAT the great end for which men enter into a state of civil society, is their
own advantage.

That civil rulers, as they derive their authority from the people, so they are
accountable to them for the use they make of it --

That elections ought to be free and frequent --

That representation should be as equal as possible --

That as all men are equal by nature, so when they enter into a state of civil
government, they are entitled precisely to the same rights and privileges; or
to an equal degree of political happiness --

That some of the natural rights of mankind are unalienable, and subject to no
control but that of the Deity. Such are the SACRED RIGHTS of CONSCIENCE. Which
in a state of nature, and of civil society are exactly the same. They can
neither be parted with nor controled, by any human authority whatever.

Attempts of this kind have been repeatedly made by an ambitious clergy,
assisted by rulers of despotic principles. The consequence of which has been,
that crowds of the best members of society have been reduced to this dreadful
alternative, either to offend God and violate the dictates of their own minds,
or to die at a stake. --

That the right of trial by jury ought to be perpetual --

That no man's property can, of right, be taken from him without his consent,
given either in person, or by his representative --

That no laws are obligatory on the people, but those that have obtained a like
consent. Nor are such laws of any force, if, proceeding from a corrupt majority
of the legislature, they are incompatible with the fundamental principles of
the government, and tend to subvert it.

"ALL human things have an end, says a sensible writer, the state we are
speaking of (meaning Great Britain) will lose its liberty, will perish. Have
not Rome, Sparta and Carthage perished? It will perish when the legislative
power shall be more corrupt than the executive" Montesquieu.


LET us cast our eye to the land of our fathers, to the kingdom from whence we
descended, and we shall find that she now totters on the brink of a most
dangerous precipice. And that she has been brought into her present deplorable
situation by a venal majority.

SOME of that people foresaw their catastrophe approaching with hasty strides;
they petitioned and remonstrated. And several excellent things were published
in vindication of their constitution and their injured rights: but all was in
vain.

THE very men who were appointed the guardians and conservator, of the rights
of the people, have dismembered the Empire; and by repeated acts of injustice
and oppression, have forced from the bosom of their parent country, millions of
Americans, who might have been drawn by a hair, but were not to be driven by
all the thunder of Britain.

A few soft words would have fixed them in her interest, and have turned away
that wrath which her cruel conduct had inkindled. The sameness of religion, of
language and of manners, together with interest, that powerful motive, and a
recollection of that reciprocation of kind offices which had long prevailed,
would have held America in closest friendship with Great Britain, had she not
"governed too much."

IT can afford the inhabitants of that once happy country, no consolation in
their present threatening condition, that it has been brought on with all the
formality of law. Rather this circumstance adds to the calamity, seeing the men
who should have saved them, have betrayed them.

WHERE is now the boasted freedom of the British government? Bribery and
corruption, seem nearly to have accomplished the prediction of the great
Montesquieu. Nor is such an event to be wondered at, while we reflect on the
inequality In Great Britain, consisting of near six millions of inhabitants,
5723 persons, most of them of the lowest of the people, elect one half of the
House of Commons; and 364 votes choose a ninth part. This may be seen distinctly
made out in the Political Disquisitions, Vol. 1. Book 2. Chapter 4. -- Dr Price.
of their representation, and the base methods that are used in their elections
of members of the house of Commons, together with the length of time they are
suffered to continue in their places.

"IF they are chosen for a long term, by a part only of the state; and if
during that term they are subject to no control from their constituents; the
very idea of liberty will be lost, and the power of choosing in constituents
becomes nothing but a power lodged in a few, to choose, at certain periods, a
body of Masters for themselves and for the rest of the community. And if a
state is so sunk that the body of its representatives are elected by a handful
of the meanest persons in it, whose votes are always paid for; They who buy
their places will sell the people, for they mean to make something by the
bargain.
and if also there is a higher will on which even these mock representatives
themselves depend, and that directs their voices: In these circumstances, it
will be an abuse of language to say that the state possesses liberty." -- This
appears to be a just description of the present state of the country, from
which we descended.

SUCH an instance affords us many important lessons; and calls upon us to guard
as much as possible, in our beginning, against the corruption of human nature.
We should leave nothing to human virtue, that can be provided for by law or the
constitution. The more we trust in the hands of any man, the more we try his
virtue, which, at some fatal hour, may yield to a temptation; and the people
discover their error, when it is too late to prevent the mischief.

UPON the truth of the principles advanced, I observe, That the authority of
the magistrate is derived from the people by consent -- that it is limited and
subordinate -- and that so long as he exercises the power with which he is
vested, according to the original compact, the people owe him reverence,
obedience and support.

INSPIRATION teaches us to give honor to whom honor, fear to whom fear.

WHEN any men are taken from the common rank of citizens, and are entrusted
with the powers of government, they are by that act ennobled. Their election
implies their personal merit, and is a public declaration of it. For it is
taken for granted, that the people have been influenced in their choice by
worthiness of character, and not by family-connections, or other base motives.
They are therefore entitled to a certain degree of respect from their
constituents* who, while they pay them due reverence, will feel it reflected
upon themselves, because they bear their commission. Both interest and duty
oblige them to reverence the powers that be. It is their duty in consequence of
their own appointment. And their interest, because the good of the community
depends much upon it. For as far as any of the citizens unjustly depreciate the
merit of rulers, so far they lessen the energy of government, and put it out of
their power to promote the public good.

WITH reverence to the person of the magistrate, we connect obedience to his
authority: Such obedience as is compatible with the principles already laid
down. The term government implies this subordination, which is essential to its
very existence.

WHEN therefore any persons rise in opposition to such authority, they are
guilty of a most daring offense against the State; because* as far as it
prevails, it tends to destroy the social compact, and to introduce confusion
and every evil work. Consequently,

IT is the duty of the people to support the magistrate, in the due execution
of the laws, against such, and all other offenders. To choose men to office, and
not to support them in the execution of it, is too great an absurdity, one
would think, to find any abettors.

THERE is also a pecuniary support which the magistrate has a right to receive
from his constituents. It is most reasonable that those persons whose time and
abilities are devoted to the service of their country, should be amply provided
for while they are thus engaged. The compensation should be adequate to the
services they render the State. Let it be sufficient, but not redundant.

WHILE speaking of that support which the servants of government are entitled
to, I beg leave to mention those brave men of every rank, who compose our army.
They have stepped forth in the hour of danger, have exchanged domestic case and
happiness for the hardships of the camp, -- have repeatedly fought; and many of
them have bled in the cause of their country. Of their importance no man can be
ignorant.

WITH deference to this venerable assembly, I am constrained to observe. That
our first attention is due to them; because, under God, they have been, now
are, and we trust will be our defense. For them let us make the most ample
provision, and rest assured of their most vigorous exertions, to defend and
save their country.

BUT, it is time to pass to the

II. CONSIDERATION of the duties of the magistrate to the people.

As a free government is founded in compact, the parties concerned in it are
consequently laid under mutual obligations. These, it has been said, are
determined by the constitution. If so, it follows, that the rulers of the
people ought to make themselves thoroughly acquainted with it, together with
the different laws of the State. Therefore, the^ should be men of leisure and
abilities, whether they are called to act in a legislative, or executive
department.

IT is taken for granted, that the rulers of the people will not forget the
source of their power, nor the design of their appointment to office -- that
they have no authority but what they derived from the people; who, from a
confidence in them, that reflects great honor on them, have put it into their
hands, with this sole view, -- That they might thereby promote the good of the
community.

WHETHER this great end is accomplished by the exercise of the authority of
civil rulers, the people are to judge; with whom the powers of government
originate, and who must know the end for which they entrusted them in the hands
of any of their fellow-citizens. This right of judging of their conduct,
implies, that it lies with them either to censure or approve it.

THESE considerations are happily calculated to prevent the abuse of power,
which has already happened in repeated instances. And of which there ever will
be danger, while mankind remain in their present state of corruption.

A SPIRIT of ambition, which is natural to man, tends to tyranny; and an undue
attachment to personal interest, may issue in fraud; or in an accumulation of
offices, which in their own nature are incompatible with each other; and which
no man, let his abilities be what they may, can discharge with honor to
himself, and advantage to his country.

A FAITHFUL ruler will consider himself as a trustee of the public, and that he
is accountable both to God and to the people for his behavior in his office.
He will therefore be very careful not to involve himself in more public
business, than he can perform with fidelity.

IT would have a happy tendency to render the duty of the magistrate easy and
successful, were he to cultivate an intimate acquaintance, with the genius and
tempers of the people over whom he presides. By such an acquisition, if
prudent, he would be capable of pursuing a mode of conduct, that would not fail
of gaining him the affections and confidence of his subjects. The importance of
which is self-evident.

HE who rules over men, says David, must be just ruling in the fear of God. In
his exalted station, he should go before the people as an example of every
moral virtue; and as a hearty friend of that constitution of government which
he has sworn to protect. To the meanest of the people he should act the part
of a political father, by securing to them the full enjoyment of life, liberty
and property. To him they are to look that justice is not delayed, nor the laws
executed with partiality. But that all those who united in clothing him with
the authority of the magistrate, may uninterruptedly enjoy that equal liberty,
for the security of which they entered into a state of civil society. Thus will
he be as the light of the morning when the sun rises, even a morning without
clouds.

THERE are many things that belong to this part of the subject* Such as, That
the people have a right to expect that the honorable their rulers, will by all
lawful means in their power encourage agriculture and commerce -- endeavor to
suppress vice and immorality, Had this sentence been duly attended to at the
time the sermon was delivered, the following objection, which some of my
friends have made, viz. "That upon the principles contained in the sermon, the
civil magistrate ought not to exercise his authority to suppress acts of
immorality," I say, had what is said above been properly observed, this
objection had been superseded. Immoral actions properly come under the
cognizance of civil rulers, who are the guardians of the peace of society. But
then I beg leave to observe in the words of Bishop Warburton, "That the
magistrate punishes no bad actions, as (...) or offenses against God* but only
a^ cri^es injurious ^o, or having a malignant influence on society." In this
view of the matter he keeps within the line of his own department.
-- lend all necessary assistance to our schools and college; it being a matter
of high political importance, that knowledge should be diffused through the
State, amongst all ranks of men. The propagation of literature is connected
with the security of freedom. Ignorance in politics as well as in religion, is
fatal in its tendency.

THESE subjects have been often considered with great ability and address, on
these anniversaries. Therefore I forbear to enlarge on them, and reserve the
remainder of my time for the consideration of a point of peculiar delicacy, and
of the greatest importance to the happiness of my country, viz.

III. To attempt to draw the line between the things that belong to Caesar, and
those things that belong to God.

To this enquiry I am naturally led by the text. Render therefore to Caesar the
things that are Caesar's: and unto God the things that are God's. It is most
evident in this passage, that there are some things which Caesar, or the
magistrate, cannot of right demand, nor the people yield. The address has it is
limits. To determine what these are, was never more necessary to the people of
these UNITED STATES, than it is at present. We are engaged in a most important
contest; not for POWER, but FREEDOM. We mean not to change our masters, but to
secure to ourselves, and to generations yet unborn, the perpetual enjoyment of
civil and religious liberty, in their fullest extent.

IT becomes us therefore to settle this most weighty matter in our different
forms of government, in such a manner, that no occasion may be left in future,
for the violation of the all-important rights of conscience.

-- I esteem it, says the justly celebrated Mr. Lock, above all things,
necessary to distinguish exactly the business of civil government from that of
religion, and to settle the just bounds that lie between the one and the other.
If this be not done, there can be no end put to the controversies that will be
always arising between those that have, or at least pretend to have, on the one
side, a concernment for the interest of men's souls, and on the other side, a
care of the common wealth.

THE common wealth seems to me to be a society of men constituted only for the
procuring, preserving, and advancing their own civil interests.

CIVIL interests I call life, liberty and health -- and the possession of
outward things, such as money, lands, houses, furniture, and the like. --

NOW that the whole jurisdiction of the magistrate reaches only to these civil
concernments, and that all civil power, right and dominion, is bounded and
confined to the only care of promoting these things; and that it neither can
nor ought in any manner to be extended to the salvation of souls, these
following considerations seem to me abundantly to demonstrate,

FIRST, Because the care of souls is not committed to the civil magistrate any
more than to other men. It is not committed to him, I say, by God; because it
appears not that God has ever given any such authority to one man over another,
as to compel any one to his religion. Nor can any such power be vested in the
magistrate by the consent of the people; because no man can so far abandon the
care of his own salvation, as blindly to leave it to the choice of any other,
whether prince or subject, to prescribe to him what faith or worship he shall
embrace. For no man can, if he would, conform his faith to the dictates of
another. All the life and power of true religion consists in the inward and
full persuasion of the mind; and faith is not faith without believing. --

IN the second place, The care of souls cannot belong to the civil magistrate,
because his power consists only in outward force; but true and saving religion
consists in the inward persuasion of the mind, without which nothing can be
acceptable to God. And such is the nature of the understanding, that it cannot
be compelled to any thing by outward force. --

IN the third place, The care of the salvation of men's souls cannot belong to
the civil magistrate; because, though the rigor of laws and the force of
penalties were capable to convince and change men's minds, yet would not that
help at all to the salvation of their souls. For, there being but one truth,
one way to Heaven; what hope is there that more men would be led into it, if
they had no other rule to follow but the religion of the court, and were put
under the necessity to quit the light of their own reason, to oppose the
dictates of their own consciences, and blindly resign up themselves to the will
of their governors, and to the religion which either ignorance, ambition or
superstition had chanced to establish in the countries where they were born? In
the variety and contradiction of opinions in religion, wherein the princes of
the world are as much divided as in their secular interests, the narrow way
would be much straitened; one country alone would be in the right, and all the
rest of the world put under an obligation of following their princes in the
ways that lead to destruction: And what heightens the absurdity, and very ill
suits the notion of a Deity, men would owe their eternal happiness or misery to
the places of their nativity.

THESE considerations, to omit many others that might have been urged to the
same purpose, seem to me sufficient to conclude that all the power of civil
government relates only to men's civil interests, is confined to the care of
the things of this world, and has nothing to do with the world to come. Locks
on Toleration, p. 35, 36, 37.


THESE sentiments, I humbly conceive, do honor to their author, and discover a
true greatness and liberality of mind; and are calculated properly to limit the
power of civil rulers, and to secure to every man the inestimable right of
private judgment.

THEY are also perfectly agreeable to a fundamental principle of government,
which we universally admit. We say, That the power of the civil magistrate is
derived from the people. If so, it follows that he can neither have more, nor
any other kind of power than they had to give.

THE power which the people commit into the hands of the magistrate, is wholly
confined to the things of this world. Other power than this they have not. They
have not the least authority over the consciences of one another, nor over
their own consciences so as to alienate them, or subject them to the control
of the civil magistrate in matters of religion, in which every man is
personally interested; and concerning which every man ought to be fully
persuaded in his own mind, and to follow it is dictates at all hazards, because
he is to account for himself at the judgment seat of Christ.

SEEING then that the people have no power that they can commit into the hands
of the magistrate, but that which relates to the good of civil society, it
follows that the magistrate can have no other, because he derives his authority
from the people. Such as the power of the people is, such must be the power of
the magistrate.

To these observations I beg leave to add, that the kingdom of Christ is not of
this world. By his kingdom we mean his church, which is altogether spiritual.
Its origin, government and preservation are entirely of him, who has upon his
vesture and upon his thigh written, KING OF KINGS, AND LORD OF LORDS.

THE doctrines that we are to believe, the duties that we are to perform, the
officers who are to serve in this kingdom, and the laws by which all its
subjects are to be governed, we become acquainted with by the oracles of God,
which are the christians infallible directory: To which he is bound to yield
obedience, at the risque of his reputation and life.

THEY who enter into this kingdom do it voluntarily, with a design of promoting
their spiritual interests. Civil affairs they resign to the care of the
magistrate, but the salvation of their souls they seek in the kingdom of Christ.

THIS kingdom does not in any respects interfere with civil government; rather
tends to promote its peace and happiness, because its subjects are taught to
obey magistracy, and to lead peaceable and quiet lives in all godliness and
honesty.

THE subjects of the kingdom of Christ, claim no exemption from the just
authority of the magistrate, by virtue of their relation to it. Rather they
yield a ready and cheerful obedience, not only for wrath, but also for
conscience sake. And should any of them violate the laws of the state, they are
to be punished as other men.

THEY exercise no secular power, they inflict no temporal penalties upon the
persons of one another. All their punishments are spiritual. Their weapons are
not carnal, but mighty through God. They use no other force than that of reason
and argument to reclaim delinquents; nor are such persons to be punished for
continuing incorrigible, in any other way than by rebuke, or exclusion.

THEY pretend not to exercise their spiritual authority over any persons, who
have not joined themselves to them of their own accord. What have I to do, says
Paul, to judge them also who are without? do ye not judge them who are within?

THE subjects of this kingdom are bound by no laws in matters of religion, but
such as they receive from Christ, who is the only lawgiver and head of his
church. All human laws in this respect are inadmissible, as being unnecessary,
and as implying a gross reflection on our Lord Jesus Christ, as though he was
either unable, or unwilling to provide for his own interest in the world. Nor
will he stand by an idle spectator, of the many encroachments that have been
made on his sacred prerogative, by the powers of the world.

SHOULD the most dignified civil ruler become a member of his church, or a
subject of his spiritual kingdom, he cannot carry the least degree of his civil
power into it. In the church he is as any other member of it, entitled to the
same spiritual privileges, and bound by the same laws. The authority he has
derived from the state, can by no means be extended to the kingdom of Christ,
because Christ is the only source of that power, that is to be exercised in it.

IT may be said, That religion is of importance to the good of civil society,
therefore the magistrate ought to encourage it under this idea.

IT is readily acknowledged, that the intrinsic excellence and beneficial
effects of true religion are such, that every man who is favored with the
christian revelation, ought to befriend it. It has the promise of the life that
now is, and of that which is to come. And there are many ways in which the
civil magistrate may encourage religion, in a perfect agreement with the nature
of the kingdom of Christ, and the rights of conscience.

As a man he is personally interested in it. His everlasting salvation is at
stake. Therefore he should search the scriptures for himself, and follow them
wherever they lead him. This right he has in common with every other citizen.

As the head of a family he should act as a priest in his own house, by
endeavoring to bring up his children in the nurture, and admonition of the Lord.

As a magistrate he should be as a nursing father to the church of Christ, by
protecting all the peaceable members of it from injury on account of religion;
and by securing to them the uninterrupted enjoyment of equal religious liberty.
The authority by which he acts he derives alike from all the people.
consequently he should exercise that authority equally for the benefit of all,
without any respect to their different religious principles. They have an
undoubted right to demand it.

UNION in the state is of absolute necessity to its happiness. This the
magistrate will study to promote. And this he may reasonably expect upon the
plan proposed, of a just and equal treatment of all the citizens.

FOR though christians may contend amongst themselves about their religious
differences, they will all unite to promote the good of the community, because
it is their interest, so long as they all enjoy the blessings of a free, and
equal administration of government.

ON the other hand, if the magistrate destroys the equality of the subjects of
the state on account of religion, he violates a fundamental principle of a free
government, establishes separate interests in it, and lays a foundation for
disaffection to rulers, and endless quarrels among the people.

HAPPY are the inhabitants of that common wealth, in which every man sits under
his vine and fig tree, having none to make him afraid. -- In which all are
protected, but none established!

PERMIT me on this occasion to introduce the words of the Rev. Dr. Chauncy,
whose age and experience add weight to his sentiments. "We are, says this
gentleman, in principle against all civil establishments in religion. -- We
desire not, and suppose we have no right do desire, the interposition of the
state to establish our sentiments in religion, or the manner in which we would
express them -- It does not indeed appear to us, that God has entrusted the
state with a right to make religious establishments." And after observing, that
if one state has this right, all states have the same right, he adds, "And as
they must severally be supposed to exert this authority in establishments
conformable to their own sentiments in religion; what can the consequence be,
but infinite damage to the cause of God and true religion? And such in fact has
been the consequence of these establishments in all ages, and in all places.
What absurdities in sentiment, and ridiculous follies, not to say gross
immoralities, in practice, have not been established by the civil power in some
or other of the nations of the world? Appeal to the public answered, p. 152,
153.


To which I take the liberty to add the following passage of a very ingenious
author. Free inquiry into the nature and origin of evil.
"The moment any religion becomes national, or established, its purity must
certainly be lost, because it is impossible to keep it unconnected with men's
interests; and if connected, it must inevitably be perverted by them. -- Again,
That very order of men, who are maintained to support its interests, will
sacrifice them to their own. -- By degrees knaves will join them, fools believe
them, and cowards be afraid of them; and having gained so considerable a part
of the world to their interests, they will erect an independent dominion among
themselves, dangerous to the liberties of mankind; and representing all those
who oppose their tyranny, as God's enemies, teach it to be meritorious in his
sight to persecute them in this world, and damn them in another. Hence must
arise Hirearchies, Inquisitions and Popery; for popery is but the consummation
of that tyranny which every religious system in the hands of men is in
perpetual pursuit of."

IT is well known to this respectable assembly, that christianity flourished
remarkably for the space of three hundred years after the ascension of Christ,
amidst the hottest and most bloody persecutions, and when the powers of the
world were against it; and began to decline immediately upon its being made a
legal establishment by Constantine, the first christian emperor. Who heaped
upon it his ill-judged favors, and introduced a train of evils which he had not
designed.

THE preachers of this divine religion were no sooner taken into the favor of
the prince, and their sentiments established by law, than they began to quarrel
who should be the greatest; and anathematized one another. -- Every man who has
read the history of the four first general councils, is fully satisfied of the
truth of these remarks.

SEEING then, christianity made its way in the beginning, when the powers of
the world were against it, let us cheerfully leave it to the force of its own
evidence, and to the care of its adorable author; while we strictly attend to
all those means, which he has instituted for the propagation of it. The
ministers of Christ are particularly called upon to preach the word, to be
instant in season, out of season; to teach the people publicly, and from house
to house; always encouraging themselves with that gracious promise, Lo, I am
with you always, even unto the end of the world.

UPON the whole, I think it is a plain, as well as a very important truth, that
the church of Christ and a commonwealth are essentially different. The one is
a religious society, of which Christ is the sole head, and which he gathers out
of the world, in common, by the dispensation of his gospel, governs by his laws
in all matters of religion, a complete code of which we have in the sacred
scriptures; and preserves it by his power.

THE other is a civil society, originating with the people, and designed to
promote their temporal interests. Which is governed by men, whose authority is
derived from their fellow-citizens, and confined to the affairs of this world.

IN this view of the matter, the line appears to me to be fairly drawn, between
the things that belong to Caesar, and the things that belong to God. The
magistrate is to govern the state, and Christ is to govern the church. The
former will find business enough in the complex affairs of government, to
employ all his time and abilities. The latter is infinitely sufficient to
manage his own kingdom without foreign aid.

THUS have I considered the important principles of civil and religious
liberty, according to that ability which God has given; and with a freedom
that becomes a citizen, when called upon, at a most critical period, to address
the Rulers of a free people: whose patriotic minds, it is taken for granted,
would at once despise the language of adulation.

IN order to complete a system of government, and to be consistent with
ourselves, it appears to me that we ought to banish from among us that cruel
practice, which has long prevailed, of reducing to a state of slavery for life,
the freeborn Africans. Congress early in the controversy with Great Britain,
protested against the Slave Trade in the following resolve:

Secondly. We will neither import nor purchase any slaves imported after the
first day of December next; after which time we will wholly discontinue the
slave trade; and will neither be concerned in it ourselves, nor will we hire
our vessels, nor sell our commodities or manufactures to those who are
concerned in it.




THE Deity has bestowed upon them and us the same natural rights as men; and
has assigned to them a part of the globe for their residence. But mankind,
urged by those passions which debase the human mind, have pursued them to their
native country; and by someting wars among them, that they might secure the
prisoners, or employing villains to decoy the unwary, have filled their ships
with the unfortunate captives; dragged them from their tenderest connections,
and transported them to different parts of the earth, to be hewers of wood, and
drawers of water, till death shall end their painful captivity.

To reconcile this nefarious traffic with reason, humanity, religion, or the
principles of a free government, in my view, requires an uncommon address.

SHOULD we make the case our own, and act agreeable to that excellent rule of
our blessed Lord, whatever ye would that men should do to you, do ye to them
likewise, the abolition of this disgraceful practice would take place.

NOR can I conceive that we shall act a consistent part, till we brand this
species of tyranny with perpetual infamy. Shall we hold the sword in one hand
to defend our just rights as men; and grasp chains with the other to enslave
the inhabitants of Africa? -- Forbid it heaven! -- Forbid it all the freeborn
sons of this western world! --

MAY the year of jubilee soon arrive, when Africa shall cast the look of
gratitude to these happy regions, for the TOTAL EMANCIPATION of HER SONS! --

THIS matter, among others, deserves the serious attention of our Honorable
Rulers, in whom their fellow-citizens have reposed uncommon confidence, which
is apparent in calling them forth to public service at such a difficult period
as this; which undoubtedly calls for the united exertions of the greatest
abilities.

THE voice of the people is, as mentioned before, and the importance of the
matter justifies the repetition of it; I say, the voice of the people is, that
government should pay their first attention to the war. If America is
respectable in the field, the greater will be the prospect of success in arms,
and of an honorable peace.

LET us not amuse ourselves with a prospect of peace, and in consequence
thereof abate in our preparations for the war. If we should, it may prove
greatly injurious to the freedom and glory of this RISING EMPIRE.

BUT it is not for me to attempt to specify the weighty affairs, which, during
the course of the present year, and particularly of the present session, are
likely to come before the Honorable Gentlemen, who have this day called us to
the place of public worship. God grant unto them that wisdom that is from above!

WHILE transacting public business, may they remember, that Jehovah stands in
the congregation of the mighty; and judges among the gods. Under the influence
of this solemn consideration, may the elections of this day be conducted. This
being the case, every elector, before he gives his vote for any person to sit
in Council, will take pains to satisfy himself, whether he possesses the
qualifications that are necessary for so exalted a station. Such as wisdom,
virtue, firmness and an unfeigned love of his country. Tried friends deserve
the preference: An experience of whose capacity and fidelity in times past,
recommends them as worthy of present confidence.

To the direction of unerring wisdom we commit both branches of the Honorable
Court; heartily wishing that they may conduct themselves in every respect, as
those who are to be accountable to God the judge of all. Thus will they enjoy
the testimony of conscience, and may expect to be accepted of the multitude of
their brethren.

IN fine. Seeing the body of christians, however divided into sects and
parties, "are entitled precisely to the same rights," it becomes them to rest
contented with that equal condition, nor to wish for pre-eminence. Rather they
should rejoice to see all men as free, and as happy as themselves.

THEY should study to imbibe more of the spirit of their divine Master, to love
as brethren, and to preserve the unity of the spirit in the bonds of peace. In
the present state of ignorance and prejudice they cannot expect to see eye to
eye. There will be a variety of opinions and modes of worship among the
disciples of the same Lord; men equally honest, pious, and sensible, while they
remain in this world of imperfection. Let them therefore be faithful to their
respective principles, and kind, and forbearing toward one another. Their
chief study should be to advance the cause of morality and religion in the
world; and by their good works to glorify their Father who is in heaven.

THEY are to be subject to the civil magistrate, not only for wrath, but also
for conscience sake; and to pray for all who are in authority, that under them
they may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and honesty. For this
is good and acceptable in the sight of God. To whom be glory for ever.


