Historical Remarks, with moral Reflections.

A SERMON, Preached at PROVIDENCE, June 6, 1779.

WHEREIN ARE REPRESENTED, The remarkable Dispensations of DIVINE PROVIDENCE to
the People of these STATES, particularly in the Rise and Progress of the
present WAR, between the CONFEDERATE STATES OF AMERICA, and GREAT BRITAIN.

BY DAVID S. ROWLAND, A. M.

Published at the Desire of many that heard it.

PROVIDENCE: Printed and Sold by JOHN CARTER, at Shakespeare's Head, near the
State-House.

HISTORICAL REMARKS, etc.
PSALM cxxiv. 2, 3, 6. If it had not been the Lord who was on our Side, when
Men rose up against us; then they had swallowed us up quick, when their Wrath
was kindled against us. -- Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us as a Prey
to their Teeth.
IT is a business entertaining and useful, to recount the dealings and
dispensations of divine providence toward a people. Such an employ has a
tendency to raise our wonder and admiration, and excite our gratitude. To be
insensible of and unaffected with divine dispensations, is an evidence of the
baseness and wretched depravity of human nature. Mercies and afflictions
oftentimes produce the most valuable purposes. God draws his people with cords
of a man, with bands of love, Hos. xi. 4. tho divine beneficenes having such an
effect upon creatures capable of love, and susceptible of gratitude, that the
prophet calls them cords of a man. Adverse and afflictive providence answer
various important ends and purposes. The pious Psalmist says, before I was
afflicted I went astray; but now have I kept thy word, Psalm. cxix. 67. They are
of use to alarm the secure, -- to humble the proud, -- to reclaim the
wandering, -- to heighten the worth of mercies, and excite the gratitude of
those for whom providence has wrought salvation.

Thus we find good men in all ages have, after manifest signal deliverances,
made their returns of thanksgiving and praise. Israel did thus after their
wonderful and miraculous deliverance from the cruel hand of the Egyptians: when
they saw that great work which the Lord did upon Egypt, they feared the Lord,
and believed the Lord, and his servant Moses. Then Moses and the children of
Israel song a song unto the Lord, as in the 15th of Exodus This was an argument
Moses often made use of to excite the obedience and gratitude of the people of
Israel. Samuel, that he might effect the same design, gives Israel a brief
retrospect of the great things God had done for their fathers, especially in
their deliverance from Egypt, with a mighty hand and an outstretched arm, and
planting them in a land flowing with milk and honey, the glory of all lands.
And afterward, when they fold (...) into the hands of their enemies, he raised
up for them deliverers, whereby they were rescued out of the hand of their
enemies on every side: -- To sum up the matter, he tells them to fear the Lord,
and to serve him in truth, with all the heart, and to consider the great things
G^^ had done for them, 1 Samuel xii. 6. David reminds them of former kindnesses,
to awaken their gratitude and engage their obedience. We have heard with our
ears, O God, our fathers have told, what work thou did in their days, in
times of old, Psalm. xliv. nor is he less mindful of the fresher instances of
the divine goodness: -- O! that men would praise the Lord, for his goodness
endures for ever.

The psalm, in which the words of our text is contained, celebrates the divine
goodness to the church. It is supposed to be composed by David, in the name and
for the use of the church and people of Israel, as a thanksgiving for their
deliverance from some imminent danger or dangers, from proud and powerful
enemies. Many such they had in David's time, but which of them are here
intended, is hard to determine, nor is it necessary for us to enquire.

The words of our text suppose the people of Israel involved in some very great
distresses, which were occasioned by some very powerful enemy, who had
threatened and attempted their ruin and overthrow, and from whose malicious
designs they were not sufficient to deliver themselves. Their wrath was cruel,
and their fury burned with irresistible vengeance, so that they must have been
swallowed up by them, had not the Lord of hosts, the God of the armies of
Israel, appeared to vindicate their righteous cause, and save them from
threatened ruin. They were sensible of their weak and defenseless condition,
that their deliverance was not of themselves, their own arm did not save them,
but the right hand and mighty arm of God; -- therefore they say, had not the
Lord been on their side, they had been swallowed up quick. They return a
tribute of praise to him who rides in the heavens for their help, whose
excellency is in the skies; blessed be the name of the Lord.

The words may, without any force or strain, be applied to the state and
circumstances of the people of this land. Our distresses have been great, but
our deliverances have surpassed them. With the Psalmist, speaking in the name
of Israel, we may say, many times turned he his anger, and did not stir up all
his wrath, Psalm. 1xx viii. 38. And with Nehemiah, ix. 28, many times did thou
deliver them, because of thy mercies. For his name sake he has deferred his
anger, and for his promise has he refrained for us, that he has not cut us
off, Isa. xIviii. 9. He has done great things for his people, for which they
have reason to rejoice and be glad. Our fathers trusted in thee, they trusted
in thee, and were delivered.

That we may see wherein God has appeared for the help of the people in this
land, let us take a brief view of the innumerable distresses and difficulties
they have been called to encounter, out of which a wise and gracious God has
marvelously delivered them. They got not the land by their own sword, neither
did their own arm save them, but thy right hand, and thine arm, and the light
of thy countenance* because thou have a favor unto them, Isa. xliv. 3. That
they have not stood by their own might, but that God has been on their side, is
evident, if we consider their weakness and inability to encounter the many and
great difficulties that lay in their way.

In the reign of James the first of England, 1602, there were a number of godly
persons in the several towns and villages in Nottinghamshire, Lancashire and
Yorkshire, in the north of England, who were zealous for reformation, not only
testifying against human inventions and additions, in the worship of God, but
carefully attending to the positive and practical (...) of divine (...) entered
into an agreement for the support of the worship and ordinances of God,
according to the primitive pattern. And finding by experience that they could
not enjoy their liberties and privileges without offense, in their own country,
they determined to remove themselves and families into the Netherlands, which
they after some difficulty accomplished; and arriving in Holland, they settled
themselves in the city of Leyden, 1610; here, under the States, they quietly
enjoyed their liberties about ten years, Mr. Prince says eleven: But thinking
Holland not the most advantageous place for them and their posterity, they,
after serious deliberation, determined to remove to America -- Matters being
prepared, they sat sail August 20, and arrived at Cape Cod the 11th day of
November, 1620: After reconnoitering the shores, they landed December 25, at a
place they called, after the name of the company under whose patronage they
came, Plymouth. Here they found themselves in a wild inhospitable wilderness,
without friends, and surrounded with enemies, in an inclement season, without
an house to shelter them, or fortress to secure them from the rage of a savage
foe, or sufficient provision to relieve the returns of hunger; few in number
(about an hundred) yea very few, and strangers in a land unknown. Of their
small number one half died before the opening of the spring, by reason of the
hardships they had undergone, which produced scurveys, etc. that awfully
diminished their numbers; and many more, if not all, must have perished with
famine, had not God provided for them the fish of the sea, and the treasures
hid in the (...).

How easy (...) prey may we reasonably suppose them to the numer^^s tribes of
savages that surrounded them, had not a good and kind providence taken care of
and watched over them night and day, and restrained the wrath of their enemies!
Such was the care of God for them, that they neither perished by famine, nor
were destroyed by the bow or sword of the wilderness. Their necessities God
supplied out of his inexhausted treasure, and their safety he guarded by the
strength of his arm. (...) round about them to be at peace; and several of
their sachems soon desired and sought their protection. Such was the beginning
of New England.

It was not long after that new adventurers arrived from time to time, so that
in the space of a few years these four governments were considerably peopled.

The natives being alarmed at their rapid increase, combined to cut them off,
and in several engagements they succeeded in their enterprises, especially
under Philip, the renowned Indian warrior. But under the kind smiles of heaven
our feeble tribes prevented them, and dispossessed them of their territories.
For many years they made inroads and depredations upon our frontiers, by
burning, captivating and destroying, in a surprising manner; the tender mother,
with the infant babe, did not escape their hellish rage, malice and cruelty.
But God, in his abundant goodness, was pleased to preserve his people, and
protected the vine his own right hand had planted, when men rose up against it;
he has prevented them from being swallowed up; he has made them to increase and
multiply, and driven out the heathen before them, so that they are become a
great and mighty people. From the small beginning of scarce fifty, that
remained after the great mortality that prevailed among them, their numbers
(...) grown to about half a million, that we might set up our Ebenezer, and
say, hitherto the Lord has helped us. The Lord has comforted Zion, even all
her waste places, made her wilderness like Eden, and her desert like the garden
of the Lord; joy and gladness has been found therein, thanksgiving, and the
voice of melody, Isa. li. 3.

It would be too tedious, at this time, to take even a brief notice of the many
signal instances of the interpositions of divine providence in favor of his
people in this land. There were many instances when they were on the brink of
ruin, when every appearance was dark and gloomy. Even then some unforeseen
deliverance and salvation was designed, and conferred upon them. Their
struggles and distresses were great, but God had mercy for them, and remembered
them in their low estate, and redeemed them from the hand of their enemies,
Psalm. lxxvi. 23, 24. In how many bloody and cruel wars were they engaged with
the savages of the wilderness; their land made an aceldama, a field of blood?
What desolations were there made upon them? Towns laid in ashes, their
inhabitants most inhumanly butchered, without distinction of age or sex.

And when the scene of affairs seemed to have been happily changed, and we were
ready to flatter ourselves with halcyon days, days of peace and tranquillity,
especially on the conclusion of the last war, in 1763, Canada being subdued,
and the savages brought into subjection; soon after peace was restored between
the contending powers, a new storm began to gather, heaven lowered with
vengeance, an unthought of enemy appeared to be rising up, both for our
chastisement and profit, to humble us for manifold crying sins, and to open a
way for our greater enlargement, and more free enjoyment of the natural rights
of mankind.

Though Great Britain had been smiled upon in a very uncommon manner, in the
prosecution of the war she had been engaged in with France and Spain, and
concluded a peace to the enlargement of the British empire in America; and
though in the contest the Americans had been much engaged, and afforded
supplies, both with respect to men and money, much beyond their due proportion,
the king and parliament themselves being Judges, for they freely refunded large
sums in requital; yet their restless, ambitious, domineering tempers would not
permit them to be easy and quiet, when it was much their interest to be so:
Therefore, no sooner were they released from the calamities of a war with
foreign nations, than they were meditating the most unnatural and impoverishing
one; that is, those measures, which it was foreseen must terminate in civil
dissentions, and violent hostilities.

The measures adopted by the king, and his venal ministers, were such as
imposing duties for the purpose of raising a revenue in America, and extending
the powers of courts of admiralty beyond their ancient limits, depriving the
American subjects of trials by jury, allowing the judges certificate to
indemnify the prosecutor from damages that he might otherwise be liable to, etc.

Not content with these amazing strides, the next year an act was passed, known
by the name of the stamp act. This gave a most terrible alarm through this
extensive continent, and rouzed every soul with zeal to stand forth and assert
their rights. The union and firmness of the people, by the blessing of God,
proved the happy means of their rescue from threatened vassalage. This
obnoxious act was the next sessions of Parliament repealed, to the very great
joy of the inhabitants of America. Though this act was cruel and unjust, yet
its repeal was not because it was an unreasonable claim, but because, as its
preamble says, the continuance thereof would be attended with many
inconveniences, and might be productive of consequences greatly detrimental to
the commercial interests of Great Britain.

There were several subsequent acts made, which might have reasonably alarmed
the Americans; such as, that his Majesty in Parliament of right had power to
bind the people of America by statute, in all cases whatsoever. And in the
following year (1767) an act passed, enabling his Majesty to put the customs
and other duties in America under the management of commissioners, etc.
Thereupon he erected the then extensive board of commissioners, for the express
purpose of carrying into execution the several acts relating to the revenue and
trade of America.

Upon the repeal of the stamp act, the people of America most gratefully
acknowledged the favor and kind providence of God, whose government is over
all.

And as they had received such a token for good, they did not disquiet
themselves, or others, in relation to the other unjust claims, but flattered
themselves with hopes of a more extensive change of measures, and that every
grievance might in due time be removed out of the way. But administration, ever
restless for effecting their purposes, did, by a statute called the glass,
paper, and tea act, made ab^^t fifteen months after the repeal of the
stamp act* resume their former language, and again undertook to give and grant
rates and duties to be paid, in what they called the Colonies, for the express
purpose of raising a revenue, to defray the charges of the administration of
justice, the support of civil government, and defense of the king's dominions
on this continent.

These and such like acts, made and passed, revived the apprehensions and
discontents which had entirely subsided, by the repeal of the stamp act. Thus
they went on to irritate the inhabitants of this continent. To fix the chains
they had prepared, the ministry agreed with the East India company to send over
to America large quantities of tea, that they might have an opportunity of
carrying their measures into execution.

Various methods were projected to avoid the blow. That which was sent to
Carolina was stored, and as effectually ^o^t to the company as though it had
been burnt. That which was sent to New York was returned. And that which was
sent to Boston, was, by reason of the Governor's refusing to give a permit for
its being sent back, thrown into the sea. Whereupon the charter of the province
was vacated, the town blocked up with ships of war, a standing army kept to awe
the inhabitants into subjection, and all trade entirely prevented; every source
for support was dried up, and thousands suffering for the necessaries of life.

These things began to awaken the attention of all the inhabitants of this
land, though comparatively little preparation was made to repel force by force,
because we were unwilling to break with a people with whom we had long been
connected; and therefore were trying, by the most humble petitions and
remonstrances, to prevent the threatened vengeance. But all was vain, our cries
could not be heard, or our petitions regarded, but shut out as unworthy of the
least notice; rather insulted were we in our most servent supplications. While
thus begging and imploring royal favor and clemency, a few provincial or
county stores being collected at Concord, General Gage detached a party of
about 1000 men, under the command of Colonel Smith, who in the evening
preceding the 19th of April, 1775, secretly sat out with a design of taking and
destroying the above mentioned stores. Coming to Lexington, they found a number
of inoffensive peasants together, upon whom they fired, killed and wounded 17
(8 killed and 9 wounded.) They then pushed on for Concord; by the time they
could reach the destined place, the inhabitants in that vicinity were alarmed,
collected together, and proceeded to the bridge, when the king's troops first
fired upon them, which was returned with a martial bravery and intrepidity,
which obliged those veterans to retreat with precipitation, and though
reinforced by Lord Percy with 1400 men, they were glad to find themselves once
more secure in Boston, while all the way thither they were falling by their
pursuers. This was the first commencement of hostilities.

Here let us reflect upon the goodness of God to his people: They were attacked
secretly* by an enemy skilled in the art of war, who had been often flushed
with victory, equipped with arms, and every accoutrement of war; an army
regularly officered and disciplined. -- While we, on our part, were without
officers, without men, arms or ammunition, in all respects unprepared for the
field; yet weak and defenseless as we were, our enemy was made to flee before
us. Surely we cannot ascribe it to our skill in war, or preparation for the
field, but must say it was because the Lord was on our side, who has the hearts
of all in his hands, and can easily intimidate them, and strike them with such
a panic that they cannot face their opposers. Must not we ascribe the glory to
him, who is the Lord of hosts, the God of armies, when a company of raw,
undisciplined and irregular men, are able to oppose and put to flight an equal
if not superior number of troops, under experienced officers, and who had been
trained up to the use of arms? Had we been to judge of things, according to the
common influence of causes and effects, we could have expected nothing short of
a most terrible carnage. -- And had General Gage at that season drawn out his
whole force, what terrible waste and destruction might he have made, especially
for a season? Seven or eight thousand regular troops, with a fine artillery,
might have laid waste, to a considerable extent, a fertile pleasant land. But
heaven restrained their madness, till there was time to form some more regular
means to oppose them.

Their defeated scattered legions with hasty steps returned to Boston, where,
with their whole army, they were shut up, and strongly fortified.

These acts of hostility so alarmed the country, that there was very soon an
army of Provincials raised in the Massachusetts and neighboring Colonies, with
a view to prevent any further excursions of our common enemy. It is here worthy
of notice, that though a considerable body of men were raised, there was no one
man that had the command of the whole: Though there was a first in every
Colony, there was no one that could claim a right of superintending the
different divisions of the different Colonies; which greatly prevented the
order and regularity of the army, and rendered them less formidable, and more
exposed by any attack their enemy might make upon them. This disadvantage was
complained of, by some of their best officers, and afterward experienced much
to their disadvantage, especially in the affair of Bunker Hill.

Amidst every disadvantage, they conducted with as much decorum as their
situation would admit of, and a spirit and bravery that their circumstances
required. That they were endowed with a true martial spirit, they gave the best
evidence of on the 17th of June, 1775, when near 2000 of them began an
entrenchment on Bunker-Hill, which the royal army perceiving, sent out double,
if not treble their numbers, to dispossess them of the ground, which brought on
a most obstinate and bloody engagement; when near 1000, some say 1500, of our
enemy were killed and wounded: Though, being overpowered by numbers, we
retreated to Cambridge, with a loss comparatively inconsiderable (about 100
killed and died of their wounds.)

Perhaps the event of this engagement had been much more favorable, (...)
there been a proper officer, whose authority had been more extensive: For where
there is a timidity, as is natural in a situation of danger, men will be very
apt to indulge it, where they imagine there is a want of right or authority to
challenge their services.

The difficulty referred to was happily remedied, by the appointment of
Continental officers, and the arrival of the Commander in Chief of all the
forces of the United States of America, his Excellency General Washington;
under whose consummate wisdom our military affairs have been conducted; whose
name is dear and highly venerated, and whose memory will, I trust, be ever
precious in the esteem of every friend of America. This celebrated officer took
the command of our troops at Cambridge on the 2d day of July, 1775.

Although this attempt did not succeed, as was desired and hoped, yet it
answered important ends and purposes; it showed us that our help was not in
ourselves, and that the providence of God was eminently concerned in the
preservation of this detached party, that they were not cut off by much
superior numbers. It also afforded matter of conviction to our enemies that we
were in earnest, and would contend even to blood, in the defense of our rights
and privileges: Besides it weakened and dispirited our enemies, so that they
thought it best to confine themselves afterward to their strong ho^^s, and
content themselves with throwing their shot and shells at so great a distance
as gave little prospect of success. And thus the remaining part of that year
was principally spent, and until the month of March following, when, by the
best accounts we were able to collect, they were meditating an attack upon our
army; being provoked thereto by our taking possession of the heights of
Dorchester.

The day the important attempt was to have been made, God, who commands the
winds and seas, sent such a terrible tempest, that the waters were impassable,
and their purpose frustrated. Thus he is able to turn the counsels of the wise
into foolishness, and make their devices of none effect. He is glorious in
holiness, fearful in praise, doing wonders. How much reason have we to admire
the conduct of divine providence, in restraining the wrath and disappointing
the purposes of our enemies, and more so, if we take into consideration our
unpreparedness to oppose our enemies? We were without a regular army, unskilled
in arms, undisciplined, and in a measure unarmed. In this our defenseless
condition, our enemies might have taken the advantage; but they were
restrained, which gave us an opportunity of collecting forces, and the various
necessaries for our defense. -- Kind providence disappointing the designs of
our enemies, and finding their situation unsafe while our forces occupied the
above mentioned heights, they, like men seized with a panic, hastily ship
themselves, that they may escape the danger, March 18, 1776. May we not then
adopt the words of the pious Psalmist, and say, had not the Lord been on our
side, when men rose up against us, they had swallowed us up quick?

But to show their rancour and malice upon their disappointment, they left fire
in a number of houses, in such a position that it might soon be communicated,
and produce a most fearful desolation through every street and lane in the
town: But kind providence directed the inhabitants to a timely discovery of the
horrid malicious plot; and thereby the most calamitous conflagration, intended
and threatened that once opulent and flourishing town, was prevented.

Bless the Lord, who has not given us as a prey to their teeth. Our soul is
escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowler; the snare is broken, and we
are escaped; our help is the name of the Lord, who made heaven and earth.

While these things were going on, our force in the north was not idle:
Ticonderoga was taken by surprise the 9th day of May. This opened a way for our
forces to Canada, which for a season was improved to advantage; Chamblee was
soon taken, and St. John's, after a siege of six weeks, November 2, 1775. Our
success soon reached Montreal, and extended to the gates of Quebec. This was an
object that commanded the attention of our officers: Accordingly a regiment of
men was voluntarily engaged in a rout by way of Kennebec, through the
wilderness, into the heart of Canada, to cooperate with the forces that should
be sent by the way of the lakes. This rout, though attended with amazing
difficulty and hardship, was performed by two parts of the whole, the other
returning, by reason of the scarcity of provisions. Some time after their
arrival, they were joined by a party under the command of General Montgomery,
who, after summoning the city to surrender, and being refused, attempted to
force it, December 31st, in which hazardous enterprise he was slain, and the
attempt was defeated. Thus fell that gallant officer, whose memory is still
venerated, and will be perpetuated in the annals of America. About 370 of our
troops were made prisoners.

Though providence did not design ^s so great a favor as the acquisition of
that important place, or the continuance of a life so good and great, yet
nevertheless we have reason to acknowledge the kindness of God, the wise
governor of the world, in the preservation of so many of our forces, in the
most critical situation, and teaching us that wisdom and strength are with God;
that we might be taken off from trusting in an arm of flesh, and never go forth
in our own strength, but in the name and strength of him who is the God of the
armies of Israel.

But to return, our enemy evacuating Boston, and retiring to Halifax, gave us a
further opportunity of recruiting, and forming a more regular army; which we
may ever consider as a smile of divine providence, which not only favored us
with an opportunity of doing something for recruiting and forming an army, but
also for recruiting and augmenting our stores. As we had been deficient in
military stores, and the importation of them attended with difficulty and great
risque, it was necessary that we should, if possible, do something for that
purpose among ourselves. We therefore soon found we could in a good measure
supply ourselves with cannon and gunpowder, far beyond the most sanguine
expectations. The art of making saltpeter soon rose to great perfection; a
business that had been little thought of, and less practiced, and upon the bare
suggestion of it, many thought it could not be accomplished.

If it were found that there was a deficiency in our manufactory, that
deficiency we could supply from abroad, without the difficulty and risque of
the whole. And besides, we made captures upon the high seas that were no small
advantage. -- These things we are ready to ascribe to ourselves, our wisdom and
sagacity, though we are as much indebted to the providence of God for them, as
we are for the bread we eat for our nourishment, or the clothes we put on.

If we had but a short respite from the immediate view and excursions of our
enemy, it was that we might prepare for more formidable and vigorous attacks.
The rod was continually held over us, and we were threatened with every
distress that was in the power of GreatBritain to inflict: Formidable fleets
and armies were preparing in Great Britain, with foreign mercenaries to reduce
this continent to obedience in all cases whatsoever.

Accordingly hostilities were again committed. Commodore Sir Peter Parker, with
his fleet, in conjunction with the army under Generals Cornwallis and Clinton,
made a most vigorous attack upon Sullivan's-Island, in South Carolina, the 28th
of June, 1776. While the ships drawn up against the fortress, with amazing fury
and dreadful roar of cannon pour in their shot, attempting its demolition,
their army three several times attempted to land, but were repulsed. Such
resolution and bravery animated both officers and soldiers, that General Lee
observed there was no need to say any thing to them, to inspire their ambition,
or emulate their activity. Far from being in the least disheartened by fatigue,
they rushed on in one continued blaze of fire, with thick columns of smoke, for
the space of twelve hours, when their enemy was glad to retire, under the cover
of the night, though so disabled that it was with difficulty they were able to
make their retreat. Their ships were much shattered, and many of their officers
and men slain and wounded; thus they concluded their enterprise. Who was it
that taught their hands to war, and their fingers to fight? Who that inspired
them with that noble ardour and fixed resolution, that procured them victory?
Might they not say with David, thou, O Lord, have girded me with strength to
the battle? blessed be the Lord, my strength, Psalm. cxli.

The British monarch with his minions, highly incensed, and burning with choler
at the disappointment his troops had met with, being unable to subjugate the
people he had devoted to his wrath, endeavored to stir up all the powers of
the east, to enable him to ^^complish his wicked designs. Fleets and armies
were prepared, that their vengeance might be hurled on the devoted Americans.
Their designs and preparations were not unnoticed, or disregarded. If we
dreaded the effects of their wrath, we had no desponding fears of their
success. We were not unapprized that it was in their power to desolate our
seaports, and they had given us instances of this kind of savage inhumanity;
let Charlestown, Norfolk, Falmouth, etc. witness.

By this time the people of America had felt enough of the cruelty and
inhumanity of Great Britain, and more they had reason to expect, it therefore
became necessary to think of some method whereby they might secure themselves
against threatened destruction, and transmit their rights and privileges to
posterity. An expedient presented, which in its consequences was the most
favorable of any that could be thought of, and promised the most lasting
benefits and blessings, namely, throwing off all connection with Great Britain;
and accordingly the fourth day of July, 1776, is one of the most memorable
aeras that ever took place in America. Then, to the almost universal joy of the
inhabitants of this country, we were declared free and independent States. If
we are indebted to any man, or any number of men, for going into this method
for our help, it must be to the British king and his ministers. I presume I may
say, that it was not so much as the wish or desire of scarce a man on the
continent, before their distresses had driven them to meditate such an
expedient: No, not until after they found that the British king was forming
alliances, and seeking assistance from foreign powers. We were sensible, that
while we were in connection with Great Britain, it would not be in our power to
procure any foreign alliance or assistance, should our distresses be ever so
great; we were therefore necessitated by Britain herself, upon the principles
of self preservation, to declare our independency. Divine providence made use
of them as the very means of this (to them) so unpleasing an event. Our enemies
have repeatedly thrown out, that it was the object we ever aimed at, which is
as far from truth as falsehood itself can be. If this had been the case, why did
we delay the matter so long? Why did we remonstrate and petition from time to
time, in the most humble and affectionate manner, by separate Assemblies, and
by Delegates in Congress, for redress of grievances (...)* Then we should much
rather have been heard, and reverted back to the state we were in in the year
1763 -- But we could not be heard, but were spurned from the throne with
threats and insults. After every dutiful method tried in vain, with long
waiting, there was no other alternative by which we could entertain the least
hope. Heaven seems to have pointed out our freedom in this way. A series of
providence conspired to bring about this glorious event, and at a juncture
when it seemed to be the most sit and necessary. -- That it should be
accomplished with such unanimity and firmness among the members of Congress,
and so prolifical in its consequences, is a peculiar smile of heaven, and
should be acknowledged to the glory of that God whose kingdom is over all, and
who disposes the hearts of men as he pleases.

But we will proceed to take notice of our danger, and our deliverance. About
the beginning of July, 1776. General How, with his fleet of men of war and
transports, hove in sight of New York, and soon after landed an army of more
than 30,000 men. While his army was airing and recruiting their health and
vigor, he pretended to set on foot an accommodation, to which Congress so far
listened as to appoint a committee of their body to hear the terms to be
proposed. The matter being looked into, it was found but an amusement, as there
were no powers committed to him and his associates that could operate to any
advantage. Thus ended the treaty, if worthy the name. -- About the 20th of
August his men were again shipped, fell down the Narrows, landed near
Gravesend, and marched through the town of New-Utrecht, in their way to
Flat-Bush, about 5 miles from the city, near which they encamped; but were much
harrassed by our rifle-men. Scouting parties were sent from our army to the
adjoining woods, but their numbers were insufficient. The British forces, in
three divisions, take three different roads, and under cover of he night almost
surround the whole of our parties, who, though encircled with more than treble
their number, bravely fought their way through the enemy (August 27) killing
great numbers of them, and carrying off many prisoners. As it was the principal
of the British force that was engaged against only a division of the American
army, who were stationed upon the west end of Long Island, opposite to
New York, they found themselves ^nsufficient to sustain a vigorous attack, yet
they were enabled to break the snare and escape, though many were slain, and
numbers captivated. Their ordnance and stores they retreated with to New York,
before the enemy were apprized of their design. -- Whatever gloom may be thrown
over the mind by the recital of such a catastrophe, yet there will, upon a
review of the matter, appear mercy in the midst of judgment. We should
acknowledge it to the glory of divine goodness and mercy, that the whole
division was not made a sacrifice, when their enemy were so numerous, and that
we were able to make so favorable a retreat.

The several skirmishes which preceded the more general attack served to weaken
the enemy, perhaps, in proportion to any disadvantage we suffered. These
outworks and fortresses were principally designed for temporary use; they
delayed the progress of the enemy, (...) an important end in view. That which
they attained in ground, they lost in time, they being retarded in their
motions, and their loss of time was no doubt our advantage.

However, it gave the enemy the advantage of a more easy access to the city and
island of New York. This our Generals saw and provided against, by removing
whatever was most valuable out of the way. On the 15th day of September they
landed, under a heavy fire of cannon from their shipping, at or near the town
of Harlem, and while they entered the city one way, our forces retreated the
other. Being now on a small island, they could not get along without some
contention; a smart action ensued on the 16th, when the Americans played the
man, and disconcerted their enemy. The motion of our enemy gave evidence that
it was their intention to get beyond our army, and prevent their retreat from
the island; but the caution and watchfulness of our Commander in Chief eluded
their design, by moving toward the north part of the island, that he might at
any time secure himself a retreat.

October 15th, General Mercer, with a party, made an excursion upon
Staten-Island, where there was a party of the enemy; but they being apprized of
our approach, fled with precipitation; a few were taken, with a number of arms,
and some baggage.

About the same time was the great movement of the enemy up the western found,
and their landing in large bodies at Frog Point: This was a movement of General
Howe's for making a bold push, to hem in and at one blow cut off our army. It
was the opinion of the intelligent, that the situation of the army of the
States was yet too confined, and that it was unsafe to continue as they were,
or hazard the important cause, in which, if they should not succeed, the army
might be lost, as a retreat would be impracticable. It was therefore concluded
to counteract the enemy, by a more general movement. It seems our whole force
was to be collected to the northward of Kingsbridge, that we might defeat the
enemy in their operations. This movement was calculated to prevent the enemy
from ravaging the country, surrounding our army, and to lead them from the
cover of their shipping. This design was so far effected, that all the road
from Kingsbridge to East Chester was open to the enemy, even from New York,
except Fort-Washington* a few guards, and a regiment at Kingsbridge, who were
ordered, in case of distress, to retreat to Fort-Washington.

While these things were doing, the enemy were not idle; having collected their
forces, they ranged their ships and troops along the shore as far as
East-Chester.

On the 18th day of October they began a heavy cannonading. Their motions being
narrowly watched, an ambuscade was laid for them, which had in a good measure
its desired effect; they were put to slight, with considerable loss, and some
captivated (36.) On the 23d day there was a warm engagement between a party of
our army and the enemy, when they were beaten, and 13 Hessians left dead on the
field. On the 27th the enemy attacked our lines at Harlem, when they were
repulsed three several times successively, and went off in confusion, with
considerable loss: And on the 28th the whole body of the enemy was perceived to
be advancing. This gave an alarm to the army of the States, and large advance
guards were kept out, toward which the enemy soon appeared advancing in solid
columns, and attempted to collect upon every side. The enemy began their fire,
which was very heavy, and was ^eturned with the greatest vigor. Our numbers
engaged being vastly inferior, they retreated before the enemy, which gave them
an opportunity of advancing near our lines, where, from a neighboring hill,
they played their cannon with amazing fury for a while, then ceased. Our loss
was not great, nor equal to the danger we seemed to be in, and by the best
accounts not equal to the loss of the enemy.

Might we not here say, if the Lord had not been on our side, they would have
swallowed us up quick? -- Praise him who rides in the heavens for our help,
whose excellency is in the skies. God is refuge for us.

October 3st, our General perceived the enemy had completed 4 or 5 batteries
upon the neighboring hills, which overlooked the plains where our army lay, so
that it could not be safe keeping that station; accordingly the army was moved
to the hills above the plains. -- The enemy advanced to the plains, and were
rising the hills, when they were saluted by a number of our cannon, and soon
retired.

General How here brings to mind the case of Benhadad, the Syrian, who warred
against Israel with ill success; his ministers, in a council of war, delivered
their advice in these terms: Their Gods are the Gods of the hills, and
therefore they were stronger than we; but let us fight against them in the
plain, and surely we shall be stronger than they. -- He hearkened to their
voice, but how to put it into execution was the question; for they being
assailants, the Israelites were masters of the ground, and there was no other
way of bringing them into the plains, but by beating them from the hills. --
Afterward they were placed in the plains, and there convinced, by woeful
experience, that Israel's God was God of the valleys as well as of the hills,
Kings xx.

A learned prelate observes, that "in the invasion of a country, the invaded
can choose their ground; and as it is their interest to avoid coming to a
decisive action, so being amidst their own native stores and provisions, they
have it in their power: On the the contrary, the invader must attack his foes
where he finds them posted* for by reason of the scantiness and uncertainty of
supplies in an enemy's country, he has not for the most part time to draw them,
by military stratagems, from their advantages Bishop Warburton's Divine
Legation.
."

From these observations we may be led to see that General Washington, in his
several movements, discovered the most consummate generalship.

General How being hitherto disappointed, turned his attention to Fort
Washington, and on the 16th day of November attac^ed our lines at Harlem, with
a much superior force to that of the ga^rison. Our men fought to their honor,
but being overpowered by numbers, they were obliged to retreat to the fort. --
Soon after, they were summoned to surrender, and finding themselves unable to
defend it, they submitted, and were made prisoners of war, to the number of
about 2000. This seemed to be the greatest misfortune which had attended that
campaign.

Here we may reflect and say, shall we receive good at the hand of God, and not
evil? Job. ii. 10. A wise and gracious God may correct his people, when he does
not cast them off.

The next object our enemy seemed to have in view was Fort Lee, upon the
opposite shore. Their motions being carefully watched, their design was
manifest; accordingly a considerable party of our army were led over to support
General Green, who commanded at that fort.

The enemy on the 20th day of November passed the river, and landed 7 or 8
miles above the fort, which General Green gaining knowledge of, he determined
to leave it, being unequal to the support of it. Removing whatever was in his
power, he retreated to Hackinsack, where he met Generals Washington and Putnam,
with the forces intended for his support. Their united strength consisted of
about 6000 (...)
perhaps not half equal to the enemy. They retreated to Newark, the enemy
pursuing them. -- They continued to retreat in the greatest order, carrying
their whole baggage and stores with them, as Israel of old before the
Egyptians, near a hundred miles, calling upon the militia in every place to
join them; they were pursued till they passed the Delaware, where they had the
advantage of putting a check upon the enemy's pursuit, by destroying or putting
out of the way every boat and vessel far and near. They encamped within about
half a mile of the banks of the river. The enemy, unable to prosecute their
purposes, as by experience they were taught when attempting to pass the river,
were repulsed by our artillery. -- The enemy were now at Trenton, and places
adjacent, waiting a favorable opportunity for passing the river, defeating our
army, and perhaps reaching Philadelphia. -- But how mortifying the
disappointment! -- On the morning of the 2^th of December, General Washington
surprised them, obtained a complete victory over part of their army, and made
prisoners 919, besides killing and wounding a number, and taking a great
variety of arms, baggage, etc. too many to be here enumerated. This gave an
effectual check to the enemy, and put a stop to their career.

General Washington having defeated the enemy, retired with his booty, and the
laurels of victory, to camp, where he gave himself and his army time to recruit
after the fatigues of his enterprise. Soon after he again repassed the Delaware
to the south side of Trenton Creek, from whence he detached two brigades
toward Princeton; about three miles distant they met the enemy in full march
for our army, before whom they retreated to our main body, though in repassing
a bridge they suffered the loss of about too killed and wounded: But by the
exertions of General Mifflin, from an advantageous eminence, with his
artillery, supported by the militia of the city of Philadelphia, they were
obliged to retreat with considerable loss. The enemy's principal attention
seemed to be to d^^^^ossess our army of their ground; but General Washington,
to disappoint them in their views, gave secret orders for all their fires to be
made, as though their intention was to dress their food, when no sooner than
this appearance was made, he with his main body, silently and undiscovered,
marched in the dead of the night preceding the 3d of January, for Princeton,
where the next day he surprised a party of the enemy, about three miles east of
the town, killed and made prisoners 500; with a large quantity of baggage, and
six field pieces. This maneuver drew the attention of the enemy back to give
succor to their party, but it was too late; where upon the enemy retired into
winter quarters at Brunswick.

Here we may reflect and say, behold the infinite wisdom and goodness of God,
who is wise in all his ways, and holy in all his works! He knows the fittest
seasons for the display of his goodness and mercy. -- He humbles and brings his
people low, that he may exalt them in his own time; and when their distresses
are the greatest, his mercy in their deliverance will be the more sensibly
relished, and gratefully acknowledged.

To view the hero of America out off from the main body of his army, driven
before his enemy, (...) a horrid banditti spreading desolation and misery
through every place which they passed, was a scene distressing beyond
description; the aged and infirm insulted, the innocent virgin ravished* the
defenseless plundered, and the patriotic friends of freedom and liberty
compelled to bow to the image, the standard of tyranny. Now, amidst all this
gloom and disappointment, that he should be emboldened by adversity, and out of
weakness made strong, and at a season the most favorable be inspired to
improve it to the best advantage, for his own honor, and the glory of the
American arms, is worthy of very special notice. And while we pay our most
grateful acknowledgments to the instrument or instruments of our safety and
deliverance at any time, we should not forget the great efficient cause of all
events. God's providence superintends all human affairs: But because he work^
by the instrumentality of second causes, we lose sight of him, and ascribe that
to the instrument, that belongs solely to the efficient.

The infallible writer faith, he gives wisdom to the wise. His divine
influence, in the natural and moral world, supports and instructs men in the
whole conduct of life; and hence it is they are endued with that fortitude that
is sufficient to support them in adversity, and secure them against
self-exaltation in prosperity: It is he that endues them with courage to face
dangers, and patience to go through hardships: He points out the fittest
seasons for the accomplishment of any end, and gives them that ardour of spirit
that is connected with the attainment of it. This is the sentiment of the
Psalmist amidst royalty, when he says, seemingly forgetting the instrument or
second cause, it is God that avengeth me, and subdueth the people under me. He
delivers me from mine enemies; -- therefore will I give thanks unto thee, O
Lord, and sing praises unto thy name.

Should we now turn our thoughts and meditations to the northward, we are
presented with little that tends to administer consolation and comfort. For
want of supplies of men and stores, General Arnold was obliged to leave Quebec
(May the 7th.) -- At the Cedars we were defeated, with the loss of 500 men (May
20.) General Thompson also, near Sorelle (June 8) with the loss of about 200.
-- General Arnold defeated on the Lake, with the loss of about 100 men (October
11.)

These and like instances serve to show us, that the race is not to the swift,
nor the battle to the strong; that it is not in man that walks to direct his
sters, that there is not any evil in the city, and the Lord has not done it;
and that pride might be hid from man, and the Lord alone exalted.

During the winter, while General How lay at Brunswick, and the army of the
United States not far from him, to prevent as much as possible the enemy's
excursions, sundry skirmishes took place, but no advantages were lost on our
part, so that we had reason to say, the Lord was on our side, and blessed be
his name.

About the 20th of June the royal army, like men afraid, and filled with
terror, secretly decamped and stole away toward Amboy, ship, and return to
New York. -- Some time after they re-ship, and put out to sea, and for some
time are not heard of, nor was their design known till they were discovered in
Chesapeak Bay; soon after they land at Elk-Creek, aiming to reach Philadelphia.
To attain this they must pass the Brandywine, which they might do at two or
three fords; at these passages the army of the States determined to dispute
their pass^^g. To do this to advantage, they labored under this difficulty;
their army must be in several divisions, while the enemy might keep themselves
together. As it could not be determined which of the fords the enemy would
take, we could not strengthen one more than another, lest we should miss the
object we aimed at. By this means their whole force was levelled against but a
part of ours, when being overborne by numbers, they were obliged to give way to
their enemy. The loss on our side was not considerable, perhaps not more if
equal to the enemy's: Nor did General How esteem it any great or important
achievement; if he had, he would not have missed of making another attempt the
next day. This happened September 11.

General Howe's next maneuver seemed to be to get and keep the army of the
States hemmed in, that they might not be able to obtain supplies, and be
reduced to obedience: But his plans were not beyond the ken of our officers,
nor was it attended with difficulty to evade them.

General How is permitted to enter and possess the city of Philadelphia, with
his army, and to occupy Germantown. Here they were attacked on the 4th day of
October by General Washington, with such spirit, that they were put to slight
with the greatest precipitation; but by reason of some unhappy mistake, we lost
our prize, after they had escaped the town, where there were many valuable
effects, and a sine train of artillery, to which the enemy afterward returned,
and took possession of.

These events are worthy of our notice and attentive regard. They show us that
our trust is not in an arm of flesh, that human skill and wisdom, nor the
greatest martial powers cannot secure us sucoess and that the blessing of the
God of armies can secure us against disappointment; that disappointment is not
our ruin, but the delay of mercy; that delays weaken and debilitate our
enemies, and render them less capable of accomplishing their wicked purposes
and designs. We may not, we cannot say, God has forsaken us, while he restrains
the rage of our foes, and confines them within the narrow compass of a city and
its suburbs; but we may say, his time is the best, and with patience wait in
the vigorous use of every means in our power for that salvation he is giving us
the agreeable prospect of. Though for the present dark clouds interpose, and
hide from our sight the wished for day, yet a durable trust in the
righteousness of our cause, and the power and mercy of the God of armies,
encourages our hope; though cast down, we are not forsaken.

Does not there seem to be mercy in reserve, when none of the attempts of the
enemy answer the end and design for which they were sent, but only to weaken
and impoverish them? With what great expense of men and money did they gain a
passage to the city of Philadelphia? -- Red. Bank and Mud-Island cost them
infinitely more in blood and treasure, than the temporary advantages they could
reap by them. Though the ground to us was lost, and the possession of them,
while they were in the city, of small importance, the acquisition to them was
of little avail; by no means a compensation equal to the expense. These things,
instead of being against us, were in our favor* Let us then bless God, that he
makes the purposes and designs of our enemies, which they mean for their
advantage, subservient to the establishment of the liberty and happiness of the
United States.

The king, ministry and parliament, being determined to reduce this country,
and bring it to obey their commands in all things whatsoever, employed by land
and sea 60,000 men; and when General How was sent to New York with a
formidable army, as has been taken notice of, and the enemy's excursions as far
as Philadelphia examined, General Burgoyne was sent to be employed for the same
purpose, with about 10,000 men under his command, by the way of St. Lawrence's
river. He arrived at Quebec May 6, 1776. This army, with a very strong fleet,
arrived at Crown-Point about the beginning of July, 1777. Soon after their
arrival, parties were sent out to reconnoitre the situation of our forts and
army at Ticonderoga. Our forts there were said to be in the best condition; our
army consisted of about 3 or 4000 men, said to be in high spirits. The
Commander in Chief, General St. Clair, gaining intelligence of the strength of
the enemy, called a council of war, when it was judged that they should not be
able to hold the fort, with the lines; accordingly orders were immediately
given (...) its evacuation, and as instantly obeyed. Their whole works were
abandoned; and most of their stores left for the enemy, who soon took
possession of them, and pursued the garrison with the greatest vigor and
spirit. Our garrison retreat to Fort-Ann, then to Fort-Edward, and from thence
to Saratoga and Still water. The tidings of this unexpected retreat of our
forces struck every face with paleness, and every heart with trembling.
Thousands of curses, imprecations and hasty censures, were thrown out against
the officer who commanded in that department. What fearful consequences were
meditated? With old Jacob we were ready to say, these things are against us.
But alas, how little do we know how short and contracted are our views? We can
see only one link in the chain of providence, and as we see, we censure; where
as, were we able to take a view of the whole, we should see reason for
different sentiments, and ground for saving our censures. Things viewed in
their separate several parts, will appear very different than when they are
viewed collectively and together. Such a providential dispensation we often say
is not best, or any thing that befalls us, when we do not look so far as to
consider it as such, it cannot be for the best. We say so, because perhaps we
think so; and we think so only because we view the matter separately. Such were
our sentiments relative to the evacuation of our fortresses on the Lake; but
when we have been led to see a little further, we have changed our sentiments,
and have been convinced that those things we thought were against us, were all
for our advantage. The effect and consequence have made it manifest.

General Burgoyne, slushed with a train of successes, until he had got as far
as Fort Edward, was ready to flatter himself that all would come in and bow to
his standard. With this view he published his manifesto, promising royal
protection, etc. He had previously sent out a party by the way of Oswego, to
attack Fort Schuyler, near the Oneida Lake, and reduce to subjection the county
of Tryon; but here he was sadly disappointed. His party was defeated, many
killed and made prisoners, in all 300, chiefly Indians, when the brave General
Harkemer lost his life. This was on August 6. The British General having gained
the knowledge of some stores at Bennington, in the State of Vermont, detached
Col. Baum with about 2000 men, to reduce the country to subjection, and procure
provisions, etc. This party arriving within about 5 miles of Bennington, was
attacked by General Stark, August 16, and entirely defeated, 680 being made
prisoners, besides the wounded and slain, and the loss of their artillery and
baggage.

General Burgoyne proceeds on his way for Albany; but soon does the gallant
General Gates appear to take the command of the army, composed of militia, with
some Continental troops, who by his prudence and vigilance stops him in his
career, and cuts off the British General's retreat; and after two or three
successful actions, There were two warm and vigorous engagements between the
armies, the one on the 19th day of September when victory hung in suspense* and
both were obliged by the approach of night to retire; the second was on the 7th
of October, when our army forced the lines, and vanquished their enemy.
he is reduced to the necessity of resigning himself and his whole army
prisoners of war. His remaining number, after having many killed and taken
prisoners, was 5752, October 16.

Thus we see a train of happy events take place, in consequence of the
evacuation of Ticonderoga and its dependencies. We feared and trembled when we
saw and heard of the triumphs of our enemy; but how soon was that saying
verified, the triumphing of the wicked is short? -- We may here adopt the words
of our text, and say, if the Lord had not been on our side when men rose up
against us, they had swallowed us up quick. -- Blessed be the Lord. Great and
marvelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy ways, thou
king of saints; who shall not fear thee! Let us sing of the mercies of the Lord
forever, and with our mouths make known his faithfulness to all generations,
Psalm. lxxxix.

I. And as in the 18th psalm, I have pursued mine enemies and overtaken them,
neither did I turn again till they were consumed. I have wounded them that they
were not able to rise; they are fallen under my feet. For thou had girded me
with strength unto battle; thou have subdued those that rose up against me.
Thou have also given me the neck of mine enemies, that I might destroy them
that hate me. O clap your hands all ye people, shout to God with the voice of
triumph; for the Lord most high is terrible, he is a great King over all the
earth; he subdueth the people under us: -- Sing praises to God, sing praises:
Sing praises unto our King, sing praises. See also Ezekiel. xxxix. 1 -- 5.

We left General How in the city of Philadelphia, where he peaceably spent the
winter, when nothing of any great importance took place, either on one side or
the other. But a most important event took place about the beginning of this
year, on the 6th of February, when by the indefatigable services of the
Plenipotentiaries of the United States of America, Messieurs Franklin and Dean,
a treaty of alliance and commerce was acceded to by the King of France, and in
consequence thereof an Ambassador was sent to attend the Congress of these
United States. Thus we have seen that God, whose kingdom is over all, and in
whose hand are the hearts of the kings of the earth, which he can turn as the
rivers of water, has disposed one of the most powerful monarchs in Europe to
own and espouse the cause of his injured people in this country. And while we
see these things actually accomplished, the king's representative at our court,
his ships on our coasts for our defense and protection, I say, while these
things are to the view of every one indisputable, we have good reason to hope
and expect that other European powers will follow the laudable example, and
which to all appearance is at the very door. The conduct of France relative to
America is a tremendous blow to Great Britain, and has brought on such a
contention as will not be easily removed. By this means the British monarch may
find other service for his ships and armies, than to burn, destroy and butcher
his unoffending well-wishers in America. Such I trust we may be styled, though
we have been inhumanly and savagely treated; yet as we make a profession of
christianity, benevolence must mark our character.

The wise and righteous Governor of the world is cutting out other work for
Britain than that she has been employing herself about these three years past.
It has been a matter of speculation with some, that the Americans should be
fond of forming an alliance with France, on account of her religious
sentiments, being in general Roman Catholics; and doubtless every one that is
an enemy to this alliance will make this the ground of their objections, even
though they were Catholics themselves, or equally superstitious, and not a whit
better.

Upon which I would observe, that such an alliance is not unexampled; England
has been in alliance with Portugal, the inhabitants of which are almost if not
wholly Roman Catholics; and France with Holland, yet the Hollanders are chiefly
Presbyterians. The king of England has been in alliance with the king of
Prussia, where Lutheranism chiefly prevails. And it is not long since we were
threatened with an alliance and assistance which Great Britain fought after
with Ru^^^^ In that case their different sentiments in religious matters were
no bar in the way. Differences in religion have no operation in the political
system, and commercial interest of nations and people; but yet advantage may
arise by such an alliance, in a moral or religious view, though not by design
and immediately, yet in its operation and influence it may have this happy
effect. The Protestants in France are not an inconsiderable part of the nation,
who have always been kept under and much out of sight, ever since the repeal of
the edict of Nantz. Now this alliance may have a good tendency to cure the
nation of their bigotry, root out their sanguinary notions, and introduce an
universal toleration. They have already granted a toleration for traders and
factors, or any that shall settle among them from America. This beginning may
have a happy and glorious end; and if it should terminate as there is some
ground to hope it may, the now unhappy Protestants of that country would feel
the most grateful sense of divine kindness, and bless God that such an alliance
had been formed. These things duly considered are sufficient to remove those
difficulties that have perplexed the minds of some, who may have thought such a
thing unprecedented. -- May it not be considered as a smile of divine
providence, and one of the methods that God is taking for our help and
deliverance from present trouble?

Perhaps this may have been one reason that the British troops evacuated the
city of Philadelphia (June 18) that their force might be more united, and that
they might be able to secure New York, in case any attempt should, by the
assistance of France, be made against it. But be that as it may, let the
reasons remain with themselves. It was enough for us to know they had evacuated
the city, and that we might prevent as much of their mischief as possible, our
army were soon in pursuit of them. They were overtaken at Monmouth, the 28th
day of June, 1773, when a very warm engagement ensued* the British forces,
after twelve hours exertion, gave way, and left the field, with their dead
unburied, to the number of 300, and 1250 wounded. Of the Americans, 7 officers
and 52 rank and file were killed, and 170 wounded. In the dead of the night
with precipitation they fled, that they might avoid their pursuers. Their
slight was not known in our camp until next morning, and the sultriness of the
season rendered it impracticable to pursue them to advantage; nor did they make
any delay until they arrived within the limits of New York.

In this instance, as in many others, we may take notice of the manifold
goodness of God, in the protection and success of our troops; and that they are
made a terror to their enemy. Now should our tongues talk of thy righteousness
all the day long; for they are confounded, they are brought to shame that seek
our hurt.

I might here take occasion just to mention another instance of success, in an
action with our enemies upon Rhode Island, where, in an open fieldfight, after
some hours engagement, the enemy were forced to flee, and leave the field to
our troops (August 28.) By the best accounts their numbers were superior. It is
true that this expedition did not succeed according to the wishes of every
friend to his country, yet it is as true, that our forces behaved with a
bravery becoming Americans. The failure of the expedition did not take its rise
from any defect in generalship, or want of valor in officers or soldiers; but
merely from a disappointment of providence. It was well known, previous to the
undertaking, that unless the harbor was blocked up, there would be little or
no hope of succeding, and while that was effected, all hope among our enemies
was gone, therefore they burnt and sunk their vessels, to the number of nine,
which in the whole carried 206 guns, and employed their seamen in assisting to
defend the garrison against our forces. The French fleet being detained at sea
by a violent gale of wind, were some of them disinasted, and obliged to repair
to Boston to refit. This gave an opportunity to the enemy to throw in succors
from New York, which disappointed, us of obtaining the prize we had in view;
not with standing kind providence so far smiled upon our arms as to vanquish
our enemy in the field, and thereby gave a safe retreat off the island, with
whatever was convenient and necessary to be brought off.

And now should we not make the Psalmist's enquiry, and say, what shall we
render to the Lord for all his benefits?

We are brought now to a period, when we have far less to fear from them then
we ever had since they beg^^ hostilities against us. Heaven has provided for us
(...) ^^werful ally, whose enterprises in distant parts must ^^mmand the
attention of Britain, and draw her forces from our shores. This we see is
already the happy effect of our treaty of amity and commerce. But were we
alone, we should have no reason to fear only from ourselves, for would we not
be our own destroyers, it would not be in the power of our enemies to do it.
They might distress us, but they could not destroy us: They might vex and
distrub us, but they could not prevail against us. If we could support our
virtue, there would be no doubt but we could support our cause. If God be on
our side, we need not fear what man can do unto us.

That God has appeared for us, amidst all the corrections we have met with, is
beyond a doubt; it will not admit of the least hesitation: That he has
chastised us many ways, and by many disappointments, is very manifest; and it
is as evident, that he has not forsaken us. He has given us many tokens for
good. That God has from the beginning been engaged in behalf of the United
States, is evident from this one consideration, namely, his restraining our
enemies. He suffered them to distress us, first, when we were most unprepared;
even then they were put to flight. And all along, from time to time, he has
suffered them to proceed in the same proportion that we have in our
preparations and expertness in war. Had our enemies taken advantage of our
weakness and unskilfulness, what carnage might they have made? What horror and
desolation might they have spread through the land? But as God says to the
raging waves of the sea, so he says to the fierce and headstrong passions of
men, hitherto shall ye go, and no further. And when we see such evident marks
of the divine hand, not only in correction but mercy, can we do less than
recount his works, and make the most grateful returns for his favor? And when
we sing his praises, let us be careful we never forget his works. With the
Psalmist we should say, not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but to thy name be
all the glory. We have deserved nothing but correction, yea, nothing short of
being cut off, and deprived of all our privileges. It is not for our sakes, but
for his great name sake, that we are yet a people saved of the Lord, who is the
shield of our help, and the sword of our excellency. Blessed be the Lord.

While we acknowledge the kindness and care of God, the all wise governor of
the world, toward his church and people, may we fear to offend him -- Let us
not abuse his patience and goodness, by turning his grace into wantonness, and
the indulgence of those sins that incur his anger and wrath. -- Let us guard
against a selfish, covetous and oppressive temper, with every abomination, that
through the depravity of nature we are prompted to; for if our ways please God,
then he will assuredly make our enemies at peace with us.

Finally, has God, in his good providence, hitherto led and preserved the
feeble tribes of his people? have they not the greatest reason, the highest
encouragement to trust in him, who has styled himself the God of the armies of
Israel? He who has done so much for this people, and in so many instances so
manifestly appeared for their help and deliverance, will accomplish his own
work in their salvation, if they, by their stupidity and folly, do not provoke
him to change the conduct of his providence. May his unerring wisdom guide us
-- his all powerful arm protect us -- his grace and goodness ever accompany us,
that we may be kept through faith to salvation. Amen.

FINIS.

