AN ORATION DELIVERED MARCH 5th, 1779.

AN ORATION, DELIVERED MARCH 5th, 1779, AT THE REQUEST OF THE INHABITANTS OF
THE TOWN OF BOSTON; TO COMMEMORATE THE BLOODY TRAGEDY OF THE FIFTH OF MARCH,
1770.

BY WILLIAM TUDOR, ESQUIRE.

-- Sed et illa propago
Contemptrix superum sevaeque avidissima caedis
Et violenta fuit.
Ov. M. L. 1. F. 5. Whatever secondary props may rise
From politics, to build the public peace,
The basis is, the manners of the land.
YOUNG. BOSTON: PRINTED BY EDES and GILL, IN COURT-STREET. M.DCC.LXXIX.

AT a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of BOSTON,
duly qualified and legally warned in public Town-Meeting assembled at
Faneuil-Hall, on Friday the fifth Day of March 1779.
UPON a Motion made, VOTED, that the Hon. John Hancock, Esquire William Cooper, Esquire
Mr. Bartholomew Kneeland; Perez Morton, Esquire John Lowell, Esquire Ezekiel Price, Esquire
John Scollay, Esquire
Be and hereby are appointed a Committee to wait upon WILLIAM TUDOR, Esquire and in
the Name of the Town to thank him for the spirited and elegant ORATION
delivered by him at their Request, in Commemoration of the horrid MASSACRE
perpetrated on the Evening of the fifth of March, 1770, by a Party of Soldiers
of the XXIXth Regiment, under the Command of Capt. Thomas Preston, and to
request. of him a Copy thereof for the Press.

Attest. William Cooper, Town Clerk.

GENTLEMEN,
CONCEIVING that nothing short of Impossibility ought to dispense with that
prompt Obedience which Individuals owe to the public Voice, this Oration was
composed and delivered in Sickness: In the same Sentiment I consent to the
Publication of it.

I am, Gentlemen, with Respect, Your most obedient humble Servant, WILLIAM
TUDOR.
MARCH 6, 1779.
AN ORATION.
FATHERS, COUNTRYMEN, FRIENDS,
"THAT man was born to delude and be deluded; to believe whatever is taught,
and bear whatsoever is imposed;" are political dogmas which have long afforded
matter for exultation and security to dignified villains, from the
powergrasping monarch, to the lowest minion of office. But however justified
they may have been, and now are, by the passive conduct of the greatest part of
mankind, you, my fellow-citizens, thank God, you are an exception to their
truth. The numerous, the respectable assembly which now crowd this hallowed
temple, prove you an exalted exception to maxims as disgraceful as they are
general. Ever vigilantly attentive to the sacred, unalienable rights of man;
equally studious in the glorious principles of liberty as intrepidly determined
to preserve inviolate the inestimable privileges she bestows; you are now
convened, not more to commemorate this anniversary, than solemnly to renew the
resolves, which freedom, wisdom, virtue, honor inspire: And not barely to
resolve, but I trust, steadily to pursue the execution of resolutions which
have resulted from deliberate investigation and full conviction.

To so intelligent, so well informed an auditory, it must be unnessary to
deduce the origin of civil society, which, founded in reciprocal advantage, and
begun in social virtue, on the mutual necessities and mutual assistance of
individuals built the combined happiness of the community -- a happiness thus
instituted, nothing but public spirit and a union of force and of council can
preserve: I must therefore request your indulgence whilst I rather point out
those evils which the concurrent experience of ages and nations prove to be
subversive of every good proposed from civil compact. Little solicitous of
rhetorical applause, I shall offer you my sentiments as they arise warm from a
heart devoted to the interests of this my parent country, in language that
becomes a freeman to use when addressing a free assembly. Rara temporum
felicitas, ubi sentire quae velis, et quae sentias dicere licet.

TACITUS.


SIMILAR causes will forever operate like effects in the political and moral,
as well as in the physical world: Those vices which ruined the illustrious
republics of Greece, and the mighty common wealth of Rome; which are now with
rapid progression ruining Great Britain, so late the first Kingdom of Europe,
must eventually ruin every State, where their deleterious influence is suffered
to prevail. Need I add that luxury, corruption, and standing armies are those
destructive efficients?

LUXURY, that siren luxury, whose treacherous song ever charms her deluded
votaries to destruction, or to infamy, no sooner finds admittance into a State
than she becomes the parent of innumerable evils, public and domestic; her
contagious influence is soon felt in society, her baneful effects discovered by
a general dissipation of manners and a declension of private virtue, which
begets effeminate habits, and by a natural gradation a base pliability of
spirit.

LUXURY is ever the foe of independance, for at the same time that it creates
Si ad naturam vives nunquam eris pauper; si ad opinionem nunquam dives. Exiguum
natura desiderat; opinio immensum. SEN. EP. 16.
artificial wants it precludes the means of satisfying them. It first makes men
necessitous, and then dependant. It first unsits men for patriotic energies,
and soon teaches them to consider public virtue as a public jest.

AT such a period, corruption finds an easy access to men's hearts. To the
promotion of interested pursuits, and the gratification of voluptuous wishes, a
ready sacrifice is made of the general good at the shrine of power. Then
slumbers that virtuous jealousy of public men and public measures, which was
wont to scrutinize not only actions but motives: Then nods that active zeal,
which, with eagle-eye watched, and with nervous arm defended the constitution.
Every day new inroads are made upon public liberty, while encroachments like
temptations, grow more frequent and more dangerous in proportion as the power
of resistance decreases. Thus before a nation is completely deprived of
freedom, she must be fitted for slavery by her vices.

GENERALLY, but not always, for we have known a people ruled by a despot, who
from a private station rose to uncontroled dominion, at a time when they were
sternly virtuous. And this mode of introducing bondage is ever to be
apprehended at the close of a successful struggle for liberty, when a
triumphant army, elated with victories, and headed by a popular General, may
become more formidable than the tyrant that has been expelled. Witness the last
century in the English history. Witness the aspiring CROMWELL!

THIS audacious citizen entrusted by his country with the command of her armies
to chastize the man whom previous folly If a man in private life, finds his
oldest son an idiot or a rascal, he may dispose of his estate among his other
children: But if the heir apparent (in hereditary monarchies) to a crown, an
inheritance in which millions are interested, turns out to be a blockhead or a
villain, still he must be King, because such is the line of succession
established by law. -- Hence the few Princes who have not been either the
scourge or disgrace of the kingdoms they have ruled.
had dubbed a King, and as such had presumed to treat his subjects, as all Kings
ever will do when they can, with contempt and injury, had no sooner dispatched
the foolish imperious Monarch, than he attempted to succeed him: With a little
management, he soon found his army as disposed to regify him as they had been
to depose Charles. With these mercenary associates at his heels, he appeared in
the Synod of the State, and dared with force, displace the most glorious band
of patriots that ever led a tyrant from his throne to a scaffold. Not content
with this enormous outrage upon the constitution, this annihilating stroke upon
the tottering liberties of his country, for a time to keep up the form of a
popular government, he convened an House of Commons, constituted entirely of his
own creatures. They met, and in a few months discovered that they were utterly
unequal to the posts they were raised to, they therefore petitioned their
master to dissolve them. Cromwell granted their request -- and became sole
tyrant of three kingdoms. -- Tyrant -- for of what consequence is it by what
style or under what modification despotism operates to the public misery --
Dictator, King, Protector, -- it is not the appellation we reprobate, though
even that we should guard against -- but the thing. Who but must own that
Cromwell under the name of Protector, was as absolute a despot as he could have
been with any other title?

THE first CAESAR affords us another instance among the thousands which history
holds up to our view, to teach us what bold and unprincipled spirits have
effected by the aid of armies. This ambitious subject having been for several
years engaged in the humane, the soldierly employment of slaughtering his
fellow men and in extending his conquests over countries which he had not even
a pretense to invade; this Caesar who boasted that he had slain a million of
men Plutarch says that Caesar could boast, that he had slain a Million of men,
gave a Million their liberty, and made a Million prisoners.

Vid. Plut. in vit. Caes.
was at length ordered home by the senate to answer to some charges against his
conduct. He knew that at such an interview his sword would be his ablest
advocate. He therefore led his veteran legions, "nothing loath," against his
country; passed the rubicon; fought his way to Rome; plunged a dagger in her
vitals; impiously trampled on her dearest rights; and seized on empire
crimsoned, execrable paricide! crimsoned with the richest blood of Rome's best
citizens!

Too late the patriot poniard reached the traytor's heart* Caesar fell --
alas! the republic had fallen before -- one tyrant dead, like the Hydra-head
cut off, up started more. Rome changed her tyrants, but the tyranny remained.
The same army that had enabled Julius to triumph over the liberties of his
country, led the cars of OCTAVIUS, ANTHONY and LEPIDUS through seas of Roman
blood, and bad the cursed triumvirate divide an enslaved world.

IF Rome could have been saved, BRUTUS and his virtuous associates would have
saved her; but a standing army, and a perpetual dictator, were, and ever will
prove too hard for the patriotic few. Learn hence, my countrymen, that a State
may sink so low in slavery that even virtue itself cannot retrieve her. From
these examples, prudence dictates -- resist beginnings. A free and wise people
will never suffer any citizen to become too popular -- much less too powerful.
A man may be formidable to the constitution even by his virtues. The
extravagant Panegyrics that have been paid to some of our principal military
characters, in Strains scarcely short of adoration, are unworthy the manly
sentiments and independent principles which should distinguish the inhabitants
of a free country. If our heroes must be deified, we ought at least to wait
until death has placed their characters beyond dispute, and our imagination
translated them to Heaven. The Romans (while they remained free) never admitted
a man to an Apotheosis, until through the gates of death he had reached
immortality, and been personally introduced to a seat in an assembly of the
Gods.


BUT why do I keep your attention fixed on remote transactions? Our own times
furnish additional and convincing proofs of the destructive consequences of
political corruption and mercenary armies.

SWEEDEN, the bravest, hardiest, freest nation of the north -- in one day -- in
one hour -- may every freeman execrate the tyrant -- SWEEDEN in one hour was
plunged from the distinguished heights of liberty into abject vassalage. What
ties can bind a King? Scarce had GUSTAVUS the THIRD ascended the throne of
limited monarchy; scarce had the roofs of the senate house ceased to
reverberate the insidious accents of his inauguration speech As this speech is
in but few people's hands, I believe, in this country it is inserted at large,
not only because it is fraught with excellent advice, but also to show how
little reliance is to be placed on coronation speeches.

The King of Sweeden's speech to the States on the 1st of June, 1772.
You are this day assembled, in order to confirm in the manner of your
ancestors, the band of union which ties you to me, and me to you, and both to
the whole commonwealth; we must therefore remember, with the most sensible
gratitude, the benevolence of the almighty, who has ordered things so, that
this very ancient kingdom of the Sweeds and Goths is still existing, after so
many foreign, as well as national shocks, and that I, in the throne of my
ancestors, can yet address free and independent States.

Assured of your hearts, most sincerely proposing to merit them, and to fix my
throne upon your love and felicity, the public engagement which you are going
to enter into, would, in my opinion, be needless, if ancient custom and the law
of Sweeden did not require it of you. Unhappy the King who wants the tie of
oaths to secure himself on the throne, and who, not assured of the hearts of
his subjects, is constrained to reign only by the force of laws, when he cannot
by the love of his subjects!

I need not put you in mind of the weightiness of the engagement you are going
to take; the States of Sweeden know best the extent of their duty to themselves
and the commonwealth; may concord and harmony ever unite your hearts; may
foreign views and private gain ever be sacrificed to public interest; may this
alone be a perpetual bond of union amongst you; and may the ambition of any
part of you, never raise any such disturbances as may endanger the freedom and
independency of the whole commonwealth!

Gentlemen of the House of Nobles,

Preserve always the honor and intrepidity of your ancestors; be an example to
your fellow-citizens; and, as you are the first order of the kingdom, be also
the first in virtue and love of your country.

Good Men of the Reverend Order of Clergy,

May mutual friendship and peace, obedience to the laws, reverence to God and
the King, bear witness to me and the country, of your zeal in the execution of
the sacred office with which you are entrusted!

Good Men of the respectable Order of Burghers,

Strive always with your fellow subjects who shall contribute the most to the
public good; may the fruits of the extensive share which belongs to you, be
general credit and confidence, useful institutions, frugal living, and moderate
gain, which lead to sure and certain wealth!

Good Men of the worthy Order of Peasants,

May piety, diligence, temperance, and old Sweedish faith and modesty, be the
strongest confirmation of the honor always due to that order which gives
subsistence to all the others; an honor which the Sweedish peasants have at
all times attained.

This is all I ask of you, when you observe this, you perform in the best
manner, that duty to me and your country, which according to the Sweedish laws,
I now call upon you to confirm by oath.

For an historical account of this revolution, vid. gentleman's magazine for
1772, page 397, etc. For the Sweedish constitution, vid. the abbot Vertot.


whilst yet the venerable representatives of their country were fondly
anticipating the blessings that would arise from the reign of so wise, so good
a King -- the unblushing paricide surrounded with an armed host the temple in
which the senate was assembled, planted his cannon against the gates, and with
the swords of his guards at the throats of the senators, demanded immediate
absolution from his coronation oath, by which he had most sacredly bound
himself to preserve inviolate the laws and liberties of the Sweedes! who could
have thought a strippling, whose language breathed the glowing sentiments of
enthusiastic generosity so natural to youth, could with such facility set at
defiance all that is held sacred, honorable and obligatory among men! but the
lust of domination, so natural to human nature, will ever prove too hard for
the checks of conscience and the dictates of righteousness, when a favorable
opportunity presents to gratify it. Gustavus knowing that the army were ready
to assist his iniquitous designs (as all standing armies are to promote
despotism, because under such a system of rule, soldiers must be necessary and
consequently favored.) the barriers raised by justice and his plighted faith to
Sweeden, became slight indeed. Force backed inclination, and Gustavus changed
circumscribed authority, for unconfined sovereignty For a complete system of
despotism, see the Lex regia of Denmark, constituted by, Frederick 3d in 1665,
and published by Christian 5th, in 1683.


LET us now turn our eyes to that nation whom we once did love, and with whom
we had yet been friends had not an unparallelled series of folly and cruelty
compelled us to renounce the pleasing relation-ship. A short retrospect of
whose public conduct subsequent to the last War will afford many and important
instructions.

IN 1763 peace was restored after a war of seven years successfully waged in
every quarter of the globe. At that period what an unrivalled figure did
Great Britain stand amongst the nations! Great beyond all former example, in
arms, in commerce and in wealth. Not a corner of the earth but had witnessed
her achievements. Wheresoever she directed her armies, victory and conquest
attended; whilst her irresistible navy, thundering over every ocean, not only
subdued, but annihilated the fleets of her enemies.

TRIUMPHANT in war, nor less distinguished in peace. In most of the polite, in
all the useful arts and sciences, superior to her neighbors. In commerce
unequalled; not a sea but bore, not a wind but wafted her countless ships,
laden with the riches of the earth, and made her crowded ports the marts of she
world. Late glorious nation, How are thou fallen, how lost! from so envied, so
stupendous an height, by the perverted will of thy infatuated monarch, and the
pernicious counsels of his nefarious ministers. Driven to the fearful edge of
ruin, we now behold Thee tottering over the gulf of annihilation, whilst
France and her allies urge Thee over the irremeable steep!

WHEN we consider the capital defects in the English constitution -- the
character of her present weak and ambitious monarch -- the luxury, dissipation
and venality of her influential men, we shall cease to wonder at her declension
and present circumstances.

IN a limited monarchy, where the prince as supreme executive magistrate, and
first branch of the legislature, is invested with the important prerogative of
making peace and war; is constituted the sole fountain of honor, and becomes
the exclusive disposer of every lucrative and honorable appointment, civil,
ecclesiastic and military; his influence becomes too enormous to be compatible
with the public liberty: But if to such extravagant powers (by a fatal error in
the Constitution, placed in the hands of the Prince) he should superadd a
detestable system of corruption to bribe the Representatives of the people (a
system which during the reign of his present Britannic Majesty has been urged
to its utmost possible extent) the worst species of vassalage must ensue. That
equipoise between the respective branches of the Legislature (in which the
seeming, the theoretic excellence of the English Constitution consists) will be
totally destroyed; the Executive will involve the powers of the Legislative,
and whilst the letter and formalities of the Constitution are retained, its
spirit and intendment will be totally lost. An absolutely arbitrary, with the
forms of a free Government (that worst and surest of all tyrannies) will
gradually succeed and be finally established, unless a total revolution is
happily effected by the timely exertions of the people, before the Despot has
strengthened himself with a mercenary army, and forever closed their chains.

BUT this tyranny is already established in Great Britain: for what hopes can
Britons entertain of effecting a revolution, whilst the Crown by the
multiplicity of gifts in its power, can maintain an infamous majority in each
House of Parliament to legalize, and a standing army to enforce its projects,
however imperious, inhuman or unjust. In vain, a few wise and virtuous men see
and lament their dishonorable situation -- An army of forty thousand soldiers
in time of peace, and a still more numerous band of placemen and pensioners
properly disposed throughout the kingdom, effectually stifle in their birth
every effort of patriotism to restore the constitution to its primaeval
principles.

SUCH is the boasted Constitution, such the Prince, and such the present
condition of the people of Britain. Unhappy nation, thus constitutionally
enslaved -- thus legally undone! Unworthy descendants of illustrious ancestors
-- thus to suffer your most essential rights to be bartered away, your
Government not only corrupted, but perverted to purposes diametrically opposite
to its original intention. A Parliament at first constituted to watch over and
preserve your rights and immunities from the encroaching steps of ambitious
Princes, you have permitted to become an engine in the hands of royalty, the
more effectually to abridge or nullify those rights. A Parliament constituted
the stewards of your property, who instead of guarding it from the insatiable
grasp of royal avidity, you patiently see lavishingly indulging the utmost
extravagance of regal profusion; granting enormous sums for effecting the most
pernicious purposes; traitorously leaguing with the servants of the Crown in
loading you with intolerable taxes, and, sharers in the spoil, prodigally
complying with the most unbounded demands of ministerial rapacity, while they
at the same time treacherously unite to screen the most infamous defaulters of
the public money. Instead of bravely drawing your swords in defense of your
freedom and national honor, you first tamely acquiesced in an insidious and
ignominious Vid. Statutes at large -- Particularly 1. Geo. 3. chapter 29. and 10th
Geo. 2d. chapter 19. and Black. Com. B. 2. chapter 27. -- For the game and forest laws.
law by which you were basely disarmed like slaves, and then from necessity
submitted to keeping on foot, in time of peace, a standing army, that in time
of war had been raised professedly for the defense of the national territories
from foreign attacks -- an army which you now behold, without shame and without
regret, spreading devastation and horror over a late peaceful and happy
country; and having at length dismembered the empire, are now attempting to
reduce us to the most infamous and most miserable of all conditions, that of
being the conquered vassals of your weak, vindictive, despotic Monarch.

DEGENERATE sons of great forefathers! Is it possible that you can console
yourselves for the loss of essential rights, because you still retain the empty
privilege of lampooning your King and mobbing his Ministers, whilst you are
destitute of that public spirit and solid virtue which should purge your
corrupted Government and reform your wretched Constitution!

FROM subjection to a government thus defective and corrupt, and thus vilely
administered, what freeman would not struggle for an emancipation? But if there
is an American present who can yet secretly wish for a reunion with this
nation and a share in her ideal privileges, let him for a moment consider the
innumerable indignities, which for fifteen years back have been offered us by
this haughty power, added to the savage barbarities which they have exercised
in every part of America where their army have made any progress, and he must
blush at the spiritless, the ignoble sentiment.

IN 1764 the plan for raising a revenue from this country was resolved on by
the British Ministry, and THEIR obsequious Parliament were instructed to pass
an act for that purpose. No content with having for a century directed the
entire commerce of America and centered its profits in their own island;
thereby deriving from the Colonies every substantial advantage which the
situation and transmarine distance of the country could afford them: not
content with appointing the principal officers in the different Governments,
while the King had a negative upon every law that was enacted: not content with
our supporting the whole charge of our municipal establishments, although their
own creatures held the chief posts therein: not content with laying external
duties upon our mutilated and shackled commerce, they, by this statute,
attempted to rob us of even the curtailed property, the hard-earned peculium
which still remained to us -- to create a revenue for the support of a fleet
and army, in reality to overawe and and secure our subjection, not (as they
insidiously pretended) to protect our trade or defend our frontiers; the first
of which they annoyed, and the latter deserted.

AFTER repealing this imperious edict, not because it was unjust in principle,
but inexpedient in exercise, they proceeded to declare, by a public act of the
whole Legislature, that we had no property but what was at their disposal, and
that Americans in future were to hold their privileges and lives solely on the
tenure of the good will and pleasure of a British Parliament. Acts soon
followed correspondent to this righteous determination, which, not quadrating
with American ideas of right, justice and reason, a fleet and army were sent to
give them that force, which laws receive when promulgated from the mouths of
cannon, or at the points of bayonets.

WE then first saw our harbor crowded with hostile ships, our streets with
soldiers -- soldiers accustomed to consider military prowess as the standard of
excellence, and vain of the splended pomp attendant on regular armies, they
contemptuously looked down on our peaceful orders of citizens. Conceiving
themselves more powerful they assumed a superiority which they did not feel;
and whom they could not but envy they effected to despise. Perhaps knowing they
were sent, and believing they were able to subdue us, they thought it was not
longer necessary to observe any measures with slaves -- hence that fastidious
arrogance in the carriage of the officers -- hence that licentioness and
brutality in the common soldiers, which at length broke out with insufferable
violence, and proceeding to personal insults and outrageous assaults on the
inhabitants, soon roused them to resentment, and produced the catastrophe which
we now commemorate. The immediate horrors of that distressful night -- Hecaten
vocat altera, saevam
altera Tisiphonen serpents, atque videres
Infernas errare Canes; Lunamque rubentem,
Ne foret his Testis, post magna latere sepulchra.
Hor. L. 1. S. 8.
have been so often and so strikingly painted, that I shall not again wring
your feeling bosoms with the affecting recital: to the faithful pen of history
I leave them to be represented as the horrid prelude to those more extensive
tragedies, which under the direction of a most obdurate and sanguinary Prince
have since been acted in every corner of America where his armies have been
able to penetrate.

OUR Citizens who fell on that memorable night, falling bequeathed us this
salutary lesson written indeliably with their blood. Confusion, murders, and
misery must ever be the consequence of mercenary standing armies cantoned in
free cities. -- Et altis Urbibus ultimae
Stetere Causae cur perirent
Funditus imprimiretque Muris
Hostile Aratrum Exercitus insolens.
Hor. Lib. 1. Car. 16.


MY Countrymen, suffer not the slaughtered brethren we now lament to have bled
in vain; let us forever retain the important lesson, and they will not have
ineffectually fallen. Security shall spring from their tombs, and their deaths
preserve the lives of citizens yet unborn. Succeeding generations shall
celebrate the era of this anniversary as the epoch of American triumph, not as
a day of sadness; and future patriots nobly envy the death of those, who dying
taught their countrymen experimental wisdom.


