MR. WOODWARD's SERMON, DELIVERED APRIL NINETEENTH, M.DCC.LXXIX.

THE HELP OF THE LORD, IN SIGNAL DELIVERANCES AND SPECIAL SALVATIONS, TO BE
ACKNOWLEDGED AND REMEMBERED.

A SERMON, PREACHED AT LEXINGTON, APRIL 19, 1779; In COMMEMORATION of the great
Distress and wonderful Deliverance of God's People on the Nineteenth of April,
1775; where Hostilities begun, and when the bloody War between Great Britain
and her Colonies commenced.

BY SAMUEL WOODWARD, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN WESTON.

The LORD reigns, let the Earth rejoice.

Ps. 97, 1. The LORD reigns let the People tremble.

Ps. 99, 1. BOSTON: PRINTED BY JOHN GILL, IN COURT-STREET. 1779.

The help of the LORD to be acknowledged and remembered.
1 SAMUEL, 7.12. Then Samuel took a Stone, and set it between Mizpeh and Shen,
and called the name of it Ebenezer, saying, hitherto has the LORD helped us.


TO commemorate the Nineteenth of April, 1775, when this distressing war began
-- To sympathize with the friends of those who fell the first victims to
British tyranny in this place -- To acknowledge the help of the Lord, which we
have experienced in the course of the dispute -- And, to encourage our trust in
God to perfect what is lacking, are, no doubt, among the designs of this
Anniversary: Which are justified and recommended by ancient usages, and the
express command of God to past ages upon similar occasions. For, if we look
back upon the annals of time, and critically observe the conduct of divine
providence in the various ages of the world, we shall find God has not lest
himself without witness, but has been doing good, filling the hearts of men
with gladness. And both before and under the Jewish dispensation, as well as in
gospel times, when God designed to perpetuate the remembrance of any peculiar
period of time -- remarkable event in providence, or extraordinary salvation
wrought for his people, -- He erected, or ordered monuments to be erected, as
standing witnesses or monitors to mankind of their obligation therefore. --
Thus, the seventh day sabbath, was instituted by God as a day of rest in
perpetual remembrance of the creation of the world, as the christian-sabbath,
was since in remembrance of Christ's glorious resurrection from the dead.

THUS it is the declared design of the holy supper to keep alive the design and
agonies of his death, who was sacrificed for us -- as a witness and monument of
that great salvation which the whole world have reason to rejoice in. The
passover was instituted and observed, as a standing memorial of the departure
of the Israelites out of Egypt. Pentecost, to admonish of the reality and time
of the law's being given on Sinai. The feast of Tabernacles, as a memorial that
the Israelites dwelt in tents in the wilderness. Thus, the Stone at Bethel was
set up, as a continual memorial of that extraordinary revelation to Jacob in
his way to Padan-Aram. Thus again, the monument or heap of stones called Gilead
was a witness of the covenant between Laban and Jacob. And thus you remember,
that the heap of stones in the midst of Jordan, and the pile erected in Gilgal,
were standing memorials, to the present and succeeding generations, of the
wonderful salvation wrought for the Israelites, in carrying them through those
waters, dry shod. And, of the like nature and design was the stone which Samuel
set up by the name of Ebenezer to keep alive the remembrance of a great
salvation, wrought for them in their success against the Philistines. And this
salvation will appear more worthy of remembrance, if we consider some peculiar
circumstances by which it was preceeded. The Philistines, who came early into
Palestine were a powerful people, even in Abraham's time: And, notwithstanding
all the conquests of Joshua, they greatly oppressed Israel since, under the
Judges, under Saul, and in the beginning of David's reign. In particular we
have mention made (in 4 th Chap. of this Book) of two battles fought between
Israel and the Philistines; in the first of which, Israel lost the battle and
had four thousand men slain; upon which they conclude, and that justly, that
the presence of the Lord was not with them: They, therefore, send for the Ark
of God, trusting in the token of his presence, rather than in the power of his
arm; hence they lose a second battle when thirty thousand fell, and the Ark of
God, in which they trusted, was taken from them: Which shows that the external
tokens of God's presence afford no security.

AFTER this, we find by our context, that Israel were bro't to an humble
dependence on the strength of the Lord; and therefore, entreat that Samuel
would not cease to pray for them. Accordingly Samuel cried unto the Lord, and
he heard him, and the Lord thundered with a great thunder that day upon the
Philistines, and discomfitted them: And the men of Israel went out of Mispeh
and pursued them and smote them until they came to Bethear.

Now this was so affecting to Samuel, and was so deserving remembrance, that he
erected a monument, a stone of Remembrance, and called it Ebenezer saying
hitherto has the Lord helped us. Samuel* who had prayed for the mercy, now
upon the receipt of it, sets up his Ebenezer as a memorial, that the salvation
might be kept in everlasting remembrance. -- -- We have only then to consider

THE valuable purposes such monuments serve -- and

THE frequent occasion a merciful God has given his people to set them up --
before we proceed to those addresses which may finish the discourse:

FIRST then, as to the valuable purposes such monuments and such
acknowledgments may serve -- I would observe with reference to that of Samuel.

1. THAT it was a perpetual remembrance of the distress Israel was in on that
day.

SALVATION is a relative term, and it is almost impossible to separate the idea
of a people's or person's deliverance, from that of the misery or danger they
were delivered from. "As the means of safety sometimes awaken the idea of
danger," so a memorial of a salvation is, at the same time, a memorial of the
distress. Hence the monument that Samuel erected, pointed to that day of
distress when the Philistines were coming against Israel again: Distress and
confusion greatly heightened by their former distresses when Israel fled before
the Philistines, and were slain by hundreds and thousands; which had left such
an horror upon their minds, as was easily roused upon such an appearance. Now
then, when the Children of Israel heard at Mispeh, that the Philistines were
coming again upon them, they were afraid -- they were surprised and plunged in
the utmost perplexity with their sudden and unexpected onset; as this people
have been upon a like occasion -- The Philistines attacked them in an
inglorious and cowardly manner; when unarmed and in no posture of defense; yea,
when met together for repentance and prayer; as though they would mock their
religion and their God both. And although the Philistines soon pay dear for their
presumption, yet the remembrance of Israel's distress on that day was never to
be blotted out.

2. THIS monument and confession might teach humility and submission under
disappointments. No words can be faller of humility and resignation than those
that Samuel uttered upon the occasion -- "hitherto has the Lord helped us;"
ascribing all to God -- not murmuring that he did not help before, when they
were distressed and overcome; for he knew that God had not punished them
according to their deserts, nor rewarded them according to their sins: No, but
notwithstanding our former rebukes and disappointments which we suffered for
our sin and idolatry; yet let us ascribe the salvation of this day to God who
has remembered mercy for us in the midst of judgment. As though he had said, "it
is of the Lord's mercy we are not consumed" -- the Lord has not poured out the
full vials of his indignation, but has made the wrath of man that is gone forth
to praise him, and the remainder thereof he has restrained. Not unto us, not
unto us, but to thy name be the glory of this salvation. For, we acknowledge in
all that is bro't upon us, thou have punished us less than our iniquities have
deserved.

3. THIS monument was a mark and evidence of God's owning and blessing a
particular trust in him.

After Israel had lost the last battle mentioned before this, in which God so
remarkably appeared for them; they were disposed universally to (...), to put
away their strange gods, and to (...) unto the Lord. Upon which Samuel (...)
them success against their enemies. And (...) they put away Baalim and Asteroth
and (...) the Lord only. And as men persuaded that their help was not in false
gods or in an arm of flesh but only in the Lord of Hosts; and persuaded that
Samuel was a powerful and prevalent intercessor, like Jacob who had power with
God and prevailed: They say to him, "cease not to cry unto the Lord our God for
us that he will save us out of the hands of the Philistines." They were very
solicitous that Samuel should not cease to pray for them.

WHAT military preparations were needful to be made, they would undertake
themselves, but let Samuel continue, instant in prayer: Perhaps remembering that
when Moses did but let down his hand, ever so little, Amalek prevailed.

THIS particular prayerful trust in the Lord, God accepted and blessed.

ISRAEL could never be threatened more seasonably, says one, than at this time,
when they were repenting and praying. Nor, could the Philistines have acted
more impolitickly for themselves, than to make war upon Israel at the very
time, when Israel were making their peace with God.

BUT God permitted them to do it, that he might have opportunity, immediately,
of crowning his people's reformation with tokens of his favor. And of
confirming the words of his Messenger, who had assured them that if they
repented, God would deliver them out of the hand of the Philistines.

4. THIS monument was a constant memorial to them and their posterity, of the
obligations they were under to God for the salvation of that Day.

THROUGH the imperfection of our memories; the ingratitude of our hearts; and
the diversions of a vain world; we are apt to have these deep impressions worn
off, which are sometimes made upon our minds, by the extraordinary providence
of God, and remarkable deliverances of his people from earthquakes or from
enemies; either when he has made us to stand still and see his salvation, or,
when he has strengthened us, and remarkably led us on to conquest.

And, Samuel sensible of this, although he had no reason to doubt but Israel were
properly affected for the present, yet though it proper to erect a monument that
should be a constant and perpetual monitor to Israel and their posterity, that
upon such a day the Lord wrought great deliverance for them, which inferred an
obligation of gratitude and obedience on them and their posterity; like what
Joshua said to the Representatives of the twelve tribes, -- "pass over before
the ark of the Lord your God into the midst of Jordan, and take ye up every man
of you a stone upon his shoulder, according unto the number of the tribes of
the children of Israel: That this may be a sign among you that when your
children ask their fathers in time to come, saying, What mean ye by these
stones? Then ye shall answer them, that the waters of Jordan were cut off
before the ark of the covenant of the Lord, when it passed over Jordan, the
waters of Jordan were cut off; and these stones shall be a memorial unto the
children of Israel forever." But a memorial of what? Not simply that such a
thing was done, but that they were bound to acknowledge the mavelous loving
kindness and astonishing interposition of God therein. As often as they saw
this monument they were reminded of God's goodness in their salvation; and it
was a constant demand of their dutiful and thankful obedience.

5. SUCH a monument served to admonish them of the necessity of relying on the
Lord in every exigence for the future.

THEY had been taught, by sorrowful experience, that the "race was not to the
swift, nor the battle to the strong," yea that success did not always attend
the name and profession of religion, or the external tokens of God's presence,
but a real, penitent trust in him. And Samuel, at least was sensible that one
salvation did not ensure another, nor was even an earnest of it, without the
like trust in God. The sin that procured their defeat formerly being pardoned
upon their repentance, the pardon was sealed upon this glorious victory, in the
very same place, where they had before suffered loss.

Samuel says, "hitherto has the Lord helped us," which, at the same time that
it expresses his thankfulness for what they had now received, expresses a doubt
for the future. Hitherto, things have done well, but what God may yet do with
us, we know not. This doubt, however, must arise from the fickleness, or
inconstancy of the people, and from a fear that they would not continue their
obedience and dependence on providence. For, none could be more confident than
Samuel was that this would assure them success; -- when he said, before this
salvation, "if ye do return unto the Lord with all your hearts -- and prepare
your hearts unto the Lord and serve him only, he will deliver you out of the
hands of the Philistines." So that this monument and inscription, taught the
necessity of a trust in God, in all future time, in every day of need.

IF, these now, and such like are the valuable ends such monuments and such
inscriptions serve: -- how suitable must it be, in the next place, to consider,

SECONDLY. How frequently God in his kind providence gives his people occasion
to erect them.

AND indeed while we are looking on the various help of the Lord in time past;
what shall we consider it with reference to? And to what period of time shall
we look back? Shall we consider it with reference only to the present day of
uncommon distress? Or, from the first settlement of the country? Or, from the
earliest accounts of time? And more especially with reference to the church of
God? For, verily God has wonderfully appeared for his people, -- for their
deliverance and help ever since he had a church in the world.

ALTHOUGH, he has suffered enemies to rise up and distress, yet not to destroy
it. The burning bush has not been consumed!

AND with regard to the christian church, he has founded it upon a rock, and
promised that the gates of hell shall not prevail against it. And that promise
shall stand in spite of all the powers of earth and the invisible world. Every
generation since, has had reason to praise God for his goodness herein, and
every generation shall have reason to do it, as long as the sun and moon shall
endure.

BUT then, how conspicuous and wonderful has been the help of the Lord, in and
since the first settlement of this country.

LET us look back and consider what a dreary wilderness this was, little more
than a century and half ago; and realize what could induce our forefathers to
exchange a rich, fruitful and long cultivated soil in their native land; for
this, then, barren and howling wilderness; but the hope of exchanging, at the
same time, tyranny and oppression, for liberty and religion -- the rights of
men and liberty of conscience.

AND how visible was the help of the Lord, in perfecting their plan and
bringing it to effect -- that when they had escaped the dangers of the sea,
being few in number and strangers in the land, that the native Savages did not
swallow them up quick.

BUT that God, who could preserve Daniel from the merciless jaws of hungry
lions, preserved these exiles from the power of this blood-thirsty people!

WE got not the land by our own sword, neither did our own arm save us, but thy
right hand, and thine arm, and the light of thy countenance, because thou had
a favor unto us.

GOD has driven out the heathen by little and little, and made room for this
vine which is of his own right-hand's planting.

AND, how often have we experienced the help of the Lord in the wars we have
been engaged in with the natives and their French neighbors? What salvations
have been wrought for us when in danger?

WHAT deliverances in time of fear? How has God preserved Americans from the
sword, famine and pestilence; and caused them greatly to increase; so that they
are become comparatively a great people.

AND in the course of the last war, the seat of (...) was in America, after
some great disapappointments, heavy losses and special discouragements; when it
was manifest we greatly needed the help of the Lord: How did God, as it were,
turn again our captivity; or, rather turn our mourning into joy? And by what a
series of successes did the Lord deliver his people? And by what conquests over
our enemies? When he gave them as dust to our sword and us driven stubble to
our bow; caused them to lick the dust -- and us to set our feet upon their
necks. Yea we were led from one success and victory to another, by the powerful
hand of the Lord of Hosts, until our conquest was finally so complete; that, as
it was though it English America would be, forever, delivered from troubles of that
sort, which she had been harrassed with, from her first settlement: That the
bitterness of war was over in this land; that the snare was broken, and that we
had, finally escaped.

BUT, "the Lord sees not as man sees." What was in the womb of providence,
and what determinations in the right hand of the most high God, respecting us,
we know not.

HOW mistaken have we been! -- As David when he got rid of Saul and his family,
had those of his own house rise up against him, who bro't him into new, and
greater troubles, than he had before: So it has been with us, those of our own
house, as it were, have risen up against us.

OUR troubles now come from what we were once fond to call our parent state;
who have assumed and exercised an unconstitutional, illegal, and unreasonable
authority over us: vid. Rev. Cook's Sermon upon 19th of April.
Whose oppressions have been enumerated and thus denominated by the united
wisdom of the Continent. The humble Petitions of the Congress to the throne.
But more fully in the declaration of Independence which the usurpation, tyranny
and unrelenting cruelty of Britain compelled us (...).


BUT however in the midst of all the designs of our enemies to distress and
enslave us, the help of the Lord has been very conspicuous; and that in
innumerable instances.

A FEW of those that are most obvious I shall mention. And it is observable,
that, however secret and skulking the attack of our enemies was at last; yet it
was happy that the fears of people had got previously alarmed; and the galling
yoke of tyranny began to be so severely felt, that, every denomination though it it
would soon be intolerable, and hence, were forced into a resolution, to spend
time and money, with their utmost endeavors, for the service and in defense of
the rights and privileges of their country.

AND indeed what had become of us on the 19 th of April, 1775. When men were
called, so suddenly, to buckle on their armor; if they had not proved it
before; and if their had not been some previous care taken by the colonies to
get equipt, and into an acquaintance with the use of arms and military
exercises. -- But as God prepared the way for Israel into Canaan -- and for our
forefathers into this land; -- So did he for that critical day, by inspiring
people with a military spirit -- diffusing it through the province and land, in a
greater degree than was ever known before; disposing people of all ages and
denominations (except such as have been in opposition to all our measures) to
prepare themselves for the time, when the cloud (of war) should break upon them.

AND the help of the Lord was seen, afterward, in that, although our enemies
meant it for evil (as it was an evil indeed to individuals) yet the Lord meant
it for good; and made the horrid murders of that day, an occasion of uniting
the Colonies, beyond the expectation of the most confident whig. From that day,
a determination was formed, to stand by each other in opposing tyranny and
slavery then breaking in upon us like a stood.

MOREOVER, the help of the Lord was conspicuous, in the pity and benevolence of
our sister States to this Province, when bro't under unheard of oppressions;
when they were disposed to send in to us, all the aid they could, in that time
of distress, not only by information and counsel, but in most liberal donations
of money and provision, for those thousands that by the cruelty of the Port
Bill were cut off, from the usual means of subsistence.

THE help of the Lord was conspicuous likewise, in that, when the exigency of
our affairs, as was though it, called for a suspension of courts of justice, and so
of the operation and execution of laws, when every man's life and property
became exposed to the lawless and violent; that there were such remarkable
restraints on the lusts and passions of men; as that it was though it, by the
candid and observing, there were, at that time, fewer overt-acts and outrages
punishable by law, than usual.

ANOTHER instance of the help of the Lord, worthy of notice is, that so many of
that small part of the community that were differently minded in political
things from the body of the people; and who from principle, interest or
prejudice, acted in opposition to the common cause, fled from the midst of us
in the beginning of our troubles.

WHETHER the particular design of their fleeing to the metropolis, was personal
safety, as they pretended; or, for distinction and applause on the other side
the water as others supposed: Yet we are convinced, from the conduct of those
that were left behind, that the removal of them that went, has contributed much
to our safety. And we never have had so much reason to wish them back again, as
to wish others, of the same dangerous principles, with them. Designing men,
among ourselves, must be more dangerous to the community, than when joined with
an open enemy.

MORROVER, How plain was the help of the Lord, that the dissolution of our
General Assembly -- the legislator of the Province, was, in so great a measure,
remedied by a voluntary provincial Congress, who transacted matters, with as
much prudence, and to as good purpose, as possible, under, our then, broken
circumstances.

FURTHERMORE, How evident has been the help of the Lord, in forming and
assembling the Continental Congress, -- the Grand Council of these United
States, in opposition to the united wishes and joint endeavors of our enemies
on the other side the Atlantic, and of their emissaries here.

AND indeed, the help of the Lord is not more to be taken notice of, in
bringing that very respectable Assembly into being at first, than his blessing
and presence with them, since.

HOW evidently, did God bless and direct them in the appointment of able
Generals for our army, and especially of his EXCELLENCY GENERAL WASHINGTON, the
commander in chief, whose prudence, wisdom, skill and courage have all along
been the envy of his enemies, and admiration of his friends.

FURTHERMORE, How plainly has the help of the Lord appeared in the many
deliverances wro't for our army in one time of danger and another? What
salvations, has God granted? What successes, has he given them -- in some
instances very remarkable indeed! Which have been mentioned before upon this
anniversary.

LET us go on then, to mention the help of the Lord, in the succors we
received from foreign powers in warlike stores, etc. -- but especially in that
open, generous alliance formed between his Most Christian Majesty, and the
United States of America. Also the blessing and help of the Lord is great, in
preserving the union of these States, when every method has been used both from
within, and without ourselves, to disunite and weaken us. And we may reckon
among the blessings of God, the remarkable health which has been generally
enjoyed in the course of the war, -- although some particular places have been
visited with sickness. And also, that God has hitherto granted us provisions
for the support of our armies. But the time would fail me, to mention the one
half of the instances in which the help of the Lord has been remarkably
experienced. -- Surely if we add to what has been mentioned, the goodness of
God in continuing to us the privileges of the gospel, it must be granted that
we have reason to set up our Ebenezer and say, hitherto has the Lord helped us.

AND now, my friends, such helps of the Lord, it becomes us to recognize upon
this occasion, even when met together to deprecate the horrors of war in
general -- the bloody scenes of this in particular -- more especially the
inhuman murders that were committed in this place, when the Flames of War first
broke out among us.

THIS day and this assembly are the memorial of the nineteenth of April, 1775.

AND this is the place, where the bloody tragedy begun.

THIS very house is a monument of the violence and rage of our enemies! -- and
here, is the ( Aceldama or) Field of Blood, where so many of our friends
wallowed in their gore. -- O dreadful day! O shocking event!

INDEED such as regard not a providence herein, may rashly say, with Job, in
the bitterness of his souls. -- "Let that day be darkness, let not God regard
it from above, neither let the light shine upon it. Let darkness and the shadow
of death stain it, let a cloud dwell upon it, let the blackness of the day
terrify it."

BUT we, rather, acknowledge the righteous hand of God, -- and wish our
bereaved friends, may hear the rod and who has appointed it, -- and
acknowledge with us, the help of the Lord in that day, when God remembered
mercy in the midst of judgment.

SUCH is the make of man -- and such the feelings of the human heart,
especially when under the aids of religion, as rendered impossible that we
should not sympathize with you, my friends, in that day of uncommon distress.
-- But who could adopt the feelings of those who saw their houses in flames,
and dwelling-places, by the malice of an enemy, sinking into ruins?

HOW much less, the piercing anguish of soul, which they endured, whose friends
-- Fathers -- Husbands or Children, were left breathless corpses on the ground?

SUCH a sight, or such tidings, in consequence of the hellish machinations of
an enemy, must afflict the soul with the most stinging remorse.

FOR your support, we have in our respective stations and capacities, most
ardently prayed to God, -- and with you we still sympathize.

BUT have you not even in the days of your mourning, experienced much of the
help of the Lord? -- the goodness of God in supporting you under your trials?
In sanctifying your bereavements? In wiping away your tears? So that you have
reason to acknowledge "hitherto has the Lord helped us." O then still commit
your way to God -- cast your burden upon him, "a father of the fatherless and a
judge of the widows, is God in his holy habitation."

BUT although my friends, your calamities made the first, and therefore the
deepest impressions on our sympathetic hearts: Yet how many hundred families?
and how many thousand souls, have since become your brethren in distress?
distress attended with more aggravating circumstances still. For, as has been
observed to you upon this occasion, before; "your friends, although murdered by
the enemy -- sleep quietly here, while others are lamenting the loss of their
friends, equally dear to them, whose bones are scattered at the grave's mouth,
or have been inhumanly buried with the burial of an ass, drawn and cast forth."

BUT beside, how many have the desolations of war, and wantonness of the enemy,
stripped of habitations, who have, now, no certain dwelling-places to hide their
weeping eyes, or console their aching hearts.

O, HOW are the miseries of war to be deprecated!

FATHERS stooping for age, are bowed down more heavily, under the losses of
sons that were the support of their years, and confidence of their gray heads.
And widows, at this day, in tears, with their fatherless children around them
crying for bread -- a situation that must move the compassions of a stone! We
must, then, mingle our tears with their's also, and divide our pity and prayers
betwixt them and you -- and must even request you to join with us, in our most
ardent cries to God -- the father of mercies, that he would compassionate the
distresses of such -- sanctify their sorrows to them, and feed, cover and
defend them, until these calamities are overpassed.

I WOULD now turn a particular address to the military companies, who appear in
arms to aid and honor this solemnity.

MY friends, it is owing to the help of the Lord. -- to his sparing
distinguishing mercy, that you escaped, that day when your neighbors and
fellow soldiers slept in death! And while God has made their deaths an
admonition to you to be ready -- even for a sudden death yourselves; -- so to
hear that the "voice of your brother's blood cries to God from the ground." --
It was here, by the permission of providence, that an ideal war, was first
converted into reality. -- here the sword was first drawn, and here the flames
of war first broke out, which have since spread through the land.

THE bravery and prudence, so conspicuous in the militia of Lexington, on that
alarming day, which we commemorate; have, I believe, met with universal
approbation. And a desire to avenge the blood of your slaughtered brethren and
defend your country, has led you to cultivate the art of war, and inspired you
with the spirit and resolution of soldiers, -- a character which the present
times have taught us, is most respectable indeed. Soldiers are an order of men
of as high importance as any at all: Yea, they are the very guardians of other
orders, and one of the main pillars of the state: -- Soldiers when under the
restraints of conscience, and religious principles, shine, with as brilliant a
character, and are as justly esteemed as any set of men whatsoever.

AND as God, in his providence, called you into the forefront of danger,
strive to be foremost in cultivating the necessary art of war. And as the war
has spread from this place -- from this place may military skill be diffused
likewise. But, be concerned, especially, to list under the Banner of Jesus
Christ, and pursue, with unremitting diligence and care, your spiritual warfare
-- that so he, who is the Captain of your Salvation, may lead you to the
complete conquest of all your spiritual enemies -- and into the glorious
Liberty of the Sons of God.

And NOW. I shall conclude, with a word to this whole assembly.

ALTHOUGH he that girdeth on the harness may not boast himself as he that
puts it off, -- yet since God has thus far supported our cause, and granted
us so many and such wonderful deliverances; so many salvations, -- given us
reason to say, hitherto has the Lord helped us; can we dishonor him, and so
much debase our christian character, as to distrust the goodness of his
providence for the future? or continue our sins which have before incurred his
anger? let us realize, that as it was our wickedness that drawed down these
judgments upon us, so it is sin only that can separate between us and our God
for the future. "But, they that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount Zion, which
cannot be removed." -- Trust in him, then, at all times ye people, pour out
your hearts before him, God is a refuge for us. He is able to complete our
Salvation from all our enemies.

Truly it is yet a day of darkness -- but, remember, light is sown for the
righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart. Don't let us destroy
ourselves by our disobedience and rebellion against God: But, may every order
of men, consider their ways, repent and turn from all their transgressions, so
iniquity shall not prove our ruin.

THE means of help, then, are so far in our own hands. When, therefore,
individuals shall humble themselves, and mourn for their Sins -- when the
public shall become reformed -- when the spirit of Christ shall reign in men's
hearts -- when sinful practices shall be laid aside, and the duties we owe to
God and man shall be faithfully performed; -- O then shall we have assurance of
the removal of God's judgments -- that wars will cease to the ends of the earth
-- this world shall then become a paradise of pleasure -- then shall our light
break forth as the morning, and our health shall spring forth speedily -- our
righteousness shall go before us, and the glory of the Lord shall be our
reer-ward.

AMEN.

