AN ESSAY ON FREE TRADE AND FINANCE, HUMBLY OFFERED TO THE CONSIDERATION OF THE
PUBLIC. BY A CITIZEN OF PHILADELPHIA.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed and Sold by THOMAS BRADFORD, at the Coffee-House.
M.DCC.LXXIX.

To the HONOURAALE The CONTINENTAL CONGRESS, The following ESSAY Is most humbly
INSCRIBED, BY THEIR MOST DEVOTED AND MOST OBEDIENT SERVANT, THE AUTHOR

AN ESSAY ON FREE TRADE and FINANCES, etc.

FREEDOM of trade, or unrestrained liberty of the subject to hold or dispose of
his property as he pleases, is absolutely necessary to the prosperty of every
community, and to the happiness of all individuals who compose it; this liberty
will produce the following effects:

FIRST. Every industrious man will procure all the goods he can for sale; this
is the way to get most money; and gain is the soul of industry, the hope of
reward sweetens labor, and the most righteous have respect to the recompense
of reward.

SECOND. Everyman will make his goods for market of the best quality he can,
because they will bring more money and quicker sale than goods of mean quality.

THIRD. Every man will endeavor to carry to market the most scarce goods,
because there is the greatest demand and best price for them. All experience
shows, that the most effectual way to turn a scarcity into a plenty, is to
raise the price of the articles waited: Witness, among other instances, the
most alarming scarcity of saltpetre and gunpowder, in the beginning of the
present war, succeeded by the most abundant plenty in less than one year,
effected altogether by the high price and premiums set on them.

FOURTH. Every men will go to market and return in good humor and full
satisfaction, even though he may be disappointed of the high price he expected,
because he has had the full chance of the market, and can blame nobody; and
should be indulge fretting on the occasion, he would be the more ridiculed, and
less pitied by his neighbors: And good humor and satisfaction contribute not
a little to the happiness and prosperity of communities as well as individuals,
and therefore this is an article by no means to be left out or overlooked in
the administration of either public or private economy.

FIFTH. In times of danger, distress, and difficulty, every man will use strong
endeavors to get his goods to market, in proportion to the necessity and great
demand for them; because they will then bring the best price, and every man is
fond of embracing golden opportunities and favorable chances.

SIXTH. When things grow scarce and dear, every man will use them with the best
economy, and make the stock on hand go as far and last as, long as possible;
or if he is destitute, will buy as little as will just serve his necessity.
This naturally preserves the stock on hand from needless profusion and waste,
and converts it to the best and most prudent use for the benefit of the
community, and naturally tends to ward off high disress or total want, till the
high price and great demand, by their natural operation, will bring further
supplies to market.

SEVENTH. In times of scarcity, every man will have strong inducements to bring
all he can spare to market, because it will then bring the highest price he can
even expect, and consequently the community will have the benefit of all that
exists among them, in a much safer manner than any degree of force could extort
it, and all to the entire satisfaction of buyer and seller, by which the
numberless feuds, riots, resentment, and mischiefs which ussually attend forced
markets, would be entirely avoided; and the market be supplied with all there
is to be had. For no principle can draw into market, all the supplies which are
attainable, so effectually, as the cheerful good will and interest of the
owners.

EIGHT. In times scarcity. When all the goods that are to be had, are exposed
to sale, its not possible the prices should exceed the degree of scarcity, for
when the prices rise very high, they will soon determine whether the scarcity
is real or not; for if not real, the high price will bring such quantity to
market as will soon lower the price; but if real, it is necessary for the above
reasons, that the prices should continue high 'till supplies are produced.

RESTRAINT of property or limitation of prices will hurt any community, and
will probably produce the following effects, contrary to the above.

FIRST. Every man will have as little to do with the market, and bring as few
goods there as he can; for the less goods he has for sale, the less
mortification and loss he sustains.

SECOND. Every man will make his goods for market of a bad quality, or at least
not the best; for they must all go at the limited price, and he therefore gets
nothing for any special care or skill, he may bestow on his goods to meliorate
or perfect their quality; for the same reason, every man will expose his worst
goods to market, and keep the best out of sight, for example, musty Tea, stale
Flour, black heavy Bread, etc.

THIRD. Every man is induced to keep such goods as are most scarce from market;
for if he carries them there, he can get no more than the limited price, and
stands a chance of a bad hustling in the crowd into the bargain. Whereas, if he
can keep his goods from market, the scarcity will soon force a great price, and
he has a chance of great profits.

FOURTH. If prices are limited, and the owner is compelled to sell at the
prices limited; he considers himself injured by every sale he makes for less
than he supposes he could have obtained in a free market, that his liberty is
taken from him, and he can no longer call his property his own. These are hard
feelings to one born to freedom almost perfect, and raised to the expectations
of enjoying it in future time, in its highest perfection. These feelings fill
the mind with anxiety and resentment, and when instances of this become
numerous among the merchants, tradesmen and farmers, small accidents may blow
up the concealed coal, and most fetal effects may easily be supposed to ensue.
This is a danger of no small magnitude, for the real strength and establishment
of every government consists in the hearty union and satisfaction of the
individuals that compose it.

FIFTH. In times of danger, distress, and difficulty; no man will be induced to
any great efforts, to supply the market, for an additional danger makes an
additional expense upon the goods; but he must take the limited price and no
more; he will not consequently combat and risk an increase of danger and
expense without any chance of compensation.

SIXTH. When things grow scarce, every man will endeavor to lay in great
stores, if he can do it, without an increase of price, and will not think it
necessary to retrench his expenses, whilst he thinks his stock will last
through the scarcity; the consequence of which is, that all the scarce articles
at market will be scrambled up by a few hands, who will have no inducement to
parsimony in the expenditure of them, by which the scarcity and distress is
increased, and many must be wholly destitute; and as far as this respects the
necessaries of life, the consequences must be dreadful.

EIGHTH. Add to the above, that in times of scarcity and great demand, every
man who can possibly conceal his goods will betempted to do it, in expectation
that the great demand will soon break through the unnatural restraint of the
limitation, and he shall be able to obtain a great profit in the future sale;
and in spite of all the vigilance and force that can be used, many will be
able to do this, which I take to be one of the natural effects of any unnatural
restraint of trade, which cannot be avoided.

NINTH. Add to all these the difficulties which must attend the execution of
such an act of limitation, may perhaps furnish not the least objection to it.
Must the owner be obliged to sell to every persorn who applies to purchase,
without knowing whether he wants for use or sale? Must he forgo previous
engagements of his goods in favor of the present demandant? Must he be obliged
so sell to every knave and litigious fellow, with whom he would not choose to be
at all concerned in any dealing? Who shall judge how much he may reserve for
his own use, and whether he may give corn to his cattle and hogs, and how much
and how many of each he may keep, etc. etc. etc. Must he have his house
searched from top to bottom for concealments? Even the lodging-rooms of his
wife and daughters! I must beg to be excused from any further description of
these horrors, which too many know are not mero creatures of the imagination.

TENTH. It is not possible to form a limitation of prices which shall be just,
and therefore the whole scheme necessarily implies injustice. The principles on
which the just prices of goods are fixed, are in a constant state of
fluctuation, and therefore the prices must rise and fall with their causes; all
experience proves this, and it holds true in the most excessive degree, in
times of such public distress and convulsion as we now experience. And as it is
much safer to bind a man in health than a man in convulsions, so it will be
safer to limit trade in peaceable than convulsed times. It Is not more absurd to
limit the precise height, to which a ship shall be fixed at a whalf, where the
tide is constantly ebbing and flowing. A great force will be requisite to keep
the ship from rising or falling with the tide, and a mighty little use to pay
for the trouble; besides the probability of very essential damage which the
ship must incur by the application of the necessary force; but indiscreet as
this would be judged, it is less dangerous in a calm than in a stormy season.

ELEVENTH. Another mischevious consequence of this fatal measure and not the
least I conceive to be its unhappy tendency to corrupt the morals and integrity
of the people. To escape the ruinous consequences of loosing all, they are in a
manner compelled; but to say the least, they have very strong temptation to
avoid them, either by downright lying, or using little arts, shifts, and
cheats, to avoid the sale of their goods to disadvantage, it naturally brings
them into the habit, and gives them a facility of inventing and practicing low
methods of shamming Abraham, which they never would otherwise have thought of,
and which it is infinitely detrimental to the public, they ever should learn;
instances of this sort might be enumerated without end. But it is needless to
give examples, 'twere better they and their causes should be removed, than that
they should be repeated. But after all, it is said that a limitation of prices
is necessary to appreciate the currency and supply the army. Two very great
objects indeed: I will attend to both.

FIRST. I don't conceive that a limitation of prices can possibly appreciate
the currency or prevent a further depreciation.

FIRST. The value of money is nothing in itself, it is a mere relation, it is the
proportion between the medium of trade and the objects of trade; these two will
always be in baliance: Therefore, if the medium of trade be increased, whilst
the objects of trade continue the same, the money must depreciate; if the
medium of trade increase, and the objects of trade decrease, the proportion
will alter fast, and the depreciation will increase in a double proportion,
which I take to be the case at present. Money will therefore increase or
decrease its value according to the increase or decrease of its quantity, and
the increase or decrease of the quantity of goods, or the objects of trade.
This principle is grounded on the nature of the thing and can never be altered,
and consequently any attempt to oppose it must be equally vain, as opposing any
other law of nature whatever: It follows from this, that nothing can ever
appreciate the money but lessening its quantity, or increasing the quantity of
goods or objects of trade, and all attempts to do this in any other method,
will prove vain and fruitless in the end.

SECOND. It follows, that the price that any article of trade will bring in a
free open market, is the only measure of the value of that article at that
time, and if this is warped from the truth, by any artifices of the merchant or
force of power, it cannot hold; but the error will soon discover itself, and
the correction of it will be compelled by the irresistible force of natural
principles, i.e. it is not possible for merchants to raise goods too high, or
the force of power to depress them too low, and make them keep so. Both these
may be done for a short time, but neither can last long.

THIRD. It follows that any limitation of prices, however strongly enforced, if
below the rates required by this great natural proportion, is but temporary
injustice, cannot be of long continuance, will tend daily to lessen the quantity
of goods in market, and so will increase the mischief it was designed to
prevent, and bring with it a large train of evils besides, which will require
much time and wisdom to remedy, and many that will be utterly remediless,
examples of which are obvious.

FOURTH. Money is made only for a medium of trade, and must be kept in
circulation and use or it perishes; for to stop the circulation of money and to
kill it is the same thing, stop its course and it dies, give it circulation
again and it revives, or comes to life again; therefore, the price of goods for
sale, or objects of trade (i.e, every thing for which money is paid) must
always be so high, as to require all the money there is to purchase them,
otherwise the sum remaining cannot circulate, i.e. there will be nothing to lay
it out upon, and so the owner must keep it by him, dead and useless, so that
let what sums of money soever be in circulation, the objects of trade must
either increase in quantity, or rise in price so high as to take all the money
there is in circulation to purchase them, and as this natural law cannot be
restrained, so neither can it be exceeded by any degree of artifice or force
for any long time, for if the objects of trade rise so high that all the money
in circulation will not purchase them, the overplus must remain dead and
unsaleable in the hands of the owner, which will soon reduce the price; for
goods which cannot be sold, are as useless in the hands of the merchant, as
money which cannot be circulated.

FIFTH. Every limitation of prices below the due proportion, checks the
Circulation of money, than which nothing can be more dangerous, when money is
over plenty; his has been the constant effect of every limitation of prices
which has been used in America. Business immediately stagnates, goods cannot be
had, people cannot purchase with their money the necessaries they want, they
begin of course to think that their money is good for nothing, and refuse to
take any more of it, and grow willing to part with what they have on hand at a
depreciated value, so that the certain operation of a limitation of prices is a
further depreciation of the money instead of the contrary. Instead of this,
it is of the last necessity in a plenty of money, that a free circulation be
kept up, people will readily and even greedily take any money which they can
readily pass again. And as long as this lasts, there can be no danger of the
money's stopping; whereas, the contrary chills it at once, and in a short time
must chill it into a Torpor, incapable of cure. Much in this case depends on
opinion, which is soon formed by people in general, when they find they cannot
buy necessaries with their money. Specious reasonings, warm harrangues,
declarations of Congress, or even the force of power operate little against
this; it is a glaring intuitive proof of the badness of money, when it will not
purchase necessaries, and as glaring and strong a proof that it is good, when it
will buy any thing in market. Hence appears the necessity of keeping up a high
and brisk circulation of money, and the folly and danger of limitations, or any
other measures which prevent a circulation and obstruct trade: These are
arguments grounded on plain fact, they have their foundation in the laws of
nature, and no artifice or force of man can prevent, elude, or avoid their
effects; their operation is uncontrolable, and therefore I conceive all
oppostion to them is the height of absurdity, and dangerous in the highest
degree. -- For ten months before the late limitations, we had a trade perfectly
free, on which two observations are obvious.

FIRST. That any goods at market might be bought for Continental money, the
Speculators especially (as they are called) were fond of receiving it, and no
person could be at any loss for any thing at market, if he had that money to
purchase the goods he needed.

SECOND. That imported goods on an average (which were the only articles
Speculators dealt in) were 50 percent. cheaper on the 25th of May last, than on
the 25th of of July preceding, i.e. any given quantity of imported goods would
buy 50 per cent more articles of country produce or hard money, on the 25th of
July, than on the 25th of May last; and for the truth of this, I refer to the
merchants books, from which it follows that the Speculators (however numerous
and however censured) have not raised the price of the goods they have
principally dealt in: -- Indeed all experience teaches, that the more hands the
goods in market are held by, the cheaper they will be, and the more difficult
to raise the price; and therefore, if the merchants ever think of raising the
price of any article, they never fail to say, We must wait till these goods are
drained out of the small stores and get them into few hands. In July 25, 1778,
price current of imported goods, at Philadelphia, was as follows, West India
rum 3l. 15s. Muscovado sugars 30l. molasses 40s. pepper 17s.6d. coffee 9s.
cotton 15s. bohea tea 60s. Madeira wine 400l. dry goods about 8 to 1 old
prices, and hard money 4 to 1, and price current of country produce, was as
follows, for Indian corn 15l. oats 12s. flour 60s, bar iron 200l. consequently
on July 25, 1778, one gallon West India rum would bring 5 bushels of Indian
corn, 6 bushels of oats, 1 hundred flour, and of a hundred of iron, or 18s. 9d.
hard money, any body may easily compare the rest, and they will find enough to
prove my assertion with large allowance. Price current 25th May last was, rum
7l. sugars 130l. iron 800l. tea 6l. 10s. etc. Indian corn 7l. 10s. oats 90s.
flour 30'. (hard money 20 to 1) and consequently one gallon of rum would buy no
more than one bushel Indian corn, 1 bushel of oats, 4 hundred flour, and
hundred iron or 7s. hard money, etc. These computations are made in the face of
the world, and grounded on facts which any body may disapprove, if they are not
true, or correct the reasoning, if it is not just. Now I have only to add; let
any body who is disposed to see, open their eyes, and see who it is that has
raised our prices, or, which is the same thing, depreciated our money. Is it
the Speculators who deal only in imported articles? Or the farmers, among whom
no kind of dangerous speculations does or can exist; perhaps it may be replied
here, that the articles of country produce are extremely scarce, which raises
their price beyound the due proportion of other things: If you say this, you
say every thing and yield every thing, viz. that the plenty and scarcity of
goods will govern the price. You must admit too, that the plenty and scarcity
of money will determine the value of that also. Why then will any one pretend
to limit either, against the operation of this great principle. It Is easy in
addition to all these to prove, that the price of imported articles in general
does not exceed the value of them, if computed on the expense of acquirement:
But this I mean only to hint, and wave it for the present; and only wish some
merchants of experience and reputation would take it up, and publish the
needful essay on it.

Nor do I think that the scheme of loans can give establishment to the
currency, or prevent its depreciation. -- For

FIRST. All loans increase the public debt, and the immensity of the sum is one
cause of the depreciation, as it induces people to think it never will be paid,
or the payment will necessarily be delayed to such a distant period, as in
point of use to the present possessor, is nearly equal to total failure.

SECOND, If the credit of the Loan Office is well supported (as it must be to
give it any good effect) the Loan-Office certificates themselves will pass in
payment, and so become an addition to the currency which they are designed to
lessen.

THIRD. If foreign loans are negociated, and bills sold here, drawn on the
loaned Bank in Europe, those very bills will become a currency here, and so add
to the mischief.

FOURTH. The discount on all European bills, is not less than 50 per cent,
which loss must immediately be sustained by the Continent, on the first sale of
them.

FIFTH. If hard money, borrowed in Europe, should be imported and sold here,
the insurance, which is more than 50 per cent, must be left, nor can any man
tell the mischief which would attend any attempt to import hard money, and open
offices for the sale of it for Continental bills; but a large group of these
present themselves too plainly to need enumeration.

SIXTH. Nor do I think the scheme adopted by our Committee promises better
success for that proposes. Loaning without inducement; and if it should succeed
to the utmost expectation, it would drain the best friends to our cause of
their money, whilst our internal enemies would pay nothing, for no compulsion
is proposed, and after all. It will be at best but an anticipation of the
revenue, very dangerous in the end; for the very worst thing that can be done
respecting a revenue, is to destroy it all, principal and use, and the next
worst thing is to anticipate it, i.e. to spend this year the rent and proceeds
which will become due and payable next year, and these two are so connected,
that the latter generally bring on the former sooner or later. After all these
objections to the various methods that have been proposed, it may be expected
that I should propose some method that will be practicable and effectual to fix
the value of our currency, and this I cannot think very difficult, either in
theory or practice, though I have not one new thought to offer the public on
the subject. We are now on the brink of ruin, and the worst disgrace, in danger
of loss of liberty hitherto nobly asserted, and subjection to shameful slavery,
to enemies most cruel and insulting in themselves, and all that hightened in
them to madness by the determined opposition we have given to their scheme of
tyranny over us. All this danger arises not from our poverty or want, we have
officers and soldiers enough, stores of every kind enough, and zeal, union, and
virtue sufficient to insure success; our difficulties arises only from our
having too much money, and the lessening that quantity, would relieve us at
once from every difficulty, and discipate the thickest clouds that hang over us.

IN matters of difficulty and importance, all wise counselors compare well the
end and the means, on which two very weighty matters always present themselves.

FIRST. Whether the means are suffcient to secure and effect the end proposed.
-- And

SECOND. Whether the end is worth the means necessary to effect it. When these
two points are settled, there remains no more room for consultation or debate,
the rest is all vigorous action, strenuous exertion to put the means into such
effectual execution as to obtain the end. This is a wise method of planning,
which no man will have any objection to. We will then adopt it in the
consideration of the weighty subjct now in view.

FIRST. The end is fixing our currency and preventing any future depreciation,
putting an effectual end to all the cheats, delusions, disappointments, and
ruinous losses, which every one who has been concerned in it have hither to
felt, and giving every one a sure and well grounded confidence in it in future.
This is an end, an object of such vast, such weighty consequence, and so
conssessed and acknowledged by all, that no arguments or illustrations are
necessary to be added here.

SECOND. The only means I conceive possible to obtain this end, are to call in
such sums annually by taxes, as shall be equal to the annual expenditures, this
will prevent the increase of the money, will make a great demand for it though
the Thirteen United States, will give it a brisk circulation, will exhibit a
most convincing proof that it may be all called in and redeemed, and that it is
the real design of Congress to do this. Nothing helps the credit of a large
debtor like making ample provision for actual payments; he may promises till he
is gray without this, and all in vain, the larger his promises the less are
they credited, and the more ridiculous does he become: The cry against him is,
Where is the money to come from? Let us see a sample of it? but theory is
altered when large payments are actually made, and sufficient provision making
for the discharge of the whole debt. Let people see the money collecting
through the Continent, and the sources of revenue actually opened, and the
whole matter in train, there can then remain no doubt but the whole of the
Continental money will be redeemed, and every one will venture to trust the
credit of it, and in this confidence it will be soon sought after and grasped
with greediness, and hugged and hoarded with avidity. This will put life into
all our public measures, civil and military, will give our government the
command of the fullest supplies of men, money, and stores that are in the
country, and that can be made or procured, will give spirit to our people, will
annimate industry, and will be a total cure of the mischiefs we now feel from
the low credit of our currency. Here is an object highly worthy of our
attention, as every one will admit without hesitation; the only thing then that
remains, is whether it be practicable; I suppose the outcry against it will be,
that the people will not bear such enormous taxes, that they would sink the
poor and distress the rich far beyond what they will ever consent to bear, etc.
etc. I conceive a vein of conversation of this sort not at all founded in
truth, for several reasons.

FIRST. It Is rare that the people refuse burdens or ever grumble under them,
when by general conviction, they are necessary for the public good. And I dare
say, that the absolute necessity of fixing and establishing our currency is
become obvious to almost every individual on this Continent, and the real
neccessity of taxes for this purpose clearly seen by all.

SECOND. As far as my acquaintance with people of middling rank extends, they
have been generally in favor of taxing for three years past; they say this
money must be paid first or last, and we can better pay it now whilst we have
little use for our money, whilst it is plenty and easy to be got, than in
future time, when we can perhaps not so well spare it, and when the getting it
will be much more difficult.

THIRD. The enormity of the sum required for this purpose consists much more in
sound than substance; a quarterly tax of one bushel of wheat, or two bushels of
Indian corn per head, on all persons in the Thirteen States, would be amply
sufficient. The number of souls are computed at 3,000,000, in all the States,
at least, this would produce 12,000,000 bushels wheat, which at 20 dollars per
bushel, (the lowest present price) will be 240,000,000 of dollars, a sum
greatly exceeding any annual exigence of these States; each State might
apportion this as they pleased, so as to relieve the poor, and increase the
share of the rich, but the middling farmer who has ten in family, would have 40
bushels of wheat or its value, to pay in a year. I admit this would be a high
tax; but is there any thing impossible, or ruinous in this. In the best of
times, it would have been 40 dollars, or 15l. and the same sum of hard money
will probably now pay it, it is to be observed this is not the tax of a post man
or a new beginner, but of a middling farmer, with ten in family; such are
spread over the face of this fetile country, and few of them so poor, that such
a sum would distress them to any great degree. It Is to be observed further this
is not a tax to last always, but to be paid only for a short time, during our
strong exertions, for the liberty of ourselves and our posterity; again, this
sum is not all to be paid at once, but at four quarterly payments; again, this
is not a tax which demands wheat in kind, hard money, or any thing else that is
scarce and hard to be obtained, but for continental money, which is fo plenty
so to become the great burden of the country, and the source of most of our
public calamities, and which any valuable commodity will procure in plenty, and
with little trouble; and for which any man may sell any thing he can best spare
without difficulty; again, this is a fare method to overcome our capital
difficulties and fix the currency. Whereas all others are precarious and
uncertain in their effect. This is a durable, a finished remedy; all others
that have been proposed are at best but temporary, and should they succeed,
would involve us and our posterity in great difficulties. Involve us in a vast
debt, which would lie so heavy on the country as would greatly check our future
prosperity and discourage foreigners from coming to sattle with us. For no body
likes to move into a country when taxes are very high and burdensome. I submit
it to every man, whether it will not be much easier for us by a spirited
exertion, for a short time, to collect large sums of our present currency, and
pay our expenses as fast as they arise, than if a foreign loan could be
obtained, to pay a vast debt of hard money with interest to foreigners in
future time, when every dollar we pay, must go out of the country never to
return again. Every man ought to consider that this proportion of the public
debt, is as much a debt fastened on his estate and become to all intents and
purposes as much a burden and charge on it as any of his private debts the same
amount, and must as surely one day be paid; is it not better then to pay it now
than to have it lie a burden on him, to be paid in future time, which may be
called for at some future time when he may not be in condition to pay it so
easy as now. Every prudent man does this with respect to his private debts, and
what reason can be given why the same prudence should not extend to the debt,
which he owes the public. Can any reason be assigned why the States should not
imitate the prudence and economy of a private man who happens to be involved
for a time in great expenditures, which is to pay up and discharge as much as
possible as he goes, and leave as little as possible to be settled in future
time. And to facilitate this, I humbly propose one thing more, viz. To take off
every restraint and limitation from our commerce. Let trade be as free as air.
Let every man make the most of his goods and in his own way, and then he will
be satisfied. Let every man taste and enjoy the sweets of that liberty of
person and property, which was highly expected under an independent government.
It Is a sad omen to find among the first efforts of independence, greater
restraints and abridgements of natural liberty than ever we felt under the
government we have lately renounced and shaken off. Let the laws point out the
duty, and be the bulwark of security of every man. Nothing gives the people
such high satisfaction, with any system of government they live under, as the
actual enjoyment of the enestimable blessings of perfect liberty and full
security under it, this will most effectually induce them cheerfully to support
it. No burdens will be thought heavy, or difficulties discouraging, which the
exigencies of government may require, when every man finds his own happiness
involved in the establishment of the State; if on the freedom of trade, any
articles should rise in their price, the mischief facilitates its own remedy.
It makes the payment of the taxes more easy and tolerable. Whereas, if the
taxes were collected during the limitation of the market and stagnation of
business, the payment would be extremly difficult, and the murmers high and
reasonable; it would be almost like the Egyptians demanding brick without
straw. But when the circulation of money is brisk, and the price and demand for
goods high, every one knows that money may be raised and taxes may be paid much
more easily than in dull times of stagnated business. And this ought to be
noticed on another account. It Is necessary our first taxes should be rendered
as easy as possible to the people; for though high in (...) sum, if they had
them easily paid, the terror and uneasi^^^^ which high taxes generally raise,
will mostly vanish, and the payment will be made without endangering the peace
of the State, and these things all considered together naturally lead is to the
free answer to the second great question to be solved.

SECOND. How is the army to be supplied. The method I propose, if it can be
adopted, will undoubtedly fix the currency and create a great demand for money,
and a quick circulation of it, this will of course open all the stores in the
State to any purchasers that may offer, and a little prudence used in
purchasing, may supply the army to the full, at reasonable prices. Indeed I am
rather I afraid of overdoing the thing in this way, so far as to cause an
appreciation of the money, which I don't think ought ever to be done, for I see
no reason why the States should be taxed to raise the money in my pocket to
twenty times the value it cost me, but this is a great argument, and may be the
subject of future discussion. I must add here that this method will not only
fix our currency and support our army, but will afford another advantage of no
small moment. It will take away the capital hope and assurance of our enemies
of conquering us; for they depend more on the failure of our funds than on
their own force, for this purpose, they count high on the quarrels, contention,
oppressions and mischiefs that will arise from the low sinking credit of our
money: and by this are encouraged to continue the war, which they would
relinquish as desperate without it.

I WILL just note here, that however intolerable the means I propose may appear
at first fight, I cannot think them impracticable; the tax I propose is not more
than two thirds of the annual taxes in Great Britain, the whole revenue raised
every year there, is about 12,500,000 sterling, which is somewhat more than
58,000,000 dollars, reckoning them at Four Shillings and Sixpence a piece;
divide this by the number of fouls in Great Britain, which are computed at
9,000,000, and we have the sum of somewhat more than 6 dollars per head on each
of the inhabitants, or living persons there; but, be this as it may, to balance
the argument fairly, I think it stands thus: On the one side certain
destruction, and on the other a tax so heavy, that a middling farmer's share
will be 40 bushels of wheat, 40 dollars hard money, or the value of it in any
thing he chases to fell, ti be paid annually, in four quarterly payments. This,
if it can be done, will undoubtedly save us, restore our finances thoroughly,
fix our currency, and fspply our army; without this, I don't see how these
great objects can be effected. If any other method can be devised, it is more
than all the united wisdom of America has yet been able to find and accomplish,
nor do I conceive we have any long time to hesitate, something speedy and
decisive must avert our fate.

THUS I have offered my best thoughts freely to the public, and with most
upright intentions, I hope they may be received with candor. The facts and
reasonings are all open to the examination of every one, if they do not
convince, I hope at least they may induce some abler person to sketch out
something more perfect, and adequate to the great subject.

PHILADELPHIA, JULY 24, 1779.
ERRATA in Page 9, 4th Line of 11th Article, for "loosing all" (...)


