A VIEW OF THE INTERNAL EVIDENCE OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION.

Almost thou persuadest me to be a Christian.

Acts xxvi. 28. BY SOAME JENYNS, ESQUIRE.

THE EIGHTH EDITION, CORRECTED.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, in Market-street, between Second
and Third-streets. MDCCLXXX.

A VIEW OF THE INTERNAL EVIDENCE OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION.
MOST of the writers, who have undertaken to prove the divine origin of the
Christian Religion, have had recourse to arguments drawn from these three
heads: the prophecies still extant in the Old Testament, the miracles recorded
in the New, or the internal evidence arising from that excellence, and those
clear marks of supernatural interposition, which are so conspicuous in the
religion itself: The two former have been sufficiently explained and enforced
by the ablest pens; but the last, which seems to carry with it the greatest
degree of conviction, has never, I think, been considered with that attention,
which it deserves.

I mean not here to depreciate the proofs arising from either prophecies, or
miracles: they both have or ought to have their proper weight; prophecies are
permanent miracles, whose authority is sufficiently confirmed by their
completion, and are therefore solid proofs of the supernatural origin of a
religion, whose truth they were intended to testify; such are those to be found
in various parts of the scriptures relative to the coming of the Messiah, the
destruction of Jerusalem, and the unexampled state in which the Jews have ever
since continued, all so circumstantially descriptive of the events, that they
seem rather histories of past, than predictions of future transactions; and
whoever will seriously consider the immense distance of time between some of
them and the events which they foretell, the uninterrupted chain by which they
are connected for many thousand years, how exactly they correspond with those
events, and how totally unapplicable they are to all others in the history of
mankind; I say, whoever considers these circumstances, he will scarcely be
persuaded to believe, that they can be the productions of preceding artifice,
or posterior application, or can entertain the least doubt of their being
derived from supernatural inspiration.

The miracles recorded in the New Testament to have been performed by Christ
and his Apostles, were certainly convincing proofs of their divine commission
to those who saw them; and as they were seen by such numbers, and are as well
attested, as other historical facts, and above all, as they were wrought on so
great and so wonderful an occasion, they must still be admitted as evidence of
no inconsiderable force; but, I think, they must now depend for much of their
credibility on the truth of that religion, whose credibility they were at first
intended to support. To prove therefore the truth of the Christian Religion, we
should begin by showing the internal marks of Divinity, which are stamped upon
it; because on this the credibility of the prophecies and miracles in a great
measure depends; for if we have once reason to be convinced, that this religion
is derived from a supernatural origin, prophecies and miracles will become so
far from being incredible, that it will be highly probable, that a supernatural
revelation should be foretold, and enforced by supernatural means.

What pure Christianity is, divested of all its ornaments, appendages, and
corruption, I pretend not to say; but what it is not, I will venture to affirm,
which is, that it is not the offspring of fraud or fiction: such on a
superficial view, I know it must appear to every man of good sense, whose sense
has been altogether employed on other subjects; but if any one will give
himself the trouble to examine it with accuracy and candor, he will plainly
see that however fraud and fiction may have grown up with it, yet it never
could have been grafted on the same stock, nor planted by the same hand.

To ascertain the true system, and genuine doctrines of this religion, after
the undecided controversies of above seventeen centuries, and to remove all the
rubbish, which artifice and ignorance have been heaping upon it during all that
time, would indeed be an arduous task, which I shall by no means undertake; but
to show, that it cannot possibly be derived from human wisdom, or human
imposture, is a work, I think, attended with no great difficulty, and requiring
no extraordinary abilities, and therefore I shall attempt that, and that alone,
by stating, and then explaining the following plain, and undeniable
propositions.

First, that there is now extant a book entitled the New Testament.

Secondly, that from this book may be extracted a system of religion entirely
new, both with regard to the object and the doctrines, not only infinitely
superior to, but unlike every thing, which had ever before entered into the
mind of man.

Thirdly, that from this book may likewise be collected a system of ethics, in
which every moral precept founded on reason is carried to a higher degree of
purity and perfection, than in any other of the wisest philosophers of
preceding ages; every moral precept founded on false principles is totally
omitted, and many new precepts added peculiarly corresponding with the new
objects of this religion.

Lastly, that such a system of religion and morality could not possibly have
been the work of any man, or set of men; much less of those obscure, ignorant,
and illiterate persons, who actually did discover, and publish it to the world;
and that therefore it must undoubtedly have been effected by the interposition
of divine power, that is, that it must derive its origin from God.

PROPOSITION I.
VERY little need be said, to establish my first Proposition, which is singly
this: that there is now extant a book entitled the New Testament: that is,
there is a collection of writings distinguished by that denomination,
containing four historical accounts of the birth, life, actions, discourses and
death of an extraordinary person named Jesus Christ, who was born in the reign
of Augustus Caesar, preached a new religion throughout the country of Judaea,
and was put to a cruel and ignominious death in the reign of Tiberius. Also one
other historical account of the travels, transactions, and orations of some
mean and illiterate men, known by the title of his apostles, whom he
commissioned to propagate his religion after his death; which he foretold them
he must suffer in confirmation of its truth. To these are added several
epistolary writings, addressed by these persons to their fellow laborers in
this work, or to the several churches or societies of christians, which they
had established in the several cities through which they had passed.

It would not be difficult to prove, that these books were written soon after
those extraordinary events, which are the subjects of them; as we find them
quoted, and referred to by an uninterrupted succession of writers from those to
the present times: nor would it be less easy to show, that the truth of all
those events, miracles only excepted, can no more be reasonably questioned,
than the truth of any other facts recorded in any history whatever: as there
can be no more reason to doubt, that there existed such a person as Jesus
Christ, speaking, acting, and suffering in such a manner as is there described,
than that there were such men as Tiberius, Herod, or Pontius Pilate, his
cotemporaries, or to suspect, that Peter, Paul, and James were not the authors
of those epistles, to which their names are affixed, than that Cicero and Pliny
did not write those which are ascribed to them. It might also be made appear,
that these books having been wrote by various persons at different times, and
in distant places, could not possibly have been the work of a single impostor,
nor of a fraudulent combination, being all stamped with the same marks of an
uniform originality in their very frame and composition.

But all these circumstances I shall pass over unobserved, as they do not fall
in with the course of my argument, nor are necessary for the support of it.
Whether these books were wrote by the authors whose names are perfixed to them,
whether they have been enlarged, diminished, or any way corrupted by the
artifice or ignorance of translators, or transcribers; whether in the
historical parts the writers were instructed by a perpetual, a partial, or by
any inspiration at all; whether in the religious and moral parts, they received
their doctrines from a divine influence, or from the instructions and
conversation of their master; whether in their facts or sentiments there is
always the most exact agreement, or whether in both they sometimes differ from
each other; whether they are in any case mistaken, or always infallible; or
ever pretended to be so, I shall not here dispute: let the Deist avail himself
of all these doubts and difficulties, and decide them in conformity to his own
opinions, I shall not contend, because they affect not my argument; all that I
assert is a plain fact, which cannot be denied, that such writings do now exist.

PROPOSITION II.
MY second proposition is not quite so simple, but I think, not less undeniable
than the former, and is this: That from this book may be extracted a system of
religion entirely new, both with regard to the object, and the doctrines, not
only infinitely superior to, but totally unlike every thing which had ever
before entered into the mind of man: I say extracted, because all the doctrines
of this religion having been delivered at various times, and on various
occasions, and here only historically recorded, no uniform or regular system of
theology is here to be found; and better perhaps it had been, if less labor
had been employed by the learned, to bend and twist these divine materials into
the polished forms of human systems, to which they never will submit, and for
which they were never intended by their great author. Why he chose not to leave
any such behind him we know not; but it might possibly be, because he knew,
that the imperfection of man was incapable of receiving such a system, and that
we are more properly, and more safely conducted by the distant, and scattered
rays, than by the too powerful sunshine of divine illumination: If I have told
you earthly things, says he, and you believe not, how shall ye believe, if I
tell you of heavenly things? John iii. 12.
that is, if my instructions concerning your behavior in the present as
relative to a future life, are so difficult to be understood, that you can
scarcely believe me, how shall you believe, if I endeavored to explain to you
the nature of celestial Beings, the designs of Providence, and the mysteries of
his dispensations; subjects which you have neither ideas to comprehend, nor
language to express?

First then, the object of this religion is entirely new, and is this, to
prepare us by a state of probation for the kingdom of heaven. This is every
where professed by Christ and his apostles to be the chief end of the
christian's life; the crown for which he is to contend, the goal to which he is
to run, the harvest which is to pay him for all his labors: Yet previous to
their preaching no such prize was ever hung out to mankind, nor any means
prescribed for the attainment of it.

It is indeed true, that some of the philosophers of antiquity entertained
notions of a future state, but mixed with much doubt and uncertainty: their
legislators also endeavored to infuse into the minds of the people a belief of
rewards and puninshments after death; but by this they only intended to give a
sanction to their laws, and to enforce the practice of virtue for the benefit
of mankind in the present life; this alone seems to have been their end, and a
meritorious end it was; but Christianity not only operates more effectually to
this end, but has a nobler design in view, which is by a proper education here
to render us fit members of a celestial society hereafter. In all former
religions the good of the present life was the first object; in the Christian
it is but the second; in those, men were incited to promote that good by the
hopes of a future reward; in this the practice of virtue is injoined in order
to qualify them for that reward. There is great difference, I apprehend, in
these two plans, that is an adhering to Virtue from its present utility in
expectation of future happiness; and this living in such a manner as to qualify
us for the acceptance, and enjoyment of that happiness; and the conduct and
dispositions of those who act on these different principles, must be no less
different; on the first the constant practice of justice, temperance, and
sobriety, will be sufficient; but on the latter, we must add to these an
habitual piety, faith, resignation, and contempt of the world; the first may
make us very good citizens, but will never produce a tolerable christian. Hence
it is that Christianity insists more strongly, than any preceding institution
religious or moral, on purity of heart and a benevolent disposition; because
these are absolutely necessary to its great end; but in those whose
recommendations of virtue regard the present life only, and whose promised
rewards in another were low and sensual, no preparatory qualifications were
requisite to enable men to practice the one, or to enjoy the other; and
therefore we see this object is peculiar to this religion; and with it was
entirely new.

But although this object, and the principle on which it is founded were new,
and perhaps undiscoverable by reason, yet when discovered, they are so
consonant to it, that we cannot but readily assent to them. For the truth of
this principle, that the present life is a state of probation, and education to
prepare us for another, is confirmed by every thing which we see around us: It
is the only key which can open to us the designs of Providence in the economy
of human affairs, the only clue, which can guide us through that pathless
wilderness, and the only plan on which this world could possibly have been
formed, or on which the history of it can be comprehended or explained. It
could never have been formed on a plan of happiness, because it is every were
overspread with innumerable miseries; nor of misery, because it is interspersed
with many enjoyments: It could not have been constituted for a scene of wisdom
and virtue, because the history of mankind is little more than a detail of
their follies, and wickedness: Nor of vice, because that is no plan at all,
being destructive of all existence, and consequently of its own: But on this
system all that we here meet with, may be easily accounted for; for this
mixture of happiness and misery, of virtue and vice, necessarily results from a
state of probation and education; as probation implies trials, sufferings and a
capacity of offending, and education a propriety of chastisement for those
offenses.

In the next place the doctrines of this religion are equally new with the
object, and contain ideas of God, and of man, of the present, and of a future
life; and of the relations which all these bear to each other totally unheard
of, and quite dissimilar from any which had ever been thought on, previous to
its publication. No other ever drew so just a portrait of the worthlessness of
this world, and all its pursuits, nor exhibited such distinct, lively and
exquisite pictures of the joys of another; of the resurrection of the dead, the
last judgment, and the triumphs of the righteous in that tremendous day, when
this corruptible shall put on incorruption, and this mortal shall put on
immortality. 1 Cor. xv. 53.
No other has ever represented the supreme Being in the character of three
persons united in one God. That there subsists some such union in the divine
nature, the whole tenor of the New Testament seems to express, and it was so
understood in the earliest ages: But whether this union does, or does not imply
equality, or whether it subsists in general, or only in particular
circumstances, we are not informed, and therefore on these questions it is not
only unnecessary, but improper for us to decide.
No other has attempted to reconcile those seeming contradictory but both true
propositions, the contingency of future events, and the foreknowledge of God,
or the free will of the creature with the overruling grace of the Creator. No
other has so fully declared the necessity of wickedness and punishment, yet so
effectually instructed individuals to resist the one, and to escape the other;
no other has ever pretended to give any account of the depravity of man, or to
point out any remedy for it; no other has ventured to declare the unpardonable
nature of sin without the influence of a mediatorial interposition, and a
vicarious atonement from the sufferings of a superior Being. That Christ
suffered and died as an atonement for the sins of mankind, is a doctrine so
constantly and so strongly enforced through every part of the New Testament,
that whoever will seriously peruse those writings, and deny that it is there,
may, with as much reason and truth, after reading the works of Thucydides and
Livy, assert, that in them no mention is made of any facts relative to the
histories of Greece and Rome.
Whether these wonderful doctrines are worthy of our belief must depend on the
opinion, which we entertain of the authority of those, who published them to
the world; but certain it is, that they are all so far removed from every tract
of the human imagination, that it seems equally impossible, that they should
ever have been derived from the knowledge, or the artifice of man.

Some indeed there are, who by perverting the established signification of
words, (which they call explaining) have ventured to expunge all these
doctrines out of the scriptures, for no other reason than that they are not
able to comprehend them; and argue thus: -- The scriptures are the word of God;
in his word no propositions contradictory to reason can have a place; these
propositions are contradictory to reason and therefore they are not there: But
if these bold assertors would claim any regard, they should reverse their
argument, and say, -- These doctrines make a part, and a material part of the
scriptures, they are contradictory to reason; no propositions contradictory to
reason can be a part of the word of God, and therefore neither the scriptures,
nor the pretended revelation contained in them, can be derived from him: This
would be an argument worthy of rational and candid Deists, and demand a
respectful attention; but when men pretend to disprove facts by reasoning, they
have no right to expect an answer.

And here I cannot omit observing, that the personal character of the author of
this religion is no less new, and extraordinary, than the religion itself, who
"spoke as never man spoke," John vii. 46.
and lived as never man lived: in proof of this, I do not mean to allege, that
he was born of a virgin, that he fasted forty days, that he performed a variety
of miracles, and after being buried three days, that he arose from the dead;
because these accounts will have but little effect on the minds of unbelievers,
who, if they believe not the religion, will give no credit to the relation of
these facts; but I will prove it from facts, which cannot be disputed; for
instance, he is the only founder of a religion in the history of mankind, which
is totally unconnected with all human policy and government; and therefore
totally unconducive to any worldly purpose whatever: all others, Mahomet, Numa,
and even Moses himself, blended their religious institutions with their civil,
and by them obtained dominion over their respective people; but Christ neither
aimed at, nor would accept of any such power; he rejected every object, which
all other men pursue, and made choice of all those which others fly from, and
are afraid of: he refused power, riches, honors, and pleasure, and courted
poverty, ignominy, tortures, and death. Many have been the enthusiasts, and
impostors, who have endeavored to impose on the world pretended revelations,
and some of them from pride, obstinacy, or principle, have gone so far as to
lay down their lives, rather than retract; but I defy history to show one, who
ever made his own sufferings and death a necessary part of his original plan,
and essential to his mission: this Christ actually did; he foresaw, foretold,
declared, their necessity, and voluntarily endured them. If we seriously
contemplate the divine lessons, the perfect precepts, the beautiful discourses,
and the consistent conduct of this wonderful person, we cannot possibly
imagine, that he could have been either an idiot or a madman; and yet, if he
was not what he pretended to be, he can be considered in no other light; and
even under this character he would deserve some attention, because of so
sublime and rational an insanity there is no other instance in the history of
mankind.

If any one can doubt of the superior excellence of this religion above all
which preceded it, let him but peruse with attention those unparalleled
writings in which it is transmitted to the present times, and compare them with
the most celebrated productions of the pagan world; and if he is not sensible
of their superior beauty, simplicity, and originality, I will venture to
pronounce, that he is as deficient in Taste as in Faith, and that he is as bad
a Critic as a Christian; for in what school of ancient philosophy can be find a
lesson of morality so perfect as Christ's sermon on the mount? From which of
them can he collect an address to the Deity so concise, and yet so
comprehensive, so expressive of all that we want, and all that we could
deprecate, as that short prayer, which he formed for, and recommended to his
disciples? From the works of what sage of antiquity can he produce so pathetic
a recommendation of benevolence to the distressed, and enforced by such
assurances of a reward, as in those words of Christ? Come, ye blessed of my
Father! inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world:
for I was an hungered, and ye gave me meat; I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink;
I was a stranger, and ye took me in; I was naked, and ye clothed me; I was
sick, and ye visited me; I was in prison, and ye came unto me. Then shall the
righteous answer him, saying: -- Lord, when saw we thee an hungered, and fed
thee, or thirsty, and gave thee drink? when saw we thee a stranger, and took
thee in, or naked, and clothed thee? or when saw we thee sick and in prison,
and came unto thee? Then shall I answer and say unto them: -- Verily I say unto
you, inasmuch as you have done it to the least of these my brethren, ye have
done it unto me. Matt. xxv. 34.
Where is there so just, and so elegant a reproof of eagerness and anxiety in
worldly pursuits, closed with so forcible an exhortation to confidence in the
goodness of our Creator, as in these words? -- Behold the fowls of the air; for
they sow not, neither do they reap, nor gather into barns, yet your heavenly
Father feeds them. Are ye not much better than they? Consider the lilies of
the field, how they grow; they toil not, neither do they spin; and yet I say
unto you, that even Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed like one of these:
wherefore, if God so clothe the grass of the field, which today is, and
tomorrow is cast into the oven, shall he not much more clothe you? O ye of
little faith! Matt. vi. 26.28.
By which of their most celebrated poets are the joys reserved for the
righteous in a future state, so sublimely described, as by this short
declaration, that they are superior to all description? Eye has not seen, nor
ear heard, neither have entered into the heart of man, the things, which God
has prepared for them that love him. 1 Cor. ii. 9.
Where amidst the dark clouds of pagan philosophy can he show us such a clear
prospect of a future state, the immortality of the soul, the resurrection of
the dead, and the general judgment, as in St. Paul's first epistle to the
Corinthians? Or from whence can he produce such cogent exhortations to the
practice of every virtue, such ardent incitements to piety and devotion, and
such assistances to attain them, as those which are to be met with throughout
every page of these inimitable writings? To quote all the passages in them
relative to these subjects, would be almost to transcribe the whole; it is
sufficient to observe, that they are every were stamped with such apparent
marks of supernatural assistance, as render them indisputably superior to, and
totally unlike all human compositions whatever; and this superiority and
dissimilarity is still more strongly marked by one remarkable circumstance
peculiar to themselves, which is, that whilst the moral parts, being of the
most general use, are intelligible to the meanest capacities, the learned and
inquisitive throughout all ages, perpetually find in them inexhaustible
discoveries, concerning the nature, attributes, and dispensations of Providence.

To say the truth, before the appearance of Christianity there existed nothing
like religion on the face of the earth; the Jewish only excepted: all other
nations were immersed in the grossest idolatry, which had little or no
connection with morality, except to corrupt it by the infamous examples of
their imaginary deities: they all worshipped a multiplicity of gods and
demons, whose favor they courted by impious, obscene, and ridiculous
ceremonies, and whose anger they endeavored to appease by the most abominable
cruelties. In the politest ages of the politest nations in the world, at a time
when Greece and Rome had carried the arts of oratory, poetry, history,
architecture and sculpture to the highest perfection, and made no
inconsiderable advances in those of mathematics, natural, and even moral
philosophy, in religious knowledge they had made none at all; a strong
presumption, that the noblest efforts of the mind of man unassisted by
revelation were unequal to the task. Some few indeed of their philosophers were
wise enough to reject these general absurdities, and dared to attempt a loftier
flight: Plato introduced many sublime ideas of nature, and its first cause, and
of the immortality of the soul, which being above his own and all human
discovery, he probably acquired from the books of Moses or the conversation of
some Jewish rabbis, which he might have met with in Egypt, where he resided,
and studied for several years: from him Aristotle, and from both Cicero and
some few others drew most amazing stores of philosophical science, and carried
their researches into divine truths as far as human genius alone could
penetrate. But these were bright constellations which appeared singly in
several centuries, and even these with all this knowledge were very deficient
in true theology. From the visible works of the Creation they traced the being
and principal attributes of the Creator; but the relation which his being and
attributes bear to man they little understood; of piety and devotion they had
scarce any sense, nor could they form any mode of worship worthy of the purity
and perfection of the divine nature: they occasionally flung out many elegant
encomiums on the native beauty, and excellence of virtue: but they founded it
not on the commands of God, nor connected it with a holy life, nor hung out the
happiness of heaven as its reward, or its object. They sometimes talked of
virtue carrying men to heaven, and placing them amongst the gods; but by this
virtue they meant only the invention of arts, or feats of arms: for with them
heaven was open only to legislators, and conquerors, the civilizers, or
destroyers of mankind. This was then the summit of religion in the most
polished nations in the world, and even this was confined to a few
philosophers, prodigies of genius and literature, who were little attended to,
and less understood by the generality of mankind in their own countries; whilst
all the rest were involved in one common cloud of ignorance and superstition.

At this time Christianity broke forth from the east like a rising sun, and
dispelled this universal darkness, which obscured every part of the globe, and
even at this day prevails in all those remotes regions, to which its salutary
influence has not as yet extended. From all those which it has reached, it has,
notwithstanding its corruptions, banished all those enormities, and introduced
a more rational devotion, and purer morals: It has taught men the unity, and
attributes of the supreme Being, the remission of sins, the resurrection of the
dead, life everlasting, and the kingdom of heaven; doctrines as inconceivable
to the wisest of mankind antecedent to its appearance, as the Newtonian system
is at this day to the most ignorant tribes of savages in the wilds of America;
doctrines which human reason never could have discovered, but which when
discovered, coincide with, and are confirmed by it; and which, though beyond
the reach of all the learning and pentration of Plato, Aristotle, and Cicero,
are now clearly laid open to the eye of every peasant and mechanic with the
Bible in his hand. These are all plain facts too glaring to be contradicted,
and therefore, whatever we may think of the authority of these books, the
relations which they contain, or the inspiration of their authors, of these
facts on man, who has eyes to read, or ears to hear, can entertain a doubt;
because there are the books, and in them is this religion.

PROPOSITION III.
MY third proposition is this: that from this book called the New Testament,
may be collected a system of ethics, in which every moral precept founded on
reason is carried to a higher degree of purity and perfection, than in any
other of the ancient philosophers of preceding ages; every moral precept
founded on false principles is entirely omitted, and many new precepts added,
peculiarly corresponding with the new object of this religion.

By moral precepts founded on reason, I mean all those, which enforce the
practice of such duties as reason informs us must improve our natures, and
conduce to the happiness of mankind: such are piety to God, benevolence to men,
justice, charity, temperance, and sobriety, with all those, which prohibit the
commission of the contrary vices, all which debase our natures, and, by mutual
injuries, introduce universal disorder, and consequently universal misery. By
precepts founded on false principles, I mean those which recommend fictitious
virtues productive of none of these salutary effects, and therefore, however
celebrated and admired, are in fact no virtues at all; such are valor,
patriotism, and friendship.

That virtues of the first kind are carried to a higher degree of purity and
perfection by the christian religion than by any other, it is here unnecessary
to prove, because this is a truth, which has been so frequently demonstrated by
her friends, and never once denied by the most determined of her adversaries;
but it will be proper to show, that those of the latter sort are most
judiciously omitted; because they have really no intrinsic merit in them, and
are totally incompatible with the genius and spirit of this institution.

Valor, for instance, or active courage, is for the most part constitutional,
and therefore can have no more claim to moral merit, than wit, beauty, health,
strength, or any other endowment of the mind or body; and so far is it from
producing any salutary effects by introducing peace, order, or happiness into
society, that it is the usual perpetrator of all the violences, which from
retaliated injuries distract the world with bloodshed and devastation. It is
the engine by which the strong are enabled to plunder the weak, the proud to
trample upon the humble, and the guilty to oppress the innnocent; it is the
chief instrument which Ambition employs in her unjust pursuits of wealth and
power, and is therefore so much extolled by her votaries: it was indeed
congenial with the religion of pagans, whose gods were for the most part made
out of deceased heroes, exalted to heaven as a reward for the mischiefs which
they had perpetrated upon earth, and therefore with them this was the first of
virtues, and had even engrossed that denomination to itself; but whatever merit
it may have assumed among pagans, with christians it can pretend to none, and
few or none are the occasions in which they are permitted to exert it: they are
so far from being allowed to inflict evil, that they are forbid even to resist
it; they are so far from being encouraged to revenge injuries, that one of
their first duties is to forgive them; so far from being incited to destroy
their enemies, that they are commanded to love them, and to serve them to the
utmost of their power. If christian nations therefore were nations of
christians, all war would be impossible and unknown amongst them, and valor
could be neither of use or estimation, and therefore could never have a place
in the catalogue of christian virtues, being irreconcilable with all its
precepts. I object not to the praise and honors bestowed on the valiant, they
are the least tribute which can be paid them by those who enjoy safety and
affluence by the intervention of their dangers and sufferings; I assert only
that active courage can never be a christian virtue, because a christian can
have nothing to do with it. Passive courage is indeed frequently, and properly
inculcated by this meek and suffering religion, under the titles of patience
and resignation: a real and substantial virtue this, and a direct contrast to
the former; for passive courage arises from the noblest dispositions of the
human mind, from a contempt of misfortunes, pain, and death, and a confidence
in the protection of the Almighty; active from the meanest: from passion,
vanity, and self-dependence: passive courage is derived from a zeal for truth,
and a perseverance in duty; active is the offspring of pride and revenge, and
the parent of cruelty and injustice: in short passive courage is the resolution
of a philosopher, active is the serocity of a savage. Nor is this more
incompatible with the precepts, than with the object of this religion, which is
the attainment of the kingdom of heaven; for valor is not that sort of
violence, by which that kingdom is to be taken; nor are the turbulent spirits
of heroes and conquerors admissible into those regions of peace, subordination,
and tranquillity.

Patriotism also, that celebrated virtue so much practiced in ancient, and so
much professed in modern times, that virtue, which so long preserved the
liberties of Greece, and exalted Rome to the empire of the world: this
celebrated virtue, I say, must also be excluded; because it not only falls
short of, but directly counteracts, the extensive Benevolence of this religion.
A christian is of no country, he is a citizen of the world; and his neighbors
and countrymen are the inhabitants of the remotest regions, whenever their
distresses demand his friendly assistance: Christianity commands us to love all
mankind, Patriotism to oppress all other countries to advance the imaginary
prosperity of our own: Christianity enjoins us to imitate the universal
benevolence of our Creator, who pours forth his blessings on every nation upon
earth; Patriotism to copy the mean partiality of an English parish officer, who
thinks injustice and cruelty meritorious, whenever they promote the interests
of his own inconsiderable village. This has ever been a favorite virtue with
mankind, because it conceals self-interest under the mask of public spirit, not
only from others, but even from themselves, and gives a license to inflict
wrongs and injuries not only with impunity, but with applause; but it is so
diametrically opposite to the great characteristic of this institution, that it
never could have been admitted into the list of christian virtues.

Friendship likewise, although more congenial to the principles of Christianity
arising from more tender and amiable dispositions, could never gain admittance
amongst her benevolent precepts for the same reason; because it is too narrow
and confined, and appropriates that benevolence to a single object, which is
here commanded to be extended over all: Where friendships arise from similarity
of sentiments, and disinterested affections, they are advantageous, agreeable,
and innocent, but have little pretensions to merit; for it is justly observed,
If ye love them, which love you, what thanks have ye? for sinners also love
those, that love them. Luke vi. 32.
But if they are formed from alliances in parties, factions, and interests, or
from a participation of vices, the usual parents of what are called friendships
among mankind, they are then both mischievous and criminal, and consequently
forbidden, but in their utmost purity deserve no recommendation from this
religion.

To the judicious omission of these false virtues we may add that remarkable
silence, which the Christian Legislator every were preserves on subjects
esteemed by all others of the highest importance, civil government, national
policy, and the rights of war and peace; of these he has not taken the least
notice, probably for this plain reason, because it would have been impossible
to have formed any explicit regulations concerning them, which must not have
been inconsistent with the purity of his religion, or with the practical
observance of such imperfect creatures as men ruling over, and contending with
each other: For instance, had he absolutely forbid all resistance to the
reigning powers, he had constituted a plan of despotism, and made men slaves;
had he allowed it, he must have authorized disobedience, and made them rebels:
had he in direct terms prohibited all war, he must have left his followers for
ever an easy prey to every infidel invader; had he permitted it, he must have
licensed all that rapine and murder, with which it is unavoidably attended.

Let us now examine what are those new precepts in this religion peculiarly
corresponding with the new object of it, that is preparing us for the kingdom
of heaven: Of these the chief are poorness of spirit, forgiveness of injuries,
and charity to all men; to these we may add repentance, faith, self-abasement,
and a detachment from the world, all moral duties peculiar to this religion,
and absolutely necessary to the attainment of its end.

Blessed are the poor in spirit; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven. Matt. v.
3.
By which poorness of spirit is to be understood a disposition of mind, meek,
humble, submissive to power, void of ambition, patient of injuries, and free
from all resentment: This was so new, and so opposite to the ideas of all Pagan
moralists, that they thought this temper of mind a criminal and contemptible
meanness, which must induce men to sacrifice the glory of their country, and
their own honor, to a shameful pusillanimity; and such it appears to almost
all who are called Christians even at this day, who not only reject it in
practice, but disavow it in principle, notwithstanding this explicit
declaration of their Master. We see them revenging the smallest affronts by
premeditated murder; as individuals, on principles of honor; and, in their
national capacities, destroying each other with fire and sword, for the low
considerations of commercial interests, the balance of rival powers, or the
amibition of princes: We see them with their last breath animating each other
to a savage revenge, and, in the agonies of death, plunging with feeble arms
their daggers into the hearts of their opponents: and, what is still worse, we
hear all these barbarisms celebrated by historians, flattered by poets,
applauded in theaters, approved in senates, and even sanctified in pulpits. But
universal practice cannot alter the nature of things, nor universal error
change the nature of truth: Pride was not made for man, but humility, meekness,
and resignation, that is poorness of spirit, was made for man, and properly
belongs to his dependant and precarious situation; and is the only disposition
of mind, which can enable him to enjoy ease and quiet here, and happiness
hereafter: Yet was this important precept entirely unknown until it was
promulgated by him, who said, Suffer little children to come unto me, and
forbid them not; for of such is the kingdom of heaven: Verily I say unto you,
whoever shall not receive the kingdom of God as a little child, he shall not
enter therein. Matt. x 14.


Another precept, equally new and no less excellent, is forgiveness of
injuries: Ye have heard, says Christ to his disciples, Thou shall love thy
neighbor, and hate thine enemy; but I say unto you, love your enemies; bless
them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which
despitefully use you, and persecute you. Matt. v. 43.
This was a lesson so new, and so utterly unknown, 'til taught by his
doctrines, and enforced by his example, that the wisest moralists of the wisest
nations and ages represented the desire of revenge as a mark of a noble mind,
and the accomplishment of it as one of the chief felicities attendant on a
fortunate man. But how much more magnanimous, how much more beneficial to
mankind, is forgiveness! it is more magnanimous, because every generous and
exalted disposition of the human mind is requisite to the practice of it: for
these alone can enable us to bear the wrongs and insults of wickedness and
folly with patience, and to look down on the perpetrators of them with pity,
rather than indignation; these alone can teach us, that such are but a part of
those sufferings allotted to us in this state of probation, and to know, that
to overcome evil with good, is the most glorious of all victories: it is the
most beneficial, because this amiable conduct alone can put an end to an
eternal succession of injuries and retaliations; for every retaliation becomes
a new injury, and requires another act of revenge for satisfaction. But would
we observe this salutary precept, to love our enemies, and to do good to those
who despitefully use us, this obstinate benevolence would at last conquer the
most inveterate hearts, and we should have no enemies to forgive. How much more
exalted a character therefore is a Christian martyr, suffering with
resignation, and praying for the guilty, than that of a Pagan hero, breathing
revenge, and destroying the innocent! Yet noble, and useful as this virtue is,
before the appearance of this religion it was not only unpractised, but decried
in principle as mean and ignominious, though so obvious a remedy for most of
the miseries of this life, and so necessary a qualification for the happiness
of another.

A third precept, first noticed and first injoined by this institution, is
charity to all men. What this is, we may best learn from this admirable
description, painted in the following words: Charity suffers long, and is
kind; charity envieth not; charity vaunteth not itself; is not puffed up; does
not behave itself unseemly; seeks not her own; is not easily provoked;
thinks no evil; rejoiceth not in iniquity, but rejoiceth in truth; fears
all things; believes all things; hops all things; endures all things. 1
Cor. xiii. 4.
Here we have an accurate delineation of this bright constellation of all
virtues, which consists not, as many imagine, in the building of monasteries,
endowment of hospitals, or the distribution of alms, but in such an amiable
disposition of mind, as exercises itself every hour in acts of kindness,
patience, complacency, and benevolence to all around us, and which alone is
able to promote happiness in the present life, or render us capable of
receiving it in another: and yet this is totally new, and so it is declared to
be by the author of it: A new commandment I give unto you, that ye love one
another; -- as I have loved you, that ye love one another; by this shall all
men know, that ye are my disciples, if ye have love one to another. John xiii.
34.
This benevolent disposition is made the great characteristic of a christian,
the test of his obedience, and the mark by which he is to be distinguished.
This love for each other is that charity just now decribed, and contains all
those qualities, which are there attributed to it; humility, patience,
meekness, and beneficence: without which we must live in perpetual discord, and
consequently cannot pay obedience to this commandment by loving one another; a
commandment so sublime, so rational, and so beneficial, so wisely calculated to
correct the depravity, diminish the wickedness, and abate the miseries of human
nature, that, did we universally comply with it, we should soon be relieved
from all the inquietudes arising from our own unruly passions, anger, envy,
revenge, malice, and ambition, as well as from all those injuries, to which we
are perpetually exposed from the indulgence of the same passions in others. It
would also preserve our minds in such a state of tranquillity, and so prepare
them for the kingdom of heaven, that we should slide out of a life of peace,
love and benevolence, into that celestial society, by an almost imperceptible
transition. Yet was this commandment entirely new, when given by him, who so
intitles it, and has made it the capital duty of his religion, because the most
indispensably necessary to the attainment of its great object, the kingdom of
heaven; into which if proud, turbulent and vindictive spirits were permitted to
enter, they must unavoidably destroy the happiness of that state by the
operations of the same passions and vices, by which they disturb the present,
and therefore all such must be eternally excluded, not only as a punishment,
but also from incapacity.

Repentance, by this we plainly see, is another new moral duty strenuously
insisted on by this religion, and by no other. because absolutely necessary to
the accomplishment of its end; for this alone can purge us from those
transgressions, from which we cannot be totally exempted in this state of trial
and temptation, and purify us from that depravity in our nature, which renders
us incapable of attaining this end. Hence also we may learn, that no repentance
can remove this incapacity, but such as entirely changes the nature and
disposition of the offender; which in the language of Scripture is called being
born again. Mere contrition for past crimes, nor even the pardon of them,
cannot effect this, unless it operates to this entire conversion or new birth,
as it is properly and emphatically named: for sorrow can no more purify a mind
corrupted by a long continuance in vicious habits, than it can restore health
to a body distempered by a long course of vice and intemperance. Hence also
every one, who is in the least acquainted with himself, may judge of the
reasonableness of the hope that is in him, and of his situation in a future
state by that of his present. If he feels in himself a temper proud, turbulent,
vindictive, and malevolent, and a violent attachment to the pleasures or
business of the world, he may be assured, that he must be excluded from the
kingdom of heaven; not only because his conduct can merit no such reward, but
because, if admitted, he would find there no objects satisfactory to his
passions, inclinations, and pursuits, and therefore could only disturb the
happiness of others without enjoying any share of it himself.

Faith is another moral duty injoined by this institution, of a species so new,
that the philosophers of antiquity had no word expressive of this idea, nor any
such idea to be expressed; for the word pistis or sides, which we translate
faith, was never used by any pagan writer in a sense the least similar to that,
to which it is applied in the New Testament: where in general it signifies an
humble, teachable, and candid disposition, a trust in God, and confidence in
his promises: when applied particularly to chrisianity, it means no more than a
belief of this single proposition, that Christ was the Son of God; that is, in
the language of those writings, the Messiah, who was foretold by the prophets,
and expected by the Jews; who was sent by God into the world to preach
righteousness, judgment, and everlasting life, and to die as an atonement for
the sins of mankind. This was all that Christ required to be believed by those
who were willing to become his disciples: he, who does not believe this, is not
a Christian, and he who does, believes the whole that is essential to his
profession, and all that is properly comprehended under the name of says. This
unfortunate word has indeed been so tortured and so misapplied to mean every
absurdity, which artifice could impose upon ignorance, that it has lost all
pretensions to the title of virtue; but if brought back to the simplicity of
its original signification, it well deserves that name because it usually
arises from the most amiable dispositions, and is always a direct contrast to
pride, obstinacy, and self-conceit. If taken in the extensive sense of an
assent to the evidence of things not seen, it comprehends the existence of a
God, and a future state, and is therefore not only itself a moral virtue, but
the source from whence all others must proceed; for on the belief of these all
religion and morality must entirely depend. It cannot be altogether void of
moral merit, (as some would represent it) because it is in a degree voluntary;
for daily experience shows us, that men not only pretend to, but actually do
believe, and disbelive almost any propositions, which best suit their
interests, or inclinations, and unfeignedly change their sincere opinions with
their situations and circumstances. For we have power over the mind's eye, as
well as over the body's, to shut it against the strongest rays of truth and
religion, whenever they become painful to us, and to open it again to the faint
glimmerings of skepticism and infidelity when we love darkness rather than
light, because our deeds are evil. John iii. 19.
And this, I think, sufficiently refutes all objections to the moral nature of
faith, drawn from the supposition of its being quite involuntary, and
necessarily dependent on the degree of evidence, which is offered to our
understandings.

Self-abasement is another moral duty inculcated by this religion only; which
requires us to impute even our own virtues to the grace and favor of our
Creator, and to acknowledge, that we can do nothing good by our own powers,
unless assisted by his overruling influence: This doctrine seems at first
sight to infringe on our freewill, and to deprive us of all merit; but, on a
closer examination, the truth of it may be demonstrated both by reason and
experience, and that in fact it does not impair the one, or depreciate the
other: and that it is productive of so much humility, resignation, and
dependence on God, that it justly claims a place amongst the most illustrious
moral virtues. Yet was this duty utterly repugnant to the proud and
self-sufficient principles of the ancient philosophers as well as modern
Deists, and therefore before the publication of the gospel totally unknown and
uncomprehended.

Detachment from the world is another moral virtue constituted by this religion
alone: so new, that even at this day few of its professors can be persuaded,
that it is required, or that it is any virtue at all. By this detachment from
the world is not to be understood a seclusion from society, abstraction from
all business, or retirement to a gloomy cloister. Industry and labor,
cheerfulness and hospitality are frequently recommended: nor is the acquisition
of wealth and honors prohibited, if they can be obtained by honest means, and
a moderate degree of attention and care: but such an unremitted anxiety, and
perpetual application as engrosses our whole time and thoughts, are forbid,
because they are incompatible with the spirit of this religion, and must
utterly disqualify us for the attainment of its great end. We toil on in the
vain pursuits and frivolous occupations of the world, die in our harness, and
the expect, if no gigantic crime stands in the way, to step immediately into
the kingdom of heaven: but this is impossible; for without a previous
detachment from the business of this world, we cannot be prepared for the
happiness of another. Yet this could make no part of the morality of pagans,
because their virtues were altogether connected with this business, and
consisted chiefly in conducting it with honor to themselves, and benefit to
the public: But Christianity has a nobler object in view, which, if not
attended to, must be lost for ever. This object is that celestial mansion of
which we should never lose sight, and to which we should be ever advancing
during our journey through life: but this by no means precludes us from
performing the business, or enjoying the amusements of travelers, provided
they detain us not too long, or lead us too far out of our way.

It cannot be denied, that the great author of the christian institution, first
and singly ventured to oppose all-the chief principles of paean virtue, and to
introduce a religion directly opposite to those erroneous though
long-established opinions, both in its duties and in its object. The most
celebrated virtues of the ancients were high spirit, intrepid courage, and
implacable resentment.

Impiger, iracundus, inexorabilis, acer, was the portrait of the most
illustrious Hero, drawn by one of the first poets of antiquity: To all these
admired qualities, those of a true Christian are an exact contrast; for this
religion constantly injoins poorness of spirit, meekness, patience, and
forgiveness of injuries. But I say unto you, that ye resist not evil; but
whoever shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other also. Matt.
v. 39.
The favorite characters among the Pagans were the turbulent, ambitious, and
intrepid, who through toils and dangers acquired wealth, and spent it in
luxury, magnificence, and corruption; but both these are equally adverse to the
Christian system, which forbids all extraordinary efforts to obtain wealth,
care to secure, or thought concerning the enjoyment of it. Lay not up for
yourselves treasures on earth, etc. Take no thought, saying, what shall we eat,
or what shall we drink, or wherewithal shall we be clothed? for after all
these things do the Gentiles seek. Matt. vi. 31.
The chief object of the Pagans was immortal fame: for this their poets sang,
their heroes fought, and their patriots died; and this was hung out by their
philosophers and legislators, as the great incitement to all noble and virtuous
deeds. But what says the Christian Legislator to his disciples on this subject?
Blessed are ye, when men shall revile you, and shall say all manner of evil
against you for my sake; rejoice, and be exceeding glad, for great is your
reward in heaven. Matt. v. 11.
So widely different is the genius of the Pagan and Christian morality, that I
will venture to affirm, that the most celebrated virtues of the former are more
opposite to the spirit, and more inconsistent with the end of the latter, than
even their most infamous vices; and that a Brutus wrenching vengeance out of
his hands to whom alone it belongs, by murdering the oppressor of his country,
or a Cato murdering himself from an impatience of control, leaves the world
more unqualified for, and more inadmissible into the kingdom of heaven, than
even a Messalina, or an Heliogabalus, with all their profligacy about them.

Nothing, I believe, has so much contributed to corrupt the true spirit of the
Christian institution, as that partiality, which we contract from our earliest
education for the manners of Pagan antiquity: from whence we learn to adopt
every moral idea, which is repugnant to it; to applaud false virtues, which
that disavows; to be guided by laws of honor, which that abhors; to imitate
characters, which that detests; and to behold heroes, patriots, conquerors, and
suicides with admiration, whose conduct that utterly condemns. From a coalition
of these opposite principles was generated that monstrous system of cruelty and
benevolence, of barbarism and civility, of rapine and justice, of fighting and
devotion, of revenge and generosity, which harassed the world for several
centuries with crusades, holy wars, knight-errantry, and single combats, and
even still retains influence enough, under the name of honor, to defeat the
most beneficent ends of this holy institution. I mean not by this to pass any
censure on the principles of valor, patriotism, or honor: they may be useful,
and perhaps necessary, in the commerce and business of the present turbulent
and imperfect state; and those who are actuated by them may be virtuous,
honest, and even religious men: all that I assert is, that they cannot be
Christians: A profligate may be a Christian, though a bad one, because he may
be overpowered by passions and temptations, and his actions may contradict his
principles; but a man, whose ruling principle is honor, however virtuous he
may be, cannot be a Christian, because he erects a standard of duty, and
deliberately adheres to it, diametrically opposite to the whole tenor of that
religion.

The contrast between the Christian, and all other institutions religious or
moral previous to its appearance, is sufficiently evident, and surely the
superiority of the former is as little to be disputed; unless any one shall
undertake to prove, that humility, patience, forgiveness, and benevolence are
less amiable, and less beneficial qualities, than pride, turbulence, revenge,
and malignity: that the contempt of riches is less noble, than the acquisition
by fraud and villainy, or the distribution of them to the poor, less
commendable than avarice or profusion; or that a real immortality in the
kingdom of heaven is an object less exalted, less rational, and less worthy of
pursuit, than an imaginary immortality in the applause of men: that worthless
tribute, which the folly of one part of mankind pays to the wickedness of the
other; a tribute, which a wise man ought always to despise, because a good man
can scarce ever obtain.

CONCLUSION.
IF I mistake not, I have now fully established the truth of my three
propositions.

First, That there is now extant a book entitled the New Testament.

Secondly, That from this book may be extracted a system of religion entirely
new; both in its object, and its doctrines, not only superior to, but totally
unlike every thing, which had ever before entered into the mind of man.

Thirdly, That from this book may likewise be collected a system of ethics, in
which every moral precept founded on reason is carried to a higher degree of
purity and perfection, than in any other of the wisest philosophers of
preceding ages; every moral precept founded on false principles totally
omitted, and many new precepts added, peculiarly corresponding with the new
object of this religion.

Every one of these propositions, I am persuaded, is incontrovertibly true; and
if true, this short, but certain conclusion must inevitably follow: That such a
system of religion and morality could not possibly have been the work of any
man, or set of men, much less of those obscure, ignorant, and illiterate
persons who actually did discover, and publish it to the world; and that
therefore it must have been effected by the supernatural interposition of
divine power and wisdom; that is, that it must derive its origin from God.

This argument seems to me little short of demonstration, and is indeed founded
on the very same reasoning, by which the material world is proved to be the
work of his invisible hand. We view with admiration the heavens and the earth,
and all therein contained; we contemplate with amazement the minute bodies of
animals too small for perception, and the immense planetary orbs too vast for
imagination: We are certain that these cannot be the works of man; and
therefore we conclude with reason, that they must be the productions of an
omnipotent Creator. In the same manner we see here a scheme of religion and
morality unlike and superior to all ideas of the human mind, equally impossible
to have been discovered by the knowledge, as invented by the artifice of man;
and therefore by the very same mode of reasoning, and with the same justice, we
conclude, that it must derive its origin from the same omnipotent and
omniscient Being.

Nor was the propagation of this religion less extraordinary than the religion
itself, or less above the reach of all human power, than the discovery of it
was above that of all human understanding. It is well known, that in the course
of a very few years it was spread over all the principal parts of Asia and of
Europe, and this by the ministry only of an inconsiderable number of the most
inconsiderable persons; that at this time Paganism was in the highest repute,
believed universally by the vulgar, and patronised by the great; that the
wisest men of the wisest nations assisted at its sacrifices, and consulted its
oracles on the most important occasions: Whether these were the tricks of the
priests or of the devil, is of no consequence, as they were both equally
unlikely to be converted, or overcome; the fact is certain, that on the
preaching of a few fishermen, their altars were deserted, and their deities
were dumb. This miracle they undoubtedly performed, whatever we may think of
the rest: and this is surely sufficient to prove the authority of their
commission; and to convince us, that neither their undertaking nor the
execution of it could possibly be their own.

How much this divine institution has been corrupted, or how soon these
corruptions began, how far it has been discolored by the false notions of
illiterate ages, or blended with fictions by pious frauds, or how early these
notions and fictions were introduced, no learning or sagacity is now able
precisely to ascertain; but surely no man, who seriously considers the
excellence and novelty of its doctrines, the manner in which it was at first
propagated through the world, the persons who achieved that wonderful work,
and the originality of those writings in which it is still recorded, can
possibly believe that it could ever have been the production of imposture, or
chance; or that from an imposture the most wicked and blasphemous, (for if an
imposture, such it is,) all the religion and virtue now existing on earth can
derive their source.

But notwithstanding what has been here urged, if any man can believe, that at
a time when the literature of Greece and Rome, then in their meridian luster,
were insufficient for the task, the son of a carpenter, together with twelve of
the meanest and most illiterate mechanics, his associates, unassisted by any
supernatural power, should be able to discover or invent a system of theology
the most sublime, and of ethics the most perfect, which had escaped the
penetration and learning of Plato, Aristotle, and Cicero; and that from this
system, by their own sagacity, they had excluded every false virtue, though
universally admired, and admitted every true virtue, though despised and
ridiculed by all the rest of the world: If any one can believe that these men
could become impostors, for no other purpose than the propagation of truth,
villains for no end but to teach honesty, and martyrs without the least
prospect of honor or advantage; or that, if all this should have been
possible, these few inconsiderable persons should have been able, in the course
of a few years, to have spread this their religion over most parts of the then
known world, in opposition to the interests, pleasures, ambition, prejudices,
and even reason of mankind; to have triumphed over the power of princes, the
intrigues of states, the force of custom, the blindness of zeal, the influence
of priests, the arguments of orators, and the philosophy of the world, without
any supernatural assistance; if any one can believe all these miraculous
events, contradictory to the constant experience of the powers and dispositions
of human nature, he must be possessed of much more faith than is necessary to
make him a Christian, and remain an unbeliever from mere credulity.

But should these credulous infidels after all be in the right, and this
pretended revelation be all a fable; from believing it what harm could ensue?
Would it render princes more tyrannical, or subjects more ungovernable? the
rich more insolent, or the poor more disorderly? Would it make worse parents or
children, husbands or wives, masters or servants, friends or neighbors? Or
would it not make men more virtuous, and consequently more happy in every
situation? It could not be criminal; it could not be detrimental. It could not
be criminal, because it cannot be a crime to assent to such evidence, as has
been able to convince the best and wisest of mankind; by which, if false,
Providence must have permitted men to deceive each other, for the most
beneficial ends, and which therefore it would be surely more meritorious to
believe, from a disposition of faith and charity, which believes all things,
than to reject with scorn from obstinacy and self-conceit: It cannot be
detrimental, because if christianity is a fable, it is a fable, the belief of
which is the only principle which can retain men in a steady and uniform course
of virtue, piety, and devotion, or can support them in the hour of distress, of
sickness, and of death. Whatever might be the operations of true deism on the
minds of pagan philosophers, that can now avail us nothing: for that light
which once lightened the gentiles, is now absorbed in the brighter illumination
of the gospel; we can now form no rational system of deism, but what must be
borrowed from that source, and, as far as it reaches toward perfection, must
be exactly the same; and therefore if we will not accept of Christianity, we
can have no religion at all. Accordingly we see, that those who fly from this,
scarce ever stop at deism; but hasten on with great alacrity to a total
rejection of all religious and moral principles whatever.

If I have here demonstrated the divine origin of the christian religion by an
argument which cannot be confuted; no others, however plausible or numerous,
founded on probabilities, doubts, and conjectures, can ever disprove it,
because if it is once shown to be true, it cannot be false. But as many
arguments of this kind have bewildered some candid and ingenuous minds, I shall
here bestow a few lines on those which have the most weight, in order to wipe
out, or at least to diminish their perplexing influence.

But here I must previously observe, that the most unsurmountable, as well as
the most usual obstacle to our belief, arises from our passions, appetites, and
interests; for faith being an act of the will as much as of the understanding,
we oftener disbelieve for want of inclination, than want of evidence. The first
step toward thinking this revelation true, is our hopes that it is so; for
whenever we much wish any proposition to be true, we are not far from believing
it. It is certainly for the interest of all good men, that its authority should
be well founded; and still more beneficial to the bad, if ever they intend to
be better: because it is the only system either of reason or religion which can
give them any assurance of pardon. The punishment of vice is a debt due to
justice, which cannot be remitted without compensation: repentance can be no
compensation; it may change a wicked man's dispositions, and prevent his
offending for the future, but can lay no claim to pardon for what is past. If
any one by profligacy and extravagance contracts a debt, repentance may make
him wiser, and hinder him from running into further distresses, but can never
pay off his old bonds; for which he must be ever accountable, unless they are
discharged by himself, or some other in his stead: this very discharge
Christianity alone holds forth on our repentance, and, if true, will certainly
perform: the truth of it therefore must ardently be wished for by all, except
the wicked, who are determined neither to repent or reform. It is well worth
every man's while, who either is, or intends to be virtuous, to believe
Christianity, if he can; because he will find it the surest preservative
against all vicious habits and their attendant evils, the best resource under
distresses and disappointments, ill health and ill fortune, and the firmest
basis on which contemplation can rest; and without some, the human mind is
never perfectly at ease. But if any one is attached to a favorite pleasure, or
eagerly engaged in worldly pursuits incompatible with the precepts of this
religion, and he believes it, he must either relinquish those pursuits with
uneasiness, or persist in them with remorse and dissatisfaction, and therefore
must commence unbeliever in his own defense. With such I shall not dispute, nor
pretend to persuade men by arguments to make themselves miserable: but to
those, who, not afraid that this religion may be true, are really affected by
such objections, I will offer the following answers, which, though short, will,
I doubt not, be sufficient to show them their weakness and futility.

In the first place then, some have been so bold as to strike at the root of
all revelation from God, by asserting, that it is incredible, because
unnecessary, and unnecessary, because the reason which he has bestowed on
mankind is sufficiently able to discover all the religious and moral duties
which he requires of them, if they would but attend to her precepts and be
guided by her friendly admonitions. Mankind have undoubtedly at various times
from the remotest ages received so much knowledge by divine communications, and
have ever been so much inclined to impute it all to their own sufficiency, that
it is now difficult to determine what human reason unassisted can effect: But
to form a true judgment on this subject, let us turn our eyes to those remote
regions of the globe, to which this supernatural assistance has never yet
extended, and we shall there see men endued with sense and reason not inferior
to our own, so far from being capable of forming systems of religion and
morality, that they are at this day totally unable to make a nail or a hatchet:
from whence we may surely be convinced, that reason alone is so far from being
sufficient to offer to mankind a perfect religion, that it has never yet been
able to lead them to any degree of culture, or civilization whatever. These
have uniformly flowed from that great fountain of divine communication opened
in the east, in the earliest ages, and thence been gradually diffused in
salubrious streams, throughout the various regions of the earth. Their rise and
progress, by surveying the history of the world, may easily be traced backwards
to their source; and wherever these have not as yet been able to penetrate, we
there find the human species not only void of all true religious and moral
sentiments, but not the least emerged from their original ignorance and
barbarity; which seems a demonstration, that although human reason is capable
of progression in science, yet the first foundations must be laid by
supernatural instructions: for surely no other probable cause can be assigned,
why one part of mankind should have made such an amazing progress in religious,
moral, metaphysical, and philosophical enquiries; such wonderful improvements
in policy, legislation, commerce, and manufactures, while the other part,
formed with the same natural capacities, and divided only by seas and
mountains, should remain, during the same number of ages, in a state little
superior to brutes, without government, without laws or letters, and even
without clothes and habitations; murdering each other to satiate their revenge,
and devouring each other to appease their hunger: I say no cause can be
assigned for this amazing difference, except that the first have received
information from those divine communications recorded in the scriptures, and
the latter have never yet been favored with such assistance. This remarkable
contrast seems an unanswerable, though perhaps a new proof of the necessity of
revelation, and a solid refutation of all arguments against it, drawn from the
sufficiency of human reason. And as reason in her natural state is thus
incapable of making any progress in knowledge; so when furnished with materials
by supernatural aid, if left to the guidance of her own wild imaginations, she
falls into more numerous, and more gross errors, than her own native ignorance
could ever have suggested. There is then no absurdity so extravagant, which she
is not ready to adopt: she has persuaded some, that there is no God; others,
that there can be no future state; she has taught some, that there is no
difference between vice and virtue, and that to cut a man's throat and to
relieve his necessities are actions equally meritorious: she has convinced
many, that they have no free will in opposition to their own experience; some,
that there can be no such thing as soul, or spirit, contrary to their own
perceptions; and others no such thing as matter or body, in contradiction to
their senses. By analyzing all things she can show, that there is nothing in
any thing; by perpetual sisting she can reduce all existence to the invisible
dust of skepticism; and by recurring to first principles, prove to the
satisfaction of her followers, that there are no principles at all. How far
such a guide is to be depended on in the important concerns of religion, and
morals, I leave to the judgment of every considerate man to determine. This is
certain, that human reason in its highest state of cultivation amongst the
philosophers of Greece and Rome, was never able to form a religion comparable
to Christianity; nor have all those sources of moral virtue, such as truth,
beauty, and the fitness of things, which modern philosophers have endeavored
to substitute in its stead, ever been effectual to produce good men, and have
themselves often been the productions of some of the worst.

Others there are, who allow, that a revelation from God may be both necessary,
and credible; but allege, that the scriptures, that is the books of the Old and
New Testament, cannot be that Revelation; because in them are to be found
errors and inconsistences, fabulous stories, false facts, and false philosophy;
which can never be derived from the fountain of all wisdom and truth. To this I
reply, that I readily acknowledge, that the scriptures are not revelations from
God, but the history of them: The revelation itself is derived from God; but
the history of it is the production of men, and therefore the truth of it is
not in the least affected by their fallibility, but depends on the internal
evidence of its own supernatural excellence. If in these books such a religion,
as has been here described, actually exists, no seeming, or even real defects
to be found in them can disprove the divine origin of this religion, or
invalidate my argument. Let us, for instance, grant that the Mosaic history of
the creation was founded on the erroneous but popular principles of those early
ages, who imagined the earth to be a vast plain, and the celestial bodies no
more than luminaries hung up in the concave firmament to enlighten it; will it
from thence follow, that Moses could not be a proper instrument in the hands of
Providence, to impart to the Jews a divine law, because he was not inspired
with a foreknowledge of the Copernican and Newtonian systems? or that Christ
must be an imposter, because Moses was not an astronomer? Let us also suppose,
that the accounts of Christ's temptation in the wilderness, the devils taking
refuge in the herd of swine, with several other narrations in the New
Testament, frequently ridiculed by unbelievers, were all but stories
accommodated to the ignorance and superstitions of the times and countries in
which they were written, or pious frauds intended to impress on vulgar minds a
higher reverence of the power and sanctity of Christ; will this in the least
impeach the excellence of his religion, or the authority of its founder? or is
Christianity answerable for all the fables of which it may have been the
innocent occasion? The want of this obvious distinction has much injured the
Christian cause; because on this ground it has ever been most successfully
attacked, and on this ground it is not easily to be defended: for if the
records of this revelation are supposed to be the revelation itself, the least
defect discovered in them must be fatal to the whole. What has led many to
overlook this distinction, is that common phrase, that the scriptures are the
word of God; and in one sense they certainly are; that is, they are the sacred
repository of all the revelations, dispensations, promises, and precepts, which
God has vouchsafed to communicate to mankind; but by this expression we are not
to understand, that every part of this voluminous collection of historical,
poetical, prophetical, theological, and moral writings, which we call the
Bible, was dictated by the immediate influence of divine inspiration: The
authors of these books pretend to no such infalsibility, and if they claim it
not for themselves, who has authority to claim it for them? Christ required no
such belief from those who were willing to be his disciples. He says, He that
believes on me, has everlasting life; John vi. 47.
but where does he say. He that believes not every word contained in the Old
Testament, which was then extant, or every word in the New Testament, which was
to be wrote for the instruction of future generations, has not everlasting
life? There are innumerable occurrences related in the scriptures, some of
greater, some of less, and some of no importance at all; the truth of which we
can have no reason to question, but the belief of them is surely not essential
to the faith of a Christian: I have no doubt but that St. Paul was
ship-wrecked, and that he left his cloak and his parchments at Troas; but the
belief of these facts makes no part of Christianity, nor is the truth of them
any proof of its authority. It proves only that this apostle could not in
common life be under the perpetual influence of infallible inspiration; for,
had he been so, he would not have put to sea before a storm, nor have forgot
his cloak. These writers were undoubtedly directed by supernatural influence in
all things necessary to the great work, which they were appointed to perform:
At particular times, and on particular occasions, they were enabled to utter
^^^^^^cies, to speak languages, and to work miracles; but in all other
circumstances, they seem to have been left to the direction of their own
understandings, like other men. In the sciences of history, geography,
astronomy, and philosophy, they appear to have been no better instructed than
others, and therefore were not less liable to be milled by the errors and
prejudices of the times and countries in which they lived. They related facts
like honest men, to the best of their knowledge or information, and they
recorded the divine lessons of their master with the utmost sidelity; but they
pretended to no infallibility, for they sometimes differed in their relations,
and they sometimes disagreed in their sentiments. All which proves only, that
they did not act, or write, in a combination to deceive, but not in the least
impeaches the truth of the revelation which they published; which depends not
on any external evidence whatever: For I will venture to affirm, that if any
one could prove, what is impossible to be proved, because it is not true, that
there are errors in geography, chronology, and philosophy, in every page of the
Bible; that the prophecies therein delivered are all but fortunate guesses, or
artful applications, and the miracles there recorded no better than legendary
tales: if any one could show, that these books were never written by their
pretended authors, but were posterior impositions on illiterate and credulous
ages: all these wonderful discoveries would prove no more than this, that God,
for reasons to us unknown, had thought proper to permit a revelation by him
communicated to mankind, to be mixed with their ignorance, and corrupted by
their frauds from its earliest infancy, in the same manner in which he has
visibly permitted it to be mixed, and corrupted from that period to the present
hour. If in these books a religion superior to all human imagination actually
exists, it is of no consequence to the proof of its divine origin, by what
means it was there introduced, or with what human errors and imperfections it
is blended. A diamond, though found in a bed of mud, is still a diamond, nor
can the dirt, which surrounds it, depreciate its value or destroy its luster.

To some speculative and refined observers, it has appeared incredible, that a
wise and benevolent Creator should have constituted a world upon one plan, and
a religion for it on another; that is, that he should have revealed a religion
to mankind, which not only contradicts the principal passions and inclinations
which he has implanted in their natures, but is incompatible with the whole
economy of that world which he has created, and in which he has thought proper
to place them. This, say they, with regard to the Christian is apparently the
case: the love of power, riches, honor, and fame, are the great incitements to
generous and magnanimous actions; yet by this institution are all these
depreciated and discouraged. Government is essential to the nature of man, and
cannot be managed without certain degrees of violence, corruption, and
imposition: yet are all these strictly forbid. Nations cannot subsist without
wars, nor war be carried on without rapine, desolation, and murder; yet are
these prohibited under the severest threats. The nonresistance of evil must
subject individuals to continual oppressions, and leave nations a defenseless
prey to their enemies; yet is this recommended. Perpetual patience under
insults and injuries must every day provoke new insults and new injuries; yet
is this injoined. A neglect of all we eat and drink, and wear, must put an end
to all commerce, manufactures, and industry; yet is this required. In short
were these precepts universally obeyed, the disposition of all human affairs
must be entirely changed, and the business of the world, constituted as it now
is, could not go on. To all this I answer, that such indeed is the christian
revelation, though some of its advocates may perhaps be unwilling to own it,
and such it is constantly declared to be by him who gave it, as well as by
those, who published it under his immediate direction: To these he says, If ye
were of the world, the world would love his own; but because ye are not of the
world, but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you.
John xv. 19.
To the Jews he declares, Ye are of this world; I am not of this world. John
viii. 23.
St. Paul writes to the Romans, "Be not conformed to this world;" Romans xii. 2.
and to the Corinthians, We speak not the wisdom of this world. Cor. ii. 6.
St. James says, Know ye not, that the friendship of the world is enmity with
God? whosoever therefore will be a friend of the world is the enemy of God.
Jam. iv. 4.
This irreconcilable disagreement between christianity and the world is
announced in numberless other places in the New Testament, and indeed by the
whole tenor of those writings. These are plain declarations, which, in spite
of all the evasions of those good managers, who choose to take a little of this
world in their way to heaven, stand fixed and immovable against all their
arguments drawn from public benefit and pretended necessity, and must ever
forbid any reconciliation between the pursuits of this world and the christian
institution: But they who reject it on this account, enter not into the sublime
spirit of this religion, which is not a code of precise laws designed for the
well ordering society, adapted to the ends of worldly convenience, and amenable
to the tribunal of human prudence; but a divine lesson of purity and
perfection, so far superior to the low considerations of conquest, government,
and commerce, that it takes no more notice of them than of the battles of
gamecocks, the policy of bees, or the industry of ants: they recollect not what
is the first and principal object of this institution; that this is not, as has
been often repeated, to make us happy, or even virtuous in the present life,
for the sake of augmenting our happiness here, but to conduct us through a
state of dangers and sufferings, of sin and temptation, in such a manner as to
qualify us for the enjoyment of happiness hereafter. All other institutions of
religion and morals were made for the world, but the characteristic of this is
to be against it; and therefore the merits of christian doctrines are not to be
weighed in the scales of public utility, like those of moral precepts, because
worldly utility is not their end. If Christ and his apostles had pretended,
that the religion which they preached would advance the power, wealth, and
prosperity of nations, or of men, they would have deserved but little credit;
but they constantly profess the contrary, and every where declare, that their
religion is adverse to the world, and all its pursuits. Christ says, speaking
of his disciples, They are not of the world, even as I am not of the world.
John xvii. 16.
It can therefore be no imputation on this religion, or on any of its precepts,
that they tend not to an end which their author professedly disclaims: nor can
it surely be deemed a defect, that it is adverse to the vain pursuits of this
world; for so are reason, wisdom, and experience; they all teach us the same
lesson, they all demonstrate to us every day, that these are begun on false
hopes, carried on with disquietude, and end in disappointment. This professed
incompatibility with the little, wretched, and iniquitous business of the
world, is therefore so far from being a defect in this religion, that, was
there no other proof of its divine origin, this alone, I think, would be
abundantly sufficient. The great plan and benevolent design of this
dispensation is plainly this; to enlighten the minds, purify the religion, and
amend the morals of mankind in general, and to select the most meritorious of
them to be successively transplanted into the kingdom of heaven: Which gracious
offer is impartially tendered to all, who by perseverance in meekness,
patience, piety, charity, and a detachment from the world, are willing to
qualify themselves for this holy and happy society. Was this universally
accepted, and did every man observe strictly every precept of the gospel, the
face of human affairs and the economy of the world would indeed be greatly
changed; but surely they would be changed for the better; and we should enjoy
much more happiness, even here, than at present: For we must not forget, that
evils are by it forbid as well as resistance; injuries, as well as revenge; all
unwillingness to diffuse the enjoyments of life, as well as solicitude to
acquire them; all obstacles to ambition, as well as ambition itself; and
therefore all contentions for power and interest would be at an end; and the
world would go on much more happily than it now does. But this universal
acceptance of such an offer was never expected from so depraved and imperfect a
creature as man, and therefore could never have been any part of the design:
For it was foreknown and foretold by him who made it; that few, very few would
accept it on these terms. He says, Strait is the gate, and narrow is the way
which leads into life, and few there be that find it: * Accordingly we see,
that very few are prevailed on by the hopes of future happiness, to relinquish
the pursuits of present pleasures or interests, and therefore these pursuits
are little interrupted by the secession of so inconsiderable a number: As the
natural world subsists by the struggles of the same elements, so does the moral
by the contentions of the same passions, as from the beginning: The generality
of mankind are actuated by the same motives, fight, scuffle, and scramble for
power, riches, and pleasures with the same eagerness: all occupations and
professions are exercised with the same alacrity, and there are soldiers,
lawyers, statesment, patriots, and politicians, just as if Christianity had
never existed. Thus, we see this wonderful dispensation has answered all the
purposes for which it was intended: It has enlightened the minds, purified the
religion, and amended the morals of mankind; and, without subverting the
costitution, policy, or business of the world, opened a gate, though a strait
one' through which all, who are wise enough to choose it, and good enough to be
fit for it, may find an entrance into the kingdom of heaven.

Others have said, that if this revelation had really been from God, his
infinite power and goodness could never have suffered it to have been so soon
perverted from its original purity, to have continued in a state of corruption
through the course of so many ages, and at last to have proved so ineffectual
to the reformation of mankind. To these I answer, that all this, on
examination, will be found inevitable, from the nature of all revelations
communicated to so imperfect a creature as man, and from circumstances peculiar
to the rise and progress of the Christian in particular: for when this was
first preached to the gentile nations, though they were not able to withstand
the force of its evidence, and therefore received it; yet they could not be
prevailed on to relinquish their old superstitions, and former opinions, but
chose rather to incorporate them with it: By which means it was necessarily
mixed with their ignorance, and their learning; by both which it was equally
injured. The people defaced its worship by blending it with their idolatrous
ceremonies, and the philosophers corrupted its doctrines by weaving them up
with the notions of the Gnostics, Mystics, and Manichaeans, the prevailing
systems of those times. By degrees its irresistible excellence gained over
princes, potentates, and conquerors to its interests, and it was supported by
their patronage: but that patronage soon engaged it in their policies and
contests, and destroyed that excellence by which it had been acquired. At
length the meek and humble professors of the gospel inslaved these princes, and
conquered these conquerers their patrons, and erected for themselves such a
stupendous fabric of wealth and power, as the world had never seen: they then
propagated their religion by the same methods, by which it had been persecuted;
nations were converted by fire and sword, and the vanquished were baptized with
daggers at their throats. All these events we see proceed from a chain of
causes and consequences, which could not have been broken without changing the
established course of things by a constant series of miracles, or a total
alteration of human nature: whilst that continues as it is, the purest religion
must be corrupted by a conjunction with power and riches, and it will also then
appear to be much more corrupted than it really is: because many are inclined
to think, that every deviation from its primitive state is a corruption:
Christianity was at first preached by the poor and mean, in holes and caverns,
under the iron rod of persecution, and therefore many absurdly conclude, that
any degree of wealth or power in its ministers, or of magnificence in its
worship, are corruptions inconsistent with the genuine simplicity of its
original state: they are offended, that modern bishops should possess titles,
palaces, revenues, and coaches, when it is notorious, that their predecessors,
the apostles were despicable wanderers, without houses, or money, and walked on
foot. The apostles indeed lived in a state of poverty and persecution attendant
on their particular situation, and the work which they had undertaken: this was
their misfortune, but no part of then religion, and therefore it can be no more
incumbent on their successors to imitate their poverty and meanness, than to be
whipped, imprisoned, and put to death, in compliance with their example. These
are all but the suggestions of envy and malevolence, but no objections to these
fortunate alterations in Christianity and its professors; which, if not abused
to the purposes of tyranny and superstition, are in fact no more than the
necessary and proper effects of its more prosperous situation. When a poor man
grows rich, or a servant becomes a master, they should take care that their
exaltation prompts them not to be unjust or insolent; but surely it is not
requisite or right, that their behavior and mode of living should be exactly
the same, when their situation is altered. How far this institution has been
effectual to the reformation of mankind, it is not easy now to ascertain,
because the enormities which prevailed before the appearance of it are by time
so far removed from our sight, that they are scarcely visible; but those of the
most gigantic size still remain in the records of history, as monuments of the
rest: Wars in those ages were carried on with a ferocity and cruelty unknown to
the present: whole cities and nations were extirpated by fire and sword; and
thousands of the vanquished were crucified and impaled for having endeavored
only to defend themselves and their country. The lives of newborn infants were
then entirely at the disposal of their parents, who were at liberty to bring
them up, or to expose them to perish by cold and hunger, or to be devoured by
birds and beasts; and this was frequently practiced without punishment, and
even without censure. Gladiators were employed by hundreds to cut one another
to pieces, in public theaters for the diversion of the most polite assemblies;
and though these combatants at first consisted of criminals only, by degrees
men of the highest rank, and even ladies of the most illustrious families,
enrolled themselves in this honorable list. On many occasions human sacrifices
were ordained; and at the funerals of rich and eminent persons, great numbers
of their slaves were murdered as victims pleasing to their departed spirits.
The most infamous obscenities were made part of their religious worship, and
the most unnatural lusts publicly avowed, and celebrated by their most admired
poets. At the approach of Christianity all these horrid abominations vanished;
and amongst those who first embraced it, scarce a single vice was to be found:
to such an amazing degree of piety, charity, temperance, patience, and
resignation were the primitive converts exalted, that they seem literally to
have been regenerated, and purified from all the imperfections of human nature;
and to have pursued such a constant and uniform course of devotion, innocence,
and virtue, as, in the present times, it is almost as difficult for us to
conceive as to imitate. If it is asked, why should not the belief of the same
religion now produce the same effects? the answer is short, because it is not
believed: The most sovereign medicine can perform no cure, if the patient will
not be persuaded to take it. Yet notwithstanding all impediments, it has
certainty done a great deal toward diminishing the vices and correcting the
dispositions of mankind; and was it universally adopted in belief and practice,
would totally eradicate both sin and punishment. But this was never expected,
or designed, or possible, because, if their existence did not arise from some
necessity to us unknown, they never would have been permitted to exist at all;
and therefore they can no more be extirpated, than they could have been
prevented: for this would certainly be incompatible with the frame and
constitution of this world, and in all probability with that of another. And
this, I think, well accounts for that reserve and obscurity with which this
religion was at first promulgated, and that want of irresistible evidence of
its truth, by which it might possibly have been enforced. Christ says to his
disciples, To you it is given to know the mystery of the kingdom of God; but
unto them that are without, all these things are done in parables; that seeing
they may see, and not perceive, and hearing they may hear, and not understand;
lest at any time they should be converted, and their sins should be forgiven
them. Mark iv. 11, 12.
That is, to you by peculiar favor it is given to know and understand the
doctrines of my religion, and by that means to qualify yourselves for the
kingdom of heaven; but to the multitude without, that is to all mankind in
general, this indulgence cannot be extended; because that all men should be
exempted from sin and punishment is utterly repugnant to the universal system,
and that constitution of things, which infinite wisdom has thought proper to
adopt.

Objections have likewise been raised to the divine authority of this religion
from the incredibility of some of its doctrines, particularly of those
concerning the Trinity, and atonement for sin by the sufferings and death of
Christ; the one contradicting all the principles of human reason, and the other
all our ideas of divine justice. To these objections I shall only say, that no
arguments founded on principles, which we cannot comprehend, can possibly
disprove a proposition already proved on principles which we do understand; and
therefore that on this subject they ought not to be attend to: That three
Beings should be one Being, is a proposition which certainly contradicts
reason, that is, our reason; but it does not from thence follow, that it cannot
be true; for there are many propositions which contradict our reason, and yet
are demonstrably true: one is the very first principle of all religion, the
being of a God; for that any thing should exist without a cause, or that any
thing should be the cause of its own existence, are propositions equally
contradictory to our reason; yet one of them must be true, or nothing could
ever have existed: in like manner the overruling grace of the Creator, and the
free will of his creatures, his certain foreknowledge of future events, and
the uncertain contingency of those events, are to our apprehensions absolute
contradictions to each other; and yet the truth of every one of these is
demonstrable from Scripture, reason, and experience. All these difficulties
arise from our imagining, that the mode of existence of all Beings must be
similar to our own; that is, that they must all exist in time, and space; and
hence proceeds our embarrassment on this subject. We know, that no two Beings,
with whose mode of existence we are acquainted, can exist in the same point of
time in the same point of space, and that therefore they cannot be one: but how
far Beings, whose mode of existence bears no relation to time or space, may be
united, we cannot comprehend: and therefore the possibility of such an union we
cannot positively deny. In like manner our reason informs us, that the
punishment of the innocent, instead of the guilty, is diametrically opposite to
justice, rectitude, and all pretensions to utility; but we should also
remember, that the short line of our reason cannot reach to the bottom of this
question: it cannot inform us, by what means either guilt or punishment ever
gained a place in the works of a Creator infinitely good and powerful, whose
goodness must have induced him, and whose power must have enabled him to
exclude them: It cannot assure us, that some sufferings of individuals are not
necessary to the happiness and well-being of the whole: It cannot convince us,
that they do not actually arise from this necessity, or that for this cause,
they may not be required of us, and levied like a tax for the public benefit:
or that this tax may not be paid by one Being, as well as another; and
therefore, if voluntarily offered, be justly accepted from the innocent instead
of the guilty. Of all these circumstances we are totally ignorant; nor can our
reason afford us any information, and therefore we are not able to assert,
that, this measure is contrary to justice, or void of utility: for, unless we
could first resolve that great question whence came evil? we can decide nothing
on the dispensations of Providence; because they must necessarily be connected
with that undiscoverable principle; and, as we know not the root of the
disease, we cannot judge of what is, or is not, a proper and effectual remedy.
It is remarkable, that, notwithstanding all the seeming absurdities of this
doctrine, there is one circumstance much in its favor; which is, that it has
been universally adopted in all ages, as far as history can carry us back in
our inquiries to the earliest times; in which we find all nations civilized and
barbarous, however differing in all other religious opinions, agreeing alone in
the expediency of appeasing their offended Deities by sacrifices, that is, by
the vicarious sufferings of men or other animals. This notion could never have
been derived from reason, because it directly contradicts it; nor from
ignorance, because ignorance could never have contrived so unaccountable an
expedient, nor have been uniform in all ages and countries in any opinion
whatsoever; nor from the artifice of kings or priests, in order to acquire
dominion over the people, because it seems not adapted to this end, and we find
it implanted in the minds of the most remote savages at this day discovered,
who have neither kings or priests artifice, or dominion amongst them. It must
therefore be derived from natural instinct, or supernatural revelation, both
which are equally the operations of divine power. If it is further urged, that
however true these doctrines may be, yet it must be inconsistent with the
justice and goodness of the Creator, to require from his creatures the belief
of propositions which contradict, or are above the reach of that reason, which
he has thought proper to bestow upon them. To this I answer, that genuine
Christianity requires no such belief: It has discovered to us many important
truths, with which we were before entirely unacquainted, and amongst them are
these, that three Beings are some way united in the divine essence, and that
God will accept of the sufferings of Christ as an atonement for the sins of
mankind. These, considered as declarations of facts only, neither contradict,
or are above the reach of human reason: The first is a proposition as plain, as
that three equilateral lines compose one triangle; the other is as
intelligible, as that one man should discharge the debts of another. In what
manner this union is formed, or why God accepts these vicarious punishments, or
to what purposes they may be subservient, it informs us not, because no
information could enable us to comprehend these mysteries, and therefore it
does not require that we should know or believe any thing about them. The truth
of these doctrines must rest entirely on the authority of those who taught
them; but then we should reflect that those were the same persons who taught us
a system of religion more sublime, and of ethics more perfect, than any which
our faculties were ever able to discover, but which when discovered are exactly
consonant to our reason, and that therefore we should not hastily reject those
informations which they have vouchsafed to give us, of which our reason is not
a competent judge. If an able mathematician proves to us the truth of several
propositions by demonstrations which we understand, we hesitate not on his
authority to assent to others, the process of whose proofs we are not able to
follow: why therefore should we refuse that credit to Christ and his Apostles,
which we think reasonable to give to one another?

Many have objected to the whole scheme of this revelation as partial,
fluctuating, indeterminate, unjust, and unworthy of an omniscient and
omnipotent author, who cannot be supposed to have favored particular persons,
countries, and times, with this divine communication, while others no less
meritorious have been altogether excluded from its benefits; nor to have
changed and counteracted his own designs; that is, to have formed mankind able
and disposed to render themselves miserable by their own wickedness, and then
to have contrived so strange an expedient to restore them to that happiness,
which they need never have been permitted to forfeit; and this to be brought
about by the unnecessary interposition of a mediator. To all this I shall only
say, that however unaccountable this may appear to us, who see but as small a
part of the Christian, as of the universal plan of creation, they are both in
regard to all these circumstances exactly analogous to each other. In all the
dispensations of Providence, with which we are acquainted, benefits are
distributed in a similar manner; health and strength, sense and science, wealth
and power, are all bestowed on individuals and communities in different degrees
and at different times. The whole economy of this world consists of evils and
remedies; and these for the most part administered by the instrumentality of
intermediate agents. God has permitted us to plunge ourselves into poverty,
distress, and misery, by our own vices, and has afforded us the advice,
instructions, and examples of others, to deter or extricate us from these
calamities. He has formed us subject to innumerable diseases, and he has
bestowed on us a variety of remedies. He has made us liable to hunger, thirst,
and nakedness, and he supplies us with food, drink, and clothing, usually by
the administration of others. He has created poisons, and he has provided
antidotes. He has ordained the winter's cold to cure the pestilential heats of
the summer, and the summer's sunshine to dry up the inundations of the winter.
Why the constitution of nature is so formed, why all the visible dispensations
of Providence are such, and why such is the Christian dispensation also, we
know not, nor have faculties to comprehend. God might certainly have made the
material world a system of perfect beauty and regularity, without evils, and
without remedies; and the Christian dispensation a scheme only of moral virtue
productive of happiness, without the intervention of any atonement or
mediation. He might have exempted our bodies from all diseases, and our minds
from all depravity, and we should then have stood in no need of medicines to
restore us to health, or expedients to reconcile us to his favor. It seems
indeed to our ignorance, that this would have been more consistent with justice
and reason; but his infinite wisdom has decided in another manner, and formed
the systems both of Nature and Christianity on other principles, and these so
exactly similar, that we have cause to conclude that they both must proceed
from the same source of divine power and wisdom, however inconsistent with our
reason they may appear. Reason is undoubtedly our surest guide in all matters,
which lie within the narrow circle of her intelligence: On the subject of
revelation her provine is only to examine into its authority, and when that is
once proved, she has no more to do, but to acquiesce in its doctrines, and
therefore is never so ill employed, as when she pretends to accommodate them to
her own ideas of rectitude and truth. God, says this self-sufficient teacher,
is perfectly wise, just, and good; and what is the inference? That all his
dispensations must be conformable to our notions of perfect wisdom, justice,
and goodness: but it should first be proved, that man is as perfect, and as
wise as his Creator, or this consequence will by no means follow; but rather
the reverse, that is, that the dispensations of a perfect and all-wise Being
must probably appear unreasonable, and perhaps unjust, to a Being imperfect and
ignorant; and therefore their seeming impossibility may be a mark of their
truth, and in some measure justify that pious rant of a mad enthusiast, "Credo,
quia impossible." Nor is it the least surprising, that we are not able to
understand the spiritual dispensations of the Almighty, when his material works
are to us no less incomprehensible, our reason can afford us no insight into
those great properties of matter, gravitation, attraction, elasticity, and
electricity, nor even into the essence of matter itself: Can reason teach us
how the sun's luminous orb can fill a circle, whose diameter contains many
millions of miles, with a constant inundation of successive rays during
thousands of years, without any perceivable diminution of that body, from
whence they are continually poured, or any augmentation of those bodies on
which they fall, and by which they are constantly absorbed? Can reason tell us
how those rays, darted with a velocity greater than that of a cannon ball, can
strike the tenderest organs of the human frame without inflicting any degree of
pain, or by what means this percussion only can convey the forms of distant
objects to an immaterial mind? or how any union can be formed between material
and immaterial essences, or how the wounds of the body can give pain to the
soul, or the anxiety of the soul can emaciate and destroy the body? That all
these things are so, we have visible and indisputable demonstration; but how
they can be so, is to us as incomprehensible, as the most abstruse mysteries of
Revelation can possibly be. In short, we see so small a part of the great
Whole, we know so little of the relation, which the present life bears to
pre-existent and future states; we can conceive so little of the nature of God,
and his attributes, or mode of existence; we can comprehend so little of the
material, and so much less of the moral plan on which the universe is
constituted, or on what principle it proceeds, that if a revelation from such a
Being, on such subjects, was in every part familiar to our understandings, and
consonant to our reason; we should have great cause to suspect its divine
authority; and therefore, had this revelation been less incomprehensible, it
would certainly have been more incredible.

But I shall not enter further into the consideration of these abstruse and
difficult speculations, because the discussion of them would render this short
essay too tedious and laborious a task for the perusal of them, for whom it was
principally intended; which are all those busy or idle persons, whose time and
thoughts are wholly engrossed by the pursuits of business, or pleasure,
ambition, or luxury, who know nothing of this religion, except what they have
accidentally picked up by desultory conversation or superficial reading, and
have thence determined with themselves, that a pretended revelation founded on
so strange and improbable a story, so contradictory to reason, so adverse to
the world and all its occupations, so incredible in its doctrines, and in its
precepts so impracticable, can be nothing more than the imposition of
priestcraft upon ignorant and illiterate ages, and artfully continued as an
engine welladapted to awe and govern the superstitious vulgar. To talk to such
about the Christian religion, is to converse with the deaf concerning music, or
with the blind on the beauties of painting: They want all ideas relative to the
subject, and therefore can never be made to comprehend it: to enable them to do
this, their minds must be formed for these conceptions by contemplation,
retirement, and abstraction from business and dissipation, by ill-health,
disappointments, and distresses; and possibly by divine interposition, or by
enthusiasm, which is usually mistaken for it. Without some of these preparatory
aids, together with a competent degree of learning and application, it is
impossible that they can think or know, understand or believe, any thing about
it. If they profess to believe, they deceive others; if they fancy that they
believe, they deceive themselves. I am ready to acknowledge, that these
gentlemen, as far as their information reaches, are perfectly in the right; and
if they are endued with good understandings, which have been entirely devoted
to the business or amusements of the world, they can pass no other judgment,
and must revolt from the history and doctrines of this religion. The preaching
Christ crucified was to the Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks
foolishness; Cor. i. 26.
and so it must appear to all, who, like them, judge from established
prejudices, false learning, and superficial knowledge; for those who are quite
unable to follow the chain of its prophecy, to see the beauty and justness of
its moral precepts, and to enter into the wonders of its dispensations, can
form no other idea of this revelation, but that of a confused rhapsody of
fictions and absurdities.

If it is asked, Was Christianity then intended only for learned divines and
profound philosophers? I answer, No: it was at first preached by the
illiterate, and received by the ignorant; and to such are the practical, which
are the most necessary parts of it, sufficiently intelligible: but the proofs
of its authority undoubtedly are not, because these must be chiefly drawn from
other parts, of a speculative nature, opening to our inquiries inexhaustible
discoveries concerning the nature, attributes, and dispensations of God, which
cannot be understood without some learning and much attention. From these the
generality of mankind must necessarily be excluded and must therefore trust to
others for the grounds of their belief, if they believe at all. And hence
perhaps it is, that faith, or easiness of belief, is so frequently and so
strongly recommended in the gospel; because if men require proofs, of which
they themselves are incapable, and those who have no knowledge on this
important subject will not place some confidence in those who have; the
illiterate and unattentive must ever continue in a state of unbelief: but then
all such should remember, that in all sciences, even in mathematics themselves,
there are many propositions, which on a cursory view appear to the most acute
understandings uninstructed in that science, to be impossible to be true, which
yet on a closer examination are found to be truths capable of the strictest
demonstration; and that therefore in disquisitions on which we cannot determine
without much learned investigation, reason uninformed is by no means to be
depended on; and from hence they ought surely to conclude, that it may be at
least as possible for them to be mistaken in disbelieving this revelation, who
know nothing of the matter, as for those great masters of reason and crudition,
Grotius, Bacon, Newton, Boil, Lock, Addison, and Lyttelton, to be deceived in
their belief: a belief, to which they firmly adhered after the most diligent
and learned researches into the authenticity of its records, the completion of
the prophecies, the sublimity of its doctrines, the purity of its precepts, and
the arguments of its adversaries; a belief, which they have testified to the
world by their writings, without any other motive, than their regard for truth
and the benefit of mankind. Should the few foregoing pages add but one mite to
the treasures with which these learned writers have enriched the world; if they
should be so fortunate as to persuade any of these minute philosophers to place
some confidence in these great opinions, and to distrust their own; if they
should be able to convince them, that notwithstanding all unfavourable
appearances, Christianity may not be altogether artifice and error; if they
should prevail on them to examine it with some attention, or, if that is too
much trouble, not to reject it without any examination at all; the purpose of
this little work will be sufficiently answered. Had the arguments herein used,
and the new hints here flung out, been more largely discussed, it might easily
have been extended to a more considerable bulk; but then the busy would not
have had leisure; nor the idle inclination to have read it. Should it ever have
the honor to be admitted into such good company, they will immediately, I
know, determine, that it must be the work of some enthusiast or methodist, some
beggar, or some madman. I shall therefore beg leave to assure them, that the
author is very far removed from all these characters: that he once perhaps
believed as little as themselves; but having some leisure and more curiosity,
he employed them both in resolving a question which seemed to him of some
importance, -- Whether Christianity was really an imposture founded on an
absurd, incredible and obsolete fable, as many suppose it? Or whether it is,
what it pretends to be, a revelation communicated to mankind by the
interposition of supernatural power? On a candid inquiry, he soon found, that
the first was an absolute impossibility, and that its pretensions to the latter
were founded on the most solid grounds: In the further pursuit of his
examination, he perceived, at every step, new lights arising, and some of the
brightest from parts of it the most obscure, but productive of the clearest
proofs, because equally beyond the power of human artifice to invent, and human
reason to discover. These arguments, which have convinced him of the divine
origin of this religion, he has here put together in as clear and concise a
manner as he was able, thinking they might have the same effect upon others,
and being of opinion, that if there were a few more true Christians in the
world, it would be beneficial to themselves, and by no means detrimental to the
public.

FINIS.

