Dr. COOPER's SERMON ON THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE Constitution, etc.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY JOHN HANCOCK, ESQUIRE GOVERNOR, THE
HONORABLE THE SENATE, AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF
MASSACHUSETTS, OCTOBER 25, 1780. BEING THE DAY OF THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE
CONSTITUTION, AND INAUGURATION OF THE NEW GOVERNMENT. BY SAMUEL COOPER, D. D.

COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS: PRINTED BY T. AND J. FLEET, AND J. GILL.

In the House of Representatives, June 24, 1780.
ORDERED, That Colonel Dawes and Major Osgood, with such as the Honorable
Board shall join, be a Committee to inform the Rev. Dr. COOPER that the two
Houses have made choice of him to preach a Sermon on the last Wednesday of
October next, being the first Day of General Election under the new
Constitution.

Sent up for Concurrence, JOHN HANCOCK, Speaker.
In Council, June 4, 1780, Read and concurred, and Thomas Cushing. Esquire is
joined. JOHN AVERY, Dep. Secr'y.
Consented to by the Major Part of the Council. A true Copy, Attest. JOHN
AVERY, Dep. Secr'y.

The Commonwealth of Massachusetts. In the House of Representatives, October
26, 1780.
ORDERED, That Mr. Lowell and Col. Dawes be appointed a Committee, with such as
the Honorable Senate shall join, to wait on the Rev. Doct. COOPER and return
him the Thanks of both Houses for his Sermon Yesterday delivered before the
General Assembly, and to request a Copy thereof for the Press.

Sent up for Concurrence, CALEB DAVIS, Speaker.
In Senate, October 30, 1780. Read and concurred, and Abraham Fuller, Esquire is
joined on the part of the Senate. THOMAS CUSHING, President,
True Copy, Attest. JOHN AVERY, Secr'y.

A SERMON, etc.
XXXth JEREMIAH, 20, 21 Ver. Their Congregation shall be established before me:
and their Nobles shall be of themselves, and their Governor shall proceed from
the midst of them.


NOTHING can be more applicable to the solemnity in which we are engaged, than
this passage of sacred writ. The Prophecy seems to have been made for
ourselves, it is so exactly descriptive of that important, that comprehensive,
that essential civil blessing, which kindles the luster, and diffuses the joy
of the present day. Nor is this the only passage of holy Scripture that holds
up to our view a striking resemblance between our own circumstances and those
of the ancient Israelites; a nation chosen by God a theater for the display of
some of the most astonishing dispensations of his Providence. Like that nation
we rose from oppression, and emerged "from the House of Bondage": Like that
nation we were led into a wilderness, as a refuge from tyranny, and a
preparation for the enjoyment of our civil and religious rights: Like that
nation we have been pursued through the sea, by the armed hand of power, which,
but for the signal interpositions of Heaven, must before now have totally
defeated the noble purpose of our emigration: And, to omit many other instances
of similarity, like that nation we have been ungrateful to the Supreme Ruler of
the world, and too "lightly esteemed the Rock of our Salvation"; accordingly,
we have been corrected by his justice, and at the same time remarkably
supported and defended by his mercy: So that we may discern our own picture in
the figure of the ancient church divinely exhibited to Moses in vision, "a bush
burning and not consumed." This day, this memorable day, is a witness, that the
Lord, He whose "hand makes great, and gives strength unto all, has not
forsaken us, nor our God forgotten us." This day, which forms a new era in our
annals, exhibits a testimony to all the world, that contrary to our deserts,
and amidst all our troubles, the blessing promised in our text to the afflicted
seed of Abraham is come upon us; "Their Nobles shall be of themselves, and
their Governor shall proceed from the midst of them."

This Prophecy has an immediate respect to the deliverance of the Jews from the
cruel oppressions of the king of Babylon. Their sufferings, when they fell
under the power of this haughty tyrant, as they are represented to us in sacred
history, must harrow a bosom softened with the least degree of humanity. They
give us a frightful picture of the effects of despotic power, guided and
inflamed by those lusts of the human heart with which it is seldom
unaccompanied. Can we forbear weeping for human nature, or blushing for its
degradation, when we view either the sufferer or the actor in such a scene; the
relentless oppressor, or those who are "sore broken in the place of dragons?"
What can be more pathetic than the description of it given by the same Prophet
who gave the consolation in our text. How does the city sit solitary that was
full of people? How is she become as a widow: she that was great among the
nations, and princess among the provinces? She weepeth sore in the night, and
her tears are on her cheeks; she has none to comfort her; her friends have
dealt treacherously with her. Judah is gone into captivity; because of
affliction, and because of great servitude, she finds no rest. Her mighty men
are trodden under foot; her young men are crushed; the young and the old lie on
the ground in the streets -- Mine eyes do fail with tears; my bowels are
troubled, my liver is poured on the earth, for the destruction of the daughter
of my people.

Such are the fruits of lawless and despotic power in a mortal man intoxicated
with it: Such desolations does it make in the earth -- Such havoc in the
family of God, merely for the sake of enlarging it is bounds and impressing its
terror on the human bosom. It often, indeed, claims a divine original, and
impudently supports itself not barely on the permission, but the express
designation of him "whose tender mercies are over all his works;" though it
exactly resembles the grand adversary of God and man, and is only a "roaring
lion that seeks whom he may devour." To plead a divine right for such a power
is truly to teach "the doctrine of devils." It covets every thing without
bounds: It grasps every thing without pity: It riots on the spoils of innocence
and industry: It is proud to annihilate the rights of mankind; to destroy the
fairest constitutions of wisdom, policy and justice, the broadest sources of
human happiness: While it enslaves the bodies, it debases the minds of the
offspring of God: In its progress it changes the very face of nature, it
withers even the fruits of the earth, and frustrates the bounties of our common
parent. "Before it is the garden of God, behind it is a desolate wilderness."

Looking upon the Jews when groaning under such a power; their armies
vanquished; the flower of their country cut off by the sword; their fortresses
reduced; their cities in ashes; their land ravaged; their temple and worship
destroyed, and the remnant of the nation led in chains to a foreign land; who
would have thought that in a few years, these cities and this temple should
rise again from their ruins, and a people so totally enslaved and widely
dispersed be restored to their rights and possessions, their laws and
institutions; peace, liberty and plenty daily augmenting their numbers, and
lighting up the face of joy through their whole land; while the haughty empire
of Babylon, from which they had suffered so much, should set to rise no more!
Such, however, were the decrees of Heaven; such the predictions of the inspired
Prophets; and such the event.

Thus says the Lord of Hosts, I will break his yoke from off thy neck, and
will burst thy bonds, and strangers shall no more serve themselves of thee; but
thou shall serve the Lord thy God: and the city shall be builded upon her own
heap, and they shall come and sing in the height of Zion: And fields shall be
bought in this land whereof ye say it is desolate, it is given into the hand of
the Chaldeans -- men shall buy fields for money. And they that devour thee
shall be devoured; and they that spoil thee shall be a spoil. And out of Judah
shall proceed thanksgiving and the voice of them that make merry: and I will
multiply them and they shall not be few; I will also glorify them and they
shall not be small. Their children also shall be as aforetime, and their
congregation, their religious and civil assemblies, shall be established before
me: and I will punish all that oppress them: and their Nobles shall be of
themselves, and their Governor shall proceed from the midst of them, and I will
cause him to draw near, and he shall approach unto me.

When Nebuchadnezzar invaded the land of Judea, and brought upon it such
devastations and miseries, it was governed by a King, who shared in the
captivity of his subjects, and was led with them by the conqueror in chains to
Babylon. But in the happy restoration promised in our text, it is observable,
that the royal part of their government was not to be renewed. No mention is
made in this refreshing prediction of a King, but only of Nobles, men of
principal character and influence, who were to be of themselves, and such as
they would choose to conduct their affairs; and a Governor, who should also
proceed from the midst of them, and preside over all, clothed with a tempered
authority and dignity, not with arbitary power, and the means of gratifying an
unbounded avarice and ambition.

The form of government originally established in the Hebrew nation by a
charter from Heaven, was that of a free republic, over which God himself, in
peculiar favor to that people, was pleased to preside. It consisted of three
parts; a chief magistrate who was called judge or leader, such as Joshua and
others, a council of seventy chosen men, and the general assemblies of the
people. Of these the two last were the most essential and permanent, and the
first more occasional, according to the particular circumstances of the nation.
Their Council or Sanhedrim, remained with but little suspension, through all
the vicissitudes they experienced, till after the commencement of the christian
era. And as to the assemblies of the people, that they were frequently held by
divine appointment, and considered as the fountain of civil power, which they
exerted by their own decrees, or distributed into various channels as they
judged most conducive to their own security, order, and happiness, is evident
beyond contradiction from the sacred history. Even the law of Moses, though
framed by God himself, was not imposed upon that people against their will; it
was laid open before the whole congregation of Israel; they freely adopted it,
and it became their law, not only by divine appointment, but by their own
voluntary and express consent. Upon this account it is called in the sacred
writings a Covenant, compact, or mutual stipulation.

A solemn renewal of this covenant was the very last public act of Joshua their
renowned leader. "He gathered all the tribes of Israel to Sechem, and called
for the elders of Israel, and for the heads and for the judges, and for their
officers, and they presented themselves before God." The occasion was great and
important; being nothing less than to renew their acceptance of the
constitution they had received from Heaven, and solemnly to confirm the
national compact. How august was this assembly of a great nation, it is
representatives and magistrates of every order, with their brave and faithful
leader at their head; He, who had been foremost to face the dangers of their
cause, who had fought so many battles for their happy settlement, and rendered
such various and important services to his country. In a short but nervous and
pathetic address to the assembly, he reminded them of their small original; of
the peculiar favors granted by Heaven to their progenitors; of their remarkable
deliverance from the slavery of Egypt; of the wonders wrought for them by a
divine hand in their progress through the wilderness; in their conquests on the
borders of Canaan, and their firm possession of that promised land. Deeply
impressed with this interesting recollection, he warmly declares his own
resolution to abide by that noble cause for which they had been led by Heaven
from an ignominious and servile dependence, and formed into a distinct and
respectable nation. But as the memorable act of the day depended entirely on
the consent of the people, he accordingly refers the matter to their own free
determination. "Choose you this day whom you will serve." It was impossible for
the people not to be moved by such an address; not to discern the excellency of
the mosaic constitutions; how well they were adapted to the particular
circumstances of the nation, and the noble purposes they were designed to
promote. The people replied, the Lord our God we will serve; we consent, and
are determined to be governed by the laws and the statutes he has been so
graciously pleased to afford us. "Then Joshua said unto the people, ye are
witnesses against yourselves that ye have chosen the Lord to serve him; and
they said, we are witnesses." If ever we renounce the constitution and happy
settlement granted to us by Heaven; if ever we break the sacred compact; this
day, and all the public and voluntary transactions of it, must be a witness
against us. "Thus Joshua made a covenant with the people at Sechem", which, we
are afterward told, he recorded in a book, and at the same time erected a
monumental stone upon the spot, as a memorial of these sacred stipulations, and
as a perpetual testimony, that the Supreme Ruler himself had not established
their polity without their own free concurrence, and that the Hebrew nation,
lately redeemed from tyranny, had now a civil and religious constitution of
their own choice, and were governed by laws to which they had given their
solemn consent.

To mention all the passages in sacred writ which prove that the Hebrew
government, though a theocracy, was yet as to the outward part of it, a free
republic, and that the sovereignty resided in the people, would be to recite a
large part of it is history. I will therefore only add a single instance. When
the tribes of Reuben and Gad, and the half tribe of Manassah had erected a
separate altar, though it afterward appeared with no bad intention, all the
other tribes were extremely alarmed, and being met in General Assembly,
determined to make war on their offending brethren, But previous to the
intended assault they agreed to send an embassy to expostulate with them on the
occasion. Phinehaz and ten princes, or principal men, were appointed for this
purpose. Here was an act of sovereignty, and an act of the highest importance
to the interest of any nation, involving in it nothing less than the power of
making peace or war. It was not done by Joshua, though he was then alive; it was
an act of the congregation of Israel: The embassy upon this momentous master
was chosen, commissioned, and instructed by them. "As it was democratically
sent, says a great author, See Algernon Sidney upon Government.
who wrote conclusively, who fought bravely, and died gloriously in the cause
of liberty, it was democratically received: It was not directed to one man, but
to all the children of Reuben, Gad and Manassah, and the answer was sent by
them all." The report was made to the congregation, who finally determined the
grand question, and decided for peace.

Such was the civil constitution of the Hebrew nation, till growing weary of
the gift of heaven, they demanded a King. After being admonished by the Prophet
Samuel of the ingratitude and folly of their request, they were punished in the
grant of it. Impiety, corruption and disorder of every kind afterward
increasing among them, they grew ripe for the judgments of Heaven in their
desolation and captivity. Taught by these judgments the value of those
blessings they had before despised* and groaning under the hand of tyranny more
heavy than that of death* they felt the worth of their former civil and
religious privileges, and were prepared to receive with gratitude and joy a
restoration not barely to the land flowing with milk and honey, but to the most
precious advantage they ever enjoyed in that land, their original constitution
of government: They were prepared to welcome with the voice of mirth and
thanksgiving the re-establishment of their congregations; nobles chosen from
among themselves, and a governor proceeding from the midst of them.

Such a constitution, twice established by the hand of Heaven in that nation,
so far as it respects civil and religious liberty in general, ought to be
regarded as a solemn recognition from the Supreme Ruler himself of the rights
of human nature. Abstracted from those appendages and formalities which were
peculiar to the Jews, and designed to answer some particular purposes of divine
Providence, it points out in general what kind of government infinite wisdom
and goodness would establish among mankind.

We want not, indeed, a special revelation from Heaven to teach us that men are
born equal and free; that no man has a natural claim of dominion over his
neighbors, nor one nation any such claim upon another; and that as government
is only the administration of the affairs of a number of men combined for their
own security and happiness, such a society have a right freely to determine by
whom and in what manner their own affairs shall be administered. These are the
plain dictates of that reason and common sense with which the common parent of
men has informed the human bosom. It is, however, a satisfaction to observe
such everlasting maxims of equity confirmed, and impressed upon the consciences
of men, by the instructions, precepts, and examples given us in the sacred
oracles; one internal mark of their divine original, and that they come from
him "who has made of one blood all nations to dwell upon the face of the
earth," whose authority sanctifies only those governments that instead of
oppressing any part of his family, vindicate the oppressed, and restrain and
punish the oppressor.

Unhappy the people who are destitute of the blessing promised in our text; who
have not the ulterior powers of government within themselves; who depend upon
the will of another State, with which they are not incorporated as a vital
part, the interest of which must in many respects be opposite to their own; and
who at the same time have no fixed constitutional barrier to restrain this
reigning power: There is no meanness or misery to which such a people is not
liable: There is not a single blessing, though perhaps indulged to them for a
while, that they can call their own; there is nothing they have not to dread.
Whether the governing power be itself free or despotic, it matters not to the
poor dependent. Nations who are jealous of their own liberties often sport with
those of others; nay, it has been remarked, that the dependent provinces of
free states have enjoyed less freedom than those belonging to despotic powers.
Such was our late dismal situation, from which Heaven has redeemed us by a
signal and glorious revolution. We thought, indeed, we had a charter to support
our rights; but we found a written charter, a thin barrier against
all-prevailing power, that could construe it to its own purpose, or rescind it
by the sword at its own pleasure.

Upon our present independence, sweet and valuable as the blessing is, we may
read the inscription, I am found of them that sought me not. Be it to our
praise or blame, we cannot deny, that when we were not searching for it, it
happily found us. It certainly must have been not only innocent but laudable
and manly, to have desired it even before we felt the absolute necessity of it.
It was our birth right; we ought to have valued it highly, and never to have
received a mess of pottage, a small temporary supply, as an equivalent for it.
Going upon the trite metaphor of a mother country, which has so often been
weakly urged against us, like a child grown to maturity, we had a right to a
distinct settlement in the world, and to the fruits of our own industry; and it
would have been but justice, and no great generosity, in her who so much
boasted her maternal tenderness to us, had she not only readily acquiesced, but
even aided us in this settlement. It is certain, however, that we did not seek
an independence; and it is equally certain that Britain, though she meant to
oppose it with all her power, has by a strange infatuation, taken the most
direct, and perhaps the only methods that could have established it. Her
oppressions, her unrelenting cruelty, have driven us out from the family of
which we were once a part: This has opened our eyes to discern the inestimable
blessing of a separation from her; while, like children that have been
inhumanly treated and cast out by their parents, and at the same time are
capable of taking care of themselves, we have found friendship and respect from
the world, and have formed new, advantageous, and honorable connections.

Independence gives us a rank among the nations of the earth, which no precept
of our religion forbids us to understand and feel, and which we should be
ambitious to support in the most reputable manner. It opens to us a free
communication with all the world, not only for the improvement of commerce, and
the acquisition of wealth, but also for the cultivation of the most useful
knowledge. It naturally unfetters and expands the human mind, and prepares it
for the impression of the most exalted virtues, as well as the reception of the
most important science. If we look into the history and character of nations,
we shall find those that have been for a long time, and to any considerable
degree dependent upon others, limited and cramped in their improvements;
corrupted by the court, and stained with the vices of the ruling state; and
debased by an air of servility and depression marking their productions and
manners. Servility is not only dishonorable to human nature, but commonly
accompanied with the meanest vices, such as adulation, deceit, falsehood,
treachery, cruelty, and the basest methods of supporting and procuring the
favor of the power upon which it depends.

Neither does the time allow, nor circumstances require, that I should enter
into a detail of all the principles and arguments upon which the right of our
present establishment is grounded. They are known to all the world; they are to
be found in the immortal writings of Sidney and Lock, and other glorious
defenders of the liberties of human nature; they are also to be found, not
dishonored, in the acts and publications of America on this great occasion,
which have the approbation and applause of the wise and impartial among
mankind, and even in Britain itself: They are the principles upon which her own
government and her own revolution under William the third were founded;
principles which brutal force may oppose, but which reason and scripture will
forever sanctify. The citizens of these States have had sense enough to
comprehend the full force of these principles, and virtue enough, in the face
of uncommon dangers, to act upon so just, so broad, and stable a foundation.

It has been said, that every nation is free that deserves to be so. This may
not be always true: But had a people so illuminated as the inhabitants of these
States, so nurtured by their ancestors in the love of freedom; a people to whom
divine Providence was pleased to present so fair an opportunity of asserting
their natural right as an independent nation, and who were even compelled by
the arms of their enemies to take sanctuary in the temple of Liberty; had such
a people been disobedient to the heavenly call, and refused to enter, who could
have asserted their title to the glorious wreaths and peculiar blessings that
are no where bestowed but in that hallowed place?

It is to the dishonor of human nature, that Liberty, wherever it has been
planted and flourished, has commonly required to be watered with blood.
Britain, in her conduct toward these States, has given a fresh proof of the
truth of this observation. She has attempted to destroy by her arms in America,
what she professes to defend by these very arms on her own soil. Such is the
nature of man, such the tendency of power in a nation as well as a single
person. It makes a perpetual effort to enlarge itself, and presses against the
bounds that confine it. It loses by degrees all idea of right but its own; and
therefore that people must be unhappy indeed, who have nothing but humble
petitions and remonstrances, and the feeble voice of a charter to oppose to the
arms of another nation, that claims A RIGHT TO BIND THEM IN ALL CASES
WHATSOEVER.

Poor Genoa! says an author Voltaire.
who exposes with great energy and spirit the idea of receiving as the gift of
a despot, by a written charter, a title to the rights of human nature, and to
which all men are born; "Poor Genoa! wherefore should thou be vain of
exhibiting a charter of privileges given thee by one Berenger: Concessions of
privileges are but titles of servitude: The true Charter of Liberty is
Independency supported by Force. -- It is with the point of the sword the
diplomas that ratify this natural right must be signed. Happy Switzerland! To
what placart owe thou thy Liberty? To thy courage, thy firmness, thy
mountains. But hold -- I am your Emperor. "We do not choose you should be any
longer so." But your fathers were my father's slaves. "It is for that reason
their children will not be yours." But I have a right by dignity. -- "And we
have a right by nature. When did the Seven United Provinces become possessed of
this incontestable right? From the moment they united; and from that moment
Philip II. became the Rebel."

Heaven and earth can bear witness that these States are innocent of the blood
that has been shed, and the miseries diffused by this unrighteous war. We have
stood upon the ground of justice, honor, and liberty, and acted merely a
defensive part. Not unreasonable in our demands, not violent in our councils,
not precipitate in our conduct, our "moderation has been known to all men;" and
without refusing a single claim that Britain could in equity make upon us, our
persons, our property, our rights have been invaded in every step that led to
this revolution. I do not wish that this should be taken for granted barely
upon our own declaration. Without appealing to foreign nations, whose conduct
toward us demonstrates what opinion they form of our principles and measures;
we have an acknowledgment of the truth of this assertion from Britain itself;
from men of approved wisdom, integrity and candor; from some of the first
characters, and brightest ornaments in her own government; from innumerable
speeches in her Parliaments, and from solemn protests in her House of Lords.

Allow me particularly to mention on this occasion the letters of Mr. HARTLEY,
member of the British House of Commons for Hull, to his constituents; in which
he gives a detail of the measures of that government respecting America, and
upon which he says; -- "Thinking, as I have always thought, that the FOUNDATION
and PROSECUTION of the war against America has been unjust, I have taken some
pains to lay open those insidious arts which ministers have practiced, that I
may contribute my feeble efforts to vindicate my country at large from so
grievous a charge as that of supporting an unjust cause, knowing it to be
unjust." In another place, he says, "When all those transactions shall come
hereafter to to be revised in some cooler hour, I am confident there is not a
man with a British heart who will not say, that in the same circumstances he
would have acted as the Americans have done." He goes on, "What had the
Americans to look to after the refusal of their last petition, but to seek for
shelter in their own strength and Independence? They were cut off from all
possible communication with their sovereign and their mother country; and the
first act of the second session of parliament was to cast them out of all
national and parliamentary protection; to fend 20,000 German mercenaries
against them; to incite an insurrection of negroes against their masters, and
to let loose the Indian Savages upon their innocent and unarmed back settlers,
and upon defenseless women and children. They had petitioned and addressed;
they had disclaimed every idea of independence; in return for which
administration sends against them an army of 50,000 men. Now let ministers
answer to God and their country for the blood which they have shed. The blood
of thousands of their fellow creatures, wilfully and premeditatedly shed in an
unjust cause, will be required at their hands; who have taken their full
stretch of vengeance, in their attempts to destroy and to lay waste to the
utmost of their malignant power the lives, liberty, property, and all the
rights of mankind."

Nothing can be more full to the point than this acknowledgment from a
gentleman of such distinguished character: He imputes indeed the whole to the
ministers, but as it was all adopted and authorized by the whole British
government, it became an act of the nation in general; though many worthy
individuals, with himself, abhorred the injustice and cruelty.

In the protest of the Lords, against the prohibitory bill, the dissentient
Peers say, "We are preparing the minds of the Americans for that Independence
we charge them with affecting, whilst we drive them to the necessity of it by
repeated injuries." "I rejoice that the Americans have resisted," said Lord
Chatham in parliament; a short but full testimony from that great man to the
justice of our cause.

Thus are we acquitted from the guilt of all this blood that "cries from the
ground," by the public declarations of many of the wisest and best men in
Britain; men who perfectly knew all the measures of her government, and all
that could be offered to justify them, being themselves a part of this
government: Men deeply versed in natural and political law, capable of forming
the truest judgment upon so important a point, and who cannot be suspected of
partiality in our favor. With all this justice on our side, we still put our
cause to great hazard by delaying to declare ourselves a separate nation, even
after Britain had with her own hands violently broken every bond of union.

By this conduct of our enemies, Heaven has granted us an inestimable
opportunity, and such as has been rarely if ever indulged to so great a people:
An opportunity to avail ourselves of the wisdom and experience of all past ages
united with that of the present; of comparing what we have seen and felt
ourselves, with what we have known and read of others; and of choosing for
ourselves, unencumbered with the pretensions of royal heirs, or lordly peers,
of feudal rights, or ecclesiastical authority, that form of civil government
which we judge most conducive to our own security and order, liberty and
happiness: An opportunity, though surrounded with the flames of war, of
deliberating and deciding upon this most interesting of all human affairs with
calmness and freedom. This, in all it is circumstances, is a singular event; it
is hard to tell where another such scene was ever beheld. The origin of most
nations is covered with obscurity, and veiled by fiction; the rise of our own
is open as it is honorable; and the newborn state, may I not be allowed to
say, is a "spectacle to men and angels". For as piety, virtue, and morals are
not a little interested in government, such a transaction has an aspect upon
both worlds; and concerns us not only as members of civil society upon earth,
but as candidates for "the city of the living God, the Jerusalem on high".

Happy people! who not awed by the voice of a master; not chained by slavish
customs, superstitions, and prejudices, have deliberately framed the
constitution under which you choose to live; and are to be subject to no laws,
by which you do not consent to bind yourselves. In such an attitude human
nature appears with it is proper dignity: On such a basis, life, and all that
sweetens and adorns it, may rest with as much security as human imperfection
can possibly admit: In such a constitution we find a country deserving to be
loved, and worthy to be defended. For what is our country? Is it a soil of
which, though we may be the present possessors, we can call no part our own? or
the air in which we first drew our breath, from which we may be confined in a
dungeon, or of which we may be deprived by the ax or the halter at the pleasure
of a tyrant? Is not a country a constitution -- an established frame of laws;
of which a man may say, "we are here united in society for our common security
and happiness. These fields and these fruits are my own: The regulations under
which I live are my own; I am not only a proprietor in the soil, but I am part
of the sovereignty of my country". Such ought to be the community of men, and
such, adored be the goodness of the supreme Ruler of the world, such, at
present is our own country; of which this day affords a bright evidence, a
glorious recognition.

To the disappointment of our enemies, and the joy of our friends, we have now
attained a settled government with a degree of peace and unanimity, all
circumstances considered, truly surprising. The sagacity, the political
knowledge, the patient deliberation, the constant attention to the grand
principles of liberty, and the mutual condescension and candor under a
diversity of apprehension respecting the modes of administration, exhibited by
those who were appointed to form this constitution, and by the people who
ratified it, must do immortal honor to our country. It is, we believe, "an
happy foundation for many generations"; and the framers of it are indeed the
Fathers of their country; since nothing is so essential to the increase, and
universal prosperity of a community, as a constitution of government founded in
justice, and friendly to liberty. Such men have a monument of glory more
durable than brass or marble.

I need not enlarge before such an audience upon the particular excellencies of
this constitution: How effectually it makes the people the keepers of their own
liberties, with whom they are certainly safest: How nicely it poizes the powers
of government, in order to render them as far as human foresight can, what God
ever designed they should be, powers only to do good: How happily it guards on
the one hand against anarchy and confusion, and on the other against tyranny
and oppression: How carefully it separates the legislative from the executive
power, a point essential to liberty: How wisely it has provided for the
impartial execution of the laws in the independent situation of the judges; a
matter of capital moment, and without which the freedom of a constitution in
other respects, might be often delusory, and not realized in the just security
of the person and property of the subject.

In addition to all this, what a broad foundation for the exercise of the
rights of conscience is laid in this constitution! which declares, that "no
subject shall be hurt, molested, or restrained in his person, liberty or
estate, for worshipping God in the manner and season most agreeable to the
dictates of his own conscience, or for his religious profession or sentiments;
and that every denomination of christians, demeaning themselves peaceably, and
as good subjects of the commonwealth, shall be equally under the protection of
the law, and no subordination of any one sect or denomination to another shall
be established by law." It considers indeed morality and the public worship of
God as important to the happiness of society: And surely it would be an affront
to the people of this state, as the convention speak in their previous address,
"to labor to convince them that the honor and happiness of a people depend upon
morality; and that the public worship of God has a tendency to inculcate the
principles thereof, as well as to preserve a people from forsaking
civilization, and falling into a state of savage barbarity".

Of these, and other excellent properties of our present constitution, the
citizens of this state are thoroughly sensible, or well informed, and jealous as
they are of their rights, they never would have adopted and ratified it with so
great a degree of unanimity. They know it is framed upon an extent of civil and
religious liberty, unexampled perhaps in any country in the world, except
America. This must highly endear it to them; and while it is written upon their
own hearts, they have the satisfaction to find that it has already received the
elogiums of others, whose capacity and distinction render their testimony truly
honorable. But lest through the imperfection of human nature, and after all the
deliberation and caution with which it has been formed and approved, some
inconveniences should be found lurking in it, of which experience can best
inform us, a right is expressly reserved to the people of removing them in a
revision of the whole, after a fair experiment of fifteen years.

When a people have the rare felicity of choosing their own government, every
part of it should first be weighed in the balance of reason, and nicely
adjusted to the claims of liberty, equity and order; but when this is done, a
warm and passionate patriotism should be added to the result of cool
deliberation, to put in motion and animate the whole machine. The citizens of a
free republic should reverence their constitution: They should not only calmly
approve, and readily submit to it, but regard it also with veneration and
affection rising even to an enthusiasm, like that which prevailed at Sparta and
at Rome. Nothing can render a commonwealth more illustrious, nothing more
powerful, than such a manly, such a sacred fire. Every thing will then be
subordinated to the public welfare; every labor necessary to this will be
cheerfully endured, every expense readily submitted to, every danger boldly
confronted.

May this heavenly flame animate all orders of men in the state! May it catch
from bosom to bosom, and the glow be universal! May a double portion of it
inhabit the breasts of our civil rulers, and impart a luster to them like that
which sat upon the face of Moses, when he came down from the holy mountain with
the tables of the Hebrew constitution in his hand! Thus will they sustain with
true dignity the first honors, the first marks of esteem and confidence, the
first public employments bestowed by this new commonwealth, and in which they
this day appear. Such men must naturally care for our state; men whose
abilities and virtues have obtained a sanction from the free suffrages of their
enlightened and virtuous fellow citizens. Are not these suffrages, a public and
solemn testimony that in the opinion of their constituents, they are men who
have steadily acted upon the noble principles on which the frame of our
government now rests? -- Men who have generously neglected their private
interest in an ardent pursuit of that of the public -- Men who have intrepidly
opposed one of the greatest powers on earth, and put their fortunes and their
lives to no small hazard in fixing the basis of our freedom and honor. Who can
forbear congratulating our rising State, and casting up a thankful eye to
Heaven, upon this great and singular occasion, the establishment of our
Congregation; our Nobles freely chosen by ourselves; and our Governor coming
forth, at the call of his country, from the midst of us?

Behold the man, whose name as President of Congress, authenticates that
immortal act, which, in form, constitutes the Independence of these United
States, and by which a nation was literally born in a day! See Him, who had
taken too early and decided a part, and done too much for the liberties of
America, to be forgiven by it is enemies! See Him, whose name, with that of
another distinguished patriot, The Honorable SAMUEL ADAMS, Esquire
was expressly excepted from a British act of grace, and upon whose head a
price was virtually bid by those who meant to enslave us: Behold this very man,
declared by the voice of his country, "the head of the corner" in our political
building; the first Magistrate of this free Commonwealth. It was not in the
power of his fellow-citizens to give an higher testimony how well they remember
the generous and important services he has already rendered to his country, and
how much they confide in his disposition and abilities still to serve it.

May God Almighty take his Excellency and the other honorable branches of the
government, the Lieutenant-Governour, the Council, the Senate, and House of
Representatives into his holy protection, and unite them in measures glorious
to themselves, and happy to their country! Vested as they are with particular
honors, they have a painful pre-eminence: Their distinctions call them to the
most weighty and important cares, at a time when the administration of public
affairs is attended with peculiar difficulties. They need therefore the
gracious direction and assistance of the "blessed and only Potentate," which,
in this solemn assembly of rulers and people, we jointly and devoutly implore.

The people of a free State have a right to expect from those whom they have
honored with the direction of their public concerns, a faithful and
unremitting attention to these concerns. He who accepts a public trust, pledges
himself, his sacred honor, and by his official oath appeals to his God, that
with all good fidelity, and to the utmost of his capacity he will discharge
this trust. And that Commonwealth which does not keep an eye of care upon those
who govern, and observe how they behave in their several departments, in order
to regulate its suffrages upon this standard, will soon find itself in
perplexity, and cannot expect long to preserve either its dignity or happiness.

Dignity of conduct is ever connected with the happiness of a State;
particularly at its rise, and the first appearance it makes in the world. Then
all eyes are turned upon it; they view it with attention; and the first
impressions it makes are commonly lasting. This circumstance must render the
conduct of our present rulers peculiarly important, and fall with particular
weight upon their minds. We hope from their wisdom and abilities, their
untainted integrity and unshaken firmness, this new formed Commonwealth will
rise with honor and applause, and attract that respect, which the number and
quality of its inhabitants, the extent of its territory and commerce, and the
natural advantages with which it is blessed, cannot fail, under a good
government, to command.

From our present happy establishment we may reasonably hope for a new energy
in government; an energy that shall be felt in all parts of the State: We hope
that the sinews of civil authority through its whole frame will be well braced,
and the public interest in all its extended branches be well attended to; that
no officer will be permitted to neglect the duties, or transgress the bounds of
his department; that peculations, frauds, and even the smaller oppressions in
any office, will be watchfully prevented, or exemplarily punished; and that no
corruption will be allowed to rest in any part of the political body, no not in
the extremest, which may spread by degrees, and finally reach the very vitals
of the community.

Righteousness, says one of the greatest politicians and wisest princes that
ever lived, "Righteousness exalts a nation." This maxim does not barely rest
upon his own but also on a divine authority; and the truth of it has been
verified by the experience of all ages.

Our civil rulers will remember, that as piety and virtue support the honor
and happiness of every community, they are peculiarly requisite in a free
government. Virtue is the spirit of a Republic; for where all power is derived
from the people, all depends on their good disposition. If they are impious,
factious and selfish; if they are abandoned to idleness, dissipation, luxury,
and extravagance; if they are lost to the fear of God, and the love of their
country, all is lost. Having got beyond the restraints of a divine authority,
they will not brook the control of laws enacted by rulers of their own
creating. We may therefore rely that the present Government will do all it
fairly can, by authority and example, to answer the end of its institution,
that the members of this Commonwealth may lead a quiet and peaceable life in
all GODLINESS as well as honesty, and our liberty never be justly reproached as
licentiousness.

I know there is a diversity of sentiment respecting the extent of civil power
in religious matters. Instead of entering into the dispute, may I be allowed
from the warmth of my heart, to recommend, where conscience is pleaded on both
sides, mutual candor and love, and an happy union of all denominations in
support of a government, which though human, and therefore not absolutely
perfect, is yet certainly founded on the broadest basis of liberty, and affords
equal protection to all. Warm parties upon civil or religious matters, or from
personal considerations, are greatly injurious to a free State, and
particularly so to one newly formed. We have indeed less of this than might be
expected: We shall be happy to have none at all; happy indeed, when every man
shall love and serve his country, and have that share of public influence and
respect, without distinction of parties, which his virtues and services may
justly demand. This is the true spirit of a Commonwealth, centring all hearts,
and all hands in the common interest.

Neither piety, virtue, or liberty can long flourish in a community, where the
education of youth is neglected. How much do we owe to the care of our
venerable ancestors upon this important object? Had not they laid such
foundations for training up their children in knowledge and religion, in
science, and arts, should we have been so respectable a community as we this
day appear? Should we have understood our rights so clearly? or valued them so
highly? or defended them with such advantage? Or should we have been prepared
to lay that basis of liberty, that happy constitution, on which we raise such
large hopes, and from which we derive such uncommon joy? We may therefore be
confident that the schools, and particularly the university, founded and
cherished by our wise and pious fathers, will be patronized and nursed by a
government which is so much indebted to them for its honor and efficacy, and
the very principles of its existence. The present circumstances of those
institutions call for the kindest attention of our rulers; and their close
connection with every public interest, civil and religious, strongly enforces
the call.

The sciences and arts, for the encouragement of which a new foundation The
American Academy of Arts and Sciences.
has lately been laid in this Commonwealth, deserve the countenance and
particular favor of every government. They are not only ornamental but useful:
They not only polish, but support, enrich, and defend a community. As they
delight in liberty, they are particularly friendly to free States. Barbarians
are fierce and ungovernable, and having the grossest ideas of order, and the
benefits resulting from it, they require the hand of a stern master; but a
people enlightened and civilized by the sciences and liberal arts, have
sentiments that support liberty and good laws: They may be guided by a silken
thread; and the mild punishments proper to a free State are sufficient to guard
the public peace.

An established honor and fidelity in all public engagements and promises,
form a branch of righteousness that is wealth, is power, and security to a
State: It prevents innumerable perplexities: It creates confidence in the
government from subjects and from strangers: It facilitates the most
advantageous connections: It extends credit; and easily obtains supplies in the
most pressing public emergencies, and when nothing else can obtain them: While
the want of it, whatever benefits some short-sighted politicians may have
promised from delusive expedients, and deceitful arts, renders a State weak and
contemptible; strips it of its defense; grieves and provoke its friends, and
delivers it up to the will of its enemies. Upon what does the power of the
British nation chiefly rest at this moment? That power that has been so
unrighteously employed against America? Upon the long and nice preservation of
her faith in all monied matters. With all her injustice in other instances,
mere policy has obliged her to maintain a fair character with her creditors.
The support this has given her in frequent and expensive wars, by the supplies
it has enabled her to raise upon loan, is astonishing. By this her government
has availed itself of the whole immense capital of the national debt, which
has been expended in the public service, while the creditors content themselves
with the bare payment of the interest. It may be demonstrated that the growing
resources of these states, under the conduct of prudence and justice, are
sufficient to form a fund of credit for prosecuting the present war, so ruinous
to Britain, much longer than that nation, loaded as she now is, can possibly
support it.

But need I urge, in a christian audience, and before christian rulers, the
importance of preserving inviolate the public faith? If this is allowed to be
important at all times, and to all states, it must be peculiarly so to those
whose foundations are newly laid, and who are but just numbered among the
nations of the earth. They have a national character to establish, upon which
their very existence may depend. Shall we not then rely that the present
government will employ every measure in their power, to maintain in this
commonwealth a clear justice, an untainted honor in all public engagements; in
all laws respecting property; in all regulations of taxes; in all our conduct
toward our sister states, and toward our allies abroad.

The treaty of alliance and friendship between HIS MOST CHRISTIAN MAJESTY and
these states, is engraved on every bosom friendly to the rights and
independence of America. If fidelity dwells in such bosoms, it will be
conspicuous on every occasion of performing our own part of these sacred
stipulations. The interest is indeed mutual, as was openly confessed: The
treaty is therefore natural, and likely to be lasting. But mutual interest does
not always banish generosity; a proof of which our illustrious Ally has given
in this compact; a proof not unapplauded in Europe, though particularly felt and
acknowledged in America. I will not affront either the understanding or the
feelings of this respectable audience, by attempting formally to demonstrate
that we have received great advantages and support from this friendship. It is
impossible we should forget the first pledge of it, in the squadron sent to our
aid under the orders of that vigilant, active and intrepid commander the COUNT
D'ESTAING; who greatly disconcerted the designs of the enemy, and did every
thing for us that wisdom and valor, in his situation, could perform. Nor need
I call your attention to that important armament lately arrived to our
assistance, under leaders of distinguished abilities, and the most established
military reputation. France, though a monarchy, has been the nurse and
protectress of free republics. Switzerland among others can attest to this: Her
free States can attest; that during an alliance with France of more than three
hundred years, their liberties have been constantly befriended by that nation,
and every part of the treaty for their support punctually performed. This they
have acknowledged in a late solemn renewal of the alliance. An happy omen to
these States, whose circumstances are in many respects similar to those of the
united cantons of Switzerland.

The personal and royal accomplishments of LOUIS THE SIXTEENTH are known and
admired far beyond his own extended dominions, and afford the brightest
prospect to his subjects and allies. The reign of this monarch diffuses new
spirit through his kingdom, and gives freshness to the glory of France. A
British author, in his account of the regulations which took place after this
prince had ascended the throne, calls him "a paternal and patriotic sovereign,
who wherever he appears is loaded with the blessings of his subjects." The
celebrated Mr. Burke, in his speech before the British House of Commons on
February last, adds his own testimony to this, when speaking of some reforms in
the finances and the court of France, he says, "The minister who does these
things is a great man, but the prince who desires they should be done, is a far
greater: We must do justice to our enemies; these are the acts of a PATRIOT
KING". The friendship of such a monarch must be valuable indeed!

The other great and powerful branch of the house of Bourbon, the king of
Spain, though not at present formally allied to us, is yet evidently engaged in
our cause, by the union of his arms with those of France. We cannot be wanting
in the sentiments due to the amity and aid of so respectable a potentate. May
God Almighty bless these Princes, and their dominions; and crown their arms,
and those of America, with such success as may soon restore to a bleeding world
the blessings of peace!

Peace, peace, we ardently wish; but not upon terms dishonorable to ourselves,
or dangerous to our liberties; and our enemies seem not yet prepared to allow
it upon any other. At present the voice of providence, the call of our still
invaded country, and the cry of every thing dear to us, all unite to rouse us
to prosecute the war with redoubled vigor; upon the success of which all our
free constitutions, all our hopes depend. I need not enumerate the former or
more recent events of the war, and the favors or chastisements of heaven sent
to us in these events: They are known to you; they cannot be forgotten: God
grant they may be properly improved! Through his aid, amidst all our mistakes and
errors, we have already done great things; but "our warfare is not yet
accomplished": And our rulers, we hope, like the Roman General, will think
nothing done, while any thing remains undone.

We have depended too much upon partial measures, temporary expedients, short
and interrupted efforts made only upon the spur of the occasion. An army
established in proper numbers, for the whole duration of the war, and
seasonably furnished with all necessary supplies, is now universally
acknowledged of the utmost consequence to the liberties of America. Particular
attention will certainly be paid to the recommendations of this great object
from the Commander in chief -- that illustrious man, formed by heaven for the
important trust he sustains, and to draw to a point the confidence of these
free states, and a patriotic army. Part of the gladness of this day rises from
the general expectation, that our new government will give new vigor to the
measures necessary to this momentous purpose; that these measures will be
instantly pursued, and without that delay we have too much experienced in times
past; and which, at this season, must prove greatly distressing, if not fatal
to our country.

Can we hesitate a moment at the burden and expense? It is impossible. Why have
the citizens of America been framing such wise and excellent constitutions, if
they meant not to maintain, but leave them to become the sport of their
enemies? If after all the memorable things we have done to repel lawless power,
and establish our rights; if after all we have endured in a war savagely
conducted by our enemies; if after the rank we have taken, and the reputation
we have acquired as an independent nation, we should now relax in our efforts,
and suffer tyranny finally to prevail, who can bear to think of the
consequences, or to look upon the picture imagination presents? In such a
reverse, we may write upon this fair region the inscription given to an ancient
dungeon. -- "You who enter here, leave behind you every hope". What would not
this people do; what exertions would they not make, rather than submit to such
debasement and misery? It is with you, our civil fathers, to direct such a
spirit, and such exertions, in a manner the most effectual to the salvation of
our country.

What heroes have bled, what invaluable lives have been offered up to redeem us
from slavery, and place us on a free constitution? Their names will never die:
Their honors will never wither. Among these we see a WARREN, and a MONTGOMERY:
Liberty wept over their tombs; and there would have remained inconsolate, had
she not beheld a succession of patriots and warriors rising in the same spirit.
Rights retrieved with such blood as has flowed from the veins of America in
our great cause, must certainly be held by us at an inestimable price, and
improved to the greatest advantage; nor can any thing show their value in a
clearer light, than a good administration of our free governments.

Our present rulers, as principal founders of the constitution, cannot but
regard it with parental tenderness. They cannot but love their own offspring,
especially when it has features and charms to attract the love and admiration
of the world: And hoping that their names and their glory may long live in such
an offspring, they have an irresistible motive to guard against every thing
that may weaken or deform it; every thing that may render its existence short,
precarious, or dishonorable.

The same kind of motive must excite the body of the people to the same care.
It is with you also my fellow-citizens, by whose appointment this constitution
was framed, and who have solemnly acknowledged it to be your own; it is with
you to give life and vigor to all its limbs freshness and beauty to its whole
complexion; to guard it from dangers; to preserve it "from the corruption that
is in the world;" and to produce it upon the great theater of nations with
advantage and glory. We have now a government free indeed; but after all, it
remains with the people, under God, to make it an honorable and happy one:
This must ultimately depend upon the prudence of their elections, and the
virtue of their conduct. A government framed by ourselves for our own benefit,
and according to the fairest models of our own minds, and administered by men of
our own choice, ought to be more deeply respected, and more religiously
supported by us than any kind of imposed authority. Having defined and adjusted
its powers by our own decisions, and made those who are vested with such as are
improper to be long continued in the same hands, amenable, at short intervals,
to the judgment of the people, we never can allow it too much weight and
energy; we only support ourselves in supporting such authority: While to oppose
or weaken it, or bring it under an undue influence, is with the hand of a
parricide to destroy order, liberty, and happiness. Upon this general
principle, and to establish a dignity and independence, where they must forever
operate to the benefit of the community, the citizens of this State have by
their present Constitution, most freely and wisely secured to their chief
Magistrate, and the Justices of the supreme judicial Court, permanent and
honorable salaries; an article which, we cannot doubt, will be sacredly
observed in the true spirit of the Constitution.

In a word, if the Rulers and the People act throughout in this spirit; if they
mutually watch over and sustain each other; and those virtues are cultivated
among us which support and are supported by a free Republic, our new Government
will then open with the most happy omens, and the commencement of it will be
the era of our rising felicity and glory.

While we receive in the settlement of our Commonwealth a reward of our
achievements and sufferings, we have the further consolation to reflect, that
they have tended to the general welfare, and the support of the rights of
mankind. The struggle of America has afforded to oppressed Ireland a
favorable opportunity of insisting upon her own privileges: Nor do any of the
powers in Europe oppose our cause, or seem to wish it may be unsuccessful.
Britain has maintained her naval superiority with such marks of haughtiness and
oppression as have justly given umbrage to the nations around her: They cannot
therefore but wish to see her power confined within reasonable bounds, and such
as may be consistent with the safety of their own commercial rights. This, they
know would at least be exceeding difficult, should the rapidly increasing force
of these States be reunited with Britain, and wielded by her, as it has been
in time past, against every nation upon whom she is pleased to make war. So
favorable, through the divine surperintendence, is the present situation of
the powers in Europe, to the liberties and independence for which we are
contending. But as individuals must part with some natural liberties for the
sake of the security and advantages of society; the same kind of commutation
must take place in the great republic of nations. The rights of Kingdoms and
States have their bounds; and as in our own establishment we are not likely to
find reason, I trust we shall never have an inclination to exceed these bounds,
and justly to excite the jealousy and opposition of other nations. It is thus
wisdom, moderation and sound policy would connect Kingdoms and States for their
mutual advantage, and preserve the order and harmony of the world. In all this
these free States will find their own security, and rise by natural and
unenvied degrees to that eminence, for which, I would fain persuade myself, we
are designed.

It is laudable to lay the foundations of our Republics with extended views.
Rome rose to empire because she early thought herself destined for it. The
great object was continually before the eyes of her sons: It enlarged and
invigorated their minds; it excited their vigilance; it elated their courage,
and prepared them to embrace toils and dangers, and submit to every regulation
friendly to the freedom and prosperity of Rome. They did great things because
they believed themselves capable, and born to do them. They reverenced
themselves and their country; and animated with unbounded respect for it, they
every day added to its strength and glory. Conquest is not indeed the aim of
these rising States; sound policy must ever forbid it: We have before us an
object more truly great and honorable. We seem called by heaven to make a
large portion of this globe a seat of knowledge and liberty, of agriculture,
commerce, and arts, and what is more important than all, of christian piety and
virtue. A celebrated British historian observes, if I well remember, that the
natural features of America are peculiarly striking. Our mountains, our rivers
and lakes have a singular air of dignity and grandeur. May our conduct
correspond to the face of our country! At present an immense part of it lies as
nature has left it, and human labor and art have done but little, and
brightened only some small specks of a continent that can afford ample means of
subsistence to many, many millions of the human race. It remains with us and
our posterity, to "make the wilderness become a fruitful field, and the desert
blossom as the rose;" to establish the honor and happiness of this new world,
as far as it may be justly our own, and to invite the injured and oppressed,
the worthy and the good to these shores, by the most liberal governments, by
wise political institutions, by cultivating the confidence and friendship of
other nations, and by a sacred attention to that gospel that breaths "peace on
earth, and good will toward men." Thus will our country resemble the new city
which St. John saw "coming down from God out of heaven, adorned as a bride for
her husband." Is there a benevolent spirit on earth, or on high, whom such a
prospect would not delight?

But what are those illustrious forms that seem to hover over us on the present
great occasion, and to look down with pleasure on the memorable transactions of
this day? Are they not the founders and lawgivers, the skilful pilots and brave
defenders of free States, whose fame "flows down through all ages, enlarging as
it flows"? They, who thought no toils or vigilance too great to establish and
protect the rights of human nature; no riches too large to be exchanged for
them; no blood too precious to be shed for their redemption? -- But who are
they who seem to approach nearear to us, and in whose countenances we discern a
peculiar mixture of gravity and joy upon this solemnity? Are they not the
venerable Fathers of the Massachusetts; who though not perfect while they dwelt
in flesh, were yet greatly distinguished by an ardent piety, by all the manly
virtues, and by an unquenchable love of liberty -- -- They, who to form a
retreat for it, crossed the ocean, through innumerable difficulties, to a
savage land: They, who brought with them a broad Charter of Liberty, over which
they wept when it was wrested from them by the hand of power, and an insidious
one placed in its room. With what pleasure do they seem to behold their
children, like the ancient seed of Abraham, this day restored to their original
foundations of freedom! their Governor "as at the first, and their Counselors
as at the beginning"? Do they not call upon us to defend these foundations at
every hazard, and to perpetuate their honor in the liberty and virtue of the
State they planted?

O thou supreme Governor of the world, whose arm has done great things for us,
establish the foundations of this Commonwealth, and evermore defend it with the
saving strength of thy right hand! Grant that here the divine constitutions of
Jesus thy Son may ever be honored and maintained! Grant that it may be the
residence of all private and patriotic virtues, of all that enlightens and
supports, all that sweetens and adorns human society, till the states and
kingdoms of this world shall be swallowed up in thine own kingdom: In that,
which alone is immortal, may we obtain a perfect citizenship, and enjoy in its
completion, "the glorious Liberty of the Sons of God! -- And let all the people
say, AMEN!


