A JOURNAL OF THE LIFE, TRAVELS, and LABORS IN THE WORK OF THE MINISTRY, OF
JOHN GRIFFITH, ^ate of CHELMSFORD in ESSEX, in GREAT BRITAIN; formerly of
DARBY, in PENNSYLVANIA.

LONDON PRINTED: PHILADELPHIA: REPRINTED BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK in Market-street
between Second and Third-streets. MDCCLXXX.

A TESTIMONY from the MONTHLY MEETING of WITHAM, in ESSEX, CONCERNING JOHN
GRIFFITH, dec.
THE character of this our well beloved Friend being so generally known, we
esteem it unnecessary to extend our Testimony concerning him, further than the
time of his arrival and residence amongst us.

In the year 1747, being a member of the monthly meeting of Darby,
Chester-county, in Pennsylvania, he was concerned to visit the churches in
Great Britain and Ireland; during which engagement his mind was impressed with
appehension of duty to settle in this nation; the importance whereof was
attended with earnest supplication to the Lord, that he might be rightly
directed therein; and, after deliberate consideration, finding the expediency
of his removal clearly confirmed, he returned to America, where, having settled
his affairs, with the concurrence of his brethren, he removed to England; and
entering into marriage-covenant with Frances Wyatt, of Chelmsford, became a
member of this meeting; wherein, we trust, the fruits of his labor afford
substantial evidence of able talents faithfully applied. Few were his
companions zealously concerned for the restoration of good order, which
rendered the task more arduous: yet in regard to the exercise of discipline,
compared with the state in which he found it, considerable regulation has been
effected.

His gift was eminently adapted to service: in ministry sound, powerful, and
clear; in discipline, diligent and judicious; searching impartially into the
causes whence the circulation of life was obstructed, which operative care,
disturbing the false rest of lukewarm professors, has, at times, excited their
displeasure; yet being mercifully preserved from the spots of the world, and
endued with authority to speak feelingly to the states of his hearers, in him
that proverb was remarkably verified, When a man's ways please the Lord, he
makes even his enemies to be at peace with him.

In doubtful cases, he manifested an exemplary tenderness and forbearance,
particularly respecting such as appeared presumptuous in launching into
religious engagements above their qualification, being disposed to afford full
opportunity for trial; observing, upon these occasions, it would be most
acceptable, that deluded persons perceived their error by its effects: but when
thoroughly convinced of unsoundness, he faithfully discharged the duty of an
elder, in the application of plain-dealing, which, indeed, was his peculiar
talent; yet so tempered with discretion, both in ministry and discipline, that
we believe few have filled these important stations with more general
approbation: nor were his amiable qualities confined to the notice of our
society, having a large share in the esteem of others, especially those of his
neigbourhood.

Much of his time was devoted to public service: in consequence whereof, a
foretaste of the reward promised to them who persevere in well-doing, proved
his substantial support through a long course of painful infirmity, being
affected with an asthma about fifteen years. At length the disorder, producing
a dropsy, strongly indicated his dissolution near; yet in this condition, he
continued about eight months: during which season of deep trial, the fruits of
faithfulness were conspicuous: being, at intervals, favored with strength to
speak intelligibly, the frame of his mind appeared to be centered in sweet
consolation, which, in great measure, overcame the sense of bodily pain, though
evidently hard to bear.

His mental faculties seemed rather enlarged in quickness of sensibility,
having frequently to express thankfulness and admiration, that during this
sharp probation, infinite goodness had not suffered his mind to be clouded, but
continued to lift up the light of his countenance upon him; under the influence
whereof, his spirit was engaged to encourage those present to faithfulness,
through the happy effect which he experienced at that awful period.

Diverse who assisted during his illness, have declared, that his patience in
suffering, kind acknowledgment of their care, and instructive admonitions, so
far alleviated their anxiety, occasioned by the sharpness of his conflict, that
they esteemed it a favor to attend him.

After a laborious winter, gradually declining, he quietly departed this life,
the 17th of the 6th month, 1776, and was interred in friends burial-ground at
Chelmsford, the 23d of the same; aged about 63 years; a minister about 42 years.

Signed in and on behalf of Witham monthly meeting, held at Chelmsford, the
28th of the 10th month, 1776.

Frances Griffith Susannah Marriage Martha Levitt Susannah Mayott Jane Hurnard
Mary Greenwood Mary Marriage Susannah Playel Sarah Levitt. Joseph Shelton John
Mayott Stephen Levitt John Hurnard Robert Greenwood Richard Osbostone Thomas
Puplitt Joseph Marriage John Plant Wheeler John Russel Joseph Docwra Joseph
Shelton, jun. Daniel Wood.
The annexed Testimony being read in our quarterly meeting, held at Coggeshall,
the 11th of the 3d month, 1777, was approved and signed in and on behalf
thereof, by

JOSEPH DOCWRA, Clerk.

THE JOURNAL OF JOHN GRIFFITH.
IT has been much upon my mind (especially of late) to write something by way
of journal, of my life, travels, and experience in the gracious and merciful
dealings of the Lord with me, through the course of my pilgrimage in this
world; together with some remarks on the state of our society in my time,
interspersed with diverse observations relating to our conduct, in various
stations of life, but chiefly in a religious sense; to remain, when my body is
laid in the dust, a lasting memorial and testimony to the truth. And as the
Lord shall be pleased to open my understanding, I may also afford profitable
way-marks to some weary travelers, who are seeking a city that has
foundations, whose builder and maker is God.

I was born on the 21st day of the 5th month, 1713, in Radnorshire, South
Wales; being favored with parents who had the substance of religion in
themselves, and were conscientiously concerned to train up their children in
the fear of God. The names of my parents were John and Amy Griffith; my mother
(as I remember) was educated in society with the people called Quakers, and a
steady valuable friend she was; having at times, a few words, by way of
testimony, tenderly to drop in religious meetings, which were acceptable to
friends. My father, as I have heard him relate, was convinced of the blessed
truth after he had arived to man's estate, and found it a great cross to join
in society with the despised Quakers; he being the only one of the family,
which was pretty large, that joined in society with that people. But the Lord
making hard things easy to him, he gave up, in earnest, to the heavenly
discoveries, and, in process of time, had a dispensation of the gospel of peace
and salvation committed to him; wherein he labored, in the parts where he
lived, with remarkable sincerity and uprightness; being indeed a truly living
minister, and an heavenly-minded man, as I well remember, though I left him
when I was young, and never saw him again. He finished his course in this
world, on the 24th of the 2d month, in the year 1745; it is added in the
register of the monthly meeting to which he belonged, thus, viz. He was a
minister many years, and left a good report behind him among all sorts of
people. He was a serviceable instrument in the Lord's hand against undue
liberties, which were then creeping in; and was very deeply affected with the
declining state of the church in those parts (many having removed to America)
which since his decease are become almost a desolation.

Having thus paid a small tribute, which I thought due, to the memory of my
worthy parents, I shall proceed to give an account of my self.

I was favored with the heart-melting visitations of God's love, I think, when
about seven or eight years old; and frequently experienced his name to be in
the assemblies of his people as precious ointment poured forth; whereby my
desires were greatly raised to attend meetings for divine worship. For
although, like Samuel of old, I was as yet unacquainted with the voice of God,
neither did I clearly understand from whence that precious consolation, which I
felt, came; yet, I well remember something working powerfully in my tender weak
mind, by way of opposition to that sweet heavenly enjoyment, in order to
deprive me thereof, by presenting to my view some transitory delight, and by
filling my mind with vain unprofitable, and sometimes wicked and blasphemous
thoughts, which were a very great affliction to me. Then he, who was a liar
from the beginning, would suggest to my weak mind, that the only way to get
over such uneasiness, was to give way to those thoughts, and to be utterly
regardless of what passed through my mind. I found the flesh wanted ease, and
to save its self; willingly joined herein with the temptations of Santan,
whereby I got a kind of present ease, but it was by such gratifications as
tended to heap up wrath against the day of wrath, and the revelation of the
righteous judgments of God. So that, notwithstanding the false ease contrived
by my soul's enemy, I did, at times, very sensibly feel, as I grew up, this
peace disturbed and broken by a sense of God's wrath, revealed from heaven
against my unrighteousness; and great bitterness of spirit I was often in, when
the chastening of the Lord was upon me for sin. I would, at such times, enter
into covenant with the Lord, promising amendment; but as those promises were
made much in my own will, they were soon broken, and that would increase the
weight of my horror and distress: the Lord, in infinite mercy, being pleased to
find me out, and to plead with me as in the valley of decision. In writing
this, my mind is greatly moved with pity and bowels of compassion toward
inconsiderate youth; who for the sake of tristing vanities, slighting their own
mercies, are subjected to distress of mind: and the case is still worse, when
by repeated disobedience and rebellion against God's unmerited grace, they have
almost stifled his divine witness in their own hearts, and go on with impunity;
for an awakening time will come, soon or late, which must strike all such with
horror and amazement. May it be in mercy!

My godly parents were very careful to prevent my falling into evil company;
notwithstanding which, I frequently, without their knowledge, found such, and
joined them in those vanities which are incident to youth; and perhaps was not
a whit behind any of them therein: yet in the cool of the day, I was sharply
reproved for the same; nay sometimes, in the very midst of my folly. But by
this time I wanted to silence that pure witness against evil in my heart. Oh! I
have often since, with deep reverence, thankfully admired the long-suffering of
a gracious God, in that he did not cut me off, when I wilfully resisted the
reproof of his instruction, which is the way to life, because I wanted my
living in the vain pleasures of this perishing world.

When I was about the age of thirteen years, a friend who had lived some time
in Pennsylvania, being in our parts, and frequently at our house, gave a very
pleasing account of that country. I having two uncles and one aunt there, some
of whom had before written to encourage our going over thither, my inclination
grew very strong to go; though my parents, especially my father, was at first
very much against it. But I was as one immoveably bent for going; which when my
parents saw, and that an elder brother inclined to go with me, they at length
consented thereunto, and procured a certificate of our being in unity with
Friends. There being a family of Friends, out of the compass of our monthly
meeting, also going over in the same ship, we were delivered under their care,
and in the year 1726, we embarked at Milford-Haven, on board the Constantine
galley of Bristol, Edward Foy master. We had a passage of about eight weeks
from land to land. Wc were about eighty or ninety passengers, generally
healthy, amongst whom three children were born whilst on board, and none
removed by death. My uncle, John Morgan, who lived about 12 miles from the city
of Philadelphia, hearing of our arrival, came on board, and conducted us to his
own house, where I continued for some time, my brother, being a weaver, settled
at my aunt Mary (...), following his trade.

Removing from under my parents watchful care over me, for my good, furnished
me with great opportunity to gratify a vain mind, in the foolish amusements of
a transitory world, toward which I had but too great an inclination. But I
have this to say, in order that parents may be encouraged to exert their godly
endeavors for the preservation of their children, that I do steadfastly
believe, the religious care of my parents over me in my youth, impressed so
great an awe upon my mind, that, through the blessing of Divine Providence, it
was a great means of my preservation from gross enormities; though I had great
opportunity of being plunged thereinto, after I left them. I hope ever to
retain a grateful and thankful remembrance of those gracious preservations,
when I consider, how narrowly I have escaped those rocks, upon which many have
been shipwrecked and ruined.

I was sometimes visited, and in degree awakened to a sense of my undone
condition without a Savior, after my arrival in American, though not so
frequently as when I was younger. As I had often, oh very often! knowingly
withstood it, my taste for worldly pleasures being now grown stronger, I was
very unwilling to give up to the call of Christ. I could plead abundance of
excuses, concluding among other things, that I was but young, and might live a
great many years; that if I did take my swing a few years, I might become
religious sooner than many others had done, who were brave men in their day. I
would, however, to make myself the more easy for that time, fully determine to
be a very religious good man, at one time or other; but it must not be yet.
Thus, through the gross darkness which had covered my mind, I who had no
certainty of seeing the light of one day more, was prevailed upon, by the
subtilty of Satan, to run the dreadful hazard of a future repentance and
amendment of life, and so became worse and more hardened in evil, though shall
preserved out of gross pollutions, or what are commonly so esteemed; I was
afraid to tell a lie, except to embellish, or set off a pleasant or merry tale
or story; apprehending it no great crime to tell a lie in jest. I never
remember to have sworn an oath, or uttered a curse in my life. Nor was I ever
prevailed upon, in my customary conversation, to depart from the rules of my
education, respecting the plain language, thee and thou to one, and you to more
than one; all this time preserving a pretty fair character amongst men, as none
could charge me with any thing accounted scandalous. I retained much love and
regard for those I thought truly religious; especially weighty substantial
ministers of the everlasting gospel; and I believe had a better sense of their
spirits and labors, than some of my companions had, and therefore was afraid
to despise or speak contemptibly of such, as some of my associates did. In this
carnal degenerate state, I did commonly, in a customary way, attend first day
meetings, and mostly had the liberty of going on other days of the week, when
any ministers from distant parts came to visit Abington meeting, to which I
belonged: but alas! it was to little or no good purpose, as the labor bestowed
upon me, by ministry or otherwise, was like water spilt upon a stone, that soon
runs off again without any entrance; I being indeed for some time, like the
heath in the desert, not knowing when good came: and if at any time, the seed
of God's kingdom fell upon my heart, which was like the highway ground, it was
soon taken away, and I presently lost the savor thereof.

When I had arrived to upwards of nineteen years of age, I was, through
infinite mercy never to be forgotten, visited in an extraordinary manner;
concerning which, as it was the happy means of turning my mind, in a good
degree, from the perishing vanities of an uncertain world, to the God of all
sure mercies, I intend to be somewhat particular. One evening, being with
diverse of my companions in vanity, and under no restraint, as the heads of the
family were not at home, we carried our frothy vain conversation, and foolish
rude actions, to a higher degree of wicked madness, than I ever was guilty of
before, in which I suppose I was as a ringleader. On this account, I felt some
sharp lashes of conscience as I went to bed that night; and a thoughtfulness
took hold of my mind, that we had not a being in this world for such a purpose,
or to spend our time as above mentioned, of which I gave some hint to my
bedfellow; yet this conviction did not sink so deep, but that I pretty soon
got to sleep. I had not slept long, before a messenger alarmed me with an
account, that one of my jolly companions, who was then in the house, and who, I
think, had been the best of us, was dying, desiring me to go immediately to
him, which I did. I was exceedingly struck with horror of mind, at the thoughts
of the manner in which we had spent the evening before, and the sudden stroke
that followed upon this poor man. But when I came to his bedside, and saw the
dreadful agony he was in, my horror was increased beyond all expression; as
none of us expected he could live many hours. For my part, I was so deeply
plunged into anxiety of mind, that it seemed as if the pains and terrors of
hell had laid hold of me already; and I was then in full expectation there was
no deliverance for me therefrom; but that I should die, with the weight of that
distress which was upon me, before morning. This happened on a seventh-day
night, and though the young man in time recovered, yet he was not fit to be
left next day, which hindered me from going to meeting, to which I was
exceedingly desirous to have gone; for by this time I was pretty thoroughly
awakened to a sense of duty; and it being a week before the like opportunity
presented to me again, it seemed the longest week I had ever known. Oh, how did
I long to present myself before the Lord in the assemblies of his people! that
I might pour forth my inward cries before him, in a state of sincere
repentance, and deep contrition of soul; which, through the effectual operation
of his power in my heart, I was then in a condition to do. Now I clearly saw,
that repentance is the gift of God, and that his love, wherewith he has loved
us in Christ Jesus our Lord, leads sinners thereinto. The fleshly will being,
for the present, overcome and silenced, there was a giving up, with all
readiness of mind, to the Lord's requirings. There was not any thing then too
near to part with for the real and substantial enjoyment of the beloved of my
soul; for I was brought in degree to experience, that he came for judgment into
this world, that they which see not might see; and that they which see might be
made blind. I could no longer look upon my former delights with any
satisfaction, but instead thereof, had a glorious view of the beautiful
situation of mount Sion, and my face was turned thitherward, and for the joy
which was set before me, I was made willing to endure the cross of Christ, and
to despise the shame; and though I became a wonder and a gazing stock to my
former companions, I did not much regard it, knowing I had just cause so to be.
My great change struck them with some awe, for I observed they had not the
boldness to mock or deride me before my face.

The young man, who was an instrument in the divine hand for my awakening, and
his brother, were both greatly reached and deeply affected, for the present, by
the abovementioned wonderful visitation, and there was a very visible change
in them for a time; but, like the seed that fell on the stony ground, they
withered away, and did not become fruitful to God.

I greatly rejoiced when first day came, that I might go to meeting; which
proved to me indeed a memorable one, there being two public friends, strangers,
sent thither, as I thought, on my account; for most of what they had to
deliver, appeared to me applicable to my state. Now did I, in some degree,
experience the substance of what was intended, by the baptism of water unto
repentance; the washing of water by the word; and being born of water and the
spirit. All which would be fully seen, and clearly understood, by the
professors of Christianity, were they rightly acquainted with the gospel of
Christ; which is the power of God unto salvation. This power, inwardly
revealed, is alone able to work that change in them, without which, our Lord
says none shall so much as see the kingdom of God. But alas! being carnal in
their minds, a spiritual religion does not suit them; for, as says the
scripture, the natural man receives not the things of the spirit of God, for
they are foolishness unto him; neither can he know them, because they are
spiritually discerned. Hence it is, that the professors of the Christian name,
retain signs and shadows, whilst the substance is neglected; pleading for the
continuance of types, when the antitype is but little regarded: where this
latter is experienced, all shadows and types vanish and come to an end; as did
the legal types, when Christ, the antitype, came, and introduced his
dispensation, which is altogether of a spiritual nature. And, what is yet more
wonderful, and an evidence of great ignorance, is, to find those happy and
blessed effects, which are only produced by the baptism of Christ with the Holy
Ghost, attributed or annexed to the ceremonies of sprinkling a little water by
a priest in a child's face: for, when that is done, the priest prays, 'that old
Adam in the child may be buried; that the new man may be raised up in him; that
all carnal affection may die in him; and that all things belonging to the
spirit may live and grow in him.' Then he prays, that the element of water may
be sanctified to the washing away sin. The child is then said to be received
into the congregation of Christ's flock, and signed with the sign of the cross:
when this is done, they acknowledge the child to be regenerate, and grafted
into the body of Christ's church, and return thanks to God, in that he has
been pleased to regenerate that infant with his Holy Spirit, and to receive him
for his own by adoption: Concerning a child sprinkled, they say, 'who being
born in original sin, and the wrath of God, is now, by the laver of
regeneration in baptism, received into the number of the children of God, and
heirs of everlasting life.' They say, by baptism, viz. sprinkling infants, that
they have put on Christ, and that they are made children of God and of the
light. They hold children baptized, dying before they commit actual sin, are
undoubtedly saved; which seems to imply, others are not. Being now weary of
reciting these palpable errors, I shall proceed with the account of my own
progress, in the real experience of this great work of regeneration, or the new
birth, which, I well know, is not obtained at so easy a rate as abovementioned.

This administration of water by the word continued in a remarkable manner upon
me, for about three months, in which I found great satisfaction, as it was
accompained with an heavenly sweetness, like healing balsam upon my wounded
spirit; my heart being melted before the Lord, as wax is melted before the
fire. Great was my delight in reading the holy scriptures, and other good
books; being favored, at that time, to receive much comfort and improvement
thereby. But this easy melting dispensation, was to give way to a more powerful
one, that the floor might be thoroughly purged, even the baptism with the Holy
Ghost and fire: for the former dispensation of the Lord to my soul seemed much
to resemble John's baptism with water unto repentance, as being the real thing
signified thereby, in order to prepare the way of the Lord.

Under this dispensation I was for a time exceedingly distressed, in a sense of
the great alteration I found in the state of my mind; attributing it to some
cause given by me, that I was thus, as I thought, forsaken. All the former
tenderness was gone, and I was as the parched ground. My agonies were so great,
that when it was day I wished for night; and when it was night I wished for
day. In meetings for worship, where I had enjoyed most satisfaction, I now was
under the greatest weight of pain and distress, even to that degree, at times,
that I could scarcely forbear crying aloud for mere agony. When meeting was
over, I would sometimes walk a considerable way into the woods, that unheard by
any mortal, I might, in mournful accents, give vent to my greatly distressed
soul. In this doleful state of mind, the grand adversary was permitted to pour
forth floods of temptations. I was almost constantly beset with evil thoughts,
which exceedingly grieved me; for though I was in such a dark distressed
condition, my mind was, by this time, too much enlightened to allow of, or join
with, wicked and corrupt thoughts: yet I often judged myself, and I believe at
times not without cause, being apprehensive, I was not earnest enough in
resisting those evil thoughts and temptations. But, oh! I was exceeding weak in
those days; and I am persuaded the Lord, in gracious condescension, looked
mercifully at the sincerity of my intention, not marking all my failings, or I
could not have stood before him in any degree of acceptance. Very great were my
temptations, and deep my distress of mind for about a year; in which time I was
but as a little child in understanding the way and work of God upon me, for my
redemption. Yet, he who will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the
smoking flax, until he sends forth judgment unto victory, by his invisible
power, bore up my head above the rageing waves of temptation, so that the enemy
found he could not overwhelm me therewith: the Lord teaching my hands to war,
and my fingers to fight under his banner, through whose blessing and
assistance, I found some degree of victory over the beast, viz. that part which
has its life in fleshly gratifications. Then began the false prophet to work
with signs and lying wonders, in order to deceive my weak and unskilful
understanding; as it is written, 'Satan is transformed into an angel of light:'
so I found him, at least in appearance. He that goes about seeking whom he may
devour, perceiving I was too much enlightened from above, to be easily drawn
into sensuality, craftily attempted my destruction another way, viz. by setting
himself up, undiscovered then by me, for a guide in the way of mortification,
which I was then resolved, through divine assistance, to walk carefully in, by
denying myself in all things which appeared inconsistent with the divine will.
This subtle transformer, taking advantage of the ardency of my mind to press
forward in this necessary concern, suggested that my work would be much easier
in obtaining a complete victory over evil, were I to refrain for a time from
some of the necessaries of life, particularly from eating, and taking my
natural rest in sleep, except just as much as would preserve life; and that I
must constantly keep my hands employed in business, as idleness is the nursery
of vice; neither was he wanting to bring scripture, and passages out of other
religious books, to confirm these requirings. I then really believed it was the
voice of Christ in my mind commanding these things, and therefore endeavored
to be faithful therein, till my natural strength abated, and I found my body
grew much weaker thereby. Greatly distressed I was, when at any time I fell
short of what I apprehended to be my duty in these respects, he that required
this service being a hard master; though he had power to deceive, yet he could
not give me faith that I should overcome. My views in those days were indeed
very discouraging, my poor afflicted soul being almost sunk into despair. My
friends took notice that I was in uncommon distress. The family in which I then
lived, as they could not be altogether ignorant, though I concealed it as much
as I could, of my wandering about in the fields, etc. at nights, and much
refraining from food (my deep distress being also very legibly imprinted on my
countenance) feared, as I afterward understood, lest I should be tempted to
lay violent hands on myself. I was forbid in myself to tell my condition to
any, as that would be seeking relief from without; a very improper and unworthy
thing.

Notwithstanding which, the God of all grace, who permitted this uncommon
affliction to fall upon me for a trial, and not for my destruction, was
pleased, in wonderful kindness, to move upon the heart of a minister belonging
to our meeting, to visit me, and to open a way for my deliverance. He strictly
inquired concerning my inward condition, informing me that friends were much
concerned about me, as it was very obvious I was under some uncommon
temptation. I was at first very unwilling to open my state to him, however he
at length prevailed, and took the opportunity to show me that I was under a
gross delusion of Satan. Being thus, through the Lord's mercy, delivered from
the wicked design of mine enemy, which undoubtedly was to destroy both soul and
body, I had, in reverent thankfulness, to rejoice in his salvation. I then
clearly saw, that Satan in his religious appearance, was also carefully to be
guarded against; as nothing in religion can be acceptable to God, but the
genuine product of his unerring spirit, distinctly heard and understood by the
ear of the soul, and the renewed understanding. "My sheep," said Christ, "hear
my voice;" which I now began to experience fulfilled; blessed be the Lord for
ever! I had many precious openings into the divine mysteries about this time;
and when I read the holy scriptures, they were opened to my understanding, far
beyond whatever they had been before, so that I had very great comfort; my hope
being revived, and my faith much strengthened, by those things that were
written aforetime. I am well assured, by certain experience, that the mysteries
couched in those holy writings, cannot be profitably understood, but by the
same spirit which inspired the penmen of them; therefore it is vain
presumption, for fallen and unregenerate man, by his earthly wisdom and human
learning, to attempt the unfolding heavenly mysteries. The lip of truth has
signified, they are hid from the wise and prudent of this world, and revealed
unto the humble dependent babes and sucklings; those who sensibly experience
their sufficiency for every good word and work, to proceed immediately from God
alone; and that Christ is made unto them, wisdom and righteousness,
sanctification and redemption. The want of this inward living sense, has been
the cause of, and has opened the way for, that great apostasy, darkness, and
error, which have overspread Christendom, so called. There is no way for its
recovery, but by humbly submitting to Christ inwardly revealed, and learning
the nature of true religion of him, the great author thereof: for I am well
assured, that forward active and inventing self must be denied, abased, and
laid in the dust for ever, and the Lord alone exalted in our hearts, before we
can come up in the several duties of religion, with divine approbation. This I
saw, in the divine light which began to shine out of my darkness, and separated
me therefrom, was the greater light which was to rule the day of God's
salvation, and that all the saved of the Lord must carefully walk in this
light, wherein there is no occasion of stumbling. I also saw, that when it
pleased the Lord in wisdom, for a trial of my faith and patience, to withdraw
this holy light, and there was a sitting in darkness, and as in the region of
the shadow of death for a time, so that I had no distinct knowledge therefrom
what to do; that it was my indispensible duty to stand still, and wait for my
sure unerring guide; if at those times, self would arise and be uneasy, it must
be brought to the cross, there to be slain. By such experience, I found I was
nothing, and that God was all things necessary for soul and body; that if I was
brought into a state of perfect reconciliation with him, I must know all things
made new.

About this time I had a distant view of being called into the work of the
ministry; my mind being at times wonderfully overshadowed with the universal
love of God, in the glorious gospel of his Son, to mankind, to that degree that
I thought I could, in the strength thereof, give up to spend and to be spent,
for the gathering of souls to him, the great Shepherd of Israel; and that I
could lift up my voice like a trumpet, to awaken the inhabitants of the earth:
but I found all this was only by way of preparation for this important work,
and that I had not yet received a commission to engage therein. A fear was upon
my mind, and care, lest I should presume to enter upon this solemn undertaking
without a right call; it appearing to me exceeding dangerous to speak in the
name of the Lord, without a clear evidence in the mind, that he required it of
me; which I then fully believed he would in his own time, which was to be
waited for. From this time, until I was really called into the work, I
frequently had, but especially in religious meetings, openings of
scripture-passages, with lively operations of the divine power in my mind; and
sometimes with so much energy, that I have been almost ready to offer what I
had upon my mind, to others. But as, through an holy awe which dwelt upon my
heart, I endeavored to try my offering in the unerring balance of the
sanctuary, I found it was too light to be offered, and was thankful to the Lord
for his merciful preservation, in that I had been enabled to avoid offering the
sacrifice of fools. But when the time really came that it was divinely required
of me, the evidence was so indisputably clear, that there was not the least
room to doubt; yet, through fear and human frailty, I put it off, and did not
give way thereunto. But oh! how was I condemned in myself! The divine sweetness
which had covered my mind in the meeting was withdrawn, and I left in a very
poor disconsolate state, wherein I was ready to beg forgiveness, and to
covenant with the Lord, that if he would be pleased to favor me again in like
manner, I would give up to his requiring. At the next first day meeting, the
heavenly power overshadowed me in a wonderful manner, in which it was required
of me to kneel down in supplication to the Lord in a few words: I gave way
thereunto, in the dread of his power, with fear and trembling. After which, oh,
how my soul was filled with peace and joy in the Holy Ghost! I could then sing,
and make sweet melody in my heart to the Lord. As I remember, I was twenty-one
years of age, the very day I first entered into this great and awful work of
the ministry; which was the 21st of the 5th month, old style, 1734.

I have found my mind engaged to be somewhat particular concerning the manner
of my entering into the work of the ministry, to stand by way of caution and
proper encouragement to others, who may peruse the same; having in the course
of my observation had cause to fear, some have taken the work of preparation,
as before hinted, for the thing itself; and so have proceeded very far, to
their own great wounding, and the hurt of others, in bringing forth untimely
fruit, which is exceedingly dangerous, and carefully to be avoided. Nothing is
a sufficient guard to preserve therefrom, but the single eye, through the
divine blessing, awfully considering what a great thing it is for dust and
ashes to speak as the apostle Peter directs, viz. As every man has received
the gift, even so minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the
manifold grace of God. If any man speak, let him speak as the oracles of God;
if any man minister, let him do it as of the ability which God gives. The
author to the Hebrews says, that no man takes this honor to himself, but he
that is called of God, as was Aaron. So that whatever some may pretend to, and
intrude themselves into, unless they are really called of God, they will have
no share in that honor that comes from God only.

The church of Christ has not been without its trouble from false ministers,
neither in the primitive times, nor in ours. That excellent gospel liberty of
all who feel themselves inspired thereunto, whether male or female, speaking or
prophesying one by one, has been, and still is, abused by false pretenders to
divine inspiration; yet the liberty ought to be preserved inviolable, and other
means found out to remedy this great inconveniency; which would not be
difficult, were the members in a general way spiritually minded, rightly
favoring the things that be of God. Forward and unsanctified appearances, by
way of ministry, would then be easily awed and suppressed, so as not to disturb
the peace of the church. The case has been otherwise, as I have observed in
some places; but little minded, if the words and doctrine were sound, and
nothing to blame in the conversation. Here the main thing, which is the
powerful demonstration of the holy spirit, is little regarded: and if a few are
deeply pained at heart with such lifeless ministry, they find it exceeding
difficult to lay hands thereon, for want of more strength; especially when they
perceive what strength there is against them: for formal professors love to
have it so, rather than to sit in silence. And I have observed such pretenders
all mouth or tongue, and no ears to receive instruction; fond of teaching
others, but very unteachable themselves. I pray God to quicken his people, and
raise the society into a more lively sense of that blessed arm of power which
gathered us to be a people; or, I fear, the great evil above hinted at will
prove a very growing one: profession without possession, being the proper
element for such a ministry to grow and flourish in. I am not quite free to omit
a remark on this head, as I am fully persuaded the living members of the church
of Christ, groan under a painful sense of this sorrowful token of a declined
society. May the Lord of sabbath hear their cries, and regard the anguish of
their souls in secret, so as to work by his invisible power for his own name's
sake, and their enlargement, by turning his hand again upon our Sion, to purge
away her dross, and to take away her tin and reprobate silver; that her judges
may be restored as at the first, and her counselors as at the beginning; that
many, having their feet shod with the preparation of the gospel of peace, may
yet appear beautiful upon the mountains! So be it, says my soul!

I have given some hints how it was with me, by way of preparative for the
great and important work of the ministry, and the danger of my being misled;
even at sometimes when I had right openings, and felt the sweet efficacious
virtue of the love of God, through Jesus Christ, to mankind: which, doubtless,
is the sensible experience and enjoyment, at times, of every faithful follower
of Christ, who never was called to the work of the ministry. I was in those
days apprehensive of some danger of being led out at that door; but I have
since more fully and perfectly seen the danger of this and other bypath,
which would have led me to give that away to others, which I was to live upon
myself; and ^ut of the humble dependant state, in which only there is safety,
to have a will and way of my own, that I might be furnished and enriched with
much treasure. But sincerity of heart, and my endeavors to preserve the single
eye, through the watchful care of Divine Providence over me, brought the day of
the Lord upon it all: so that I came clearly to see, and experimentally to
know, my sufficiency was of God; that there must be a steady dependence on the
Lord, to be immediately fitted and supplied, every time I was to engage in this
solemn service. I ardently desire, that all who have the least apprehension of
being called into the work of the ministry, may dwell in an holy dread of the
divine presence, and know their own wills wholly subjected to the divine will;
waiting for a distinct and clear certainty of the Lord's requirings, not only
in entering upon it at first, but also at all other times. And as self comes to
be laid in the dust for ever, they will receive undeniable evidence, in their
own minds, of the certainty of their mission; and they will not be without a
testimony thereof, from the witness for God in the consciences of mankind,
amongst whom they are sent to minister. They will be a savor of life to the
living in the truth, and of death to those who are in a state of death. Let it
ever be remembered, that nothing of, or belonging to, man, can possibly add any
luster or dignity to so divine a gift. Neither will the best and most curiously
adapted words or doctrine, ever so truly and consistently delivered, be any
more than as sounding brass, or as a tinkling cymbal, without the power, light,
and demonstration of the spirit of Christ. There is no occasion at all, for
those who regard his power as the substance of their ministry, to be any wise
solicitous about words; as the lowest and most simple are really beautiful,
when fitly spoken under that holy influence.

Having thus entered upon the solemn and awful service of the ministry, I gave
up for the most part, as I found the requirings of truth, through the divine
power and efficacy thereof, moving upon my heart, and subjecting my will, to
utter a few words in a broken manner, with fear and trembling; the Lord being
exceeding merciful to me, as a tender father, taking me by the hand, and making
me willing by his mighty power, to be counted a fool for his sake and the
gospel's.

The meeting I then belonged to was large, and a valuable weighty body of
friends therein; who, as far as I could observe by their carriage, did own and
approve of my weak and low appearance in this service: yet they used Christian
prudence, not to lay hands suddenly, but gave me full opportunity to make proof
of my ministry, and to feel my feet therein.

About this time, a fine spring of ministry was opened within the compass of
our Yearly Meeting; there having, by account, about one hundred opened their
mouths in public testimony, in little more than a year; diverse of whom became
powerful able ministers, and some of them withered away like unripe fruit.
About ten appeared within that time, in the particular meeting of Abington, to
which I belonged.

As I was enabled to wait on my ministry, I experienced a considerable growth
and enlargement; and, in a faithful discharge of duty therein, great peace and
heavenly consolation, like a pleasant refreshing stream, flowed into my soul. I
also found, that it was a means of engaging the minds of friends, in a sweet
and comfortable nearness of unity with me, which I had never before so largely
and livingly felt. Many young well-minded people, and some others of little
experience, seemed to admire my gift, and would sometimes speak highly of it,
which they did not always forbear in my hearing. But oh how dangerous this is,
if delighted in by ministers! It may be justly compared to poison, which will
soon destroy the pure innocent life. My judgment was against it; yet I found
something in me, that seemed to have no aversion thereunto, but rather inclined
to hearken to it, yet not with full approbation. The same thing in me would
want to know, what such and such, who were in most esteem for experience and
wisdom, thought of me. I sometimes imagined such looked shy upon me, which
would much cast me down; all which, being from a root or fiber of self, I found
was for judgment, and must die upon the cross, before I was fit to be trusted
with any great store of gospel treasure. I begun also to take rather too much
delight myself in the gift; which had not divine goodness in mercy, by a deep
and distressing baptism, kindly prevented; might have opened a door for
spiritual pride (which is the worst of pride) to have entered in, to my ruin. I
have reason to think, that solid friends, by observing my large growth in the
top, with spreading branches, were in fear of my downfall, in case of a storm.
However, in the midst of my high career, the Lord was pleased to take away from
me, for a time, that which he had given me, viz. the gift of the ministry, and
with it all sensible comforts of the spirit: so that I was, as I thought, in
total darkness; even in the region and shadow of death. In this doleful state
of mind, I was grievously beset and tempted by the false prophet, the
transformer, to keep up my credit in the ministry, by continuing my public
appearances. It might well be said of him, that he would cause fire to come
down from heaven, in the sight of men, to deceive them; for so I found it. It
is hard to imagine, how near a resemblance he could make, how exact an
imitation he could form of the very thing itself, to the state of mind I was
then in; even to that degree, that I have at times been ready to say, 'Ah! I
see and feel the fire of the Lord coming down to prepare the offering'; and
have been almost ready to give up thereunto, when a godly fear would seize my
mind, and a desire yet to try it; by which means, the strong delusion has been
discovered, and the false fire rejected. My soul has been plunged into deeper
anxiety, by this false heat, than I was in before. No tongue nor pen can set
forth to the full, the deep and almost constant anguish of my soul, for about
the space of four or five months; being as near as I can remember the time this
sore affliction was upon me. It fared with me in some degree, as it did with
Job, respecting my friends; some conjecturing one thing, and some another
thing, to be the cause of this fall, as it was apprehended; though, through
mercy, they could not charge me with any evil as the cause thereof. The most
probable reason to them, of this alteration was, that I had been too much set
up by others, and so had lost my gift; and this, I think, came the nearest to
the truth of the case. Yet it was not so lost, but that when my gracious helper
saw my suffering was enough, he restored it again, and appeared to my soul as a
clear morning without clouds: everlasting praises to his holy name! My mind was
deeply bowed in humble thankfulness, under a sense of the great favor of being
again counted worthy to be entrusted with so precious a gift; therefore I was
careful to exercise the same in great fear and awfulness, and more in a cross
to mine own will than before; as that which was but too likely to have decked
itself therewith, was, for the present at least, in a good degree slain. I have
very often, in the course of my religious experience, had cause to adore and
admire divine wisdom, in his dealings with me for my preservation in the way of
peace; being well assured, that he will so work for mankind, if they are
sufficiently given up in heart and soul to him, that it will not be possible
for them to miss of everlasting happiness; for none are able to pluck those out
of his almighty hand, who do not first incline to leave him.

After I had appeared in public somewhat more than two years, I found some
drawings of gospel-love, as I apprehended, to visit the meetings of friends in
some part of New Jersey; and being but young in the ministry, I was in great
fear, at times, lest I should be mistaken, in that which I, at other times,
thought to be the divine requirings: for I much dreaded that of running when
and where the Lord did not send me, lest I should bring dishonor to his
blessed name, and expose myself naked and void of proper qualifications for so
great an undertaking, to wise and discerning friends. Great indeed was my
distress, night and day, crying to the Lord for greater confirmation; which he
graciously heard, and was pleased, by a dream or night-vision, to afford me
such full satisfaction in, that I do not remember I had any doubt afterward
concerning the same.

I entered upon the said journey the 7th of the 8th month 1736; having a
companion much older than myself every way. We visited the following meetings,
viz. Pilesgrove, Salem, Aloways-creek, and Cohansey, where my companion left
me, and returned home, being under some discouragement about the journey in his
own mind. But as I found the Lord by his blessed power near, opening my mouth,
and enlarging my heart abundantly in his work, I was encouraged thereby to
proceed, being joined in travel by an innocent friend belonging to
Aloways-creek-meeting, who had a few words to drop in meetings. We went from
Cohansey, through a great desert or wilderness, for about forty miles, without
inhabitants, to Cape May, where we had a meeting. From thence to Great and
Little Egg-Harbour, and had meetings. From thence, through the wilderness, to
the yearly meeting at Shrewsbury, which was large, and much favored with the
divine presence: diverse ministering friends from Pennsylvania were there, viz.
Thomas Chalkley, Robert Jordan, John and Evan Evans, Margaret Preston, and
others.

It neither suited with my growth in the ministry, nor my inclination, to take
up much time in those large meetings. I therefore, for the most part, gave way
to such as were better qualified for the work, and in my esteem worthy of
double honor. I had a great regard in my mind for those whom I thought as
pillars in the house of God, whether ministers or elders; and really think, if
such had given it as their sense, that I was wrong in my offerings, at any
time, I should have been more likely to have depended on their judgment than my
own. I looked upon myself, for many years, as a child in experience every way;
and therefore thought a subjection was due from me, to those who were fathers
and mothers in Israel, and never, that I remember, manifested any disregard to
them; which is now a satisfaction to my mind. But, I confess, I have at times
since had cause to marvel at the forwardness of some, who though but children,
if rightly children, have undertaken the work of men, hardly discovering a
willingness to give the preference to any; and when they have been admonished
by those of much more experience than themselves, they have been apt to retort,
or to plead a divine commission, and that it is right to obey God rather than
man; as if they had the sole right of speaking and judging too. I had diverse
times seen the great danger of being deceived and misled by the transformer;
and therefore was afraid of being over confident of mine own sight, and looked
upon it the safest way to stand quite open for instruction, come from what
quarter it would; there being nothing more desired by me, than to be right.

This large meeting ended well, and sweetly. Praises to the Lord over all for
ever! From thence I went to the following meetings, viz. Chesterfield, Trenton,
Bordentown, Mansfield, Upper Springfield, Old Springfield, Burlington, Bristol,
the Falls, Ancocas, Mount-holly, Evesham, Chester, Haddonfield, and Woodbury
Creek; from whence I returned home. The Lord made my journey prosperous, and
was to me, at times, as a fountain unsealed, furnishing daily for the work he
had engaged me in; being, in wonderful condescension to my weak estate, both
wisdom and utterance; as it is written, Out of the mouths of babes and
sucklings thou have ordained strength. Praises to his holy name for ever!

Notwithstanding the Lord committed unto me a dispensation of the gospel, and
was pleased to reward my sincere labors therein, with the sweet incomes of
peace and joy in the Holy Ghost, and with the unity of the brethren, in a
comfortable degree; yet great were my temptations, and various the combats I
had, for diverse years after; with my soul's enemies. Oh! how hard I found it to
keep from being defiled, more or less, with the polluting floods, which were
almost continually poured out of the great red dragon's mouth, in order to
carry away my imagination into unlawful delights, from which I did not always
wholly escape; being sometimes prevailed upon to set bounds to myself, that
though I would not directly fall into the evil I was tempted to, yet I might
take some distant delight and satisfaction, in approaching as near thereunto as
I thought was lawful. Thus, for want of a watchful care, not only to shun that
which I knew to be really evil, but also every appearance of evil, I sometimes
brought great anguish and deep distress upon my own mind; and when I had gone
but a little out of the right way, I found many, oh! many weary steps and
painful heart-achings, before I was received into the way and favor of the
heavenly Father again. I have often since been humbly thankful for his
preservation, even out of gross evils, considering my dangerous tampering
therewith at times in the imagination. How can weak mortals determine what
length they will go, when any way is given? Most certain it is, they go out
greatly to their hurt, who take any pleasure at all in the thoughts of
forbidden things. I have found, by woeful experience, that when the least way is
given to the enemy, he gains much advantage over us, and we are greatly
enfeebled thereby; so that, instead of growing as willows by the watercourse,
there is danger of withering, and becoming of those that draw back, in whom the
Lord has no pleasure. I have found it the first subtle working of Satan, to
draw me off from a constant care of bringing all my thoughts, words, and
actions to be tried by the light of Christ in mine own heart; and instead
thereof, to examine them by my partial reasoning part. Here, many things really
evil in their nature, or tendency, or both, would carry the appearances of
indifferency; the pleading would then be, there is no harm in this, that, or
the other thing: yet there has been a doubt perhaps in the mind to reason
away, not duly considering, that he who doubts, is condemned if he receive.
So I have many times found it, when the judge of all has been pleased to
arise, and to find me out, with my fig-leaf covering on; having very
imprudently, by giving way to wrong things, in a great measure lost the garment
of innocence, and an holy confidence toward God, Oh! how very hot has my
neglect occasioned the furnace to be made, that so the dross might be done away.

Thus it was with me, until the many chastenings of the heavenly Father had
brought me into more fear, care, and subjection. I could not be quite easy to
omit giving these hints of my many weaknesses and failings, that others may
learn thereby to be aware. This I apprehend to be the chief reason of our
having the failings and miscarriages of God's people transmitted to us in the
holy scriptures. Thou traveller Sionward, look forward to the joy set before
thee, not suffering thine eyes to wander about thee, lest they convey such
delight to thy heart, as may infect thy soul with pernicious distempers, by
which thou may be rendered unable to proceed on thy journey toward the holy
city; and through the defect occasioned thereby to thy sight, thou may, in a
great measure, lose the glorious prospect of its beautiful situation, and the
splendour of its structures. Beware thou do not load thyself with the seeming
pleasant fruit of that country through which thou travellest: although they may
appear to hang plentifully on each hand, they will neither be of any use to
thee in that heavenly country whither thou art going, nor for refreshment on
the way thither. If thou have a mind to make thine own way prosperous, look
steadily forward, with a single eye, to the recompense of reward. Bring every
motion toward seeking of satisfaction in forbidden places, immediately to the
cross, and thou will much sooner find the yoke of Christ made easy, and his
burden light; all his ways pleasant, and his paths peace. This is abundantly
better than that uneasy in and out way of traveling, sinning and repenting,
repenting and sinning again; which lays a foundation for murmuring, labor, and
toil; crying out, as some do all their days, there is no complete victory to be
obtained over sin on this side of the grave. Miserable sinners we must remain,
when the cause thereof is wholly in themselves; because they will not come
into, and abide in, the help of the Lord, against the mighty enemies of their
soul's happiness, which is altogether sufficient to give a complete victory
over them; yea, to give power to triumph, and say, We are made more than
conquerors through him that has loved us.

The 8th month 1737, I set out in order to visit some meetings in East-Jersey;
having Richard French, an ancient friend, to bear me company. We had meetings
at Stonybrook, Bethlehem, Lebanon, and at a Baptist's house near Black-River.
None of our society were thereabouts, but there were some ranters of Rogers's
followers, who had taken upon them the name of Quakers, to the great scandal of
friends in that remote place: they came to the meeting, being mostly women.
Their impatient restless spirits would not suffer them to let us hold our
meeting quietly; yet they did not seem inclinable to contend, but rather to
flatter and applaud us. Some of them stood up, after we had severally delivered
what we had upon our minds, to signify their unity with our doctrine,
pretending it to be the same they held forth to the people, though not enough
regarded by them. But we were not free to receive their testimony, any more
than Paul and Silas could that maid's who was possessed with an evil spirit;
but rebuked them openly, and publicly declared our disunity with them,
desiring the people not to look upon them as belonging to the society of the
people called Quakers, as we could assure the meeting it was not so; and that
we had no more unity with those pretenders, than they had. I thought the chief
service we had at that place, was to testify against those wild frantic
people, who we found had, by being accounted Quakers, caused the way of truth
to be evil spoken of. This unexpected opposition raised their flighty spirits,
so that they became very troublesome, being full of words, and asking frivolous
questions. Whereupon that of Paul, to some such women in the Corinthian church,
came fresh into my mind. I therefore called out aloud, "Let your women be
silent in the church;" and opened to them, that it was such women as they were,
that the apostle rebuked and commanded to be silent; who not experiencing their
spirits to be truly subjected, that they might know how to speak concerning the
things of God with a right understanding, ought to learn in silence: not
meaning to exclude those of mine own sex in the like case; the same being as
necessary for them. We left them as full of themselves as we found them, and
went from thence to Whippany, where, in a friend's house, we had a precious
meeting. The greatest number being of other societies, the testimony of truth
flowed forth freely; they appearing to be much tendered and affected therewith.
After meeting, some of them took us by the hand, and in an affectionate manner
expressed their satisfaction with our labors amongst them. From thence we went
to Plainfield, and Woodbridge, where we had meetings. After which we returned
home; having been favored to accomplish this little journey to my own
satisfaction.

Sometime before I entered upon the beforementioned journey, I found my mind
pretty strongly drawn, and much inclined, to enter into a marriage state with a
young woman belonging to the same meeting, within the compass of which I had
lately taken a farm, and to which I was then joined by certificate. Her name
was Rebekah, the daughter of Josiah and Sarah Fearn, and granddaughter of John
Blunston: she being a valuable branch of a good stock. By the death of her
brother, she was then possessed of that part of her said grandfather's estate,
where he had lived, and entertained friends from almost the first settlement of
Pennsylvania, until his death; which afterward was continued by his widow many
years, but of late years had been laid aside. It was in Lower Derby, about
seven miles from Philadelphia, near a large meeting; the meeting house being
built on some of that tract of land. The reason of my being so particular in
this account, is to show the Lord's kindness, and gracious condescension to me,
in so fully answering what I had so often desired, viz. that in case I ever
married and settled, I might be so placed and circumstanced, as to entertain
the Lord's servants and messengers in an agreeable manner: on which account, as
well as that he was pleased to give me an affectionate virtuous wife, I had,
and have great cause of humble thankfulness. We took each other in marriage the
30th of the 10th month 1737, at a large and solemn meeting, held in the
meeting house beforementioned, under the precious overshadowing of the power
of divine love; I think to a larger degree than I had often, if ever, known
before: which was no small confirmation of our being rightly joined together;
it being that alone which can truly enable to make and keep covenant rightly
with each other.

After marriage, I constantly attended our particular meeting, both on first
and other days of the week; also the quarterly and yearly-meetings as they fell
in course, and frequently visited adjacent meetings. I visited friends in the
county of Bucks twice, but have no account by me of the exact time. I signified
to my wife, some time after we were married, that I did expect, in a few years,
I should find a concern to leave her for a longer time than I yet had done, and
gave her a hint what time I thought it would be; which fell out accordingly;
having then a distant view of visiting New England.

When the time for undertaking that journey appeared clear to me, I gave up
thereto, in humble resignation and faith in the sufficiency of that divine
power which I believed required it of me; yet not without some intervals of
discouragement, and reasoning in myself what would become of my family and
outward concerns: neither did I then know of any companion to join with me in
this great undertaking, but at times believed I should be favored with one, if
I gave up thereunto. However, I laid my concern before the monthly meeting to
which I belonged, requesting their concurrence and certificate, if upon a
weighty consideration thereof, they had unity with my concern. A certificate
was prepared, whereby I was left to my liberty to proceed; but I had not yet
heard of a companion, and greatly feared going without. Our quarterly meeting
falling quickly after, I went to it, where I soon made inquiry of my much
esteemed friend John Churchman, whether he knew of any suitable companion for
me. He readily told me that his brother-in-law, William Brown, had procured a
certificate in order for the same journey, and did not then know of any
companion, but believed one would be provided for him. This was very acceptable
to me. When William Brown and I had an opportunity of conferring together,
which was the same day, we found our concerns and views so exactly agree, and
our spirits so closely united for the service, that our hearts bowed in
thankfulness to the Lord, for his care and providence over us; believing what
we were about to engage in, was agreeable to his will, and in his counsel. It
being the meeting for ministers and elders that day, we laid our concern before
that meeting, where it appeared to be well approved, which was no small
strength to us. I did then, and hope ever shall, greatly love and highly value
the unity of the brethren; having found it no small strength and encouragement
to me, in many low and trying times, which are necessary and unavoidable in
that solemn engagement of visiting the churches; especially now in their low
declined state. It became indisputably clear to my understanding, that it is
altogether impossible to administer, in a feeling effectual manner, to people's
several states, unless we are baptized thereinto. Well adapted words, and sound
doctrine, as to the external appearance, may, without much difficulty, be
attained; seeing we have the holy scriptures, and many other good books,
containing the principles of truth, and the Christian experience of the Lord's
people: yet all this, delivered with the tongue of men or angels, will prove an
empty, fruitless sound, without the power and demonstration of the spirit of
Christ, who enables his upright-hearted ministers to search all things, yea,
the hidden mystery of iniquity, as well as the deep things of God, even as he
led his prophet Ezekiel to look through the hole in the wall, that the most
secret abomination may be brought to light, and testified against.

I took leave of my dear wife, and set out with my beforementioned companion,
the 5th of the 7th month, 1741. Passing through New Jersey, we had a meeting at
Chesterfield. We crossed Staten-Island, and came to an arm of the sea, called
the Narrows, which separates the beforementioned island from Long Island. The
wind blowing very strong, and the sea running exceeding high, we were obliged
to wait some time; the ferry-men being afraid to run the hazard of carrying us
(and diverse others who were there also waiting) over. Toward evening the wind
somewhat abating, they appeared willing to venture, if we would; and we being
desirous to proceed, agreed to go. I think we had eight or nine horses, besides
people, in the boat. They set all their heads to the wind, which proved of
singular service, in bearing up the boat against it, otherwise it did not seem
altogether improbable, but that she would have been laid on her side. We ran
over in about ten minutes, which is accounted at least two miles and an half.
We were thankful for preservation; as I believe most, or all of us, when we
were on the water, apprehended some considerable danger. We made but little
stay on Long Island, only taking Newtown meeting in our way. Then crossing the
water, to the main land in New York government, had meetings at Mamaroneck,
Long-reach, and the Purchase. From thence, having a guide provided for us, we
set out for our journey, about 200 miles through the colony of Connecticut to
Rhode Island. We met with a kind reception and entertainment for our money, at
a very low rate, amongst the high professing Presbyterians of this colony: the
case was very different formerly, when our friends were banished from thence by
a law. I remarked, as I passed along, very good order observed in their inns;
and, as far as could be discovered, the people in general appeared to be sober,
and religious in their way; far from being so vitiated and corrupt as I have
found those in the mother country, as they call it. We were attacked diverse
times by some of them on religious subjects, but, through divine favor, were
enabled to answer them in such a manner, as that I hope neither we, nor the
truth professed by us, suffered thereby. I can say with thankfulness, I never
was at a loss in giving answers to those that asked a reason of the hope that
was in me, when I had my chief dependence on the Lord to be furnished
immediately by him alone, without leaning to mine own understanding. We were
kindly received by our friends at Newport on Rhode Island, where there is a
large body; some of whom we found much hurt by differences and parties about
government affairs; which caused hard close work for us in their meetings. From
Rhode Island we went to the island of Nantucket, where is also a large body of
friends, amongst whom we had good satisfaction. We then returned to the main
land, visiting meetings as follows, viz. Sandwich, Yarmouth, Suckanesset, and
a quarterly meeting at Pembroke, where we met our friend Samuel Hopwood, who
was arrived at Boston from England a few days before, in company with Moses
Aldrich, on a religious visit. From thence we went to Boston, where we had a
meeting, there being a small number of friends in the town; but truth never
prospered much there: it seemed to me, that something of the same spirit was
yet alive, and to be felt, that formerly would have wholly extirpated our
friends, and truth as held by them, from the face of the earth, and prevailed
to inflict cruel sufferings on many of the Lord's servants, four of whom they
put to death, as is related at large in a book entitled, New England Judged,
written by George Bishop, and in Sewel's History of the People called Quakers.
Happening to walk into the prison-yard, I observed a very ancient building,
which I judged, by its appearance, might have been the same our friends had
formerly suffered very great hardships in. Upon which I asked some present, if
that was the prison their forefathers put our friends into? A woman answered,
Yes; and added, 'It was a very wicked thing of the rulers of that time, for the
land had suffered for it ever since;' or to that import. A friend of Boston
related to me, what he said he had from an ancient inhabitant of that town, who
had seen that wicked act of putting to death the four friends as above hinted,
viz. that he could well remember fine wheat growing about and near Boston; that
he never knew nor heard of any wheat blasted, or pease eaten by bugs, until
they put the Quakers to death; and that they never could raise either wheat or
pease near that town since, perhaps not within 15 or 20 miles: though I suppose
the inhabitants were so often disappointed formerly, that they have not
attempted to raise any lately, the land being generally turned to grazing, and
for raising Indian corn. They seem sensible of the extraordinary alteration;
but I suppose few of them are willing to attribute it to that cause. I had some
discourse with one of the inhabitants, as we were riding together near Boston,
concerning the abovementioned wonderful event. He pretended to argue a natural
cause for it; but I endeavored to show him, that (according to my
apprehension) those very reasons which he advanced to prove a natural cause for
the change, if they proved any thing, I thought it was directly the contrary of
what he intended, viz. he urged, that clearing away the woods might have so
changed there nature of the air, as to have produced a blasting quality therein.
But if the airy, any thing resembles the watery element herein, the freer its
course, and the less the obstruction it meets with, the more it purges and
purifies itself, and is therefore the less capable of producing hurtful
consequences either to vegetables or animals.

We passed on from thence, and had meetings at Lynn, Salem, Cachechy, Dover,
Hampton, Haverhill, Aimsbury, Newbury, Taunton, Coxett, and to Dartmouth
yearly meeting, which was held there and at Akushnet four days: it was a large
meeting. After which, we had meetings at Rochester, Freetown, Swanzey,
Leicester, Smithfield, Providence Woods, at one Harris's, Greenwich, South
Kingston, Connanicut-Island, Portsmouth, Tiverton, Little Compton, and so to
Newport again: diverse of which meetings were large. The Lord was graciously
pleased to furnish us, according to the occasion, painfully to labor amongst
the professors of truth in those parts, many of whom appeared to us ignorant,
in a sorrowful degree, of the life and nature of true religion. Our spirits
were often very deeply baptized on their account, in great travail, that Christ
might be formed in them. It was a very exercising laborious journey, but the
Lord mercifully made all up to us, by the comfortable enjoyment of his love and
peace flowing into our hearts. Glory to his name for ever!

From Newport we set our faces homewards, taking Westerly meeting in our way,
and proceeded through the colony of Connecticut to Long Island; upon which we
had meetings at Cowneck, Joseph Leatham's, Jericho, Westbury, Matinicock, and
were at the quarterly meeting at Flushing. From thence we crossed the water to
Westchester on the main; got thither some time before the hour appointed for
the meeting, and staid a while at an inn in the town. The landlady coming into
our room in a pleasant manner, said, 'I suppose you are traveling friends?' My
answer was, We are travelers, and we are friends; therefore we are traveling
friends; 'But I suppose, said she, you are preachers;' and added, 'I like your
way very well, as you come up to the command of Christ, in traveling about as
you do, more fully than our ministers: but there is something lacking with you'
What is that, said I? 'Why, said she, you should baptize as well as preach. I
then asked her what we should baptize withal. She replied, 'With water to be
sure; for it is not in the power of man to baptize with any thing else.' Upon
which, I showed her from the holy scriptures, that the primitive ministers of
Christ were so gifted, as to be able to baptize believers into the name or
power, of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; instancing, in particular, that
passage of Peter at the house of Cornelius, Acts xi. 15, 16. And as I began to
speak, the Holy Ghost fell on them, as on us at the beginning. Then remembered
I the word of the Lord, how that he said, John indeed baptized with water; but
ye shall be baptized with the Holy Ghost. It is evident from this account, that
by the effectual preaching of Peter, the Gentiles were baptized with the Holy
Ghost; and as the dispensation of God to man is the same now it was then, and
he has graciously promised to be with his ministers always to the end of the
world, and man, by nature in a fallen degenerate estate, as much involved in
sin, and a stranger to God as he was then; no good reasons can be given, why
the same powerful efficacious means are not as necessary for his recovery, by a
reconciliation with his maker, as they were at that time. The woman was very
attentive to what was said on the occasion, and seemed pretty much affected,
being quite silenced as to that subject. We invited her to our meeting; she
told us, it was what she intended, and also to prevail with her husband to go
too, if she could, but doubted being successful therein. However, she and her
husband were both at the meeting, and the Lord was graciously pleased to give
us a precious opportunity together, wherein I am persuaded she was made in some
degree sensible of that baptizing power, which, in a comfortable degree,
accompanied the ministry that day. She was tendered, and, at parting, with
tears desired us to remember her and pray for her.

After this meeting we proceeded homewards, taking three meetings in the
Jerseys as they fell in our way, viz. Elizabeth-Town, Woodbridge, and
Stonybrook. I got home the 7th of the 10th month, and found my dear wife and
family well, which was cause of mutual thankfulness; having performed near as
much in about three months, as was usually done in about four. It is very
necessary to avoid both extremes in traveling on truth's account; neither to
be overhasty, nor too dilatory: yet I have always found great satisfaction and
peace, in being as diligent and expeditious therein, as sits easy on the mind,
and the constitution of body will bear; that all may have cause to be fully
convinced, we travel not for outward pleasure, but from a necessity laid upon
us; which will certainly add considerable weight to our service, and greatly
tend, in the eyes of mankind, to maintain the credit of that truly
disinterested gospel ministry, the Lord has been pleased to raise up amongst
us as a people.

Having staid at home some time, to make necessary provision for an increasing
family, I found a concern upon my mind to visit friends a second time on
Long Island and the main land in New York government, and set out in order
thereunto, the 27th of the 8th month, 1743; being accompanied by my well
esteemed friend, John Sykes. The first meeting we attended on the island, was a
yearly meeting, which was held on a first day at Matinicock. It was a large
precious meeting; many not of our society being there, the Lord was pleased to
open the doctrine of his kingdom largely, and his glorious truth was over all;
to whom alone be the praise for ever! Notice was given at this meeting, of our
intending to be on the next first day at Westbury, not far from this place; and
that week we had meetings at Brookhaven, Islip, Bethphage, Rockaway, Henry
Willis's, and so to the beforementioned meeting on first day. Friends came to
it from diverse parts of the island, and also many people of other societies, so
that it was a very large meeting. Their expectation was greatly out after
words, which the master of our assemblies did not see meet to gratify; for we
were almost wholly shut up as to ministry; which I hope proved a profitable
lesson of instruction to many. After this meeting we crossed the water, and had
meetings at Westchester, Mamaroneck, Long-reach, and Ryewoods; we then returned
to the island, and had meetings at Flushing, Oyster-bay, Cowneck, Flushing
again, and Newtown. Having finished our service thereaway, we traveled
homewards, taking meetings as we passed along in East-Jersey, at Raliway,
Plainfield, and Woodbridge; and in West-Jersey at Upper Springfield, and
attended the quarterly meeting at Croswicks; after which I returned home, and
have to say with thankfulness, that the Lord was to me in this little journey,
strength in weakness and riches in the time of poverty; and was pleased to
conduct me safe to my dear wife and family in peace.

About the latter end of the year 1744, I found my mind drawn to visit friends
meetings in the western part of our county; and had meetings at East and West
Nottingham, Deer-Creek, New-Garden, London-Grove, Ockeshan, Kennet, and
Concord. The Lord enabled me, either to do or suffer, in this little journey,
as the same appeared to be my duty. At Ockeshan I was quite shut up as to
words, yet had peace, believing it was my business that day, as it has been
many times since, in order (as I apprehend) to lead others into silence by
example; as being the most profitable state they or I can possibly arrive at in
mutability, in order to attain a right underdanding of all religious duties.

Soon after my return home, I went into West-Jersey, to visit the following
meetings as I found my mind drawn thereunto, viz. Haddonfield, Chester,
Evesham, Mount-Holly, Ancocas, Old-Springfield, Trenton, and Burlington
quarterly meeting, in which I had good satisfaction. I think it was about this
time, I went in company with my well-beloved friend Michael Lightfoot, to the
yearly-meetings at Cecil, and Treadhaven in Maryland, wherein we were greatly
favored. He returned homewards from Maryland, but I went to some meetings in
the lower counties of Kent and Newcastle, had a meeting at Duck-Creek, and went
to the yearly meeting at Little-Creek, which was a very precious meeting,
divine goodness greatly overshadowing the same, to the tendering many hearts.
From thence I went to George's-Creek, and Newcastle, and returned home.

I have no account by me, of any other journey in the service of truth, until
the 2d month 1746, that I went in company with our worthy friend
beforementioned, to the yearly meeting at Salem, in West-Jersey; and visited
Cohansey, and Pilesgrove meeting. In the 3d month the same year, I went to
Chesterfield quarterly meeting in the Jerseys, and had meetings at Stony-Brook,
Burlington, and Haddonfield.

In the 5th month the same year, I visited the county of Bucks, and had
meetings at Middletown, Bristol, the Falls, Wrights-Town, Buckingham, and
Plumsted; taking North Wales meeting in my return home. The Lord was my sure
help and sufficiency in all these journies, affording the comfortable enjoyment
of sweet peace in my return: to whom the praise (if any service was done) is,
and I hope ever will be, freely offered up; for he alone is worthy thereof for
ever!

Soon after my return home, great and inexpressible afflictions were permitted
to befall me, and my greatly afflicted family, most of whom were seized with the
bloody flux; of which distemper I buried a daughter between four and five years
old, and was taken very ill myself of the same disorder: in which time, my dear
wife was delivered of a child, and for a week or ten days after appeared
hopeful to do well and recover; but being, in that condition, taken with the
beforementioned distemper, was in a short time removed from me by death,
leaving me three small children, the youngest about two weeks and three days
old, I found the Lord near to support my distressed drooping spirit under this
great affliction. I well remember, when my dear wife lay with great symptoms of
death upon her (having also sometimes, as I thought, intervals of hopeful
symptoms) my mind was in a very great and painful fluctuation between hope and
fear. It seemed to me then impossible to give her up for death, and to be
wholly separated from so valuable a companion; but the Lord, who formerly
rebuked the winds and allayed the ragings of the sea, was pleased, as in an
instant, to bring an holy calmness over my mind, in which there was an entire
resignation to his divine will; so that I could say, with Job of old, The Lord
gives, and the Lord takes away, blessed be his name. I did not, from that
time, look upon her as any more mine, but gave her up into his hands who had
kindly bestowed her upon me. I write this by way of encouragement to others,
that they may live in the fear of God, and give up in steady obedience to his
requirings; and then, I am well assured, they may lean upon him in all their
afflictions, and they will find to their comfort, that those things which
appear impossible with man, are possible with God: who will make hard things
easy and bitter things sweet to his humble followers. She departed this life
the 22d of the 7th month, 1746; we having lived together near nine years.

I have this short testimony to give concerning my dear deceased wife; that she
made it her early care to lead a sober and virtuous life; and I know a godly
concern remained upon her mind, to keep a conscience void of offense, both
toward God and man; being engaged (according to ability received) for the
promotion of the blessed truth, and gladly entertained the Lord's faithful
laborers; esteeming it a blessing to be favored with their company. And when
I found a concern to travel abroad in the service of truth, she freely gave me
up thereunto; having, with great satisfaction, to acknowledge the Lord's
goodness, in favoring her with true peace and contentment in my absence; and
also, in a steady trust and dependence on his providence, for our support every
way in a faithful discharge of duty.

She was favored with great calmness and resignation to the divine will, in
her last illness, either to live or die; signifying, that she did not find any
thing in the way; and that, if it pleased the Lord to remove her out of this
world, she hoped it would be a glorious change to her, and that she should go
to her little innocent babes who were gone before her; often confessing the
Lord's goodness in giving her so much ease both of body and mind* She was very
loving to those who visited her in her illness, and said, she had nothing but
love and goodwill to all. She took her leave of our children in a very tender
and affectionate manner, committing them to divine providence, and expressing
her belief, that his watchful care would be over them when she was gone. The
apprentice and servant boys were called for, at her request; she took them by
the hand, and in a loving tender manner, gave them good advice; an heavenly
sweetness accompanying her words, which much affected those present. She
discovered great nearness of affection to me, to almost the very last, and so
departed this life in sweet peace, of which I was favored, after her removal
from me, with a certain evidence to my unspeakable satisfaction; whereby I
plainly saw my great loss was her everlasting gain, and was enabled to bow in
humble acquiescence to the divine will, who knows what is best, and orders all
things in perfect wisdom.

Being apprehensive that I should be concerned to travel pretty much abroad in
the service of truth, for some years; I thought it my duty, as soon as I
conveniently could, to place my children where they might be trained up in the
way of truth, and to go myself out of business. This view or apprehension of
things, had been gradually coming upon my mind for a considerable time; but now
the weight thereof much increased; the ^ime also of entering thereupon,
appearing pretty clear to my mind: having found it my incumbent duty, not only
to wait for a full confirmation of a right call to travel abroad in the work of
the ministry, but also to know the acceptable time for engaging therein; all
which will be fully discovered by such, as with a single eye to God's glory,
desire, above all things, to be found faithful.

The first journey I entered upon, was a second visit to friends in
New England. I set out in order thereunto, the 23d of the 3d month, 1747, and
was at two meetings in Burlington next day. From thence I went to a
quarterly meeting at Chesterfield; after which I got to Flushing on Long Island
the 27th. Next day I attended their weekday meeting. The yearly meeting for
that province then came on, which held four days. It was large, and the divine
presence appeared therein to our mutual comfort and strength.

The 2d of the 4th month, being four in number, we set out for Rhode Island;
passing through the colony of Connecticut, we met with civil courteous usage,
as before, when I traveled through that country. I felt great love in my heart
toward them, in which I had a strong persuasion, if not something of a
foresight, that truth, in the Lord's time, will break forth and spread in that
colony. For though I believe superstition and bigotry are very predominant
amongst them; yet they appeared to me in general, a cleaner people in their
morals, than in many other places where I have traveled. At New Haven in that
colony, they have a college in order to train up their ministers, etc. I found
an inclination to go amongst the collegians, who gathered about me, carrying
themselves civil and respectful. I had much discourse and reasoning with them
concerning our principles: they appearing desirous of information, I answered
their questions in a concise manner; referring them to Robert Barclay's apology
(which I supposed they had in their library) for a further explanation thereof.
I could not help remarking, with pleasure, the becoming order they observed in
their questions and answers: one at once, without the least flout, jeer, or any
thing like mockery. I found work also amongst them, to remove the prejudice
some had imbibed against us as a people, on account of the wicked and frantic
behavior and conduct of one Rogers and his followers; who, I think, dwelt
about New London in that province, calling themselves Quakers; and as there
were none of the right sort, that people might see the difference, they were
ready to conclude, that all the people called Quakers were such, to the great
reproach of our society. I declared to them, that their actions were as much
abhorred by us, as they could be by any people whatever; that Rogers and his
company of ranters were no more of our society than they were of theirs; that
it would be very hard and unjust, if we, as a people, should be defamed, by
means of a crew, whom we had nothing farther to do with, than to let the world
know our abhorrence of their practices, and that they took our name upon them,
in all probability, as a cloak to cover their wickedness. These young students
readily admitted what I said to be very just and reasonable. I believe this
opportunity tended to the reputation of our society; and am sure it was to my
comfort and satisfaction; feeling the love of God flow in mine heart toward
those young men, some of whom I did not think far from the kingdom. I called
again to see them in my return, and gave them some books, viz. two letters
written by Samuel Crisp, giving reasons why he joined with the people called
Quakers; a Treatise on Baptism, by William Dell; and I think some others, but
do not now particularly remember; which they received very kindly, still
carrying themselves respectful to me. Now I am on these remarks, I cannot well
omit taking notice of the great difference observed by me since in the nation
of England, at the two great universities, in the behavior of the students,
whom they pretend to be training up for gospel ministers, and for some other
employments to get a living by. Oh! what floutings, jeerings, mockings, and
deriding of that which is serious and humble like true religion! as though to
work out our salvation with fear and trembling, were not now the way to the
kingdom of God; but that a sufficient assurance, to scoff at and ridicule what
in the primitive church and by the people of God in all ages, was accounted
religious, were now the distinguishing mark of true Christians, and ministers
of the gospel. How have they frequently broken in upon our peaceable quiet
meetings, like the raging foaming waves of a troubled sea, casting up mire and
dirt! Such a conduct gives sober discerning people, cause to look upon them as
a nest of unclean birds; who, instead of promoting true religion, may be
instrumental to subvert it. I have often wondered, seeing the conduct of many
of these pretended gospel ministers is obviously so very bad, not only whilst
they are learning the trade of preaching, but also in their following the same
for a livelihood; how it comes to pass that the people bear them. One reason
that appears, is, the laws of the land are much in their favor; but the
principal reason is, that people, in almost a general way, are strangers to the
life and power of true religion; being satisfied with a profession thereof, and
having itching ears, heap to themselves teachers; erroneously supposing the
principal part of religion to consist in performing what they call religious
duties* as hearing sermons, prayers, and singing psalms, etc. some of the
hearers being so dark as to say, such a one is a good teacher, though, perhaps,
a drunkard, a swearer, or guilty of other evils. It is plain, that the strength
and security of such ministers, is in the darkness and ignorance of people's
minds. We do not read in the Revelations, of the locusts coming upon the earth,
until the smoke arose out of the bottomless pit and darkened the sun and air;
and whenever the children of men shall, in a general way, turn to the light of
the Sun of Righteousness in their own hearts, mystery Babylon, the mother of
harlots, must fall, and these her merchants will be wholly rejected. All their
abominable craft will be fully discovered. Great will be their torment, fear,
and distress in that day! The Lord Almighty hasten the time for his own name's
sake, when all craft violence, and shedding of human blood may be at an end;
and righteousness cover the earth, as water covers the sea!

Some of the inhabitants of New Haven signified their desire that we should
appoint a meeting there, but we did not find sufficient strength and courage to
answer their request; so proceeded on our journey, and got to Newport, on
Rhode Island, the 8th of the 7th month. Here we were kindly received by
friends, and attended their yearly meeting, which begun at Portsmouth, where it
held only one day, being a meeting for worship; after which, the meetings for
worship and business were held four days at Newport: they were very large and
divinely favored, so that those who depended on the Lord alone for wisdom and
strength, were enabled to come up in the discharge of their respective duties,
to their peace and comfort. When this great meeting was over, I had meetings at
Tiverton, Little Compton, Accoakeset, and Aponyganset, on first day, and was at
their monthly meeting on second-day. Next morning, about eight o'clock, I went
on board a vessel bound to the island of Nantucket, John Hanes master, where we
arrived about one o'clock next morning. I staid upon this island about six
days, and was at their yearly and monthly-meetings; having good satisfaction
therein. I returned in the same vessel, and landed on the continent in about
six hours; had a meeting at Falmouth, and went to their monthly meeting at
Sandwich, and attended the quarterly meeting which was held there. Here I met
with diverse friends from our parts who were on the service of truth. We had
very close searching laborious service amongst them, as things were very low
and much out of order; in part owing to the neglect of some members whose minds
had been too much taken up with earthly things to watch over the flock, as
those who must give an account. We endeavored to lay the weight of things more
closely upon the active members, and lest them to the Lord's dealings; knowing,
that although Paul may plant, and Apollos may water, it is he alone that can
give the increase.

I went from thence to Pembroke, where I had a meeting; and through Boston to
Lynn, where I had a meeting also; thence to Salem monthly meeting, and returned
to Boston, and had two meetings there, being first day. From thence I went
directly to Rhode Island, and had meetings at Portsmouth, and Newport, to good
satisfaction: the Lord giving power and dominion, by the blessed efficacy of
his pure word of life, over all of a contrary nature to itself, whereby I was
enabled to clear my mind, to my great ease and comfort. I then returned
homewards with much satisfaction and peace of mind; taking meetings in my way
at Connanicut-Island, and South Kingston; so proceeded on my journey through
Connecticut, and lodged at New Haven. I spent part of a day in conversation,
and reasoning with some well disposed people, to satisfaction. I also visited
the students as before hinted; after which I proceeded on my journey to
Long-Reach, where I had a meeting, and went to the yearly meeting at
West-Chester. From thence I traveled homewards, having, as heretofore, cause
to be humbly thankful to the fountain of all goodness, who was near to help as
the eye was single to him, in all proving times, whether in heights or depths;
and as he was waited upon, gave wisdom and utterance. I desire he alone may for
ever have the praise and glory, if any good is done; as there is no good but
what proceeds from him. I had not been long returned from the beforementioned
journey, when I laid before the monthly meeting I belonged to, a concern which
had been upon my mind some years, to visit the churches in diverse parts of
Great Britain and Ireland; desiring their concurrence and certificate, if, upon
weighty deliberation, they found unity with my proposal; intimating the time
for entering upon that solemn undertaking had appeared to me for some time to
be drawing near, and that I should look out for a passage before the end of the
year. A certificate was prepared, setting forth their unity with my service in
the ministry, and with my intended journey; desiring my labors therein might
tend to the edification of the churches where my lot should be cast, and for my
return to them again in peace; also expressing that I had settled my outward
affairs to the satisfaction of that meeting: for I had acquainted friends how I
had settled them, as I thought it concerned them to be satisfied in that, as
well as other things; it being my earnest desire to have the full concurrence
of my brethren in so great an undertaking.

I took some little turns in visiting adjacent meetings; and before the
yearly meeting came on, I went to North Wales meeting, and about twenty miles
further up the country to Richland, in order to take my leave of some friends
and relations, as well as to visit that meeting. In my return homewards I was
taken very ill of what is there called the yellow fever; because the patient is
thereby turned as yellow as if he had the jaundice. I reached to the house of
my worthy friend, Thomas Foulke, who, with his good wife and children, were as
affectionately kind to me as if I had been one of their nearest relations. But
this malignant fever greatly increased upon me. My sister was sent for, and
several doctors were employed. Those who saw me concluded all was over, and
that I must depart out of this life. I look little notice of any thing; yet I
think I was for the most part sensible, and could perceive I was given up for
death, by those who had the care of me. Once they thought I was near drawing my
last breath; they therefore drew a pillow from under my head, and unbuttoned
the neckband of my shirt, out of kindness, to make the last struggle between
life and death the easier. For my part, I could not see how it would go with
me; but had not much, if any apprehension of being taken away by death at that
time. This sore illness happening in the yearly meeting time, which was held
that year at Philadelphia, I requested the certificate I had obtained of the
monthly meeting, for my intended journey into England, etc. might be laid
before the yearly meeting of ministers and elders (as is usual in such cases)
for the concurrence of friends; and if they found freedom and unity therewith,
to signify the same to the brethren in England, by an indorsement thereon. It
was laid before the said meeting by my good friend Michael Lightfoot, and the
meetings free concurrence obtained; it was signed by a very great number of
friends. This was done when many thought there would be no occasion for a
certificate, as they fully expected it was near over with me, as to this world.
But I was not easy to miss so good an opportunity of having a concern of so
great importance solidly weighed by such a substantial body of friends; as I
was not likely to have such another opportunity, if the Lord should be pleased
to raise me up again. This sore illness brought me very low indeed, so that
when the fever abated, and I was fit to be helped out of bed, I could not stand
alone; yet I recovered to admiration; being able, in about a week, to ride home
in a chaise, about twenty-six miles; which I bore very well. On my return home,
my friends and neighbors came to see me, greatly rejoiceing at my recovery,
which they did not expect from what some had seen and others had heard, for
several of them visited me in my illness. This was a time of deep probation to
me both inwardly and outwardly; being tried, as I sometimes have been when
great weakness of body has been upon me, with sore and distressing poverty of
spirit; not having distinct satisfaction and clearness in my own mind how it
was with me as to my inward condition, judging an evidence of peace and comfort
from the holy spirit would be a wonderful support at such times of bodily
affliction; and have found it so, when it has pleased the Lord to favor me
therewith. But he knows what is best and most suitable for us; and therefore I
find by experience, it is the safest way to resign our wills to his holy will;
as we must, for the most part, whilst in this militant state, walk by faith,
and not by sight. I am fully persuaded such trying dispensations of divine
providence to us, are greatly profitable for our growth in the way that is well
pleasing to him; and if patiently borne, will, in his time, be a means to work
for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.

Soon after my health was restored, an ancient friend whose name was Peter
Davis, from New England, came to Philadelphia in order to take a passage for
England, and our friend Thomas Gawthrop having performed a religious visit to
friends on the continent of America, intending to embark shortly for the same,
with Isaac Greenleaf a friend on trade, I joined them; all agreeing to take our
passage in a new ship bound for London.

One thing I would just remark, that some friends, and, as I understood, some
others also, taking notice how providentially public friends had been
preserved during the war which was then with France and Spain, so that none of
them had been taken by the enemy, did presume thereon; and would say There is
no need to insure goods in that ship, as so many public friends are going in
her, she will doubtless go safe. I much disliked this (as I thought)
injustifiable confidence, seeing the judgments of the Lord are a great deep,
being unsearchable, and his ways past our finding out. It becomes us in all our
undertakings, to commit ourselves and all we have into his hands, in humble
resignation to do or suffer whatever his wisdom may point out or permit to fall
upon us, for the trial of our faith and patience; as his mercy, power, and
goodness are as conspicuous in preserving, defending, and carrying us through
great and uncommon probations to his glory, consequently to our own advantage
in the end, as in wholly exempting us from them. Even Job had no cause to
complain of his unparallelled afflictions, when they were over and he saw how
greatly he had profited thereby. A friend said to me before we embarked, he did
not pretend to determine whether we should be taken or not; but however that
might happen, he did believe some friends in our station would be taken: not
only to check that unwarrantable confidence in some, both friends and others,
but he also apprehended, a service might arise from such being cast amongst
those dark people, though against their will. I did not pretend any assurance
in my own mind, of preservation out of the enemies hands; but was made willing
to commit my soul, body, and all that I had unto the Lord, as into the hands of
a faithful Creator, not doubting the sufficiency of his power for preservation
in every condition of life.

On the 30th of the 9th month 1747, the beforementioned friends, who were to
be my companions upon the mighty ocean, set out from Philadelphia in order to
embark at Chester, in company with many friends, and called for me at my house
in Derby, being the direct road. Myself, and a considerable number of friends
and neighbors joined them, and proceeded to Chester that night; where, at the
house of our ancient friend Grace Lloyd, we had a solemn meeting. Next day,
being the 1st of the 10th month, about two o'clock in the afternoon, we took
leave of friends in great love and tenderness, and went on board the ship,
which fell down the river that evening a little lower than Newcastle. Next day
in the evening, we came to an anchor near Reedy-Island, where we were detained
by a great storm of wind and rain until the 5th in the morning, when we set
sail with a fair wind, taking our departure from the Capes of the Delaware
about six the same evening. The wind continued fair for the most part, though
very strong, and a following sea running exceeding high until the 18th; when,
according to their calculation, we had run about two-thirds of our passage;
seldom having more than a foresail set, and that sometimes reefed, and at other
times double reefed. As we had such a high following sea, it was thought the
ship was ahead of their reckoning. From the 18th to the 23d the wind continued
pretty fair, but more moderate than before. Then it turned about to the
eastward and blew exceeding hard, with a very high sea, until the 29th, in
which time we lay to, and drove about withersoever the wind and waves could
carry us. We could get very little or nothing forward, but were exceedingly
tossed. This was indeed a very trying time; the motion of the waves was so
violent, that though she was a strong new ship, she was beat upon with so much
force as to make her crack from end to end in a shocking manner, as if she
would have been broken to pieces. I then thought those in my situation had good
reason to know well what they were about, and what they exposed themselves to
such dangers for; that they had great need to have the mighty Ruler of the sea
and land for their friend. For if he had been pleased to withdraw his
protection, there was only about a two-inch plank between us and eternity,
which was to me very awful at that time to think of; for I was not without my
tossings and combats of mind, at times, during these outward probations. The
29th proved a fine day, so that they had a good observation, and judged we were
then about an hundred and fifty leagues from the Land's-End of England. Next
day, being the 30th of the 10th month, Thomas Gawthrop having had a very
restless painful night, by troublesome dreams, etc. had some expectation of our
being taken (as he afterward intimated) he stepped upon deck about eight
o'clock in the morning, and immediately espied a sail upon our windward
quarter, giving us chase. He quickly raised the careless captain, who ought to
have been looking out before that time, and to have watched more narrowly than
he did, considering the trust reposed in him. The captain, when he perceived we
were chased, appeared much concerned, giving the ship up for taken in his mind
already. We urged him to put out all the sail he could crowd, and to exert his
utmost endeavor to escape, offering to assist all in our power, as we often
had done before, being very poorly manned; in part owing to the sailors
unwillingness to go into ships bound to London, lest they should be pressed on
board men of war. It happened to be a moderate wind, so that we could have
borne all the sail belonging to the ship; but through neglect before, neither
topgallant-sails nor steering-sails were in a condition to be set; neither
would the captain be prevailed upon to have a reef taken out of the mainsail.
The vessel was very badly steered, as the French remarked when they had taken
us. The captain ordered her to be close hauled to the wind, vainly hoping, as
he intimated, we should get to the windward of them, being deeply laden. But
this was very ill judged, if really the effect of judgment, as the way of the
ship was thereby much hindered to what it would have been if she had gone
large, taking the strength of the wind. Notwithstanding this, we held the
privateer in chase about nine hours. She came up with us about five o'clock in
the evening, and fired a gun under French colors; upon which our people
lowered their colors and topsail, by way of submitting to them. They hoisted
out a small boat to sea, the sea running high, in which came the second captain
and a lieutenant with seven or eight sailors, to take possession of a very
valuable prize. She was a snow privateer belonging to Bayonne, carrying ten
carriage guns, and about one hundred men, commanded by one Peter Garalon. As
the boat was rowing toward us, the people therein made such a dark, mean, and
contemptible appearance, that our poor sailors cried out in a very mournful
affecting manner, We shall all be used very bad and cruelly, like dogs, for
they are a pitiful crew, and no officer amongst them: but in this they were
mistaken. For my part, the Lord being exceeding gracious to my soul, by the
blessed support and solacing comfort of his holy spirit, all that day I was
quite calm and easy: all fear of the enemy or whatever I might have to pass
through in such a time of trial, was wholly taken away for the present; my mind
being filled with humble resignation to the divine will; yet was willing, as I
thought it a point of prudence, to use endeavors for escaping out of their
hand if it were practicable.

The beforementioned second captain of the privateer, whose name was Andrew De
St. Andrew, boarded us with a naked cutlass in his hand, eight or nine men
following him. He spoke to us in good English very cheerfully, saying to this
effect, 'Your servant gentlemen; it is the fortune of the war, although it is
ours to day, it may be yours tomorrow; and promised good usage. He then
ordered the captain, mate, and sailors, except two, and we who were cabin
passengers, being ten in number, to go on board the privateer; upon which the
boat was loaded and went off. He took notice that we were of the people called
Quakers; by which he gave us to understand that he was not altogether a
stranger to us as a people. The chief reason of sending away those on board a
prize being for their own security, lest there might be danger of their rising
and recovering the ship again, we conceived some hopes, from the known
peaceable principles we profess, to be so far indulged as to have remained on
board the prize; and therefore did not incline to go with the first boat-full;
making use of that space of time in an earnest solicitation to remain there,
having much better accommodation than we could reasonably expect on board the
privateer; but all the arguments we could advance seemed ineffectual. When the
boat returned, he still urged the orders he had from the head captain to send
us all on board: upon which I stepped over the side of the vessel, taking hold
of the hand-rope, with a design to go into the boat: when there, it appeared to
me exceedingly hazardous, the sea running very high. I turned about and looked
this French captain full in the face, and expressed myself in as moving terms
as I was capable of, concerning the danger he was about exposing us to
unnecessarily; which, through divine favor, took such impression upon him,
that he took me by the hand and drew me into the ship again, saying, You shall
stay here to night however. He had before demanded the keys of our chests,
under pretense it was to prevent their falling into the hands of the common
men, whereby they might plunder our chests; but the true reason was, that he
and the other officers might do it themselves first; which they did after we
were gone to-bed that night, returning our keys next morning, with large
promises of protection and good usage; which, every thing considered, they in a
good degree fulfil^^d. We could not help looking upon it as a kind providence,
which made way for our remaining on board the prize; having there the free use
of our private stores, and being better waited upon than before we were taken,
having two cabin boys for that purpose. Captain Andrew, to give him his due,
carried himself respectfully to us; frequently filling our plates plentifully,
though he might, at times, have less left for himself; and when he wanted any
liquors or other provisions out of our chests, he would ask us for them in a
submissive manner, as if he had no authority to demand. This kind carriage of
his gained much upon us, to place some confidence in him, which in the end he
made use of to his own advantage, by craftily getting from us to the amount of
about L 200 sterling, the particulars of which would be too tedious to relate.
After the French had got possession of our ship, they put her in a fine trim
for sailing, so that it was plain she could outsail the privateer that took her
by much. Captain Andrew informed us, we were, when they took us, about eighty
leagues from Cape-Clear in Ireland, and about one hundred and twenty-five
leagues from the Land's-End of England.

The next day came on board the chief captain, to examine the cargo, etc. He
made this Andrew captain of the prize, of which we were glad, as he could speak
English well, and from what we could conceive of him, there was reason to
expert favorable usage under his care; which was also promised us by the head
captain. They found the cargo so valuable that it was concluded the privateer
should keep us company, in order to convoy us safe to some port of France or
Spain. Now having new masters, we had a new course to steer; but the wind set
against us, blowing very hard and stormy. We lay to often, and were exceedingly
tossed for the most part, for about two weeks, and did not in that time think
ourselves any nearer Bayonne than when we were taken. They wanted more prey,
therefore espied and chased several vessels, who had the good success to get
away from them. We were once chased ourselves, by a fine large ship; they took
her to be an English man of war, and appeared to be greatly alarmed; but when
she came up, they found her to be a privateer belonging to the town called St.
Maloes, carrying twenty carriage guns and about three hundred men. We left the
privateer that took us, a great way during this chase, our ship being fixed
upon at a great distance, for the best booty.

It was the 22d of the 11th month before we saw any land, and when we did, they
proved much mistaken, thinking themselves sixty or seventy leagues nearer
Bayonne than they, upon better information, found. We had pleasant sailing near
the land on the Spanish Coast which borders on the Bay of Biscay; it being high
land, afforded considerable delight to us, as we had been long confined to the
sight of water only. The 24th in the dusk of the evening, we had near entered
the port called St. Sebastian, when the wind chopped in right ahead and drove
us out to sea again. The privateer got into a place called Port-Passage, about
a league from thence, next morning early. But we, being forced farther off by
contrary winds, had great difficulty to get in that day, being for many hours
towed by fifteen boats, in which were one hundred and fifty men laboring at
their oars. They appeared very anxious to get our vessel into some port, as
they feared some English ship cruizing in the Bay, might call them to an
account. We poor captives went on shore the 26th in the morning, being glad and
thankful to have the opportunity of setting our feet again on firm land,
although in an enemy's country; for, setting aside the great affliction of
being taken by an enemy, it had been an exceeding rough boisterous trying
passage, of about eight weeks. It was very mild spring-like weather there,
though about the middle of winter. We diverted ourselves with walking about in
the day, and lodged aboard at night, whilst we staid in that small place, which
was till the 29th, when horses were provided for us to travel by land, about
thirty miles, to Bayonne; the doctor of the privateer being all the guard and
guide we had. There was a very plentiful dinner provided for us at a seaport
town in France called St. Jean-de-Luz. I was not at all pleased with the
forward wanton carriage of the women; such as I had never seen before: I
reproved them, but some, by way of excuse, said, the principal thing they
intended thereby, was to cheer up our spirits in our captivated state; yet I
could hardly believe their design was so innocent.

We had been told by Captain Andrew, that on our arrival at Bayonne, we that
were cabin-passengers should immediately have a parole of honor granted us;
but we did not find it so. Being brought before the commissary, he ordered us
to be taken into the castle; yet we had the liberty there to hire rooms, with
beds in them (such as they were,) and to have provisions for our money; of
which we soon found we had need to be well stored, as they had a notable knack
of getting it from us; for we could not buy any thing ourselves, but all must
come through the hands of such as knew how to make a property of us. I never
knew any people so thoroughly furnished with artful ways to get money, as the
French. Their tongues were very much at command, and they could use them with
great wit and address in order to gain our good opinion of them, but I never
perceived they meant any thing else in the main thereby, but advantage to
themselves; and therefore, saw it necessary to be as much as I could on my
guard. We were very much imposed upon on account of provisions, and our money
went very fast. Not being quite without fear, if they should discover we had
sufficient, some other way might be found out to get it from us, we made
inquiry whether any could be found willing to supply us with money, and take
our draught upon London, allowing them a premium. We soon found they were very
willing to do it, merely upon the credit of our society; such reputation has
the real possession of truth gained our friends, far and wide; but, to our
sorrow, the bare profession of it, in diverse mournful instances of late, has
produced quite the contrary effect; so that there has been reason to fear, the
great credit gained by our worthy predecessors for justice and punctuality, is
in danger of being, in some measure, lost to the society, by the misconduct of
some of their descendants. They told us, that diverse of the people called
Quakers had been amongst them, but they were not like us; that they looked upon
us to be precise stiff Quakers; but those who had been there before, behaved in
a complaisant manner, not sticking at the punctilio of the hat, etc. We let
them know, that our behavior in those respects, was no other than what is
consistent with our principles; that we could not answer for those who were
hypocrites, professing one thing and practicing another. We could discover,
that upon all occasions, they seemed to have a greater dependence on our
veracity, than that of the rest of our company; and upon the whole, showed us
full as much, if not more kindness. Our confinement and usage in the castle
grew very disagreeable to us; we therefore took the opportunity, when the
commissary came (which we understood was usually once a week) to lay before him
the treatment we met with, and to request our liberty upon parole. He pretended
to make some difficulty of it, and we found many then in the castle had been
endeavoring some time to procure that liberty and could not. But when we
discovered danger of being put off, as they had been, we pressed it upon him
with more earnestness. Hereupon we had a parole of honor granted for upwards
of twenty. The place fixed upon for our residence was Dax, an ancient town
about forty miles up Bayonne River. We were sent thither by water, and were in
the boat all night, having very disagreeable company, the worst of whom were
English and Scotch. These had laid a scheme to prevent our being admitted into
the same boat, which was very ungrateful in them, as they knew we had been the
principal instruments of procuring that liberty, especially for some of them.
Without doubt, their reason for that attempt was, that they might enjoy the
intended frolic, without any rebuke or interruption from us. We bore their
filthy obscene discourse and behavior for some time; but, at length, being
exceedingly burdened, Thomas Gawthrop and I were concerned to reprove them very
severely, desiring them to consider, what the French people in the boat could
think of those who called themselves Protestants. Some of them seemed at first
to retort, but the weight of our spirits came over them; we being on truth's
side, which is strongest of all, they were soon overcome and silenced. From
that time we kept them at a distance, not looking upon them worthy of our
notice in a way of intimacy, so that when we came to Dax, we separated from
them, boarding by ourselves. On our arrival there, we were brought before the
governor of the castle; and our manner of appearing before our superiors being
different from that of others, with which we did not expect he was acquainted,
and might probably put an unfavourable construction upon; we therefore desired
our interpreter to inform him, that we did not stand before him covered in
contempt, or any ways in disrespect, it being our principle and practice so to
appear before our superiors in our own nation. His answer was to this effect,
viz. 'I am not at all offended with their appearance; I know something of those
people.' He gave us the liberty of the town and country around; and we got
pretty good quarters, and lived much more to our minds than in Bayonne Castle.

This town is now a mean place, but there are still remains of its ancient
greatness. I find by history, it was once the capital of Aquitaine, and was
then called Aqua Solis, from its hot waters. At one place I found the heat so
surprizingly great, that I could not bear my fingers in the water a quarter of
a minute. This water was enclosed with stone walls of about twenty yards
square, having brass or iron cocks or spouts, to convey water for the use of
the inhabitants; it answering the purpose of boiling water for washing linen,
etc. There arises a steam or smoke therefrom, like unto a vast furnace or
lime-kiln. We being there in Lent-time (as they call it) were told the priests
were uneasy at our being indulged with flesh, and that they requested the
governor to give orders for preventing it. We were informed that he turned very
short upon them, and said, 'I will give no such orders. What have they to do
with your Lent? Cannot you be contented to keep it yourselves?' He carried
himself very civilly to us, and came once in person to invite us to a
bull-bating, offering, as we were strangers, to prefer us to the best place for
the purpose of seeing, which was the balcony in the front of his house. We
acknowledged his civility, but at the same time gave him to understand, we did
not allow ourselves to attend such kind of diversions. I understood they bait
bulls there with men instead of dogs; but I did not see it.

There are many worship-houses, and two nunneries in Dax. Their clergy, of
various orders, swarm like locusts, who fleece the people to that degree, that
it may be truly said, of much the greater part, they are in a state of abject
poverty and vassal-age; stupidly devoted to follow these blind guides
withersoever they think proper to lead them, not daring to judge at all for
themselves in matters of religion. Oh, happy England! Oh, land blessed with
liberty! What have thou not to answer for, if right use be not made of so great
a privilege?

We went one day to visit and converse with the nuns, which we did through
large iron grates, by an interpreter. They behaved themselves very civil,
courteous, and free in discourse. One of the sisters lay dead in an apartment.
The corpse was laid in a coffin dressed in black, having twelve wax candles
lighted and set in silver candlesticks, six on each side, and some at her feet,
and a black cross fixed between her fingers on her breast, as if she was
looking at it. Several of the nuns were about her, some kneeling, and others
sitting on the floor, with books in their hands, praying for the soul departed,
as we conjectured. One was ringing a bell, perhaps it was what they call a holy
bell, that at the sound thereof all the evil spirits might be chased out of the
soul's way in its flight toward the other world. We went from this to the
other nunnery, but could not be immediately admitted to see the nuns, as they
were employed in singing psalms or some kind of religious songs, which we could
hear at a considerable distance: it was thought by some of the company, the
finest music they ever heard; but I neither am, nor desire to be, a judge
thereof. We stood in an open entry before a fine chapel, but did not go into
it, though the door was open; for indeed I had no freedom to go into any of
their idols temples, yet we could see many upon their knees praying, some
before one image, and some before another. As we waited here, not intending nor
expecting to give any offense, it being an open entry (but I suppose it was
hallowed, or consecrated, as they call it, though not discovered to be so by
us,) there came a monk to us in a great passion, and talked very fast in
French. We saw he was angry, but did not understand what he said, and therefore
asked the interpreters, having, I think, two with us then. They told us, he
said we had polluted that holy place, viz. in keeping our hats on, inasmuch as
their Lord God was there; that if we had no more manners, they had a way to
teach us better. We then departed, being deprived of the intended visit to the
nuns, but that was no great disappointment. Their crosses, either of wood or
stone, are very numerous, being erected in all the cross roads, and also at
many places in and about their towns and villages; on some of which images are
fastened, with an imitation of the crown of thorns, the reed, spear, and
sponge. That the people's great poverty may more fully appear, I shall give a
short description of the shoes most of them wear, who wear any sort: they are
wholly made of wood, being hollowed out for the feet, except a piece of leather
about three inches broad, across the instep. They appear very inconvenient to
walk in, as they do not yield at all to the feet. I am persuaded there is not
one in sixty, in that part of France, who wear any other sort of shoes. Many
wagon loads of these shoes are brought to Dax market every week.

The 21st of the 12th month, a messenger from Bayonne brought us the agreeable
news of a cartel-ship from England being arrived at Port-Passage. An order came
soon after for our return, and that we might be ready to embark therein the
24th. We hired a boat for that purpose, and went in her to Bayonne, being on
the water all night. It was very cold snowy weather, and I suffered much
thereby, taking a great cold, which I did not get over for many days. What
still added to our distress, was the commissary's receiving us very roughly,
and ordering us into the castle again. I know of no reason he had for being in
that ill-natured disposition; neither do I remember he gave us any. I was ready
to imagine it was only to furnish a pretense to get something into his own
pocket by our confinement. One thing made me think he had a feeling in the
profits there, was his unwillingness to give us and others, a parole. However,
when it appeared that we must go to prison again, the captain of the
beforementioned cartel ship being present, demanded our liberty; which I
suppose the commissary durst not deny him; by which means we had the liberty of
the town a few days, until matters were settled for our traveling toward the
ship.

One thing I am not willing to omit, as it will be a specimen of the
unaccountable superstition and idolatry of those people amongst whom our lot
was cast, Thomas Gawthrop and I taking a walk, as we often did, into the
fields, came to a small building, which was somewhat in the nature of a
conduit, as there issued out at one end, spouts of water, over which was
enclosed, in network, an image whose head seemed as if cut off or severed from
his body. It appeared to be a fine spring of water; but that which came most
under our notice was, to observe so many worshipping this water and beheaded
image: I suppose not less than fifteen on their knees, some much nearer
thereunto than others. We inquired the meaning thereof; but none understood
English, nor we French enough to converse one with another; so that we still
remained in the dark, until by making inquiry in the town, we received the
following account, viz. that it is St. Leon's well, who is the titular saint of
Bayonne. That this Leon was the first gospel missionary sent thither in the
pagan times, and that he was greatly persecuted by them, and last of all
beheaded on a hill above that place where the well now is. That when his head
was severed from his body it rolled down the hill and fell upon this place,
upon which there immediately issued out a spring or fountain of water. That it
is now the constant practice of confessors to send people to do penance at St.
Leon's well; who must fix themselves on their knees nearer or farther off
according to the nature of their crimes.

When our captain had fully settled things with the commissary relative to us,
we proceeded on our way toward the ship as far as the town called St.
Jean-de-Luz, where we abode some time, taking up our quarters at a large inn.
One day when at dinner we received a visit from two friars, one of whom being
an Irishman could speak English well; the other had very little English. We
understood the design of their coming was to use endeavors in their pretended
catholic spirit, for our conversion, by bringing us into the bosom of their
church, out of which, they say, there is no salvation. This Irish friar soon
began to ask questions, which, for a little while, several of us answered; but
the dispute seemed too much in a promiscuous and scattered way, which was not
quite satisfactory; neither did it appear altogether fair for so many to engage
with one; for the other friar could be of little use in argument, as he had not
the language. I therefore finding my mind pretty much opened and warmly
engaged, entered into a close dispute with him, which my companions observing,
left it to us. I soon found that his main support in argument was the authority
and infallibility of their church, but more especially of the Pope; I therefore
told him it was altogether fruitless to support arguments against me, by an
authority I had no faith in; but seeing he and I both allowed the holy
scriptures to be of divine authority, it would be much better for us to back
our arguments by that authority only. It was exceeding difficult to bring him
to this, as I believe he clearly foresaw I should there be too many for him:
which fell out accordingly, to that degree (the Lord being near, opening my
understanding) that the poor man was so confounded he knew not what to answer,
nor how to support an argument thereby; his memory scarce serving him to quote
one scripture passage truly. This I sometimes helped him in, repeating the
passages he aimed at, to see what use he could make of them; but I found him as
deficient in applying, as he was in remembering the holy scriptures; which
induced me to think that even their clergy, so called, find those sacred
writings make so little for the support of their religion, that they do not
much regard them. The dispute continued most of the afternoon; in which I must
say he carried himself with good nature and civility, at least in appearance.
He would sometimes express his wonder at my memory; saying, he thought I could
repeat all the scriptures by heart from the beginning of Genesis to the end of
the Revelations. But I knew who graciously helped me; for I did not go against
him in my own strength, the Lord being with me in such a manner that I thought
I should not have been afraid to have engaged with an hundred of their most
crafty priests; and therefore I did, and do offer the thanksgiving and praise
to him alone who is eternally worthy! Toward the conclusion he asked me what I
thought of their eucharist. I felt (as I thought) a snare in his question,
whereupon I asked him whether he intended to ensnare me by that question; which
he did not offer to deny. I was, however, enabled to answer him in such a
manner as that he could take no advantage thereof, to bring me into trouble. I
often cried unto the Lord to preserve us in maintaining our testimony,
agreeably to what he knew was right in his sight; and at the same time to be
exceeding watchful over our own spirits, lest they should be too much heated
and raised in a false zeal, with indignation against the detestable idolatry
and abominations of those dark countries, that we might not thereby imprudently
put ourselves into their power; not doubting if the Lord required any service
of us amongst them, he would support us therein, for he has all power in
heaven and earth. The friars took their leave of us in the evening, signifying
they would visit us again; but they never did, nor I hardly believe they
intended it.

From this place we went into that part of Spain where we first landed, and
staid there and at Sebastian several weeks for the cartel ship's sailing. The
Spaniards are much more disagreeable to live amongst than the French. The men
appeared to us in a general way, poor, proud, and exceeding lazy; filled with
high conceits of themselves, both in a civil and religious sense. They
sauntered about, walking with their cloaks over their shoulders, looking upon
us with contempt, as we neither could bow to their pride nor to their religion;
nor could we look upon them in a favorable light, when we observed what slaves
they made of their wives and of the women in general, who are employed in all
or most of the drudgery, even in rowing their boats. I have seen near the two
last mentioned places in their ferries, and other business on the water, to
speak within compass, more than a hundred women thus employed; and scarcely a
man is seen to touch an oar, unless he goes a fishing; and then his wife, or
some woman, must bring his cloak or sword to the waterside against he comes on
shore, and carry the fish home on her head, while he walks in state to the
town. This one of the friends who were with me assured me he saw. I am far from
envying our English women their happiness; I think such indulgent usage is due
to the tenderness of their sex every where; yet I think that were they to see
even what I have seen, as above hinted, they would be very thankful to the
Author of their being for casting their lots in England, or the English
dominions. And indeed, considering some difficulties the sex labors under,
which the men are exempt from, such as childbearing, nursing, etc. which
render them very unsuitable for such laborious employment, it discovers great
cruelty in the men to impose it upon them.

The darkness of popery seems greater here than in France; although it may be
seen and felt there beyond all expressions. Oh the pain and distress of soul I
was almost continually under by the muddy rivers of Babylon in those lands of
darkness! the harp being indeed, as it were, hung upon the willows. No sweet
melody nor song of Zion could be echoed forth (the Lord knows) under the
power of the king of the bottomless-pit, who rules in the mystery of iniquity.
Yet so it must remain, until that Almighty arm of power that cut Rahab and
wounded the dragon, is pleased to arise and put on strength, that he may turn
and overturn; pouring forth the phials of his wrath upon the seat of the beast
and false prophet, thereby making the scarlet whore of Babylon desolate, and
burning her flesh with fire; that the nations may no more be intoxicated with
the abominations of the wine of her fornications See Psalm 137. Isaiah 51. and
Revelations.
. May the Lord, for his oppressed seed's sake, hasten that day, so that the
people and saints of the Most High may obtain the kingdom, and the earth enjoy
her sabbath, when sweet incense in every place on the Lord's footstool may be
offered up to him with gracious acceptance Daniel 7.
.

I took notice of Port-Passage that a person went about the street every
evening tinkling a hand-bell, as if he had something to sell, yet I could not
see any thing he had, which made me ask the reason of it: I had told, that it
was to remind people of the souls in purgatory, that they might pray for them.
The maid of the house where we boarded brought a crucifix, desiring us to kiss
it; which some of the English then present did, to please her; but upon my
refusal, and withal giving her a gentle rebuke for offering me such an affront,
she alarmed the house with complaints what a bad Christian I was for refusing
to embrace that piece of brass. Having soon after to pass through an entry, I
found two men, I suppose lying in wait for me. One of them came slily behind my
back, laying fast hold of both my arms, in order to confine me, whilst the
other brought the image to my face; intending, no doubt, to force me into that
which they could not bring me voluntarily into. I soon perceived what they were
about, and presently freed myself from their (to me) very odious design;
showing them, by a stern countenance, and some sharp expressions, that I was
much displeased with their uncivil treatment.

I cannot fully account for the cause, but whilst in Spain, I felt at times, or
at least I thought so, something like snares laid to do us mischief. However
that was, the Lord graciously preserved us, and gave ability to maintain our
testimony, as far as he was pleased to require of us in those countries; which
was chiefly in feeling the distressing weight of death and darkness that covers
the holy seed sown in the hearts of mankind, and which is pressed down by their
superstition, idolatry, and wickedness as a cart is pressed that is full of
sheaves. It as surely groans for deliverance as Israel did under Egyptian
bondage. In sympathy therewith (as I take it) my soul was mostly in deep
anxiety; being, as it were, dumb with silence, and closed up in painful death
and darkness; ready at times to say, Surely I am in the same spirit with them.
But the material difference was this; it was their element, wherein they lievd
pleasantly and delighted to breathe; whereas I could neither live nor breathe
therein; so far from it that I often looked upon myself in a manner quite dead.
But let everlasting praise ascend to the God of the living, world without end!
He was pleased to bring me through this horrible death and darkness, to enjoy
the glorious day of his salvation again, and to be one of those, though
unworthy, who have "the lamb slain from the foundation of the world" for their
light and leader. Then I saw that even in that day of uncommon trials both
within and without, my life was sure (though not discerned by me,) being hid
with Christ in God.

It was some time after my arrival in England before the thick darkness
beforementioned quite wore off my mind; yet I was favored, at times, with the
shining of the Sun of Righteousness, as it were breaking through a thick cloud,
to my unspeakable joy and comfort, and I believe in the work of the gospel, to
the great satisfaction of many others, to whom I was, through deep suffering,
in some degree qualified to speak, even as deep calls unto deep.

We arrived in England, and came to an anchor in Torbay, the 26th of the 1st
month, 1748, after a passage of five days. The ship was bound for Plymouth, but
the sailors who had been prisoners in France, being in fear of another
confinement by being pressed on board of the men of war, took the command of
her from the captain, by something, in appearance at least, like force. He told
them he had a safe protection from the government, whereby they would be
secured from what they feared by going to Plymouth. But they did not regard
that, neither was he, as we thought, averse to going into Torbay, as he had the
sailors to lay it on; for we had reason to apprehend he did not keep us waiting
in Spain so long for nothing; so that the Bay might suit his purpose better
also. It being the 1st day of the week, in the evening, when we came to an
anchor, Thomas Gawthrop and I had a great mind to go on shore, that we might
endeavor to find a meeting of friends. Next day some of the company signifying
their intention of going about midnight, that being the time when I suppose the
tide would serve best; we therefore requested they would call us, which they
did. The ship lay a considerable distance from the town of Bricksham, where we
intended to land. We had been in the boat but a little while, when a great
storm of wind and rain beat furiously against us, so that the men at the oars
found it hard to keep the boat up against it. We encouraged them all in our
power to work for their own lives and ours, letting them know, if they would
bring us safe to land, they should be well rewarded for their pains. The danger
of being driven back to sea was very apparent, and I believe much feared by all
in the boat. The poor men exerted their utmost endeavor, which, through the
good providence of God, proved successful in bringing us safe to land. This I
looked upon as a merciful preservation, having seldom, if ever, in the course
of my life, apprehended greater danger. We were exceedingly wet with the rain,
but having good fires made for us, and other necessary accommodations, did not
suffer much thereby. By enquiry, we found there was a meeting of our friends
held near a place called Newton-Bushel, about ten miles off, to which we went,
being truly thankful for the great favor of a safe arrival in England, and the
opportunity of sitting down in a meeting of friends again; though we did hold
meetings amongst ourselves in our captivity, on first-days, when it appeared
practicable. This meeting was but small, and the life of religion seemed to me
at a low ebb. I had nothing to deliver unto them by way of testimony. Friends
were very loving to us. On second-day we proceeded toward London, as far as
Exeter, where friends entertained us kindly that night. Next day Thomas
Gawthrop, Isaac Greenleaf, and myself (leaving our ancient friend Peter Davis
with friends there) hired horses as far as Honiton. There I bought a good
serviceable mare, that carried me safe and well through most of my travels this
journey in England and Wales. We took Bridgport in our way, and lodged with our
worthy friend Samuel Bownas, who, with his housekeeper, entertained us with
affectionate kindness. Now did we begin to enjoy the sweetness of brotherly
love again. The quarterly meeting for Dorsetshire was held next day at that
place, to which we went. It was very small, and the power of truth which is the
crown of all our religious meetings, as I thought was very low therein. We must
live in that power at other times, if we expect its gracious assistance in the
weighty affairs of the church when met for the management thereof; for that
which is born of the flesh is but flesh, and cannot enter into the kingdom of
God, nor so much as see it. All is certainly of the flesh that has its
principal delight and satisfaction in sublunary things. So that, although some
may maintain the character of God's people as to the outward appearance, yet if
the love of earthly things has the chief room in their hearts, the love of the
Father is not in them; and therefore such are not qualified to do God's work.
Church Government, according to the discipline he in his wisdom has
established, requires our understandings to be divinely enlightened to move
rightly therein; but when any speak and act in the same natural reason and
understanding whereby they manage their outward affairs, which although capable
of the one, is altogether unfit for the other; for "the world by wisdom knows
not God," consequently these are not likely to understand his work; but in
their pretended endeavors to promote, they mar it, and frequently darken
counsel by a multitude of words without right knowledge. Instead of raising
life in a meeting, they bring death and darkness over it, to the great pain of
the upright-hearted, who are not always ready (like those above hinted at) but
experimentally knowing their sufficiency for every good word and work to be of
God, they dare not move until it please him, by moving upon their hearts, to
open their understandings and to be a spirit of judgment unto them: in this
only, there is binding and loosing, remitting and retaining, with divine
approbation; which is livingly known and sealed upon the understanding of the
faithful, by the holy spirit of promise. Our way was quite shut up as to
ministry or other public service in that meeting. After which we pursued our
journey for London. But I found constant riding very painful, not only because
I had not rode much for a considerable time, but having, according to the
custom of America, been used to an easy pacer. My mare now being a trotter, was
hard to bear until I was more accustomed thereunto, which then proved very
agreeable. Our friend John Hunt and his wife met us on 7th day at Stains, and
being in a coach, prevailed on me, as I was weary with riding, to go with them
thereinto, and took me to their house, where I was kindly entertained, not only
that time of my stay in the city, but also at diverse other times during my
travels in this nation. I continued about two weeks in the city, visiting
meetings as they fell in course, being mostly low and pretty much discouraged
in my mind with a deep sense of mine own weakness, the greatness of the work
which was before me, and the mournful state of the church, as it appeared to
me, in London. I had but little openness as to ministry, yet endeavored to
wade along as patiently as I could; it appearing to be my principal business
then to suffer with the oppressed seed, mourning with a sensible remnant, who I
could perceive had sackcloth underneath, for the prevalence of worldly wisdom
and grandeur in that great city; the little low meek thing, which by the power
of God was exalted amongst us in the early time of our being a people, was in
too general a way overlooked and disregarded; and man's will and wisdom taking
its place, was grown very high, assumed the government in a large degree, where
the wisdom of God formerly bore rule. But this did not prosper; instead
thereof, greater waste and desolation prevailed. The breathing panting babes
after heavenly substance were greatly discouraged, being ready to say, All is
gone! The glory is departed from Israel! What can be done now? But I saw they
were to be raised in the Lord's time, as an army to fight his battles against
the uncircumcised in heart and ears; and that the victory over that spirit was
to be obtained through sufferings. Thus I have given a short hint of the
afflicting view I had of the state of our society in the city of London; which
place I shall leave for the present; as I shall, in the course of this journal,
have occasion, diverse times, to make some farther observations thereon, which
may tend to explain the above.

I had an ancient mother in Radnorshire, South Wales, whom I had not seen for
about twenty-two years. I therefore purposed taking meetings in my way thither,
and also in my return to London yearly meeting. I set out in order to be at
Reading quarterly meeting the 16th of the 2d month, which I attended to good
satisfaction. After this meeting I took the following in my way, viz. Henley,
Warborough, Witney, Gloucester, and Ross. The Lord being my gracious helper,
either to do or suffer, in which I endeavored to be faithful, according to the
discovery I received of the divine will. The 26th I got to my mother's house,
having sent a messenger a little before, lest a sudden surprise, although
arising from much joy, might prove too great a shock for my dear ancient mother
to bear without some inconveniency. I suppose our meeting might somewhat
resemble that of Jacob and his son Joseph's. It doubtless afforded much comfort
to my worthy mother, she being a valuable religious woman, not only to see me
again, but also that I was come upon a service she so greatly loved and valued.
My honored father had then been dead about three years. I had a brother and
sister then living with my mother, and another sister married, who lived not
far from her. I staid thereabouts somewhat more than two weeks; in which time I
had diverse very large, and some very open precious meetings; many of other
societies flocking to them, who seemed much reached by the testimony of truth.
But alas! I found things very low there, as to friends, which was cause of
sorrow to my mind. Wrong things creeping in, and very few if any, who had
judgment and courage enough to deal plainly with disorderly walkers. I was at
their monthly meeting, and endeavored to stir them up to a more diligent and
zealous exercise of wholesome discipline; but they appeared weak. On 2d day,
the 16th of the 3d month, I took leave of my dear mother, brother, and sisters,
and set out in order to be at the yearly meeting in London, Edward Jones
bearing me company. I took the following meetings in my way, viz. Ammelly,
Leominster, a quarterly held at Broomsgrove, Worcester, Evesham, Shipston; on
first day had two meetings, at Lonycompton in the morning and Chippingnorton in
the afternoon; then to High Wickham, Chesham, and Uxbridge. I had diverse open
satisfactory meetings, and some very trying and afflicting. The Lord was
pleased to be my help and support, to whom be humble thanksgivings for his
gracious condescension to the low estate of his poor servants.

I got to London on the 7th day of the week, and the day following attended
Grace Church Street and Devonshire-House meetings; but I had very little
openness therein. My spirit was very low and greatly depressed, so that I
seemed to myself near fainting under the weight of my burden, which was very
great. On 2d day the yearly meeting began. The first was a meeting of ministers
and elders in the morning. Many brethren were met from diverse parts of the
nation. Amongst whom, I looked upon myself as a mere child, having much fear
and reasoning in my mind lest I should dishonor the great master's cause, and
discover my great weakness (as the same appeared in my own view) to those
pillars in the church and experienced servants in the Lord's work. But he in
great mercy condescended to my very low estate, and regarded my humble
breathings, giving me the word of life to preach with demonstration that day,
which much opened my way in the minds of friends, and was of considerable
advantage to me in my future service; for very much depends on our having good
place in the hearts of the faithful, and that cannot well be until they know
us. Christian prudence teaches not to lay hands suddenly on any; therefore
such must see and feel the spirits one of another, in some degree, before they
can unite. Was there not great care and caution in this respect, gross
hypocrisy, by putting on the outward appearance, might be encouraged, which
would be a very grievous wound to God's cause? Many friends after this meeting
showed affectionate regard to me; but none more than that substantial minister
of the gospel Samuel Bownas. It had a proper effect upon my mind, to strengthen
it, and raise humble acknowledgements to the Lord for his mercy herein. It
being my fervent prayer, that whatever I might go through on account of the
unfaithful, my service and labors might be acceptable to the saints, and that
I might be favored with a sense of the unity and help of their spirits
accompanying me therein. I attended the yearly meeting constantly, both the
meetings for worship and discipline as they fell in course. The power and
virtue of truth was near, to the strengthening and comforting our spirits in a
good degree: but I have known a much fuller enjoyment and overshadowing
thereof, even when all the hills and mountains have been melted as it were,
before him who is glorious in holiness, and fearful in praise, working wonders
for the help and preservation of his people. O then we could experimentally
say, the Lord of awful majesty presideth amongst us, being a spirit of judgment
to them that sit in judgment, and all we stand in need of; even as a place of
broad rivers and streams, where nothing of man's invention could obtain any
place! These were times of rejoicing in the presence of the Lord, and drinking
freely of the wine and milk, without money and without price. O how has my
soul said, it is good to be here! Having a desire, with Peter, to tabernacle
there; much dreading to descend into this vale of tears again, where I must
struggle with my many infirmities, which I did not then much feel: but I do not
instance this with design to justify those anxious fears and taking thought for
the time to come; but rather as a mark of my great weakness and want of growth
in the most precious faith, which is the saints victory, whereby, as we grow
therein, strength and patience is received, to endure hardness as good soldiers
of Jesus Christ; not viewing with much anxious fear these light afflictions,
which are but for a moment; seeing, in due time, if we are properly exercised
thereby, they will work for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of glory.

On the sixth-day of the next week after the yearly meeting, I set out in order
to be at the three eastern yearly-meetings, being accompanied by my friends
John Hunt and his wife, and Christopher Wilson who was to be my companion. We
lodged that night at Brentwood; next morning early we passed on to Chelmsford,
(the weather being extremely hot,) and breakfasted at my dear friend Frances
Wyatt's, who afterward, through the kind providence of God, became my truly
affectionate wife. Diverse friends went forward toward Colchester, but my
companion and I staid at Chelmsford meetings on first day. The weather
continuing very hot, I think then equal in heat to our weather in America,
there arose a storm of thunder and rain in the time of the meeting: one clap of
thunder, whilst I was upon my feet, so terrified friends as to take away their
attention for the present, and I expected to have been obliged to sit down; but
waiting a short time, friends recovered, and I went on. A boy was killed
thereby, as he was playing near Springfield steeple-house, about a mile from
Chelmsford. We went after meeting to Kelvedon, and next morning were
accompanied by several friends toward Colchester; but I was so extremely ill
of a fever, that I was obliged to alight at Lexton, about a mile from the said
place. We mounted our horses again after I had recovered a little; but before
we had proceeded on the way above half a mile, there came on such terrible
thunder, as is seldom known in this part of the world. The lightning appeared
to glide in streams of fire on the surface of the earth a considerable way, and
there seemed, as I thought, a strong smell of sulphur. The thunder frighted my
mare to such a degree, that I being poorly, could scarcely sit her; but through
mercy I received no hurt. I continued ill at Colchester, so that I did not
attend many of the meetings. The yearly meeting ended there on fourth-day. On
the sixth-day following, I was so recovered as to ride in a chaise to
Maningtree, and had a meeting there the same day. On seventh-day we went
through Ipswich to Woodbridge, in order to attend the yearly and quarterly
meetings there for the county of Suffolk. We were at their meeting on
first day; on second-day was held their meeting for discipline, wherein the
power and virtue of truth seemed to me low and depressed; and, although I was
fully persuaded there were diverse living, concerned members therein, who had
the cause of truth at heart, yet they appeared also depressed. The chief reason
whereof I then apprehended and have more clearly seen since, was giving too
much place to a few busy forward members, in whom man's will and wisdom was too
much exalted, who assumed the rule and government of that meeting; which they
were too much indulged in by the cowardice of those whose proper business it
was to work for God; that by his blessing and assistance, they might exalt the
weight and authority of truth over such spirits. For the dominion and majesty
of truth in a meeting soon foils and overcomes them, as it is abode in by the
heirs thereof; but if they are slack and negligent in possessing their right,
usurpers will often take it from them, in this sense. So that such who are
called to work for God in his church, by holding back more than is meet, not
only bring poverty and leanness upon their own souls thereby, but also open a
door for the spirit of antichrist to enter in. I have often seen, that when the
wise woman neglects to build the house, the foolish woman, by pretending to
build, has pulled it down with her own hands: this has been no small cause of
the waste and desolation in some places. I have had much labor with that busy
active forward spirit since, both in meetings and in private plain-dealing, as
also in stirring up and encouraging the right minded to stand their ground;
which I hope has not been altogether without some good effect. I could not
well be easy to proceed without making the above remarks, as a caution to such
into whose hands this may come, since it is no small thing to be guilty of
negligence in the work of God, nor to engage therein without a proper
qualification. Meetings for worship were held on third and fourth days, wherein
we were favored with a good degree of that heavenly virtue, in which there is
renewal of strength and comfortable fellowship one with another. From thence we
proceeded toward Norwich, taking Brandiston and Layston meetings in our way;
where true religion appeared to be mournfully low. At Norwich we were favored
with considerable openness and satisfaction in their meetings on first day. The
quarterly and yearly meetings for the county of Norfolk were held on second,
third, and fourth days. Divine goodness was felt assisting in close exercise
and labor, for the help and recovery of a declined people; and heavenly
fellowship sweetly enjoyed with those who preferred the prosperity of the city
of God to their chiefest joy. On fifth day we had a meeting at Wymondham,
wherein we were opened in gospel service, to our comfort and relief in a good
degree. Next day we had a meeting at Tasborough, which was a very painful
trying time; my duty therein was to set an example of silence. Here my
agreeable companion and I parted. He had been with me ever since I left London.
I was now alone, as to any constant companion, and on the first day following
attended Norwich meeting to pretty good satisfaction; and had the following
meetings appointed in my way to Lynn viz. Lammas, North Walsam, Holt, and
Wells; in most of which I had close laborious service: being led, as was often
my lot, to stir up and awaken (if possible) careless lukewarm professors. Our
friend Edmund Peckover accompanied me to Lynn, where we had two meetings on
first day; they proved very painful and laborious: I had very little openness
as to ministry. From thence we went to Wisbeach, which was a small meeting, and
things appeared very low. The next meeting we had was at Gedney, things being
also very low. From thence we went to Spalding, and had a heavy laborious
meeting: here my friend Edmund Peckover left me and returned home. The same day
was a considerable eclipse of the sun. The next meeting I had was at Broughton,
which was very painful and afflicting. The great loss some in that part of
Lincolnshire (through which I passed) have sustained, by forsaking the fountain
of living water and the commonwealth of our Israel, that they might embrace
this present world, Demas-like, was sorrowfully felt: although some of them
might retain the outward form, yet having lost the dew of their youth, they
were become dry and formal: by whose means, and the undue liberties indulged in
too many of the youth, a thick darkness was raised that might be felt; which
did, in a sorrowful degree, tend to eclipse the beauty of our Sion. I traveled
from thence through Newark, and a considerable way by the pleasant river Trent,
to Nottingham. Being first day, I was at the meetings there both fore and
afternoon. Truth greatly favored in opening doctrine and counsel in the
morning; the afternoon not quite so open, but in a good degree to satisfaction.
From thence to Oxon meeting, which was small yet open. From thence to
Mansfield, and had a painful trying meeting there. The next was at
Chesterfield, where the meeting was but small, yet truth livingly favored,
opening counsel for our help and encouragement in the way of well doing. Notice
being previously given, I had a large meeting at Matlock on first day. There
were a few friends, and many others at this meeting, which proved heavy and
laborious for some time; yet divine goodness afforded ability to work through,
and the holy power of God was in a good degree exalted; praises to his name for
ever! The next meeting I had was at Hansworthwood-House on the borders of
Yorkshire. There were but few friends, and of those few, most of them seemed to
depend too much upon the labor of the ministers, as is sorrowfully the case in
too many other places. I had nothing to administer unto them but an example of
silence, that appearing best adapted to their states; for unless the great
benefit thereof is experienced, there can be no real advancement in true
religion. I went from thence to Sheffield, which was a large meeting, and the
doctrine of truth was largely and livingly opened therein; I believe to general
satisfaction, and to the comfort of the upright-hearted. From thence I went to
Highflats, and was at their meeting on first day, which was very large; being
composed of plain country friends. The Lord was pleased to favor us with a
precious opportunity together, in the comfortable enjoyment of his love shed
abroad; under which holy influence, the doctrine of truth was largely opened;
the glorious powerful name of the Lord was magnified, and his humble, dependant
children were encouraged to serve him with a perfect heart and with a willing
mind. The next meeting I had was at Brighouse, which was to pretty good
satisfaction; truth owning and comforting our spirits therein. Next day I had a
very painful afflicting meeting at Halifax, having reason to fear but few of
the members were rightly acquainted with the quickening virtue of true religion
in themselves: when this is the sorrowful case, it makes heavy work for painful
travelers. My labor amongst them was in a close rousing way, but it did not
appear to have much impression. From thence to Gildersome, where I had a pretty
open comfortable meeting; and next day one at Leeds to satisfaction. This being
a large meeting. I staid over first day, and am pursuaded there was a sensible
weighty body of friends belonging thereunto; yet there seemed to me a much
larger, as to number, who contented themselves in the profession of truth, and
in hearing the report of others concerning the heavenly country. The
indifference of these, together with their eagerness after words, appeared to
me a cause of painful anxiety of spirit in that meeting, which I had to suffer
under both morning and afternoon. Here my friends John Hunt and his wife from
London met me, with intent to accompany me to some meetings in that county, of
which I was glad, being alone, often low and much discouraged in mind, in a
deep feeling of mine own weakness; as also having to wade from place to place,
in a painful sense of a greatly declined people whom I was concerned to labor
amongst; so that, had not divine goodness at times made me sensible his
everlasting arm was underneath, to support my afflicted soul in various
probations, I had certainly fainted. But, blessed be his holy name forever, he
was often graciously pleased to open a way for me to hold on, when I could see
none, leading me by the hand like a tender merciful father, one step after
another; and giving me more place in the love and regard of his people than I
looked for, or could, as I thought, reasonably expect. I was many times greatly
abased in mine own sight; ready to say, to what good purpose do I visit the
churches? for I seem to move in an untrodden path, as under the weight of the
hills and mountains of exalted unfruitfulness; and often, as it were, groping
in the chambers of death, with such constant afflicting views, that I was ready
to say with the prophet, I am a man of unclean lips, and I dwell amongst a
people of unclean lips; but the live coal from the holy altar, soon removes all
that tincture or seeming defilement, which does not proceed from our own sins
and miscarriages, but from those of others. Thou deep wader for the good of
souls, this is wrote principally for thy sake, that thou may see others have
gone the same way before thee, and be encouraged so as not to sink under thy
burden. I found in the Lord's time (as thou will, if thou patiently holds on
thy way) that tribulation works patience, and patience experience, and
experience hope. The Lord gave me thereby clearly to see, I must thus feel the
wounds, bruises, and putrefying sores of the sons and daughters of Sion, or I
could not speak to their states and conditions feelingly and effectually for
their help and recovery. Our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ was touched with a
feeling of our infirmities. He bore the weight and painful sense of the sins of
the whole world, tasting death for every man; whereby he reached forth a
merciful hand of help and salvation for the recovery of all, sufficient for all
who believe in him and obey him; and his faithful messengers must know, in
degree, a drinking of the same cup, and being baptized with the same baptism he
was baptized with, not only on their own accounts, but also on the account of
others. He still suffers by his spirit, as under the weight and oppression of
sin and iniquity, in the hearts of the children of men; so that all those who
are one in spirit with him, must in measure feel his sufferings, and sympathize
with him therein; traveling in pain, that Christ may be formed in the hearts
of mankind, ruling in his kingdom on earth, as he rules in heaven. But these
things are too mysterious for the wise and prudent of this world to understand,
being only revealed to those who are indeed born of God.

We staid at Leeds until fifth-day, there being a burial, attended by a large
number of friends and others. Truth opened our way in the ministry to good
satisfaction. Next day we had a small meeting at Knaresborough, where we found
things very low. From thence we went to Thirsk, and on first day had a precious
open meeting there, in which the testimony of truth was greatly exalted, and
the upright-hearted sweetly comforted. The praise of all belongs to the giver
of every good and perfect gift. Next day we went to visit our ancient
honorable friend John Richardson, at his house near Hutton in the Hole. He had
scarcely sight enough to distinguish us one from the other. We were received
and entertained by him with true love and brotherly affection. He was much at
liberty in his spirit, and very free in discourse about religious things, in
which his life and great delight appeared to be. He showed us (in manuscript) a
journal of his life and travels in the service of the gospel, since published,
wherein are many very useful observations and remarkable occurrences, which I
hope will be of great service in the world. On third-day we had a meeting at
Hutton, wherein we were favored with some degree of openness; yet truth did
not raise to any considerable degree of dominion: but all is best as the Lord
is pleased to order, for from him alone proceed the issues of life. On
fourth-day morning we took leave of our said worthy friend in much affection,
and had a small meeting at Bilsdale: things were low as to the life of religion
in that meeting; after which I parted with my friends John Hunt and his wife.
John Scot of Leeds continued with me, who was an honest labourer for the
arising of life in meetings, and I thought of considerable help to me. The next
meeting we had was at North Allerton; which was rather low and heavy to wade
through. We went from thence to Darlington in the county of Durham. I had close
painful labor there; earthly-mindedness in professors is often the cause of
such hard work, as it obstructs the current of life, both in themselves and
also frequently in our religious meetings, like the Philistines stopping up the
wells which the true seed has opened in the hearts of believers; so that many
times, instead of their having to sing, Spring up, O well, and we will sing
unto thee! there is mourning and painful labor in sympathy therewith, to have
them opened again, that the flock of Christ's fold may all be watered with the
refreshing streams of that river which flows from the presence of God. The next
meeting I went to was Raby, being on a first day; it was a large heavenly
meeting, truth having great dominion, and friends were sweetly comforted
together. At Bishop Auckland, the Lord favored with matter and utterance to a
considerable degree of ease and satisfaction. From thence I went to the city of
Durham, and had a hard painful meeting in silence; also at Newcastle we had a
close, trying, laborious meeting; occasioned, as I apprehended, by undue
liberties in thinking and acting, which had raised darkness to be felt in that
meeting. We had an open comfortable meeting the next day at Shields. We went to
Sunderland, and attended their meetings on first day: that in the morning was
very open and satisfactory, the testimony of truth going forth freely to the
several states of those present, who were much affected therewith. In the
afternoon it was a heavy afflicting meeting; but little felt of that which
crowned the meeting in the morning. We often find afternoon meetings are the
most heavy and painful, occasioned, no doubt (in part at least) by answering
the cravings of nature to the full; whereas they should be denied a full
gratification, as little sustenance would, for that short space of time, answer
much better, and be no injury to the constitution. If any think this hint, by
way of caution, impertinent, there is reason to doubt, that they are yet too
much strangers to the nature of true worship and the many impediments in the
way of its due performance; what I have abovementioned is none of the least. I
was quite shut up as to ministry in the afternoon. Here I met my valuable
friends Jonathan and Margaret Rain of Trawden in Lancashire, being the first
time I saw them; concerning whom, more hereafter. On second-day we had another
meeting in the city of Durham, wherein the Lord was graciously pleased to exalt
his glorious and powerful name over all disorderly and corrupt libertine
spirits; there being some such in the meeting, which was evident to me, from
the main scope of the testimony I had to deliver amongst them. It was with
remarkable authority and sharpness against such, who having departed from the
divine light, wherewith all mankind are enlightened, choosing rather to be in
darkness, were so lost in a maze of error, as even to call in question the
truths of the Christian religion. I was afterward informed that there were
some such in that meeting who had imbibed the dark and wicked principle of
deism, or free-thinking, so called; but I had no outward information concerning
the state of any there before the meeting, which I always carefully shunned.
The next meeting I had was at Stockton, to pretty good satisfaction, as truth
opened my way to discharge the service required; yet the meeting was small, and
things appeared low, as to the life of religion. I went from thence to Yarum in
Yorkshire; had a meeting there, and at Yatten, and Moorsham, to a good degree
of satisfaction. The next meeting I had was at Castleton. The two last named
were on the Moors, amongst a very plain people, who appeared to be in a low
station of life, but I found the savor and virtue of truth amongst them,
especially at the latter; to which that substantial minister of the gospel Luke
Cock, did in his lifetime belong: the remembrance of whom, although I never
personnally knew him, was very fresh and livingly before me in that meeting, as
if his spirit had been present; I could, as I thought, perceive the good
effects of that worthy man's Christian labors amongst those people; and a
precious meeting the Lord favored us with together: to whom, for the multitude
of his mercies bestowed upon us, poor unworthy helpless creatures, be humble
thanksgiving and praise, now and for evermore. Whitby was the next meeting I
attended, being on first day, where I had very close laborious work. An earthly
lofty spirit had taken too much place in some of the professors; the tendency
whereof is, by darkening the understanding, and blinding the judgment, to
account various weighty branches of our Christian testimony small trifling
things. Here the flesh, that warreth against the spirit, having the ascendency,
its language is quite opposite thereunto. The flesh says, there is little in
dress; religion does not consist in apparel; there is little in language; there
is little in paying tithes etc. to the priests; there is little in carrying
guns in our ships, to defend ourselves in case we are attacked by an enemy. To
which, I think, it may be safely added, there is little or nothing in people,
who plead as above hinted, pretending to be of our society; for if they can
easily let fall the beforementioned branches of our Christian testimony, I am
fully persuaded, they will maintain the others no longer than they apprehend it
will suit with their temporal interest. I have often wondered why such continue
to profess with us at all. They are not really of us who are not concerned to
maintain those principles and testimonies the Lord has given us to bear. I
was, through mercy, enabled to discharge the service required of me, and went
from thence to Scarborough, where the Lord, in gracious condescension, was
pleased to open doctrine and counsel for their help; who appeared to me mostly
low and weak, as to a real growth in true religion. From thence I went to
Pickering, where the Lord gave us a very precious opportunity together, in the
comfortable enjoyment of his power and refreshing presence; to the exaltation
and renown of his great name, who is worthy for ever. Next day I had a meeting
at Malton, being a close searching time; truth seemed at a low ebb there. The
next meeting at Cransick was very small, but the Lord was pleased to own and
comfort us together, affording counsel for their help and encouragement. I went
from thence to Bridlington, and was at their meeting on first day; it was
small, and things very low amongst them, as to the life of religion. Oh how
greatly is that, and many other meetings declined, both as to number and a
lively experience of true religion: some friends informed me, as I remember,
that they knew the time, when fourteen or fifteen ministering friends belonged
to that meeting; and now perhaps, not a much greater number of members of all
sorts, belong to it. Once there was a wonderful time of gathering into the
vineyard of Christ; but since, with sorrow and lamentation it may be said,
there has been a losing, scattering, and dwindling away in many places; the
principal occasion whereof seems to have been, an inordinate love for
transitory enjoyments, lawful in themselves and places, but not to have the
chief possession of the mind. When that becomes the sorrowful state of any,
they cannot savor the things that be of God, but the things which be of men;
and are of consequence deprived of that all-sufficient help, so to live and
walk, as to answer the witness of God in others; to train up their children in
the nurture and admonition of the Lord; and to maintain the testimonies of
truth with a convincing strength and efficacy. So that although the form is
retained in a considerable degree by such, and they may also be fortified with
arguments, to maintain the consistency of our profession with the primitive
plan laid down in holy writ, yet, wanting the salt of the kingdom in
themselves, all their pretensions without it will prove nothing; yea, worse
than nothing; seeing, by how much more they have had the opportunity of knowing
more than others, by so much their condemnation will be greater. Next day we
had a small meeting at Hornsey, and from thence went to Oustwick, and had a
large meeting, wherein truth favored in opening doctrine largely, and to a
considerable degree of satisfaction. The next meeting we had was at Hull, which
was indeed a very painful exercising time of silence, in a mournful sense of
great declension. We find it recorded in the holy scriptures, that we must
enter the kingdom of heaven through many tribulations. It is indeed a very
wonderful mercy, that such unworthy creatures as we are should be so highly
favored, as to be admitted thereinto on any terms. I have considered, that our
afflictions in this day, both in the manner and cause, differ much from the
trials of our worthy predecessors. Their bodies were frequently imprisoned, and
grossly abused by people of different religious persuasions; but our spirits,
when engaged in the work of the gospel, are often imprisoned, depressed, and
greatly afflicted, by means of the great unfaithfulness of many under the same
profession with ourselves; being at times, on account of such, so closed up in
a painful sense of death and darkness, as to be somewhat like the prophet of
old, quite shut up and dumb with silence. This may be occasioned by such, who
are so far alienated from the sensible reaches of that measure of grace in
their own minds, as not to be opened thereby to receive the word preached to
advantage; (for the word goes not forth in vain; but will accomplish that for
which it is sent;) and it may also be necessary, on account of those who have
often been comfortably refreshed by sitting under a living ministry, yet
neglecting their own duty in a spiritual labor for heavenly bread, look too
much for food from the labor of others: which unjustifiable dependence and
expectation, is often disappointed and mortified. The main design of gospel
ministry, is to turn the children of men to the grace of God in themselves,
which will teach them to work out their own salvation, and diligently to seek
the Lord for themselves, in whom, their strength being renewed, their spirits
would unite, and greatly help and relieve the ministers in their
gospel-labours. From Hull I went to North Cave, where I had an open comfortable
meeting. Thence to Howden, where the meeting was small and things very low; it
was held in silence. I went next to Selby, and attended their meetings on
first day. I had some strength and openness for service in the morning; in the
afternoon I had to sit in silence; I could find but very little of the life of
religion there. Next day I had an open comfortable meeting at Rawcliff; thence
at Pontefract, where things were low and painful. The next meeting was a small
one at Wakefield, wherein I was quite closed up in silence; the state of the
meeting, as I apprehended, requiring it. I went from thence to Leeds, and next
day to the house of my esteemed friend William Hird, intending for Bradford
monthly meeting, which was held on sixth-day, wherein I had thorough service,
and the blessed truth had great dominion, to the joy and comfort of many
hearts. I returned to Leeds, and attended their meetings on first day. They
were low and rather painful; my service therein was in a close searching way;
but those who are at ease in Zion like smooth things best, and are almost ready
to say now, as some did formerly to the seers, see not, and to the prophets,
prophesy unto us smooth things. I went from Leeds to the quarterly meeting at
York, wherein I had considerable openness in service; yet my spirit was
inwardly and secretly pained most of the time; the cause whereof, as I
apprehended, was the numbness and earthly-mindedness of many members of that
very large assembly; in which there were, notwithstanding, a wise lively
substantial body of friends; which, by account, has continued in a succession
from the early times of our society. When this meeting was over, I set out, in
company with several friends in their way home, in order to visit some meetings
in the Dales, on my way to Kendal quarterly meeting; John Scott being also with
me. The first meeting we had was at Bane-bridge in Wensley Dale, which was
large, being on a first day. It was a very close trying laborious meeting. I
had very little to say by way of ministry, but suffered deeply in spirit, under
a sorrowful sense of carnality prevailing. Next day I had a very comfortable
reviving meeting amongst a few plain friends in Grisdale. After which I went
home with that plain faithful minister of the gospel Alice Thistlethwaite, who
had borne me company from York, to her house in Dent Dale, where we had a
meeting next day, which I hope was in a good degree serviceable, although
things were but low. After this we went to the house of that worthy elder and
minister of the gospel James Wilson, near Brigflats, where, next day, the Lord
was pleased to favor us with a powerful glorious meeting; so that we could
thankfully witness truth was over all. Such thorough open meetings, but seldom
fall to our lot in this declined state of things. Yet the Lord is
all-sufficient for the help and support of his faithful servants, in all times
and dispensations of his providence to mankind; so that we not only can say,
sufficient to the day is the evil thereof; but also, sufficient to the day is
the strength and wisdom afforded for our assistance in the Lord's work. Next
day I went to Kendal, being accompanied by the beforementioned worthy friend,
who entertained me on the road with diverse very pleasing accounts concerning
the spreading of truth in those parts, and the wonderful convincements
thereabouts, by that memorable servant of the Lord George Fox, which the said
friend had heard related by eyewitnesses, who were themselves convinced at
that time; this made the journey exceeding pleasant to me, nothing disagreeable
therein, but its being too soon over, as that put an end to this delightful
conversation.

There appeared to me a valuable body of friends in and about Kendal yet left,
although diverse in that town had been removed by death but a little time
before; the loss of whom was much lamented by the survivors, as they had been
useful members in their day. It also appeared that good order was well
maintained, and that excellent discipline established amongst us in the wisdom
of truth, seemed to be as duly put in practice, as in most places I have
observed amongst friends; yet my way was much closed up in suffering, during
the quarterly meeting: I staid their meetings on first day, and was largely
opened in the morning, truth having great dominion; but in the afternoon was
shut up in silence. On third-day, being Windermere general meeting, I went to
it; truth greatly overshadowed that large assembly, and the testimony thereof
was much exalted, to the edification and sweet refreshment of the upright in
heart, as well as deeply affecting the minds of many, I hope to their lasting
advantage, who had taken more liberty than truth allows of. Next day I had a
small meeting at Grayrig, where things were low. At Preston the Lord was
pleased to favor us with an open comfortable meeting, and truth's testimony
was exalted. After which I went to Kendal, and had a very comfortable meeting
amongst friends there. From thence I went to Swarthmoor, and was at their
meeting on a first day, in a meeting house built near the hall, by George Fox;
I could not discover much lively sense of true religion there, it being a time
of painful suffering silence. From thence to the Hight meeting, which was to
pretty good satisfaction; and thence to Hawkshead; the meeting there was low
and afflicting. My principal service was to give an example of silence, which
frequently fell to my lot; the Lord favoring with resignation to his divine
will. Next day I had a small open satisfactory meeting at Keswick; and went to
Isel meeting; but had nothing to deliver by way of testimony, being wholly shut
up. From thence to Pardshaw, which, I think, is the largest country meeting in
England, and friends there generally made a plain becoming appearance, much
resembling many meetings in Pennsylvania, both for largeness and otherwise; the
view whereof gave me singular pleasure, and abundantly the more, as the great
master of our assemblies was graciously pleased to honor and comfort us with
his living presence, in which there is fullness of joy: matter and utterance was
given by him to a discharge of duty, in which there was peace. I had an open
satisfactory meeting in the evening, at my friend and old companion Christopher
Wilson's. Next day I had a meeting at Whitehaven. Thence to Broughton, where I
had a meeting. I endeavored to lean upon the Lord alone, for guidance in my
service, and by him was frequently much opened, in the states of meetings and
individuals present. The next meeting was at Cockermouth, which was to a good
degree of satisfaction. Thence to Allonby, where truth favored with a good
degree of openness and peace. From thence I went to Holme, a meeting remarkable
for having been, I suppose, more than sixty years interrupted, and grievously
disturbed by a wicked unruly company of ranters. It began in some of the
Pearsons, and when they were removed, others succeeded in the same spirit. Some
of them were at the meeting when I was there. A woman of the party spoke
several times in such rancour, that I do not remember ever to have taken notice
of a voice so much tinctured with a dark diabolical spirit; but friends, in the
blessed enjoyment of the powerful truth, were quite over it and them, and I
believe, had therein been in a good degree preserved; as that meeting appeared
to me the liveliest of any thereabouts, having, as I remember, five or six
public friends belonging thereunto. The next meeting I had was a small one at
Bolton; truth favored with a comfortable degree of openness therein. Thence I
went to Wigton, and attended both their meetings on first day; it was an
exceeding painful exercising time. My mouth was, as it were, closed up in
mournful silence, yet not without a pretty clear view and sense of the
sorrowful states of those amongst them who had been the principal cause of the
death and misery which I felt; I saw what they were doing in the dark, as it
were, through the hole in the wall. O! what a great snare bright genius, and
extensive natural abilities are to some, when they are deluded by Satan to
trust in them, and presumptuously to imagine, they are sufficient to answer
every purpose for guidance and help not only in temporal but spiritual things,
without supernatural and divine aid immediately communicated. I have met with
no state more at enmity, nor in greater opposition to the truth; nor from whose
spirits more pain and distress is to be met with, than from these worldly wise
and self-sufficient people, who, no doubt, would deride this observation, or
any thing else that asserts an inward sense of things. They are very much out
of the way of being reached unto and helped; therefore they are in great danger
of being left alone, that they may wonder and perish. I sincerely wish, that
the tenderhearted, both youth and others, may be preserved from the infection
of that poison of asps which is under their tongues. Next day I had a poor
small meeting at Kirkbright, where my business was to example them with
silence. From thence to Moor-house, where I had some openness and satisfaction,
though things were but low as to religion in that meeting. The next meeting was
in the city of Carlisle; my way was closed up in painful silence. I had a small
open meeting next day at Scotby; then went to a meeting at Sowport, where there
were but few friends, and things very low amongst them, as to the life and
sensible understanding of religion; but there came in many of the neighbors,
toward whom I found great openness to declare the truth, and it was a good
meeting. I went next to Kirklington, or the border meeting, being on a
first day. Friends having without my knowledge, given notice to their
neighbors, and to diverse people of account in the world; it is likely they
expected great things from one come so far to visit them; and some perhaps
hoped to get credit by that day's work; but we see sometimes, when man
appoints, the Lord disappoints; which in the issue, seems to have been the case
here; as I sat the meeting, (which was very large) throughout in silence, to
the great mortification of many present, some of whom, one might have expected
from their appearance and pretensions, to have better understood the nature of
spiritual worship, than to have been so anxious after words or outward
declarations; it proved, I think, as painful and exercising a meeting as ever I
knew, to which the expectations of friends and others did not a little
contribute. At the conclusion, I was fully satisfied I had discharged the
service required of me that day, in an example of silence, in which I had
peace. I could perceive great uneasiness in many under our name, at the silence
of the meeting. It evidently discovers a mournful degeneracy, seeing silent
worship is so directly consistent with our Christian profession of the inward
teachings of the grace of God that brings salvation, which has appeared to all
men, and teaches all those who diligently hearken thereunto, that no time is
more suitable than when assembled together, unitedly to wait for this blessed
teaching, and thereby, a renewal of our strength. How absurd then is it, for
those who profess this teaching and access to the fountain of all good, to
depart therefrom and gaze at the clouds, or depend on the conduits and
water-spouts, as if it was in their power to fill themselves, and so to supply
all their wants? for although they have at times, by the Lord of all, been used
as a means for our help and edification, yet such means or helps are not so
essentially necessary to the spiritual worship professed by us as a people, but
that it may be as effectually, and consequently as acceptably performed without
them, in an awful solemn silence: than which nothing can be more reaching and
convincing to those in whom the divine witness is regarded, and which may also
tend greatly to raise that in the minds of such where it is depressed. Some
have remarked, that those who have been convinced in the silence of our
meetings, have generally stood their ground in religion best. The reason is
plain, because they have at the very first laid hold of and embraced the very
substance of religion; whereas, the understanding may be, in a great measure
convinced by testimony, and the mind much tendered and affected with lively
declarations of the truth; but all this goes off sooner, and will leave such
minds destitute, unless they happily come to be fixed under the teachings of
the grace of God in themselves, and have to sit under their own vine, and under
their own fig tree, where none can make them afraid. None need be ashamed of a
solemn awful silence before God, and in the sight of men; seeking the Lord, who
will be found of all such, and will, by his secret invisible power, vindicate
that sort of silence in the hearts of all who suffer his pure witness to arise.
All who reject the voice of this holy witness, may justly be disregarded by
God's people, so as not to be discouraged by what they say on that account. But
on the other hand, when any thing of this nature is done in the form and by way
of imitation only, there being nothing supernatural to support and defend the
same, it must necessarily fall under contempt, and like the salt that has lost
its savor, will be trodden under the feet of men. That scripture passage is
very observable, where some undertook to cast out devils in the name of Jesus,
whom Paul preached. It is plain the evil spirits knew, notwithstanding their
pretenses, that they wanted power to subject them; and therefore answered these
imitators and pretenders, Jesus I know, and Paul I know, but who are ye? and
the man in whom the evil spirit was, leaped upon them, and prevailed against
them, so that they fled out of the house naked and wounded. I instance this
passage to show how inefficacious imitation is: they would do well to consider
this, who, upon a serious examination, do not find the Lord with them in their
religious performances; for assuredly nothing can stand approved in his sight,
nor maintain a dignity worthy of him, in this state of probation, but the real
product of his own spirit in us; therefore, let all who profess spiritual
worship, greatly dread being found in senseless stupid silence, although it be
in the very same form the people of God have been, and are still led into;
knowing, that the best and most consistent form is altogether contemptible
without the heavenly power. I felt and perceived diverse of them were much
offended with me, for abiding in that station the Lord placed me in that day,
which they did not altogether forbear letting me know by words; neither did I
let them pass without some close remarks on their sorrowful state and great
blindness. In about a week after, I received a long letter upon the subject,
from one, setting forth amongst other things, how great a mystery it was to
him, that a person in my station, traveling from one nation to another, should
disappoint people, friends and others, by such unaccountable silence; had not I
discovered sufficient cause to believe this friend was not then what he had
been, his letter would have been as great a mystery to me as my silence in that
meeting was to him. When I had perused the said letter, I was most easy to let
it pass as not worth answering. This was a time of very great anxiety to my
mind, and I have made the above remarks thereon, as I felt my mind opened
thereunto; for no reason, than as a caution or warning to all professors of the
blessed truth into whose hands this may come, that they may watch and pray
continually; lest, by departing from the pure leadings of truth in themselves,
they fall into the like absurdities; manifesting to others, that they are but
mere pretenders to spiritual worship; and also for encouragement to painful
travelers in the work of the gospel, whose lot, in the course of their
service, may fall amongst such, to whom they may be as signs and gazing-stocks,
because their time is not always ready. What makes such examples more necessary
in some places, is the busy forwardness of unskilful ministers amongst
themselves, who may be too apt to feed the people with a multitude of words;
perhaps frequently recommending silence in words, but not sufficiently by
example. I have seen it much my place, especially at home, to show friends by
my example, the benefit and necessity of silence, and, as it were, to lead them
into it. And as may be seen by this account, I many times found it my duty to
sit meetings appointed for me in silence; (being at times greatly distressed in
a sense of the states of the people,) like a sign unto them, of what they ought
to be more in the practice of. This indeed was no easy task to flesh, as the
expectation of people was greatly toward me, being come from far to visit
them; yet there was no remedy but patience and resignation to the divine will,
without whose assistance, I knew it was in vain to attempt any thing by way of
ministry. My way of traveling as above hinted, often silent, was looked upon
then by many, as a strange and unusual thing; but some others have been led
pretty much in the same track; however, I had mostly great peace, and inward
strength to stand my ground therein, as all will who follow the Lord
whithersoever he shall be pleased to lead them.

I had a meeting on third-day at the house of Cuthbert Wigham in
Northumberland, which was a sweet refreshing time, and tended much to
strengthen and revive my drooping spirit. Next day I had a pretty open
serviceable meeting at Allondale. From thence to Alstonmoor, where the Lord was
pleased to favor me with a thorough rousing opportunity, and God's everlasting
truth was exalted. The next meeting I had was at Penrith, where things appeared
to me but low. I went from thence to Coldbeck, and was at their meeting on
first day. It was a very hard distressing time. There I felt, as I thought,
some of those hard dark spirits, which had occasioned great anxiety at sundry
places in that county; who might, as I apprehended, be compared to the bulls of
Bashan that compassed David about. It is likely they would scoff at the
expression of their spirits being felt, but the time will soon overtake them
wherein their spirits will feel, though now perhaps in a great measure past
feeling. Next day I had a small but pretty open meeting at Massdale. From
thence to Terril, where I had a good open satisfactory meeting, truth being
exalted and friends comforted. The next meeting was Strickland, which was but
small yet to good satisfaction. I went from thence to Kendal, and attended
their meetings on sixth-day, first day, and third-day. Most of them were to me
trying laborious meetings. I was not much opened as to ministry. Friends in
many places had need to be brought from words, to the one eternal inspeaking
word. On fourth-day at Yealand in Lancashire, I had a close searching meeting.
The next day I was favored with an open comfortable time at Wray meeting. From
thence I went to Bentham, where truth assisted to discharge what I had before
me, to a good degree of satisfaction. From thence to Settle, where on first day
we were favored with a precious open meeting. The testimony of truth went
forth freely and affectingly, to the tendering many hearts: Praises and
thanksgiving to the Lord for the same. Next day I had a small but a very open
meeting at Monybent. From thence to Soly meeting, which appeared to me in a
very weak, low condition, as little of the life of religion was to be found
therein. After meeting I went to the house of my kind friends Jonathan and
Margaret Rain; and from thence to Marsden Height meeting, in which the Lord's
power was livingly felt, whereby the testimony of truth was delivered with
clearness and good demonstration. Next day had a meeting at Trawden. On
first day I went again to Marsden meeting, which was a thorough good
opportunity, and we were sweetly comforted together.

Being now pretty much fatigued with constant traveling and close labor, I
rested at Jonathan Raine's about a week, and then went to a large meeting of
friends in Lathersdale, where I was much favored, and largely opened to
deliver the doctrines of truth, with good demonstration, and to my own peace.
The next day I had a comfortable open meeting at Airton; my friend Jonathan
Rain bearing me company. From thence to Skipton, and had a meeting; things
were but low. I had that evening a good open opportunity amongst our worthy
friend David Hall's scholars. Thence I went and had a meeting at Fairfield,
which was small, but pretty open and I hope serviceable. The next meeting was
at Nethersdale, where I had very laborious searching work; the testimony was
close and sharp against formal professors, yet, through divine favor, I was
enabled to get through to very good satisfaction, and the meeting ended
comfortably. I went from thence to Asquith, where was a small open meeting. The
next meeting was at Rodan, and being on a first day, it was very large: a plain
solid body of friends belonged thereunto. We were favored with an open
meeting, the testimony of truth being exalted. Next day I had a very
comfortable open meeting at Bradford, and went to Keighley, which was also an
open satisfactory meeting. There I received from my worthy friend David Hall,
by the hands of his wife, a truly substantial and encouraging letter: as it
contains matter of weighty instruction, I willingly give it a place here, not
doubting but it will be very agreeable to some readers, and think it cannot
hurt any.

Esteemed and well-beloved Friend,
IN the sweet spirit, and fellowship of the everlasting and glorious gospel of
peace, I hereby kindly salute thee, and thy dear companion and fellow laborer
in the acceptable work thou art now engaged in; not forgetting his worthy
consort Margaret, when thou see her. Be not at all discouraged on any
account, for I trust, thy good Lord and master whom thou serves, who made thee
willing to leave thy outward habitation and little ones, and to traverse the
rugged ocean with thy life in thy hand, as an ambassador in Christ's stead, to
preach glad tidings of good things to the meek; to call upon and rouse the
indolent and careless; to direct the straying sheep unto the fold of rest; to
raise the drooping ones that are now too low, and endeavor to bring down the
lofty that are too high, to the true center, even the midst of the path of
judgment: in short, to bring unto us the pledges of thy master's love and
thine, and to receive ours; who, after he had in his wisdom and counsel,
suffered thee to be taken captive for the trial of thy faith, in mercy ransomed
thee as an evidence of his power, will never leave thee nor forsake thee. I
have unity with thy spirit, gift, and with the manner of the administration
thereof. I entreat thee, dear brother, keep to thy steady bottom way. The
present state of the church loudly calls upon us, for the entire resignation,
faith, hope, charity, and patience of the ministers of the gospel.

The diversities of gifts, operations, and administrations, from the one
spirit, are beautiful and serviceable: as the stars in the firmament are not
all of one magnitude, have not all one station nor degree of luster, but are
each ornamental and serviceable in their respective places and seasons. The
Lord bless thee, be thy shield and exceeding great reward in time here, and in
eternity hereafter. Now as the apostle, in a paternal way, advised his son
Timothy, to drink no longer water, but use a little wine for his stomach's sake
and his often infirmities: I desire, as thou servest not an austere man or hard
master, but the most merciful and bountiful King of Kings and Lord of Lords,
thou will take due care of thyself, and rightly consider thy constitution. Do
not drive on too fast in this cold climate and season of the year; consider,
nets are not always to be spread and cast into the sea, but sometimes to be
mended and repaired. Thou finds the good seed lies low in many bosoms, and many
meetings; experience teaches thee, that where and when our master suffers; who
said, where I am, there shall my servant be; we ought to be content to suffer
with him; that when he reigns, we may also reign with him: shall the servant
think to reign, when and where his Lord and master suffers? There are, my
dear friend, thou know, times of sitting at the king's-gate; a safe,
honorable, and profitable situation, previous to advancement: they that are
faithful in this low, safe sitting, in due time receive a call from the king to
put on his royal robes, mount his horse and ride around, which is a high
dignity, and a high day; yet those so favored, must not expect always to sit
in that saddle, nor always to be clothed with that royal apparel, but as
certainly dismount, as ever they mounted; and must by no means forget the road
to the honorable king's-gate, and their honorable seat there. We should be
glad to see thee here once more. Pray write to us. My wife joins with me in
dear love to thee, and those abovementioned.

I am thy truly affectionate friend, DAVID HALL.
Skipton, the 19th of 10th month, 1748.

After this meeting, I went home with my companion Jonathan Rain, to Trawden.
From thence I went next day to Todmorden, and had a laborious exerciseing
meeting there; yet through the extending of heavenly help, I was enabled to
discharge the service required, to mine own ease and comfort in a good degree.
I had a small poor meeting at Oldham next day; silent labor seemed to be my
proper business therein. On first day, the 25th of 10th month, I went to
Croshawbooth in Rossendale, which was a pretty large meeting; but I was in so
weak a state of body, being much spent with traveling and deep close labor,
having for some time but a very poor appetite, that my spirits were greatly
exhausted; so that finding my mind engaged in that meeting, I stood up in order
to deliver what seemed to be required, but was obliged soon to sit down again,
being so very weak and spent I could not raise my voice, so as to be heard. I
then concluded it was time to take some rest, in order to recover strength as
formerly if it was the Lord's will, which I did not then much expect, thinking
myself far gone; nor indeed did I desire it; for my afflictions, several ways,
about that time were very heavy, which made me weary of this world, and had it
been the Lord's will, should have been glad to have embraced death rather than
life; yet I endeavored to be resigned to the divine will. Great care was taken
of me with affectionate kindness, by my worthy friends Jonathan Rain, his
wife, and her sister Ann who then lived with them; having often the company of
that valuable family, the Ecroyds of Edgend: I was brought very near these two
families in that love that thinks no evil; being by illness, or rather
weakness, detained there about nine or ten weeks. It was an exceeding wet
season; being also the dead of winter, yet I got mostly out to their meeting,
which was near; and went diverse times to Marsden-Height meeting, about four
miles off; and once to Skipton, and Lotherdale, about eight or ten miles off:
in most of which meetings the Lord was with me to my great comfort, enlarging
my heart in service for him and his people, to my satisfaction and
encouragement. As soon as I was pretty well recovered and the weather more fit
to travel in, I set out for Lancaster; my kind friend Jonathan Rain bearing me
company; and attended both their meetings on first day; being painful and
laborious. I had nothing given me to deliver by way of public testimony; diverse
friends there appeared to me then, and more since, lively and sensible of the
work of true religion; yet I apprehend, the expectations of too many were out
after words that day, which was to be disappointed. O that all were really
turned to the more sure word, that they might never be disappointed! I was next
day at their monthly meeting of business, which was low, truth not having much
dominion therein. I went to Wyersdale, and had a pretty open meeting; returned
to Lancaster, where next day, we were through divine goodness, favored with a
heavenly baptizing meeting, to our great joy in reverent thankfulness; friends
being sweetly united in the precious enjoyment of the pure love and goodness of
God; having an additional confirmation, that when the Lord is pleased to shut,
none can open, and when he is pleased to open, none can shut. As there had been
very little openness at diverse meetings there before, and at this the Lord
opened places of broad rivers and streams, to the unspeakable pleasure and
refreshment of thirsty souls; in a sense thereof I took my leave of friends,
being accompanied by my esteemed friends William Backhouse and Jonathan Rain.
We had a pretty open comfortable meeting at the Fylde. Next day had a thorough
awakening opportunity at Freckleton, being enabled to divide the word with
great plainness to their states; wherein I had ease and peace. We then went to
Preston, where the number of friends was exceeding small, and but little to be
felt of a spiritual travail or lively sense of religion amongst those few,
there having been a mournful declension; yet I found the Lord's merciful
loving kindness graciously extended toward them for their help and recovery.
From Preston I went to the following meetings, viz. Cappul, Ashton,
Bickerstaff, and Leverpool: in all which, the Lord was graciously pleased to
afford wisdom and strength, to open doctrine and counsel for the stirring up
careless lukewarm professors, as well as to the encouragement and edification
of the sincere-hearted, also to mine own ease and peace in a good degree. I
went from Leverpool to the house of Gilbert Thompson, and was at Penketh
meeting on first day; where my spirit was deeply afflicted, under a sense of
too many professors sitting down at ease, seeking to be fed with words and
outward declarations concerning the things of God. I have found this much the
case at some places where eminent instruments have dwelt. Friends have suffered
their minds to be too much drawn from a diligent spiritual labor, to receive
the bread and water of life immediately from the fountain thereof; and depended
upon the labor of such instruments who are but as clouds or water-spouts;
having no power to fill themselves nor to feed the flock profitably, until
furnished for that purpose, by the bounty of the inexhaustible treasury of
wisdom and all sufficiency. Here the fountain is forsaken for the stream's
sake; the eye being more to the gift than the giver, which is an abuse of the
gift, and provokes the Lord to jealousy; giving him just cause to withhold such
instrumental means from people. The reason of such a dangerous mistake, to me
is obvious, viz. because it is found easier for flesh to receive by such a
medium; Let not God speak unto us, lest we die, said the people of Israel, but
let Moses [the instrument] speak unto us. There is a life that ought to die on
the cross, which is easier saved alive under testimonies be they ever so
substantial and excellent, than under the immediate teachings of Christ; whose
voice is as a fire against evil of every kind, and affords no peace after it is
discovered, until it be given up for destruction, and to be purged away by the
spirit of judgment and burning. This pure voice speaks to us in such a manner,
as that we can by no means turn it off from ourselves by applying it to the
states of others; which may be done under the most searching testimonies; there
being a partiality to ourselves, which, through the deceitfulness of the heart,
we are but too apt to fall into; and also to flatter ourselves, by supposing
the pleasure we take in hearing the doctrines of truth delivered, arises from
the good in us, when it may be no other than the state of those, to whom the
prophet Ezekiel's words and declarations were as a lovely song, of one that
has a pleasant voice: for they heard his words, it seems, with pleasure, but
did them not; their heart going still after their covetousness. I have
lengthened this remark the more, because of the very hurtful consequences I
often have seen and felt, by an over-anxiousness in people after outward
declarations; even to the neglect of that great and necessary work, of drawing
near to God with true hearts, in full assurance of faith; wherein is our only
safety and help. May this consideration deeply engage all minds to return unto
him, the great shepherd of Israel, who puts his own sheep forth and goes
before them, leading into green pastures, bringing them up from the
washing-pool, bearing twins, none being barren amongst them. I found it my
place to give that meeting an example of silence. From thence I went to their
monthly meeting at Hartshaw, wherein I sat a considerable time in silent
waiting upon and seeking the Lord, who was pleased in his own time to open a
living spring of ministry, and truth greatly prevailed, to the comfort and
edification of friends: there being also diverse not of our society present
during the meeting for worship, amongst whom one, who expressed a sense he had
of an awful solemnity to be felt in the meeting before any words were uttered,
which to him exceeded words or outward declarations, or to that effect: as a
friend told me afterward. This, doubtless, would be much more the case with
many who at times come amongst us, were our religious meetings held more in the
sensible feeling of the divine power. From thence I went to Manchester, and had
a meeting there, which was low and afflicting. Some who should have been
way-marks and leaders of the flock, not keeping their own spirits in due
subjection to the peaceable spirit of truth, had not maintained the unity
thereof, which is the bond of peace: whereby that meeting was hurt and the
pernicious effects thereof were painfully felt. I staid until their first day
meetings were over, where the Lord was pleased to afford sufficient ability to
discharge the service required, to mine own ease and comfort, in a good degree.
I went from thence to Stockport in Cheshire, and had an open comfortable
meeting, to the reviving of those few who labored to keep their habitations in
the truth, and warning of careless professors. I had next day a small poor
meeting at Macclesfield. I went from thence to Morley, where, although the
appearance of professors was large, yet very little to be felt of the life of
religion amongst them; but instead thereof, a sense of death and darkness,
occasioned by wrong things. I had no openness at that time to administer any
thing, but an example of silence. I had a meeting next day at Frandley, where
truth favored with a degree of openness. I went from thence to Sutton, where
things appeared low: I found it my place to sit the whole meeting in silence.
The next meeting was at Newton, being on first day, where I was favored with a
pretty thorough opportunity to clear myself. Then went to West-Chester; had a
small meeting there in silence, and things appeared very low. The next day I
had a good satisfactory meeting at Namptwich; and went to Middlewich, where I
met our worthy friend Joshua Toft. The meeting was, through divine goodness
extended for our help, to pretty good satisfaction. I went home with the
abovementioned friend, and had a meeting next day at Leek in Staffordshire: I
sat the whole time in silence; friends appeared to me, in too general a way, at
ease in an empty form of religion, depending on the labor of others. I went
next day in company with Joshua Toft, to the burial of a friend at Stafford;
there were but few of our society thereabout, but many others came, some of
whom were very rude and noisy in the meeting. Our way was quite blocked up as
to ministry. I returned with Joshua Toft and went to Leek meeting on first day,
wherein I had a thorough rousing opportunity; truth being exalted, and the
great name of God magnified, who alone is worthy for ever. I went from thence
in company with my dear friend Joshua Toft, to the quarterly meeting for
Cheshire, to be held at Middlewich: infinite kindness was greatly manifested at
that meeting, for the benefit of friends in general and the encouragement of
the upright-hearted in particular. Things respecting truth and friends being in
the general, very low in that county; yet the Lord, in condescending kindness,
extended his love for their revival and recovery. Here I found my mind engaged
to visit Morley meeting again, the aforesaid friend joining me therein; and
sending notice by some friends returning from the quarterly meeting; we had a
very large meeting, composed of friends and others. I had thorough service
therein; yet near the conclusion, not finding my mind clear of those under our
profession, others were desired to withdraw, which they immediately did. Our
labor was very close and searching amongst those under the profession of
truth, things being much out of order; undue liberties having crept in. The
Lord favored me with wisdom and strength, so to discharge myself of the
service required, as to go away with a peaceful easy mind.

I have now to give an account of an unexpected turn I found in my mind,
respecting the course I was to steer in my travels. When I left Lancaster I had
no other view than to visit meetings agreeable to the foregoing account, and to
proceed in a pretty direct course through the Midland counties toward London.
But, very contrary to my expectation, I found my way quite blocked up and
stopped as to what is before hinted, and another opened before me, viz. To turn
into Yorkshire again, and take meetings in my way to the quarterly meeting
there; from thence to Lancaster quarterly meeting; and to the circular
yearly meeting for the northern counties, to be held that year at Kendal; after
which, to cross the sea for Ireland. But O, the close exercise this
unlooked-for turn brought upon my mind: not so much out of reluctance to obey
the Lord's requiring, provided I was favored with clear certainty thereof, as
fears of being mistaken; and great reasonings there were in my weakness; yet
through divine favor, I was enabled, in a good degree to go over them, and to
yield obedience to that which I believed was required. I thereupon acquainted
my friend William Backhouse with the time I purposed going for Ireland, as he,
when with me in the Fylde country of Lancashire, had signified his desire of
bearing me company therein, when I found it my duty to undertake it; although
neither he nor I thought then it would be so soon; however, I received his
answer, that he intended to prepare against the time proposed, in order to bear
me company. We went from this meeting to Lowlighton in Derbyshire, where we
were favored with a good open meeting, and so proceeded over the mountains of
Derbyshire-Peak, to Sheffield in Yorkshire; where the Lord was pleased to give
us a very gracious confirming meeting; truth and its testimony being greatly
exalted. This blessed opportunity removed all my reasonings and fears before
hinted; for which my soul was humbly thankful to the Lord, my alone helper.
After this meeting my much esteemed friend Joshua Toft and I took leave of each
other, he returning home. I went with our worthy friend John Haslam to his
house at Handsworth Woodhouse, where the next day I had a very open
satisfactory meeting; the Lord affording doctrine and counsel suitable to the
states of those few belonging to that meeting. When at the house of my friend
beforementioned, my mind was touched with something like his bearing me
company to York and from thence to Kendal yearly meeting, which I informed him
of; but he made very light of it, perhaps thinking my motive was only for the
sake of having his company. I advised him to take with him such things as he
might think necessary, in case he was to go; and if, when at York, he found no
such concern, he might then return home. We set out together for York, taking
meetings in our way, at Newel-Grange and Barton, which were precious open
times; the life and power of truth attending to our great comfort. We traveled
on to Leeds, and lodged at our worthy friend Christiana Horne's, who in her
time had been a succourer of many of the Lord's messengers, being a truly
open-hearted woman, a mother in our Israel. But she did not continue a great
while in mutability after this. Next day we proceeded to York, and attended the
quarterly meeting; but cannot find any memorandum by me of its state, therefore
have but little to say concerning it. I staid over their first day meetings at
York; they were hard and painful; I had nothing by way of testimony, save a
little at one of them. My truly valuable friend John Haslam acquainted me, that
what I had said to him at his own house, of bearing me company to Lancaster
quarterly meeting and the yearly meeting at Kendal, had laid such close hold of
his mind that he could not find freedom to leave me. He said I had, by those
few expressions, although he did not much regard them at first, cast such a
mantle over him, (or to that effect) that he found he must go with me, though
not so well provided for the journey as he could desire. We went from York to
our friend William Hird's, and from thence to David Hall's, and so to the
monthly meeting at Settle. In the afternoon the same day, we were at the burial
of a friend there, which was an open satisfactory time, truth overshadowing the
meeting, and the testimony thereof was exalted to our great comfort. Next day
we had a pretty open comfortable meeting at Bentham, and went from thence to
the house of our friend William Backhouse, who I expected to find prepared to
go with me into Ireland; but to my no small surprise, I found he had reasoned
it away, under an apprehension that his proposal of accompanying me proceeded
more from his love to me than any real concern at that time. I was fully
persuaded his concern was right, as he had acquainted me it had remained on his
mind to visit Ireland again for some years: I therefore had a great travail in
my mind for him, that he might be brought to a right sense and discerning of
the Lord's requirings; being fully satisfied he was a man of sincerity, who
would not wilfully transgress.

I took an opportunity with him next morning, and his concern returning, and he
abiding steadily under the weight thereof, afterward performed the said
journey to his own peace, and was to me an agreeable friend and
fellow laborer. Having appointed to meet me at Whitehaven; we went from his
house to Lancaster, and attended their meetings on first day. In both which I
found it my business to set an example of silence. I was taken suddenly that
night after all were a bed, with an uncommon swelling in my throat, not much
unlike a quinsey; I could scarcely swallow liquids for some time, so that it
seemed very probable to those about me, that it would soon be over with me, as
to this world. Concerning which, I was very easy in my mind. A doctor was
quickly sent for; by whose care, under divine favor, I soon recovered, so as
to attend the yearly meeting at Kendal. It was very large, there being a great
collection of friends from many parts, and large numbers of people of other
societies. This meeting was divinely favored, especially at the concluding
meeting, wherein God's everlasting truth triumphed gloriously, and my poor
depressed spirit, that had long waded under the weight of wrong things, was
raised into comfortable dominion, and obtained, through the captain of our
salvation, complete victory over those hard unmortified spirits, undue
liberties, and carnal lifeless professors, I had long mourned under a painful
sense of, in my northern travels; now I was set over them all, for I sensibly
perceived, and livingly felt his eternal power set over all wrong spirits, and
clearly saw the Lamb and his followers will obtain the victory: and although it
has been, is, and will be, through great sufferings; yet those who patiently
suffer with Christ, shall also reign with him. This meeting crowned all my
service in those parts; after which I found my mind quite at liberty to embark
for Ireland. I set out next day for Whitehaven in company with my good friend
Christopher Wilson; a very pleasant journey we had, in that sweet innocent
freedom which clothed our spirits, feeling the consolating streams of that
river which makes glad the city of God. Here we, in degree, enjoyed the new
heavens and the new earth wherein dwells righteousness: the fruit and effect
whereof is quietness and assurance for ever. I was at Pardshaw meeting, being
on a first day. It was a precious opportunity; truth was greatly in dominion
and its testimony exalted, the sincere-hearted being sweetly comforted and
united one to another. The next day I went to their monthly meeting, and had
good service, both in the meeting of worship and that for transacting the
affairs of the church. The weighty service of visiting families was before that
meeting, and I understood had been sometime obstructed by some of the members,
to the concern and uneasiness of others. It was clear to me, when it came to be
weightily considered, that the power and virtue of truth was livingly with the
promoters of so good a work, and I did fully believe the Lord would bless it in
their hands. I therefore endeavored to sift the opposite side as well as I
could, to the bottom, and found very little or no weight in what they had to
offer against it. Upon which they were earnestly desired not to hinder the
service of others, in that important work that had so often and so evidently
been blessed, although they might be unwilling to put their own hands thereto.
Truth arose and came over them, so that friends at that meeting appointed
fifteen or sixteen men and women, to go in several companies on the service, as
that monthly meeting is large in its extent. This afforded great relief and
satisfaction to the sincere travelers for Sion's prosperity. I went from
thence accompanied by several friends, to Whitehaven, where I met my intended
companion William Backhouse; and a ship belonging to a friend, whose name was
James Nicholson, being ready to sail for Dublin, we went on board of her, the
19th of the 2d month, 1749, in the evening, and were soon under sail. We met
with contrary winds, and a very rough uneasy passage as to our bodies; being
five days and as many nights before we landed. What made it much harder for
William and me to bear, we had given up the beds prepared for us to two women
friends that came on board and were unprovided, they being also very sea-sick
most of the time; so we were under a necessity of lying down on the cabin floor
or upon some of the chests, in our clothes, which we did not take off all the
while, that I remember. This proved very trying and hard to us, and greatly
spent and fatigued we were when we landed at Dublin: where we were received and
entertained with affectionate kindness by our friend Samuel Judd and family, at
whose house we lodged while in that city. The half year's meeting began in the
morning of the day we landed, it being afternoon when we got on shore.

The next day we attended two meetings for the affairs of the church; and I am
fully persuaded, there was a faithful exercised remnant, painfully laboring
for the restoration of ancient beauty and comeliness, and the affairs of the
church were transacted with very considerable order and decency; yet my spirit
was, as it were, clothed with deep mourning, and much closed up in painful
anxiety. The cause whereof I did not then distinctly understand; but when I had
traveled through the nation, visiting the churches, and sorrowfully viewing
the desolations thereof, my sufferings in spirit at the half year's meeting
were no longer a mystery to me. The next morning was held a general large
concluding meeting for worship and in the afternoon a meeting of ministers and
elders; at both which, especially the latter, I had open thorough service; as
also in their weekday meeting at Sycomore-alley on sixth-day. We staid at
Dublin over first day: at Meath-Street in the morning the Lord was pleased to
furnish largely with matter and utterance, to a good degree of satisfaction. In
the afternoon at Sycomorealley, I found it my duty to be silent. On second-day
we set out from Dublin, accompanied by James Evans and wife, in order to visit
the following meetings in our way toward Cork, viz. Ballycane, Wicklow,
Errats, Wrights, Cooladine, Wexford, Lambston, Ross, Waterford, Clonmel,
Kilcomon, Youghall, and so to Cork. We found things very low indeed in most of
the said meetings; my labor in them was generally searching, painful, and
laborious. Truth seldom having that comfortable dominion (by reason of the
prevalence of wrong things) as was earnestly labored for, both by us, and also
by a few mourners scattered up and down in those parts, who waited for, and
ardently sought the prosperity of Zion. Such can only rejoice when the
righteous seed bears rule. We had several meetings in the city of Cork, where
there is a considerable body of friends, as to number. But oh! the love of this
world and other undue liberties, has prevailed, to the great hurt of the
society there also. Our labor was for the most part, painful and exercising
amongst them. From thence we went to Kilcomon again; so to Cashel, Limerick,
Jonathan Barns's, and Birr. At several of which meetings I found it my place to
example the people with silence, which was the case at Birr, having (as it was
said) all the people called Methodists residing there, and their preacher at
the meeting; than whom, I think no people are more at a loss what to do with
silence in worship; I am persuaded there have been awakenings of merciful
kindness to them, and they have seen the necessity of the newbirth; but their
notions about it have been for the most part, in the airy visions, and
flightiness of their own imaginations; not coming to cease from man, or from
their own willings and runnings. Oh that they were so happy as to be emptied!
that God might be all in all, working in them the will and the deed; then would
they come really to experience true poverty of spirit, and to abhor forward
active self, whose time is always ready. In this safe, self-denying situation,
they would really feel an absolute necessity to wait, as with their mouths in
the dust before the Lord, until he shall be pleased to arise in their hearts;
whereby all his and their enemies would be scattered. Then would true worship
be performed, and they established upon the immovable rock that the gates of
hell cannot prevail against. After Birr, we had meetings at the Moat,
Old-Castle, Ballyhaise, Coothill, and Castleshane; which meetings were mostly
small and painful; truth favored with a degree of strength, to labor for
their help and recovery; but, alas! the life of religion appeared to be at a
very low ebb. The next meetings we had were at Ballyhagen and Charlemont, which
were large, yet but little to be felt of the life of religion moving or
stirring in them; neither did there appear to be much soundness amongst some of
the foremost rank; several of whom having administered cause of stumbling and
discouragement to others, it had a bad favor and influence; instead of
gathering, it had tended to scatter from the fold of Christ's flock. I had very
close searching-work amongst them, in order to bring the judgment of truth over
such, as the Lord was pleased to open my way and to discover their states to
me, being altogether without any outward information thereof. I understood
afterward some of them resented it, though they said nothing to me about it;
but as some had before, so I understood one or more of them did soon after,
manifest a base ungodly foundation. We proceeded from thence to take the
meetings round Lough Neigh, viz. Toberhead, Colraine, Ballinacre, Grange, and
Antrim; which meetings appeared indeed almost a desolation with respect to the
sensible possession of truth, although it was professed by some. A time of deep
mourning and distress it was to my soul, to view their captivity and loss,
which themselves did not seem to have much sense of. The next meeting was
Ballinderry, being very large, but heavy and painful; yet the blessed power of
truth prevailed in a good degree. From thence we went to the following places
and had meetings, viz. Lisburn, Hilsborough, Lurgan, and Moyallan; where,
although we found some true mourners in and for Zion, yet the bulk of the
society seemed to love the world and the things that are therein, to that
degree, as to have very little taste or relish for the things of God. Even some
of those, who, by their stations in the church, ought to have been lively
examples of self-denial in this respect, appeared to be as deeply plunged into
this mournful cause of desolation as any. Alas! what account will they have to
give of their stewardship, when the chief shepherd shall appear. From this
place we crossed the country to Edenderry; once remarkable for a brave, lively
body of friends: there are now a large number of professors belonging to it;
but, alas! the glory is much departed, and the fountain of living water
forsaken by many. Oh, how are they gone into captivity by the muddy waters of
Babylon! We attended their meeting on a first day, but could hear no melody or
song of Zion; all being closed up, and our harps hung, as it were, upon the
willows. It was a time of deep silent mourning. About the time of breaking up
that meeting, it livingly sprung in my mind, that as they had rejected abundant
favors bestowed upon them that they might be gathered to God, so the Lord
would reject many of them. The next meetings we had, were at Timahoe, Rathagon,
Mount Melick, Mountrath, Ballinakill, at James Hucheson's, Carlow, Kilconner,
and the province meeting at Castle Dermot. Pain, distress, and close labor,
either in testimony, or an example of silence, attended in the last-mentioned
meetings; yet the Lord was a gracious support through all. I hope our deep
wadings and painful service, was not without some good effects, both to the
stirring up the careless, and comforting the mourners in Zion. I had very close
service at the province meeting; yet, by divine favor, was carried through to
pretty good satisfaction, and I believe it was a serviceable meeting to many.
From thence, in our way to Dublin, we had meetings at Athy, Ballytore, and
Baltybois, which were very small, and true religion very low. From thence we
went to Dublin, intending shortly to embark for England. We attended the
meetings in the city, both on first and other days of the week during our stay,
but I had very little openness therein; being made to the professors as a sign
and example of silence from meeting to meeting. Great indeed were my inward
distresses, on account of the mournful declension of the church in Ireland: the
Lord knows, and was my only support under it. Blessed be his name for ever!
Diverse there were amongst themselves, who greatly lamented it. The travail of
whose pained souls, I hope the Lord of sabbaths will regard in his own time, so
as to turn his hand again upon a greatly declined church, that he may, by the
spirit of judgment and burning, purely purge away her dross, take away her tin
and reprobate silver; that her judges may be restored as at the first, and her
counselors as at the beginning.

It may by some be looked upon rather imprudent, to lay open the defection and
spiritual condition or state of our society, which depends so much upon my own
testimony of an inward sense given me thereof in my travels. In the first
place, no other person can do it for me, and I cannot find my mind easy that it
should be wholly omitted. It has been so repeatedly, and with such clear
evidence to my understanding confirmed, that I have not the least doubt of what
I write in that respect; although it be with a considerable degree of
reluctance, yet it seems my way, and I am not easy to go out of it; intending
no other by those close remarks, than as lessons of instruction, caution, and
warning to succeeding generations; if, when I am removed hence, this be looked
upon worth printing. So far I may add, that the laying open the mournful
declension of the society, and pointing out some of the causes thereof, as my
understanding might be opened thereinto, was one of the principal things that
engaged me to write a journal: it never entering into my thought, that my
travels and little services, singly considered, were of such consequence as to
merit the regard of my friends, so as to be published; but thinking the account
of my travels and the observations of the state of things are necessarily
connected together, so that in doing the first, I could not well avoid the
last. I have further to add, that I think myself also warranted herein, by the
example of God's faithful witnesses in ages past, with whom it was usual to lay
open the states of the people, both in an individual manner and in a more
collective body, viz. as nations, societies, or churches; also setting forth,
for a warning to all succeeding generations, those particular evils which
caused the Lord's displeasure, and would, if not turned from, bring down his
judgments upon them. We also find, that even these warnings and heavy
denunciations of judgment, were preserved in writing, as a testimony for God,
and against themselves, even by those against whom they were really given
forth; yea, the particular evils and frailties which, through inadvertency, the
Lord's choice servants fell into, and deeply repented of, are recorded; not
only as warnings to all, but also to excite charity and tenderness toward
those who have fallen into evil, in case they repent and forsake; considering
ourselves, that we may also be tempted, and therefore never dare upbraid those,
who, through their own imprudence, have fallen amongst thieves and are naked
and wounded, provided they return again to the father's house. I have just
further to remark, that I have observed a prevailing disposition in some of
considerable eminence in the society, and in a great many others, to cry up
mightily for peace and charity, the maintenance of unity, and not to press any
thing very closely, lest the peace of the society should thereby be endangered;
although, perhaps, the things urged cannot well be objected to upon any other
principle, than groundless fears, and a faint-hearted mind not yet quite
upright to God, nor wholly redeemed from the praise of men: as there is an
unwillingness to displease them, though in maintaining the Lord's cause: for if
I yet pleased men (said Paul) I should not be the servant of Christ. What makes
me take notice of this, is, that I have seen a great snare in it, wrong things
suffered to remain and prevail under it, and the fire of primitive zeal against
undue liberty, too much quenched. We have no such examples in the prophets, or
in Christ and his apostles, of indulgence, and winking at wrong things, and
false ease. They, in their concern to testify against such things, had no fear
of breaking unity, nor disturbing the quiet and peace of any people, let their
rank or station be what it may. Had this noble spirit of ancient zeal been more
generally exercised in plain dealing and speaking the truth one to another, the
mournful declension so justly complained of amongst us as a people, would not
have so generally prevailed. It is but about a century, since the Lord, by an
outstretched arm, gathered our society, as from the barren mountains and
desolate hills of empty profession; chooseing them for his own peculiar flock
and family; as by many evident tokens of his love and mighty protection, does
fully appear: even when the powers of the earth, like the raging waves of the
sea, rose up against them, with full purpose to scatter and lay waste. This
remarkable instance of his regard, must, I think, gain the assent of every
considerate person, who has not yet a capacity of understanding clearly the
Lord's gracious dealings with his people, in a more spiritual and mysterious
relation. When I view the multitude of his favors and blessings to them in
this respect, I am afraid even to attempt the recounting and setting forth so
copious and amazing a subject, which can better be admired, and the bountiful
author adored for the same. It may be justly queried, what could the Lord have
done for us that he has not done? Notwithstanding which, what indifference,
lukewarmness, and insensibility as to the life of religion, is now to be found
amongst numbers under our name; nay, in some places, this painful lethargy is
become almost general; although I hope a few may be excepted, who are much
afflicted on that account, being exceedingly burdened with an earthly, carnal
spirit. Oh! how does covetousness which is idolatry, and an inordinate love of
things, lawful in themselves and places, cloak, shelter, and hug themselves,
even under a plain appearance in some; yet plainness is no more to blame for
that, than the name disciple or apostle was to blame, because Judas once bore
that name. I could write much more on this mournful subject, having suffered so
deeply in my travels on account of the grievous declension; but hope to ease my
mind, by dropping here and there a remark, as I proceed in giving account of my
travels.

We embarked at Dublin the eighteenth of the 5th month in the morning, and
landed at Peel near Swarthmoor-Hall next day. One thing I am not quite free to
omit, as I could not well help looking upon it a providential preservation of
my life, viz. the sands being very extensive thereabout, and we happening
rather too late, as to the time of tide-serving, to be set on shore, could not,
by the waters leaving of us, bring the boat up so as to land in time. We were
thus set fast, about half a mile from firm land. We could therefore think of no
better way in this difficulty, than accepting the poor sailors assistance,
which they kindly offered us, viz. to carry us to land on their backs, which
was no small undertaking, as we were, especially myself, none of the lightest;
however, I was the first, and believe the sailor, who was a strong man, would
have carried me to land, had not both of us, in our journey thither, fallen
into a large quick-sand. The sailor immediately left me (his burden) to shift
for myself, whilst he did the same; but he had greatly the advantage of me, as
he could swim, which I had never learned. However, I was, some how or other,
buoyed up in a wonderful manner, so that I never was plunged over head; to
which, perhaps, my great coat buttoned about me, might in some measure
contribute. I well remember, that I could feel nothing under my feet but water,
or soft mud that could bear up no more than water; my head being all the while
above water; I knew which way we tumbled in, and being near the bank, I made
some shift to scramble to it, and to climb up of myself. I then waded to the
shore, being exceeding wet and dirty. We went to a poor cottage, where the
accommodations were indeed very mean; but the poor people's kindness and
hospitality was very noble, which we did not let pass unrewarded. We got that
night to my affectionate companion's house; having traveled the
beforementioned journey with great diligence, in much love and harmony one
with another, and were not quite three months out of England. The first meeting
I went to after we landed, was Yeoland, as my companion belonged to it, which
was a good open meeting; truth being exalted over wrong things. I went from
thence to Lancaster, where I had a satisfactory meeting; the Lord's power in a
good degree having dominion, to our comfort. I went from Lancaster directly to
Warrington, and was at Penketh meeting in the forenoon, being first day; where
the Lord was pleased to favor us with a precious opportunity, truth being
exalted over all, and the sincere travelers Sionward greatly comforted, in the
sweet enjoyment of the Lord's presence, which was livingly felt amongst us.
Praises to his holy name for ever! In the afternoon we had a large meeting at
Warrington, where it appeared my duty to sit in silence; the want of which,
properly employed, proves a great loss to our society in many places. I went
next day, accompanied by my worthy friends Samuel Fothergill and William
Dilworth, in order to be at Marsden-Height yearly meeting, and to visit my kind
friends thereabout. I attended Marsden weekday meeting on fifth-day, which was
satisfactory. On the first day following, the yearly meeting was held, to which
came a large collection of friends from parts adjacent, and a pretty many
people of other persuasions. The Lord was pleased to exalt his glorious truth
and the testimony thereof, in a free and open manner that day, to the comfort
of many hearts. I went from thence to Todmorden, and so to Manchester, being
accompanied by my affectionate friends Jonathan Rain and his wife. At
Manchester we had an open comfortable meeting, truth having dominion; wherein
alone the upright-hearted can rejoice, with joy unspeakable and full of glory.
I went to Oldham meeting on first day; which was in a good degree open, and I
hope serviceable. The next day I traveled to my worthy friend Joshua Toft's
near Leek; had a meeting there, in which I found it my place to sit the whole
time in silence. From thence I traveled toward Birmingham in Warwickshire,
having my said friend with me. We attended both their meetings, being on
first day; they were very heavy and laborious, through the prevalence of
lukewarmness in some, and undue liberty in others; so that I had but very
little openness at either of the meetings, and was quite shut up in silence at
one of them. The next meetings we had were at Wigansal and Atherstone; but
found the life of religion very low in them. The yearly-meetings for the
westerly counties being to be held at Coventry, we went thither in order to
attend the same, which began on first day, the sixth of the sixth month, 1749.
The meetings were held in a large town hall; convenience being made therein by
friends for the purpose; so that one room which was called the hall, would
contain by computation, not less than a thousand people; and another under the
same roof, it was supposed would contain above five hundred. We had a pretty
large meeting house besides. These, I think, once or more, were all filled at
one time. There was indeed a great collection of friends from many parts, and
very great flockings in of others, amongst whom there was considerable
openness, and their behavior in general was becoming. The gospel was preached
with power, clearness, and good demonstration. I found myself much excused from
public service, which I accounted a favor; having greatly to rejoice in the
exaltation of truth's testimony through well qualified instruments, of whom
there were a considerable number present, whom I greatly preferred, and was
glad the public service fell chiefly upon them; for I have ever accounted it a
concern of great importance, to appear by way of public testimony in those
large assemblies, and have earnestly prayed they might be conducted in the best
wisdom; which, doubtless, would always be the case, if the spirits of all who
undertake the great and awful work of the ministry, were truly subjected to the
alone source or fountain thereof: who is, to his humble dependant ones, wisdom
and utterance. The meeting ended on third-day, to the comfort of friends, and,
as far as appeared, to the general satisfaction of others; whose attention to
what was delivered, and behavior to friends in general, was to their honor,
and the reputation of the city of Coventry. On fourth-day there was a meeting
appointed at my request, in Warwick, to which I went; but when I saw the great
comings in of people; many of whom by their appearance, seemed to be of the
principal inhabitants; I was pretty much intimidated, and fell under
discouragement for a time, knowing my own great weakness. My great fear was,
lest through my means, or that of some others present, truth might suffer. I
cried with earnest concern to the Lord, who sees in secret, and he was
graciously pleased to hear, and to furnish with might, by his spirit in the
inward man; so that the everlasting truth and its testimony, was exalted that
day, and the people appeared to be pretty much affected therewith.

I have many times seen it very profitable to be deeply humbled, and awfully
prostrated before the almighty powerful helper of his people; that so, what we
are in the ministry may be by his grace only; having observed, where the
creaturely part is not wholly abased, but some sufficiency or treasure
belonging thereunto is yet saved or reserved (it being very close work to be
stripped of all) there has been a mixture brought forth; a wearing the linen
and woollen garment, and sowing the field with two sorts of grain; and when any
by custom, their own unwatchfulness, or the neglect of others whose care should
have been over them, become, as it were, established in this mixture, I think
they seldom get out of it the right way, by the bad being removed, and the good
preserved. Oh, it is a great thing to stand fully approved in this solemn
service! to speak as the oracles of God, and to minister of the ability
immediately given by him. Blessed will that servant be, who when his Lord
comes, is found dividing the word aright, giving the flock and family of
Christ their proper portion of meat, and that in due season.

Having a desire to take some meetings in my way into Wales, whither I intended
in order to visit my dear ancient mother, I took the following meetings, viz.
Henley, Broomsgrove, and Worcester. I had close laborious service in them, as
was often my lot where I traveled. I spent about a week at my mother's, having
several large thorough serviceable meetings amongst friends, my old neighbors,
and acquaintance; their hearts being tendered, and some much affected. But,
alas! things are at a low ebb with our society in those parts, and the conduct
of some rather administers cause of stumbling than convincement to others. I
traveled from thence to Bewdly, Stourbridge, and Dudley; my brother Benjamin
bearing me company. I had good open service at the said meetings, and went to
Birmingham, where I had a hard trying meeting as before. I went from thence to
Hartshill general meeting, being on a first day. It was, through divine favor,
an open good meeting. I went the third-day following back to the burial of a
friend at Birmingham; and returned to the house of my kind friend John
Bradford, who bore me company next day to Hinkley in Leicestershire, where we
had a pretty open meeting, and went to Leicester, where the Lord was pleased to
favor us with a satisfactory meeting. Next day I had a small meeting at
Soilby, things being very low there. From thence to Castle-Dumington, and had
two meetings, being first day; to which many friends from Nottingham came; they
were large, and I believe serviceable meetings to many. Next day I had a small
poor meeting at Wimes-Wood; and went to Longclawson, where I could perceive
very little of the life of religion. From thence to Oakham in Rutlandshire, and
had a comfortable meeting; truth and its testimony had considerable dominion.
From thence to Leicester quarterly meeting; and to Kettering in
Northamptonshire; where I had a good degree of openness, and truth prevailed.
Then to Wellingborough, on first day, and attended their fore and afternoon
meetings; the first was a close exercising time, in a painful silence, and
sorrowful sense of the indifference and insensibility of many; it was a large
meeting, and to me, the much greater part appeared very ignorant of the
importance of that worship and service they professed to meet about. In the
afternoon I was favored with wisdom and strength to discharge my mind, in a
close searching testimony. The next day I had a meeting to pretty good
satisfaction, at Rance. The day following I went to the monthly meeting at
Ramsay in Huntingdonshire, where I had good service. After which, had meetings
at Ives, Godmanchester, Erith, and Hadenham; most of which were pretty open and
serviceable, through divine help, for without the Lord's blessing on our
labors, they prove altogether fruitless, the increase being from him alone. I
went next to Mildenhall in Suffolk, where on a first day I had a large meeting
to good satisfaction. The next meetings were at Burry, and Haverill; the last
of which, being mostly people of other societies, was open, and the testimonies
of truth appeared to be well received. I went from thence to Saffron-Walden in
Essex, and had a very painful afflicting meeting: very little to be felt of the
life of religion therein. Oh! what pity it is, so many up and down, do satisfy
themselves with a profession of truth; only having a name to live, when they
are really dead, as to the quickenings of heavenly virtue. The next meeting I
had was at Stebbing; wherein we were favored with the opening of the living
fountain in a good degree; yet there appeared to me to be some obdurate
unfaithful spirits under our profession, who seemed out of reach in a sorrowful
degree, and very hard to be made sensible of the weight and importance of our
religious testimonies; especially in some branches thereof. Such cause a secret
pain and anguish, which covers the minds of poor travelers in the work of the
gospel, like unto the sackcloth underneath. I seldom found room and opportunity
to put it wholly off, though I was frequently favored with a comfortable
evidence, that the Lord was with me, graciously owning my service for him and
his people. At the next meeting at Coggeshall, on first day, I had close,
searching, laborious service, and found something exceeding heavy in that
meeting; yet, by divine favor, I was carried through to a good degree of
satisfaction. Next day I had a meeting at Kelvedon, and another the day
following at Witham. At both which, my labor in testimony was very close and
rousing; in order, if possible, to awaken and stir up lukewarm, unfaithful
professors; and by the blessed efficacy of the word of life, the wholesome
doctrine of truth was set over them, and the few upright-hearted had relief. I
went from thence to Chelmsford, where I had good open service at their weekday
meeting, and also on the first day following: notwithstanding which, a secret
pain accompanied my mind, occasioned, in a great measure no doubt, by those
unfaithful professors before hinted at, who have neither courage nor fidelity
to maintain any branch of our Christian testimony, when there appears any
probability of outward losses, or suffering thereby: dealing with our principle
in a very lax, indifferent manner, taking what they please, and sacrificing the
rest to their own selfish views; such are as spots in our feasts of charity,
and a mournful load to the truly living in religion: but the Lord Almighty, who
hears their groanings, will in his own time grant relief; and these shall bear
their own burdens. I went from Chelmsford to a marriage at Dunmow, and from
thence to Royston in Hertfordshire. Things, as to the life of religion,
appeared very low there; I had nothing to minister unto them but an example of
silence. Next I had a meeting at Baldock, which was low and rather painful. I
went from thence to Hitching, and was at their first day meetings. They were
pretty open and satisfactory. From thence to Ampthill, where things appeared
low. Then to Hogstyend, where I had some openness and satisfaction: at
Sherington I had a low painful meeting. The next meeting I had was at
Northampton, which was a very trying time; but the Lord, by his powerful word,
gave me dominion in a good degree, over dark, libertine spirits: things, as to
true religion, seemed almost lost there. The next meeting was at Bugbrook,
where I had some openness, and got through my service to pretty good
satisfaction. From thence to Coventry, and was at their meetings on first day:
in one whereof, I had close searching labor; I was silent in the other. The
next meeting was at Edington, which was small, and things but low. I went from
thence to a marriage at South-Newton. I found it my place there to sit the
whole meeting in silence. The earnest expectation of people, especially on such
occasions, may, and I believe often does, obstruct the current of right
ministry. Silence, if duly considered, may be the best lesson of instruction,
for those whose life is too much in words or outward declarations. I have
thought some amongst us are so void of a right understanding, as to apprehend a
kind of necessity for something to be done by way of ministry, at marriages,
and funerals especially; it being hard for them to apprehend, that they can be
so honorably conducted without. I have therefore observed some, though but
little concerned in the general, to maintain our testimonies by an uniform
consistent deportment, appear very zealous on these occasions; taking a deal of
pains, and riding many miles, and sometimes from one preacher to another, to
make themselves sure of having one; and when they have been so successful as to
prevail upon any to come, it would no doubt be a great disappointment, were
they wholly silent. In this situation, the minister himself may, unless
well-grounded, be exposed to temptation to gratify such. My principal view in
this remark is, to show how remote such are from the truth they profess, and
how nearly allied to some other professors of Christianity, who make religion
chiefly consist in outward performances; and think it not like a Christian
burial, when a corpse is committed to the earth without something said over it.
If that over-anxiousness in the people, above hinted, should prevail on the
preachers amongst us, to answer their cravings and expectations, both in
attending, and when there, in gratifying them with words, without a due regard
to the holy weight and impressions of the word of life, as the alone moving
cause to public service, they would be lost as to the living body in the
society; and although such might continue in a consistent form of sound words
and sound doctrine, as to the external appearance, yet the substance being
lost, their performances would be no more than as sounding brass, or a tinkling
cymbal. Some, to our sorrow, have been observed to lose ground by such means:
what can we imagine more offensive to the gracious, bountiful giver, than to
prostitute such a precious divine gift, by making it subservient to the carnal
unsanctified desires of those who are strangers to God, yet love to hear of him
and his glorious acts, by the hearing of the ear? From this place I went to
Hooknorton, and had a meeting; wherein my business was to example with silence.
I then went to Sibford, where I had a meeting, and some openness; yet things
were but low. From thence to Banbury, and attended their meetings on a
first day. I had open thorough service in them, and the testimony of truth was
in a good degree exalted. Next day I went to South-Newton again, where I had
great openness, and truth was comfortably in dominion. Much satisfaction is
received by following the safe guidance and conduct thereof, whether in heights
or depths, sufferings or rejoicings. I had a good meeting next day at a place I
forgot the name of; and then to Adderbury, where I had a meeting; things but
low. From thence to Bicester, and had a small poor meeting; there being but
very few under our profession, and but little to be felt of the life of
religion amongst them. My face being now turned toward the city of London, I
had a small meeting at Aylesbury, and some open service therein to my
satisfaction. There are but few friends thereabout. I went to their first day
meeting at Jordans, which was large: my service therein, was to example the
people, friends and others, with silence; which I believe was a considerable
disappointment to many; bat I hope it was profitable to some. Diverse friends
from London met me there. We lodged that night at a friend's house on the way,
and got to the city next day. I continued thereabout three weeks, visiting
meetings diligently every day in the week, except the last, and one more. It
was a very painful time of deep suffering in spirit, even beyond all
expression. I was as a sign of silence from place to place, especially at
Grace Church Street meeting; which, doubtless, was a great mystery to many. But
it was my way to peace of mind, and I sought after contentment, though it might
occasion me to be accounted a fool, by the lofty towering spirits in that city,
who may justly be compared to the tall cedars of Lebanon. I left London the
19th of the 10th month, 1749, to visit the following meetings, viz. Hertford,
and St. Albans, where our friend Benjamin Kidd met me, and accompanied me to
Hempstead, Wickham, and the quarterly meeting at Oxford. The meeting there for
worship was excedingly disturbed and hurt by a rude company of students, who
came in like a flood, and allowed little or no stillness, till by breaking up
the meeting they dispersed; by which means, we held the meeting for discipline
and good order, in a quiet peaceable manner. After meeting I went to Witney;
where next day I had a very painful exercising time, not only under a sense of
undue liberties prevailing, but also of an exalted self-righteous,
self-sufficient state; than which, none are harder to be reached unto, or made
any impression upon: my business was to sit in silent suffering with the
oppressed seed. I went next to Burford, where there seemed to me very little of
the life of religion. From thence I went to Cirencester, where my spirit was
deeply distressed, under a painful sense of wrong things and wrong spirits. The
next meeting I went to was Nailsworth, where I had close searching labor, in
testimony against lukewarmness and undue liberties. From thence to the
quarterly meeting for Wiltshire; being a stranger and altogether unexpected by
friends there, the close searching testimony given me to bear, especially
relating to the state of some active members, might be better taken, and might
have more effect, than if the same had come from one better acquainted with
their states. I always coveted, to be wholly unacquainted with the states of
meetings by outward information, in all my travels; and when, by the discourse
of friends previous to my attending them, there appeared any probability of
their inadvertently opening in my hearing, any thing of that kind, I have
generally either stopped them, or walked away out of hearing; but in general,
friends who entertain us in our travels, have more prudence, and a better guard
in these respects; as indeed all ought: for it straitens, and may give much
uneasiness to right spirited ministers, who have a sure infallible guide
within, and therefore have no need of any outward guide or information in their
services. After this meeting, I visited the following meetings in that county,
viz. at the house of John Fry, in Sutton. Caln, Chippenham, Melsham, Corsham,
Bradford, Lavington, and Salisbury, and found things mostly low, painful, and
laborious to work through; as those under our profession appeared to me, in too
general a way, satisfying themselves with the religion of their education only;
without much experience in the life and virtue thereof, operating upon their
hearts. Some, it is to be feared, undertaking to rule and act in the church
without a proper qualification, and so do not therein seek the honor that
comes from God only. Here the equal balance and standard is not kept to;
partiallity gets place; men and women's persons are respected, because of
riches or outward substance: true judgment is perverted; wickedness escapes
censure, to the affecting the whole community, as in the case of Achan. Such
things provoke the Lord, (who is the only strength and defense of his people)
to withdraw. They then become languid; their hearts become water, and the
inhabitants of the land prevail against them, till they are in the end made
desolate. The next meetings I had were Andover, Whitchurch, Basingstoke, and
Alton; having, through divine help, had some profitable service, tending to
warn and excite friends to a more diligent and careful discharge of the several
duties their stations required: but I could not help viewing, with some painful
reflections, a lukewarmness and declension which sorrowfully prevails in many
places. At Alton, which is a large meeting, I found some solid weighty friends,
to whom my spirit was nearly united; having, in the main, good satisfaction and
openness amongst them; with searching close service to the unfaithful; in which
I was favored with the comfortable help of upright spirits, whose sincere
travel is maintained for an increase of faithful laborers in the Lord's
vineyard and the restoring of ancient beauty.

Now did my deep and painful labors in this visit begin to wear off, and to
draw toward a period, as far as related to my travels at this time, in
Great Britain and Ireland. I therefore soon expected a full discharge, as I
then saw little before me, save the city of London. I had meetings at
Godalming, Guilford, and Esher, in my way thither; in which I had some service
to my own satisfaction, and I hope to the help of friends.

I continued in the city some time, visiting meetings with diligence. My mind
being deeply exercised as usual in a painful travel, with and for the suffering
seed of God in the hearts of professors, who to me appeared, in too general a
way, living, moving, acting and breathing, in an airy exalted region above it.
I have often been ready to say, By whom shall Jacob, the true seed, arise? for
he is very small in the esteem and regard of professors of most ranks. Yet I
could see an afflicted suffering remnant, lie very low, as under the ruins,
panting, and, as it were, struggling for life. And although we could see, and
knew one another, and traveled together under a degree of the same painful
feeling sense of things; yet, not having it in our power to relieve one
another, our proper business was to travel under our respective burden, until
the Almighty Deliverer was pleased to appear, calling his suffering ones to
dominion and rule with him, who is Lord of Lords and King of Kings: for the
Lamb and his followers shall have the victory; though they are permitted
sometimes to suffer long. I had then, at times, faith to believe he would raise
the dry bones, and they should stand upon their feet; an army to fight the
Lord's battles; to bring the mighty from their seats, and to take the crowns of
some who seemed to reign as kings, from them; making their nakedness appear.
Surely the complaints of the Lord, by the mouth of his prophet concerning
Israel, was mournfully verified in the city of London, respecting a great part
of the society, viz. My people have committed two great evils; they have
forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewn them out cisterns, broken
cisterns that can hold no water. Such is a profession, though of the truth
itself, without the real possession. Such is truth in notion, speculation, and
imitation only. The same may be said of whatever is done in religion, without
the immediate influence, direction, and leadings of the holy author's spirit
and power. Sound doctrine may be preached, as to words and the main scope
thereof, and true principles imbibed from education, tuition, or other outward
means; yet the man's part being alive, active, and always ready; the child's
and fool's state, that knows its sufficiency for every good word and work to be
immediately received from God alone, is neither experienced nor abode in. For
it is not you that speak, but the spirit of your Father that speaks in you,
or by you. I say, without this living sense of things, all is but a broken
cistern; it will hold none of the water of life; which is the real cause, that
the endeavors and seeming zeal of some for the promotion of religion, are so
dry, insipid, and inefficacious. Truth will carry its own evidence. The spring
of action being the holy spirit of Christ, it will gain the assent of all his
children, and answer his pure witness in the hearts of the rebellious, far
beyond what many conceive or imagine. Upon which I would just observe, that the
only way to preserve the strength, glory, and dignity of a religious society,
is for all who undertake to be active in it, certainly to feel the Lord leading
and directing them in all their services; and, on the other hand, the sure way
to desolation is, when the active members in religious things move therein by
the strength of human abilities only. A great deal depends hereon, more than
some are aware of; it is observable, that the preservation of the Jewish church
in purity, much depended upon the governors and rulers thereof; and so does,
and will, the prosperity and purity of the Christian church.

I had very little openness in respect to ministry, but was silent as usual,
from meeting to meeting. Indeed, my sufferings in spirit were exceeding great
and deep, day and night, in that city, so that I was weary of this life, and,
as it were, sought for death; being at times ready to say, it is better for me
to die than to live. I much wondered why it should be so; but have since seen,
it was in order for the filling up that measure of the sufferings of Christ
allotted to me, which I have seen the great advantage of, with respect to
giving dominion over those things and spirits, that were the cause of those
great sufferings, which could not be stood against, nor overcome any other way.
For, as says the apostle, If so be we suffer with Christ, we shall also reign
with him. And our Lord also said, Verily I say unto you, that ye which have
followed me in the regeneration; when the Son of Man shall sit in the throne of
his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of
Israel. I have sometimes thought, as I believe it may, by the foregoing
account, appear to others, that I was led in a manner somewhat uncommon, to see
and feel the sorrowful declension of our society, in my travels through these
nations; though I am very sensible, diverse faithful brethren have shared in the
like painful travail; which, in some degree, may be compared with that of
Nehemiah; who, under great anxiety and distress of mind, entered upon a long
and hazardous journey, and went in the night, to view the breaches and
desolations made in the city of the great king, before he and the people arose
in the name of the Lord, to build the walls of that city and to set up the
gates thereof. For he found the hand of the Lord upon him, moving and
strengthening him to seek the good and prosperity of his own people. These
things are written for encouragement and instruction to the painful laborers
in the Lord's work; that they faint not under the weight and exercise thereof;
nor think strange concerning such fiery baptisms and trials as they may meet
with in the course of their travels. They may be well assured, that such things
are all directed in wisdom; which, in the Lord's time, will appear to their
full satisfaction and comfort. For it is far from the fountain of infinite
kindness, to permit such heavy affliction to fall upon his servants
unnecessarily.

I went from London into Essex, in order to visit some meetings in that county,
which I had not been at before, and was at Chelmsford weekday meeting on
fifth-day, where I had good satisfaction. The virtue of truth being shed
abroad, to the joy and comfort of the living. On the first day following I was
at Colchester meetings. My mind was painfully depressed, under a sense that
truth suffered much in that place by wrong things: where evil is winked at, and
undue liberties in a religious society, are suffered to escape judgment or
censure; weakness, and, as it were a cloud of darkness, comes over meetings as
well as individuals. The Lord was graciously pleased for his blessed name's
sake, to arise, and in some good degree, to dispel the darkness; whereby truth
and the testimony thereof, was exalted over all corrupt unsanctified spirits;
and the few upright-hearted were sweetly comforted; it being a time of relief
to their spirits, in a good degree. I went from thence to the following
meetings, viz. Copford, Coln, Halstead, and Braintree, wherein I had thorough
service, in plain dealing and close labor with the unfaithful, of which number
there seemed to be many; and but few who had really bought the blessed truth.
It is such only, who know how precious and valuable it is, and who cannot
easily be prevailed upon to sell it for a thing of naught, nor even for any
consideration whatever. But it is not so with those who have their religion, if
it may be so called, by education only, or derived as it were, by way of
inheritance like their outward possessions, from their ancestors. The
principles of religion only thus received and held, are often subjected to
temporal convenience and worldly interest. Where the world and true religion
stand in competition with each other, such professors will soon give place to
the world; wherein they do really deny Christ before men, and will as
certainly, unless they repent, be denied by him before the Father and his holy
angels. I returned out of Essex to London; for though I had had but little
openness as to ministry there, yet I found my mind engaged to attend their
meetings, as I apprehended, in order to suffer and travail with the true seed,
for its enlargement, as well as to be a sign and example of the important duty
of silence, to the professors of truth. They had been long and greatly favored
with living testimonies, even line upon line, and precept upon precept; under
all which, for want of a proper application and improvement thereby, the
society declined, and the ancient beauty thereof greatly faded away; I mean, in
what relates to the life and spirit of religion in the practical part thereof;
for the body of the society every where, as far as ever appeared to me, are
remarkably one in faith and profession, the same which has been held and
professed by us as a people, from the beginning. This wonderful oneness and
agreement amongst us every where, (which I have not observed, neither do I
believe it is to be found amongst any other set of Christians, to that degree,)
is to me a clear evidence, that the original foundation thereof, was the one
infallible spirit of Jesus Christ our Lord, who prayed the father, that his
followers might be one, as the Father and the Son are one. And notwithstanding
great numbers in our society are resting satisfied with an empty profession,
and by their unfaithfulness, fall greatly short of the dignity our worthy
predecessors attained unto; which, considering the abundant favors bestowed
from time to time, for the help and preservation of the society, is cause of
deep mourning and sore lamentation; yet, there has been, through the kind
providence of God, from the beginning down to this time, a living body,
preserved the same in faith and practice with our ancients. These are scattered
and interspersed throughout the whole society like the salt thereof, in order,
if possible, that all may be seasoned. I think there are very few if any
meetings, wholly destitute of some of that sort; so that I would not have it
understood, by the foregoing mournful complaints, (although there may be just
cause for them) that I think the society is become desolate, or that the glory
is departed therefrom: far be that from me; I am fully convinced to the
contrary, and at times have faith to believe, the glory will never wholly
depart, nor shall we cease to be a living people: yet I believe, numbers under
our profession, for their great unfaithfulness and unfruitfulness, will be
blowed upon by the Lord, and rejected, and others called into the vineyard, who
will be more diligent and faithful.

After I had continued some time in the city, apprehending myself nearly clear
of further service at this time in these nations, and that I might with safety
look out for an opportunity of returning to my outward habitation in America; I
therefore applied to the brethren here, for a certificate of my travels, etc.
which they readily granted; setting forth their unity with my services and
demeanor under this weighty engagement. But as no suitable opportunity appeared
likely to present for some time, I had leisure to look into, and carefully to
weigh an affair of great importance, which had by this time so far prevailed on
my attention, that I was afraid wholly to reject it, as I had a considerable
time done on its first darting into my thoughts; looking upon it almost
impracticable to be brought about: which was, entering into a married state
with my endeared friend Frances Wyatt, before mentioned. Although I never had
any other objection to it, than our both being, as far as appeared then to me,
settled in our places; from which I thought it would be very unsafe, without
the best counsel, to remove. But that objection was wholly removed, by my way
opening (as I thought) with great clearness, to settle in England on account of
my future service. I was deeply concerned in my mind to be rightly guided
herein; which was answered so indisputably clear to my understanding, that I
could no longer hesitate about it. The next thing was, settling matters
relative thereunto with my said friend; that so, if she found no objection, our
marriage might be accomplished, if providence permitted, after my returning
home, settling my affairs there, and removeing in order to settle in this
nation. I therefore laid the whole before her, as things relating thereunto had
appeared to me, desiring her solid consideration thereof, and answer, when she
was prepared to return me one. I found the same powerful hand which had removed
my objections, was at work in her mind to remove hers also; so that she could
not be easy to put a negative upon the proposal, as believing the thing was
right, which was still confirming to me, We therefore in the fear, and, as we
had cause to believe, in the counsel of God, engaged with each other, in the
relation we then stood, and to accomplish our marriage, when way should be made
by divine providence for the same. We had no views on either side for worldly
advancement: an anxiousness after which appeared to me immaterial, as I was
fully persuaded we were directed in our said engagement, by the wisdom and
counsel of him, who can give or take away outward blessings at his pleasure. I
therefore had not freedom, previous to my engaging with her therein, to make
any inquiry into her circumstances in the world. All which, however, with the
superior blessing of an affectionate wife and true help-mate, I afterward
found agreeable and comfortable. Having, as above, paved the way to remove and
settle in England, and a good opportunity presenting of a ship, in which
several valuable friends intended to embark; I went on board the Speedwell,
John Stevenson master, at Gravesend, the 8th of the 3d month, 1750, in company
with our friends Jonah Thompson and Mary Weston, who were going on a religious
visit to the churches in America. We had several friends on board, and many
other passengers, being fourteen or fifteen of us belonging to the cabin and
state rooms. Some of them were bad people, whose conversation proved very
disagreeable to us; so that we spent much of our time on the deck, night and
day, except when we took our rest in sleep. Our departure was from the Start
Point, the 11th in the evening, being the last land seen by us until we
discovered America. We had a fine gale of wind down the English channel, and a
good set off to sea by the same; but we often had scant, and sometimes contrary
winds afterward, which made it rather a slow passage, though much quicker than
some have gone. The seventeenth of the 4th month, we found ourselves on the
banks of Newfoundland, and in the midst of near twenty sail of French ships who
were fishing there for cod. We spoke with one of them, who told us we had about
twenty-five fathom water; whereupon the captain ordered the ship to be brought
to, that we might take some fresh cod. This was very agreeable to us all; they
succeeded so well, that in about two hours, there lay upon the deck twenty-four
of the finest cod fish I ever saw. This proved an agreeable feast to us for
about one week; and although through mercy, we had very great plenty of
provisions; yet this was an acceptable change. It was the 5th of the 5th month,
about three o'clock in the afternoon, when to our great joy we saw the land of
America; and by sounding, found ourselves in about twenty-five fathom water,
and entered the Capes of Delaware that night. We had a prosperous gale up the
bay and river, so that I landed at Chester in Pennsylvania, about eight miles
from my own house, on the 7th of the 5th month about three o'clock in the
afternoon, and got home that night; having been on board two months lacking one
day, and from home in the whole journey, two years, seven months, and eight
days; having traveled in that time by sea and land, I think on a moderate
calculation, 11875 miles, and was at about 560 meetings. I had before
concluded, with divine permission, to return in the same ship, and left a large
chest of stores on board. When discharged of her loading, she was to sail for
Maryland, there to take in a cargo of tobacco, where I intended meeting her; it
being about seventy miles from my house. In a day or two after my arrival I
went to Philadelphia, where I found my friends generally much alarmed, with
news brought by letters in the ship I came over in (for they had not heard it
before) of my intention to return, to marry and settle in England. Many, I
believe, being ignorant of the grounds and motives upon which I acted therein,
judged concerning the same from the outward appearance only; supposing that
having found one I liked, I had let my mind out toward marrying, and made that
the principal inducement of my removing. Had this been the case, I freely
acknowledge that I should have deserved blame; as acting upon a very dangerous
bottom to myself, and setting an unsafe example for others to follow; believing
some have sustained great loss, by inadvertent steps of this kind, in their
travels on truth's account. This was what I greatly feared in relation to
myself, and therefore (as before hinted) durst not give way to the thoughts of
entangling myself therein, until I had repeatedly (as I thought at least)
received clear evidence in my mind, of its being my duty to remove into this
nation for future service. I do therefore earnestly caution all, to be aware of
taking any encouragement from my example herein, unless they have the same
evidence, and act upon the same bottom as I did agreeable to what is
abovementioned, and are well assured of divine direction, as I was. That I was
rightly guided in my removal, has not only been fully confirmed to myself
since, but, I am persuaded also, to many others: and even at that time, those
who were free enough to confer with me thereon, appeared to be well satisfied,
whom for their freedom and openness to me on that account, I looked upon to be
some of my best friends; and as to others, I thought it my duty to bear with
patience and meekness all they were pleased to say and conjecture, until time
made manifest who were in the right.

I attended the yearly meeting held at Burlington, for Pennsylvania and the
Jerseys, in the seventh month, wherein the Lord was graciously pleased to
overshadow our large assemblies with his heavenly power and presence, to our
great comfort and edification; having with joy to draw water out of the wells
of salvation, and to offer the praise and humble thanksgiving to the alone
fountain thereof, who is for ever worthy.

Having settled my affairs, and obtained a certificate of removal from the
monthly meeting of Darby, in Chester county, in Pennsylvania, to which I
belonged, directed to the monthly meeting of Witham in Essex, Old England;
myself and daughter set out from my own house in Darby aforesaid, accompanied
by my sister Mary (who since my wife's decease, had been my good careful
housekeeper) together with several friends, the 12th of the 8th month, 1750.
We traveled to East Nottingham, being about sixteen miles from the place where
the ship lay in which I intended to embark. My sister and one of the friends
staid with us about a week, and then took their solemn leave. My daughter and I
staid thereabout until the 2d of the 9th month. I visited some meetings in the
neighborhood to good satisfaction, and was at many in East Nottingham, it
being a very large meeting, and a zealous body of friends then belonged
thereto; amongst whom I had good service and great openness; the precious unity
of the one spirit being livingly enjoyed, in which we took a solemn farewell of
one another. The 2d of the 9th month aforesaid we set out, accompanied by
diverse of our worthy friends, and crossed the great river Susquehannah, taking
our quarters at Jacob Giles's house within sight of the ship; but were not
ordered on board until the 8th. We did not sail until the 11th at noon. The
unskilful pilot ran us a-ground twice that afternoon, and caused the poor
sailors hard labor and much fatigue, which I was sorry for. It was the 18th
about two o'clock in the afternoon, before we got clear of Chesapeak bay;
having then a fine wind, we soon lost sight of land.

We had been at sea but about four days, when he espied a sail or two, who, by
their motions, appeared very desirous to speak with us, which, at length, one
of them belonging to Rhode Island effected, informing us, they were reduced to
a very small quantity of provisions, and earnestly entreating the master to
afford them some assistance. He, to my grief and surprise, gave them a very
short denial; allegeing we were but newly come out to sea, and did not yet know
what we might want ourselves. I was very much troubled in my mind at the
hardness of his heart, and immediately stepped up to him, and in as moving
language as I was capable of, interceded for the poor sufferers. The first mate
being a man of a good disposition, joined with me herein. We at length so
prevailed on the master, that he gave them liberty to hoist out their boat, and
come on board us; telling them he would see what could be done for them; which,
poor creatures, they gladly complied with; the master of the ship and four of
his sailors, being quickly on board of us. It was very affecting, to behold
want so conspicuous in their faces, and to see how greatly they rejoiced, with
thankfulness, that kind providence had, in mercy, cast us in their way, for
their relief; in which I could heartily join with them; much rejoicing we had
not inhumanly turned them off without help. The master, (to give him his due,)
did at last hand to them pretty liberally; for which he charged what he thought
proper, and took that master's draught for the money, on his owner in London. I
spared them some out of my private store, for which I wanted no other pay, than
the satisfaction of relieving their great wants; being very glad I had been
instrumental thereunto.

The next day we had a great storm, and an exceeding high sea, so that we could
carry no sail, but fastened the helm and let the ship drive withersoever the
wind and waves would carry her: we were indeed mightily tossed; but through
divine favor, my mind was sweetly calm and comfortable, feeling his living
presence who is God of the seas and the dry land, to be near. My heart was
filled with the joy of his salvation, so that I could sing and make melody
therein to him; in which I had confirming evidence, as I many times had under
the same precious enjoyment, both by sea and land after I left England, that my
way and undertaking was approved of the Lord, and would be blessed and
prospered by him; which yielded more comfort to my mind, than any thing in this
world could do. The severest part of the storm lasted but about twelve hours;
and although we had two considerable storms afterward, yet for the most part, it
was a ready good passage. On the 17th of the 10th month in the morning, we
sounded, and in sixty-nine fathom water we found ground. The same morning about
ten o'clock, we had the very agreeable sight of England. Next day, the wind
being against us, we made but little advantage of sailing. The nineteenth about
eight o'clock at night, we came to an anchor in Falmouth harbor. Going on
shore next day, we went to an inn in the town. Our kind hospitable friend
Joseph Tregellis, came and invited us to his house, where we had generous
entertainment whilst we were at that place. I was several times at their
meetings, both at Falmouth and Penryn, and had openness and good satisfaction.
My worthy friends of that town, Andrew Hingeston and his wife, and daughter,
were affectionately kind to me, which I cannot well avoid mentioning, out of a
grateful sense I retain thereof, as we were entire strangers; for I had not
been that way when in England before.

Having been detained there about a week, we put out to sea again, in order to
proceed to London, whither we were bound. The second-day of our being out,
toward evening, as we were sailing within about a league and half of Dover, a
boat from thence came on board for letters. The wind then not being fair to go
up the River Thames, we went with them to Dover, and next day to Gravesend,
where crossing the water at Grays in Essex, I proceeded from thence to
Chelmsford.

My dear friend Frances Wyatt and I, after proceeding according to the good
order of friends, accomplished our marriage with each other, at a large meeting
of friends and others in Chelmsford meeting house, the 14th day of the then 1st
month, 1750-1, in the sweet and sensible enjoyment of his presence, who saw in
the beginning, it was not good for man to be alone; and therefore he did, in
great kindness, provide an help-mate to be with him, who was bone of his bone,
and flesh of his flesh. It is therefore said, they shall be no more twain, but
one flesh. The Lord then joined the man and his wife together. Happy would it
have been for mankind, had they never sought, nor found out any other way of
joining in that relation since. But as the sons (or worshippers) of the true
God, formerly looked upon the daughters of men, with an eye that tends to
prevert this ordinance, making it only answer the base ends of carnal desire;
following the dictates of their own evil heart, instead of the counsel of God,
in this great undertaking; so it is evidently the case at this day with too
many. It is also often not so much what the woman or man is, as what worldly
substance they have. Where there is plenty of that, many real defects, with
respect to those qualifications and endowments essential to real happiness in a
married state, are over-looked. Thus, by man's ignorantly and presumptuously
taking upon him the guidance and government of himself, instigated thereunto by
the subtilty of Satan; those outward accomodations, which were by divine
providence intended as blessings, become quite the reverse. To prevent such
unhappy consequences to young people and others, I know of no advice better
adapted for their safety and preservation, than that of our Lord's, viz. Seek
ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness, and all these things shall
be added unto you. Those who have happily, by seeking, found this kingdom, and
live therein, which consists in righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy
Ghost, have great advantage, even in outward things, above all others; as the
blessing of God, which makes truly rich, attends all their worldly affairs.
They enjoy what appertains to this life with a proper relish. Blessed are the
meek, for they shall inherit the earth, Mat. v. 5. As it is man's duty and
safety to seek the Lord's counsel and blessing; so it is truly honorable
amongst men: for this, Jabez was said to be more honorable than his brethren;
for he called on the God of Israel, saying, Oh, that thou would bless me
indeed, and enlarge my coast, and that thine hand might be with me, and that
thou would keep me from evil, that it may not grieve me! And God granted him
that which he requested. Let me conclude this observation with tender advice
and caution to all whom it may concern, into whose hands this may come, to be
aware they do not fall into that dangerous snare of supposing, as marriage is
an outward affair, they need consult nothing further therein than their own
inclination, and their own reason; it is said, Woe to the rebellious children,
that ask counsel, but not of me, says the Lord. And Christ is called,
Wonderful, Counselor, as well as a mighty God. Now as marriage is allowed to
be the most important affair in this life, and may tend greatly either to
promote our happiness or misery in the next; if we have no occasion to seek the
Lord's counsel herein, in what are we to expect or desire it? Abraham's
servant, when he was only engaged about procureing a wife for his younger
master Isaac, with great earnestness sought the Lord's guidance and blessing
therein, and obtained it in a remarkable manner. What (say some) are we to look
for, or to expect a revelation in such cases? We must desire the Lord to guide
and direct our steps in this, and all other affairs of consequence in relation
to this life, or we shall certainly miss our way. But this we cannot clearly
understand, until the man's part is reduced in us, and we see what we are
without God, that we may find occasion to pray without ceasing, and in every
thing to give thanks. Then the constant cry will be, Guide me with thy counsel.
When this is, with great sincerity, the state of the mind, we cannot miss our
way; because divine protection is ever present, although we do not always see
it, no more than the prophet's servant did, until his eyes were opened 2 Kings
vi. 7.
. The great thing is, to have a single eye, that whatever we do, may be done to
the glory of God. When this is the case, we say, if this or that be not
agreeable to thy will, O God, thou have all power in thine hand; do thou, by
thy overruling providence, direct me according to thy blessed will. The Lord
will keep such in all their ways, and be their sure defense.

We settled together after marriage, at Chelmsford in the county of Essex,
where I enjoyed great satisfaction and comfort in an affectionate wife. Yet
such I found the low and almost desolate situacion of our society in the said
county; especially in relation to good order and that discipline established
amongst us, by the power, and in the wisdom of truth, as a hedge to defend and
preserve from hurtful things, that it gave me much painful concern of mind. The
difference appearing so very great, as I had before resided where discipline in
the general was well maintained. I could not discover, either by their books or
inquiry, that the unfaithful or disorderly walkers had (a few instances
excepted) been for many years regularly dealt with, and their misconduct
censured, either by monthly or quarterly meetings. I diligently attended those
meetings, but my spirit was greatly distressed therein, as the members seemed
to move and act in another element (as I may say) than that I had been
accustomed to, in managing the weighty affairs of the church. The first thing
of importance that laid hold of my mind, as wanting to be reformed, was
relating to women's meetings* there being no such held quarterly, nor at but
few of the monthly meetings; and where there was any thing of that nature it
was of little or no service, in the manner then held. Having therefore the
advices and directions of the yearly meeting, relating to women's meetings, I
requested liberty of the quarterly meeting to read the same therein, which I
did, making such remarks thereon, as appeared to me then necessary. At the same
time I proposed, that the meeting should take that weighty affair, of
establishing women's quarterly and monthly meetings, agreeable to the repeated
pressing advices of the yearly meeting, into solid consideration; and if it was
thought proper, that a few friends might be appointed to form some general
directions for the assistance of our women friends, pointing out to them (as
for want of opportunity, they were pretty much strangers thereunto) how such
meetings are to be conducted, and the part of church discipline that properly
comes under their notice, and requires the management of the women. All which
was agreed to, and minuted. The proposed directions were prepared by the
friends appointed, brought to the next quarterly meeting, and there agreed to.
The women having previous notice, withdrew at the close of the meeting of
worship, into an apartment, to receive what we had to lay before them, and
unanimously agreed thereunto. A quarterly meeting of women friends being then
established, pressing advice was sent by minute, to monthly meetings, that they
should encourage and establish women's meetings amongst them also, which was
complied with. And although our women friends, for want of being brought up by
their ancestors in the management of the discipline, might be rather
unexperienced at first, yet I am well assured, this step tended much to enlarge
our meetings, and to make them more lively; opening the way of sincere
travelers to a fuller enjoyment of spiritual good, wherein alone is our
ability for every good word and work. Some few, from a right sense of the
importance of the work, joined me in an earnest labor for a general
reformation, and as we felt the weight of things upon our minds, we gave up to
visit monthly-meetings, to help the weak, and to move forward the wheels of
discipline, which, especially at the first, moved very heavily; for although we
had many in the county under our profession, yet few of them had their hands
clean enough to handle the affairs of the church; many being, as it were,
crippled with unfaithfulness, especially in their mean and cowardly compliance
with the antichristian demand of tithes, and things of that nature, which of
itself unfits for service amongst us; for I never saw much, if any, true living
zeal for the cause of God, in those who have fallen into this defection. Oh!
the darkaess and cause of stumbling it has occasioned in this poor county, and
in other places where it has prevailed. We found ourselves concerned,
repeatedly to visit such in their families, laboring in Christian love, to
bring them into a sense of the inconsistency of their conduct with their
profession therein; which labor, though prevalent with some, has been no
otherwise successful in general, than the discharge of that duty, which one
member of a religious community owes to another; and by bringing the judgment
of truth in some degree over them, they became more distinguished from the
faithful. We had great peace in this labor, though hard and unpleasant, as we
found them dark and difficult to be reached unto, a few excepted. However,
these endeavors greatly tended to exalt truth's testimony, for which our
worthy predecessors deeply suffered. In process of time, through the blessed
assistance of our holy head, engaging a small remnant to labor in the monthly
and quarterly-meetings for a reformation, good order has been much promoted,
and our Christian discipline, in its several branches, has been in a good
degree put in practice; and some came to understand, it is necessary to receive
wisdom and strength from God, for the maintaining that work. So that although
things, in that respect, through the unsoundness and lukewarmness of many
professors, are now low, yet the Lord continues to be gracious, in affording us
the blessed assistance of his holy spirit, both in our meetings for divine
worship, and those for discipline; whereby some are enabled in meekness to
labor for the maintaining his cause, notwithstanding the discouragement they
meet with, not only from a view of the languid state of the society in general,
but also from the brittle jealous spirits of some. Having labored in our own
county, according to ability received of God (for without his divine
assistance, I have, by long experience, known I could do nothing) I attended
the yearly-meetings in London as they fell in course, therein to join with the
sincere travelers for Sion's prosperity, in the important care of truth's
affairs throughout the world. This weighty engagement coming more upon some of
us than heretofore, as many of the ^^^ers and faithful laborers were removed
to their rest. Our valuable friends John Churchman and William Brown from
Pennsylvania, were at several of the first yearly-meetings after my settling in
this nation. They labored in these nations, in the service of truth, near four
years, having left affectionate wives and children for truths sake. Such noble
disinterested endeavors, without any view toward temporal interest, is a very
great mystery to the worldly wise. The above named friends were great and good
instruments in the Lord's hand, not only at the yearly-meetings, but also in
their travels up and down, for the promotion of discipline and good order in
the churches; though not without considerable opposition from some, who, under
pretense of acting for the good of the society, were in reality advocates for
undue liberty. Notwithstanding some such difficulties, the Lord has greatly
strengthened the hands of his pained ones for Sion's welfare, and blessed his
work to the promoting of good order, as the likeliest means of reviving ancient
beauty and comeliness; there having been great stirrings, and much labor of
late years, to bring the several members of the society into the holy order of
the gospel. May the Lord yet continue the blessing of wisdom and strength, that
the work may be carried on, to the praise of his worthy name and the
preservation of his people, is the earnest prayer of my soul!

I set out the 16th of the 6th month, 1751, intending to take some meetings in
my way to the circular yearly meeting for the western counties, to be held at
Broomsgrove in Worcestershire, and from thence to visit the meetings of friends
in Wales. I first went to the burial of a friend at Stebbing, and proceeded
through Walden, Cambridge, and Huntington, to Wellingborough in
Northamptonshire; and attended both their meetings on a first day; having close
earnest labor, in a sense of great dullness, and much insensibility prevailing
on many professors. My spirit was greatly burdened therewith; but the Lord was
pleased to arise, and dispel the darkness in a good degree, giving me thorough
service, especially in the afternoon; I hope not easily to be forgot. I went
away greatly relieved, and had a meeting at Coventry, which was heavy and
laborious, though I was, through divine favor, enabled to wade through to mine
own ease, in a good degree. I had a good open meeting that evening at
Nun-Eaton; there being but one family of friends in the town, but a large
number of others were at the meeting; diverse of whom seemed pretty much
affected with the testimony of truth. I had a close exercising meeting the next
day at Atherstone, where things were very low, yet truth arose and opened
doctrine for their help. I had a meeting that evening at Polesworth, which was
open and comfortable. From thence I went to Woolverhampton, where I had a small
meeting, things being very low. After which I went to Colebrook Dale, where I
had a meeting, and close thorough service, tending to stir up friends to
diligence, as well as to encourage the upright-hearted. I went from thence to
Shrewsbury: the number of professors there was very small, and the life of
religion very much depressed, not only by the lukewarmness of some, but also by
a blasting, windy, lifeless ministry, which they had long sat under; doubtless,
to the great uneasiness of the few sensible amongst them. I had a painful sense
of the great hurt thereof in that meeting, being concerned to sit the whole
meeting through in silence, I believe, as an example to friends, and rebuke to
that forward unsanctified spirit: the same soon after was made manifest to both
friends and others, to be very corrupt, and was deservedly testified against by
the monthly meeting. I have diverse times, in my travels, perceived great hurt
to the prosperity of truth, by such unsanctified pretenders to a divine
commission, intruding themselves into the ministry; but always have apprehended
them a bad sort of people to deal with by advice and caution, as they are
commonly very positive and self-willed; being seldom, in this declined state of
the church, without a party, who had rather have almost any kind of ministry
than silence; which makes it much more difficult for those who have a right
sense of their spirits, to bring the judgment of truth over such; as those
abovementioned are apt to screen them, and cover their heads, unless they
manifest themselves, which has in the end frequently happened, by their being
guilty of some immoral conduct. I went after meeting to visit two friends, who
had been imprisoned there a considerable time for refusing to pay tithes. As
soon as I had entered the place of their confinement, I sensibly felt the Son
of peace was there. My mind being brought into great nearness, unity, and
Christian sympathy with them in their suffering state, which they appeared to
bear with cheerfulness, and true resignation to the divine will. The sense of
the great importance of that testimony they were concerned to maintain, by
suffering for it, and what our worthy predecessors went through, in nasty
stinking prisons and dungeons, where many of them ended their days in support
thereof, who may be very justly numbered amongst the faithful martyrs of Jesus
Christ, overcame my mind with tenderness to that degree, that I could not
presently discourse with them about their sufferings. We had a blessed
opportunity together, and took our leave of each other, in the sweet enjoyment
of the pure love of God. Oh, how much more joyous and refreshing it is to visit
such faithful sufferers, than to visit carnal professors of the same truth, who
violate that precious testimony, by voluntary putting into the priests mouths,
lest they should prepare war against them, making religion bow down to their
supposed temporal interest, thereby not only declaring themselves mere
pretenders thereunto, but also increasing the sufferings of those under the
same profession who dare not temporize! I returned from thence to Colebrook
Dale, where I had a hard trying meeting held in silence; and went to
Birmingham, where I had diverse times been before, and generally had painful
laborious meetings; but now it pleased divine goodness to favor with openness
and good authority, to declare the truth largely; I believe to the stirring up
of the careless, at least to a present sense of their duties; as well as to the
comfort and edification of the honest-hearted, to my own peace and great
relief. From this place I went to Broomsgrove, in order to attend the
yearly meeting beforementioned, which began on first day, the 1st of the 7th
month, being held in a barn, fitted up by friends for that purpose: it ended
the third-day following; many ministering friends attended it, some of whom were
largely opened by the power and wisdom of truth, to publish the gospel tidings
with clearness and good demonstration. The people, though numerous, being
generally very still and attentive, appeared to receive the testimony of truth
with pleasure, and things were in the main well conducted. Here my friend John
Bradford joined me as a companion. We had a large meeting at Worcester on
fourth-day, in which truth had comfortable dominion, especially near the
conclusion, to the great satisfaction and joy of many hearts. Blessed be the
Lord our God, for his continued favors to his people! On the fifth-day we had
a small poor meeting at Broomyard in Herefordshire; things being very low in
that place, as to truth and friends. On sixth-day we had a meeting at
Leominster; the fore part was very cloudy and painful, yet by the gracious
springing up of light and life, I got through my service therein to good
satisfaction. The next day, being the seventh of the week, I went to my dear
mother's in Radnorshire. On first day, the neighbors being apprized of my
being come, flocked to the Pales meeting in abundance. The Lord was pleased to
favor me with a large open time, to declare his everlasting truth amongst
them, with which they appeared to be much affected. I had such another
opportunity with friends and many others, at Talcoyd, near my mother's house.
They seemed greatly affected with the virtue of truth; but I doubt they stumble
at the cross. On second-day we had a meeting at a place called the Coom, about
six miles from my mother's, pretty open and comfortable. On fourth-day, the
11th, I took leave of my worthy affectionate mother, relations and friends
thereabout, having my brother Benjamin for our guide over the bleak mountains
into Cardiganshire. The wind blew hard and it rained, but through mercy we
received very little harm thereby. Next day we had a small poor meeting at one
Evans's; religion being at a very low ebb in that place; my chief business, as
far as I could see, was to detect a vile impostor, who had, by a feigned and
hypocritical show, got the advantage of the weakness and credulity of friends
there. I never had seen him before, that I know of, but my spirit was
exceedingly burdened with his deceitful groanings and feigned agitation in the
meeting, and was then satisfied his spirit was very foul and corrupt, as it was
like a nuisance to me all the time. I warned friends to be aware of him; and to
keep him at a distance; but they seemed willing to hope that there was some
good in him, as he appeared so much concerned in meetings, etc. so I saw
whereabout they who pleaded thus were themselves, as they seemed taken with,
and rather to approve of what was so very offensive and even odious to me in
that meeting, viz. his pretended exercise therein. But if people will lay hold
suddenly on such, they must partake with them in their sins; for this man
discovered himself to be very bad, by being guilty of gross wickedness. I think
the meeting was held in silence. After which, we went to a place called Penbank
in Carmarthenshire, where a meeting was held next day to pretty good
satisfaction, being favored with matter and utterance for their help; though
things appeared low; the same day in the evening I had a very poor afflicting
meeting at Penplace; great slackness and weakness appeared in the few
professors there. We were quite silent as to public ministry. We went from
thence to Carmarthen, and attended their meetings on a first day; had good open
service therein, especially in the afternoon, many of the neighbors coming in:
the testimony of truth went forth freely and largely amongst them, with which
they appeared to be much reached and affected; and might, I hope, tend to
remove a prejudice they had imbibed, from the misconduct of one or more, of
high pretentions lately in that place, but then removed. We had a meeting on
second-day in the evening, at Laugharn, where very few, if any, properly of our
society, resided; many of the neighbors came in; we had a good opportunity
amongst them, in the free extendings of gospel love; the doctrine whereof
seemed to have a considerable reach upon them. On third-day we had a meeting
amongst a few professors at James-town; it being their harvest time, they
seemed more concerned about their corn than religion; several rushing out, in a
disorderly manner, to take care of that, as there was some appearance of rain.
It was with much difficulty we procured a guide to Haverfordwest. At length we
prevailed on a young woman, who seemed to have the most lively sense of
religion of any amongst them. Having a large ferry to cross over Milford Haven,
by such difficulties we were so hindered, as not to reach the aforesaid place,
until about an hour after the time appointed for the meeting, to our great
uneasiness. This meeting was, for the most part, held in silence; yet near the
conclusion, I had some things given me to deliver, with considerable weight and
gospel authority. I went next to Redstone, where the meeting was small, yet
open and comfortable. From thence we traveled to Carmarthen, and next day to
Swansey, about thirty miles, being a very rough open road; the day very stormy,
so that we were exceedingly wet. Great care was taken of us, when we got to our
friend Paul Bevan's house, so that, through mercy, we received but very little
harm. On first day, being the 22d, we attended their meetings: that in the
forenoon was held in a silent labor. In the afternoon I had a close searching
testimony to bear, tending to stir up and rouse friends to more zeal and fervor
of mind; and was favored to get through to satisfaction. On third-day we had a
poor small meeting amongst a few friends at Freeveraque. I had nothing to
administer, but an example of silence. We went after meeting to Pontypool, and
next day had a precious open meeting there. The testimony of truth going forth
with good authority and clearness, was exalted, and the upright in heart were
sweetly comforted in the enjoyment of the Lord's pretense, returning him the
praise, who is worthy for ever! On sixth-day, the 27th, we crossed the Severn
at the New-Passage, and went that night to the widow Young's at Earthcott; had
a hard trying meeting there next day; after which we went to Bristol, and on
first day the 29th, we attended three meetings there; the two first were held
in a painful distressing silence, and the last also, except a few words near
the breaking up of the meeting. This was the first of my visiting that city,
and a time not easily to be forgot by me. It was indeed a season of sore
mourning and lamentation, in a sense of their great declension. But very little
to be seen or felt of that plainness, pure simplicity, humility, and contempt
of the world, so conspicuous in their worthy predecessors, who trampled upon
the glory of this world, counting all as dross and dung, in comparison of the
smiles of the Lord's countenance, and being clothed with the beautiful garment
of his salvation. Oh, how was the choicest vine planted, made to spread, and
mightily to prosper, through great sufferings and persecution, in that city, in
early times; sufficiently, one would think, to have deeply established the
permanency thereof, and to have recommended its superior dignity and excellency
to many generations! May not that of the apostle to the Galatians, be justly
applied to them? viz. O foolish Galatians! who has bewitched you, that you
should not obey the truth? Before whose eyes Jesus Christ has been evidently
set forth, etc. Are ye so foolish, having begun in the spirit, are ye now made
perfect by the flesh?

I parted with my companion at Bristol, and turned my face homewards, taking
meetings in my way to London, at French-hay, Corsham, Chippenham, Caln, and
Reading; in all which I had considerable openness, largely, and with good
authority, to publish the doctrine of truth, to mine own peace, and I hope to
the comfort and help of many; though in some places my spirit was much pained
with a sense of prevailing indifference and lukewarmness, in this day of ease
and outward plenty. On seventh-day, the 5th of the 8th month, I got to London,
and staid their meetings on first day. After which I returned home, and found
my dear wife and family well, to our mutual comfort; being thankful to the kind
hand of providence, whose goodness attends those who trust in him, both in
heights and depths; taking care of their bodies, souls, and those outward
benefits he has bountifully favored them with; affording real comfort
therein, with his blessing, which makes truly rich, and adds no sorrow with
it. I was out this journey about eight weeks, and traveled about 740 miles,
having been at about forty meetings.

I have preserved very little or no account of short journies and service in
this and the adjacent counties; in which, however, I was diverse times engaged
to labor, both at quarterly and other meetings, for the reviving ancient zeal
and diligence. But, alas! the inordinate love of worldly enjoyments, good in
themselves, covers the minds of many professors, like thick clay, who are
exceeding hard to be made sensible of the chiefest good, so that I have often
feared some of them will not hear, until the Lord is provoked to speak, with a
louder voice, in judgment, which they will not be able to turn aside from, or
any way to shun. Many in our society, as in others, having departed from the
life, rest satisfied in a profession of religion: some also have departed from
the power and form too, in a great degree; neither appearing one thing nor
another, Could they see themselves as judicious persons see them, shame and
confusion of face would cover them.

The next considerable journey I have any account of, was entered upon the 27th
of the 8th month, 1753, in order to visit friends in some parts of Yorkshire,
Lancashire, Westmoreland, etc. I met some friends at Walden, who with myself
were appointed by the quarterly meeting to visit that monthly meeting for their
help. I was largely opened in the meeting of worship, to set forth the beauty,
order, and excellent harmony of the several members in the church of Christ;
and truth had considerable dominion therein, to our great comfort, as it
prepared our spirits for close and painful labor with wrong spirits in the
meeting of business, who had the boldness to plead the payment of tithes to be
justifiable, because required by the laws of the land; not considering the
gross absurdity of making human laws to be preferred before the laws of Christ,
however contrary thereto, and enjoined as an absolute rule for Christians;
unless they suppose it impossible that any human laws can be made contrary to
Christ's laws, which is equally absurd; as well as that such an opinion tends
to invalidate the great sufferings, and martyrdom of all those, who gave up
every thing they had in this world, and even their lives, rather than actively
comply with the laws of the land, when they believed them inconsistent with the
nature of Christianity, and therefore a transgression of God's law. But the
ground of that misapprehension, which such reasoners fall into, appears to be
upon a presumption, that the source of property is in the law, viz. that the
laws of the land can alienate the right of one, without rendering him any
equivalent, and give it to another, who had no right therein before: whereas
right and wrong are immutable, and cannot be altered by human laws, which only
grant people aid to preserve and recover that which of right appears to belong
to them; so that human laws cannot bind the consciences, any further than they
are consistent with the laws of God. When a sincere Christian is persuaded they
enjoin any thing contrary to the perfect law of liberty in his own mind, he may
not actively resist, but passively suffer the penalty thereof, whereby he
faithfully bears his testimony against the iniquity of such a law, and so far
contributes to have it removed. Now paying tithes under the gospel, being an
antichristian, popish error, the laws enjoining their payment being grounded
upon a supposition, that they are due to God and holy church; how then can any
clearly enlightened person pay them in any shape, as he thereby assents to that
great error, and contributes to support it, to the great scandal and abuse of
the Christian religion, and that noble, free, disinterested ministry,
instituted by our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ; whose direction in that case
is, Freely ye have received, freely give? Much more might be said to manifest
the absurdity of such a plea for the payment of tithes; but that I would not be
tedious, hoping there are not many amongst us so blinded by the God of this
world, as to adopt such an argument. Truth prevailed in the meeting, and the
testimony thereof was exalted over all such spirits. Praises to our God for his
gracious assistance, mercifully afforded to all those who put their trust in
him alone! I proceeded on my journey, and had meetings at Godmanchester,
Oakham, and Leicester; I had close searching labor, in order that careless,
lukewarm professors might be stirred up, and awakened to a sense of their
states. The testimony of truth also, flowing forth at times, as a refreshing
stream of encouragement to the mourners in Sion, and sincere travelers
thitherwards. From thence I went to Nottingham, and had a meeting; the Lord
graciously favoring with wisdom and utterance, to divide the word aright to
the several states of those present. Truth greatly prevailed, overshadowing the
meeting to the rejoicing of many hearts. Next day I had a small meeting at
Furness in Derbyshire, wherein I had close labor with indolent professors,
who, neglecting their own proper business, were too much depending upon the
labors of others, to their great loss, as well as, that such unwarrantable
dependence greatly tended to load and depress the life in those concerned,
making their exercises much the greater. The next meeting I had was at Matlock,
which was large; the greatest part were people of other persuasions; it was,
through the blessed efficacy of the word of life, an open good time, and the
doctrines of truth were largely declared; showing, that the world by wisdom
knows not God, as well as how and to whom he is pleased to make himself known.
The meeting was generally pretty much affected with the virtue of truth, which
was eminently extended that day, and I hope would not be easily forgot by many.
I went from thence to Sheffield, and attended their meetings on first day,
which were large. In the morning my spirit was deeply baptized into painful
sense of the empty formal state of some, as also the undue liberties of many
others. I was made willing and resigned to go down into sufferings on their
account; that if it pleased the Lord, I might be the better qualified to
administer effectually to their several states, as experience has taught me
repeatedly, that I could not speak feelingly to mankind for their help and
recovery, any other way. At the afternoon meeting I was largely concerned to
lay their several states open before them; it was a blessed and seasonable
opportunity, tending much to their awakening to a sense of duty, and I think it
may, with thankfulness, be said, truth was over all. The next meeting I had was
at Highflats, which was large, there being a numerous body of plain friends, as
to the outward appearance, belonging thereunto. It was a laborious meeting, but
through divine favor, there was strength afforded, to lay before them in a
close pressing manner, the great danger of resting contented in a decent form
of religion without the life and power thereof. I hope it was a profitable time
to many. I went from thence to Brighouse meeting, wherein matter and utterance
were given, tending to rouse the indolent, and to encourage the truly concerned
for truth's prosperity. The next meeting was at Rauden, which was very large
and open, and the testimony of truth had great dominion. I had a pretty open
meeting next day at Bradford; after which I went to visit a friend who was very
low and weak in body, few expecting her recovery. I felt the pure virtue of the
holy anointing with her, and had it given me to signify, that I did believe the
Lord would raise her up for further service, which accordingly came to pass. I
went from thence to Leeds, and attended their meetings on first day. In the
forenoon the testimony of truth was greatly exalted, in setting forth the power
and efficacy of living faith: it was a glorious time, truth being over all. In
the afternoon, it was thought several hundreds attended, mostly of the people
called methodists. I was quite shut up as to ministry, I thought, in order to
set an example of the important duty of silence to friends and others. The
meeting concluded with an awful solemnity, which I hope was profitable to many.
I went from thence to Skipton, where the meeting was large, and the power of
God's eternal truth went forth in a searching awakening testimony, as well as
in a refreshing stream of consolation to those who stood in need of
encouragement in their travels toward the city of God. I hope it was a
profitable time to many. I had a small meeting next day at Airton; it was a
heavy painful time of silence in the fore part; but the Lord was pleased to
appear, and afford ability to search some barren professors, by opening their
states to them, with which they seemed somewhat affected; but alas! how hard it
is to reach effectually unto those who are settled as upon their lees, living
in a state of mind that can rest satisfied in an empty profession. Next day I
had a pretty large meeting at Settle: there I found the life of religion much
depressed with an earthly formal spirit; but through divine goodness, truth
arose and prevailed over it for the present, and was exalted, as being the one
thing needful. I went from thence to Lothersdale, where I had a very large
meeting; the Lord enabling me, otherwise a poor helpless creature, to bear a
thorough testimony, suited to the various states of those present; and his
glorious name was exalted above every name. From thence I went to the house of
my beloved friends Jonathan and Margaret Rain, at Trawden; whom, for their
tender regard to me when I wanted succor both for body and mind, I have
heretofore, more than once, had occasion to make mention of; as likewise of the
Ecroyd's family. We greatly rejoiced in the opportunity of one another's
company once more; truth having nearly united us in our former acquaintance. I
staid thereabout something more than a week, attending several meetings there
and at Marsden Height; wherein, especially at some of them, the Lord was
eminently with us, opening the wells of salvation, that we might drink
together, and sing praises to him the fountain of all good. I had great
openness in my service amongst them; and we took our leave of one another in a
sweet sense of God's love uniting our hearts one to another. On second-day, the
first of the 10th month, I set out for Lancaster, in order to be at their
quarterly meeting, being accompanied by my friend Jonathan Rain. I was at
their monthly meeting there on third-day, where I had some considerable
service. Fourth-day in the morning was held their meeting of ministers and
elders; which was to comfort and edification. I found myself concerned to set
forth the nature of true gospel ministry; as also, to point out some dangers
which might, without a steady care and watchfulness, attend those exercised
therein. It was, I hope, a profitable opportunity to some present. The same day
was held the quarterly meeting, wherein the Lord was graciously pleased,
according to his wonted goodness, to appear for the help of his sincerely
concerned laborers; as, blessed be his worthy name, he is found of those that
truly seek him, and does not fail those who lean upon him, and not to their own
understanding, nor to former experience of his assisting power and wisdom.
Truth was greatly in dominion and friends much edified, the unity of the one
spirit being livingly enjoyed. I went next day, accompanied by Samuel
Fothergill, William Backhouse, and William Dilworth, to the quarterly meeting
at Kendal. The select meeting for ministers and elders was held that afternoon;
I had some good open service therein, on the nature of gospel ministry, and the
mysterious workings of Satan in his transformations. It was a time of
edification and comfort. Next day was held the quarterly meeting; in the fore
part for worship, and after for the discipline of the church, wherein I had
some service. Things were but low: we had a large meeting in the evening, both
of friends and others; it was, through the pure efficacy of divine virtue, a
blessed opportunity. I was largely opened in testimony concerning Christ, the
divine light, which enlightens every man coming into the world. It ended in
solemn prayer and praises to almighty God; our friend Samuel Fothergill being
engaged therein, in a very powerful and affecting manner. I staid at Kendal, to
attend their first day meetings; at both which, especially the latter, I was
very largely opened to declare the truth with power, which affected and
tendered many hearts, there being a great number of friends, mostly of a
younger sort, in that meeting; it having been stripped, like many other places
of late, of diverse substantial elders. My labor was very earnest, that the
rising youth might come rightly under the yoke of Christ, that they might be
really prepared and fitted to succeed those who are removed hence, having
finished their day's work. I went from thence, accompanied by several friends,
and had a meeting at Grayrigg, to good satisfaction. The testimony of truth
went forth with clearness and good demonstration, tending to awaken the
careless, as well as to strengthen and encourage the honest-hearted. I returned
to Kendal, and went next day, accompanied by many friends, to a general meeting
at Windermoor. The Lord's blessed power was livingly felt in that meeting,
whereby I was enabled, from the expressions of our Lord to Nicodemus, to show
the necessity of regeneration or the new birth; a doctrine highly necessary to
be pressingly recommended to the youth in our society, and carefully weighed by
them, lest any should vainly hope for an entrance into the kingdom of God, by
succeeding their ancestors in the profession and confession of the truth. A
lamentable error! many I fear have fallen into, imagining they are God's
people, without his nature being brought forth in them; or, as says the
apostle, being made partakers of the divine nature, and escaping the
corruptions that are in the world through lust. Great opportunity have such, by
education, the writings of our predecessors, and also by the gospel ministry
the Lord has been pleased to bless our society withal, to collect and treasure
up a great deal of knowledge in the speculative understanding part, even to
profess and confess the truth in the same words or language made use of, by
those who really learned it in the school of Christ. This is no more than an
image or picture of the thing itself, without life or savor; therefore an
abomination to the living God, and his quickened people. I have touched the
more closely on this head, being apprehensive the danger is very great, which
the rising youth are exposed to, by dwelling securely and at ease, as it were,
in houses they have not built, and enjoying vineyards they never planted; for
great are their advantages above others, if rightly improved; otherwise, this
must increase the weight of their condemnation. I have diverse times looked upon
the mournful condition of those who trust, as above hinted, in the religion of
their education, to be aptly set forth in the holy scriptures, by an hungry man
dreaming that he eats, and behold, when he awaketh, his soul is empty. Oh,
that all may deeply and carefully ponder in their hearts, what they have known
in deed and in truth, of the new birth, with the sore labor and pangs thereof!
I cannot conceive, if they are serious and consider the importance of the case,
but they will soon discover how it is with them in this respect, by observing
which way their minds are bent and thoughts employed, whether toward earthly
or heavenly things. Those who are born from above, or risen with Christ, which
is the same thing, it is natural for them to seek those things which are above;
their affections being fixed thereon. So, on the other hand, that which is born
of the flesh is but flesh, and can rise no higher than what appertains to this
transitory world; for flesh and blood cannot inherit God's kingdom; and it is
said, those who are in the flesh cannot please God. The apostolic advice
therefore, is to walk in the spirit; that is, let the spirit of Christ be your
guide and director, how to order your lives and conversation in all things; for
the children of God are led by his spirit. I hope to be excused in dwelling a
little on this subject, having often greatly feared, that the descendants of
the Lord's worthies who were full of faith and good works, should take their
rest in the outside of things, valuing themselves on being the offspring of
such: a sorrowful mistake which the Jews fell into! May all duly consider, that
it is impossible to be the children of Abraham, unless they do the works of
Abraham.

Truth was greatly in dominion that day, and many hearts were much tendered and
contrited before the Lord; to whom be everlasting praises, Amen! The next
meeting was at the Height, where I had close rousing service, in order to
awaken careless formal professors. The day following I had a large meeting at
Coltis, near Hawkshead; where I was favored with great openness upon the
nature of true faith, and that it must be evidenced by good works; for faith,
when only an assent or consent of the mind to principles of religion true in
themselves, being alone, is dead, as a body is without the spirit. The power of
truth had great dominion, it being a time not easily to be forgot. The next day
I had a meeting at Swarthmoor; there also I was led to speak largely of faith,
viz. of historical faith, implicit faith, and to set forth the nature of that
faith which was once delivered to the saints; being their victory over the
world and all the corruptions thereof. It works by love, to the purifying of
the heart, and when the heart is made pure, we can thereby see God. Blessed are
the pure in heart, said Christ, for they shall see God. And his apostle said,
By faith we come to see him that is invisible. It is plain from the holy
scripture, that it proceeds from a divine principle in man; for it is the
evidence of things not seen, and the substance of things hoped for. No man can
possibly please God without it. O that mankind would carefully examine
themselves, whether or no they be in this faith! If they be in it, they cannot
be strangers to Christ, inwardly revealed; for he dwells in the hearts of true
believers by faith; his kingdom being within, where all his laws and ordinances
are discovered, clearly understood, and willingly obeyed. No complaint, when
this faith is received and held in a pure conscience, of hard things being
required, or his commandments being grievous; but a soul endued with this
powerful principle, can say with sincerity, the Lord's ways are ways of
pleasantness, and his paths are paths of peace. It was a good time, and I hope
profitable to many. The next meeting I had was at Preston, near Kendal; there I
was earnestly concerned to stir up friends to more faithfulness and a closer
union one with another. It was a laborious time, but the blessed truth
prevailed and carried through, to mine own ease in a good degree. I went from
thence to Briggflats, near Sedburg. The meeting was large, and for some time
heavy and afflicting; but it pleased the great Master of our assemblies to
arise, without whose gracious help his poor instruments can do nothing to any
good purpose. It was a solemn awakening time; I hope to be remembered by many.
I had a meeting next day at Ravenstondale, which was a laborious trying time:
my way was shut up as to ministry; friends seemed too much at ease in a
profession. When this is the case, the life of religion is exceedingly
depressed; so that those who feel its state, must suffer therewith, until it
please the Lord to raise his pure seed, in judgment against evil in people's
minds: then man falls under for the present, and confesses to that name or
power given under heaven for his salvation. But alas! he soon denies it again,
by giving way to a contrary power; an enemy to God and his own soul. In such
ups and downs, changes and conflicts, by the working of contrary powers in
their minds, many weary out their days in vain, because they will not resolve
to choose the good, and to eschew the evil, that they might be established upon
the rock of ages for ever. The next day* I had another meeting at Preston; it
was a time of close labor, yet through gracious help, I hope it was a
serviceable meeting. I went from thence to Yeoland; this was a suffering time,
much of the testimony given me then to bear, went forth sharp against such who
were strong and confident in profession, without real experience of the living
virtue and holy efficacy of God's eternal truth, to quicken and season their
spirits. We find it very hard to gain any entrance on such. The testimony is
often felt to rebound, which in low times is a great discouragement to the poor
instrument. Here the faith and patience of the gospel must be exercised. I
understood after meeting, that the state of some present had been remarkably
spoken to that day, which tended to humble my mind in thankfulness before the
Lord, for his gracious help and guidance. After these exercising painful times,
doubts are apt to enter, and fears to possess the mind, lest we have been
mistaken in what we apprehend the Lord required of us to deliver. (I say us, as
I do not doubt but it has been the experience of many others, as well as mine.)
This ought to be carefully guarded against, lest the poor instrument sink
thereby, below its service, by giving away its strength and sure defense. The
soul's armor and weapons being thus imprudently given away or cast off, our
spirits are weaker than those of others, and consequently fall under them. Here
that dominion, in which there is ability to teach, may be lost. There is great
danger also, on the other hand, of being too confident and secure, as I have
observed some, after they have darkened counsel by a multitude of words without
right knowledge, and exceedingly burdened the living, appear quite cheerful and
full of satisfaction, seeming as if thoroughly pleased themselves: which is a
lamentable blindness, and discovers them to be at a great distance from the
dictates and holy impressions of truth. This is what all ought earnestly to
pray they may be preserved from, walking carefully in the middle path,
retaining a jealousy over themselves, with a single eye to God's honor, and
the promotion of his truth. Then will their feet be shod with the preparation
of the gospel of peace, and will appear beautiful as upon the mountains. I went
from Yeoland to Lancaster, and attended their meetings on first day, where I
had good open service, truth being comfortably in dominion, and friends thereby
nearly united one to another. From Lancaster I went to the following meetings,
Filde, Frekleston, Preston, Langtree, and Ashton. They were generally small,
and the life of religion at a very low ebb. I was favored with strength to
discharge the service required, in a close painful labor for their help and
recovery. But alas! great is the declension in those parts, and I fear but
little laid to heart. The next meeting I went to was at Hartshaw, being a
general meeting, which was very large, and although something heavy and painful
in the fore part, yet, through divine goodness, it proved a solemn serviceable
meeting, and by strength and wisdom received from above, diverse weighty gospel
truths were delivered, to the comfort and edification of many. I had that
evening a large meeting at Warrington; but, as heretofore in the same place, I
felt their life and dependence was too much upon and after declarations. I
found it my duty to disappoint that spirit, by sitting the whole time in
silence. I went from thence to my valuable friends John and Joshua Toft's, near
Leek in Staffordshire, having Samuel Fothergill for company and guide. I had a
serviceable meeting at Leek; my labor was close in plain dealing with some,
who appeared to me too much exalted in their own wisdom and conceit of
themselves, whereby the simplicity of the truth was too much overlooked by
them. On fifth-day, the 1st of the 11th month, being accompanied by Joshua
Toft, I went to Stafford, and had a small poor meeting there. Next day in the
evening we had a meeting at Tamworth, which was large, being chiefly made up
with the considerable inhabitants of the town. The public service thereof fell
upon my companion, with which I was well pleased, but found my mind not clear
of friends belonging to that meeting, and therefore desired to have a meeting
with them next day, at a friend's house, as I was desirous to have friends
only. I had close searching service amongst them, yet to my comfort and great
relief in the end. On first day, the 4th, I was at Birmingham meetings; the
forenoon was a good open time, wherein the testimony of truth was exalted; but
the afternoon proved a heavy painful meeting; my way was quite shut up as to
ministry. Now apprehending myself discharged from further service in this
journey, on second-day morning I set my face homewards, and got to Northampton
that night, and next day to Hitchin, and got home on fourth-day, the 7th of the
11th month, finding my dear wife and family well; being thankful, as we had
great cause, to the fountain of all our mercies, for his providential care over
us, when outwardly separated for his service sake. I was from home this
journey, about ten weeks and three days, in which time I traveled, by account,
about 760 miles, and was at about fifty-five meetings. In the year 1754, I
traveled with my esteemed friend John Churchman, through Hampshire, the Isle
of Wight, and part of Surry; the particulars whereof I cannot at present find;
but I remember it was the last of his travels in this nation, and that we were
nearly united in the service; the power and wisdom of truth being livingly and
comfortably with us, enabling us to labor with diligence for the promotion of
truth, and our own peace. In the fore part of the year 1756, being in company
with my esteemed friend Peter Andrews from America, sometimes visiting meetings
in the city of London, I was seized with a violent disorder; it was with
considerable difficulty I got home, and soon took my chamber, where I continued
many weeks under great affliction of body, and also of mind at times, which I
have diverse times experienced as a further trial of my faith and patience. The
Lord has been pleased to withdraw his comforting enlivening presence; I have
thought rather more so in those times of bodily afflictions, than others; for
wise ends, best known to himself. Oh! who can understand or conceive the
anxiety of the mind when this is the case, except those who have felt the same?
But, through divine favor, it was not so with me always, especially in the
last of my great illnesses, which was the latter end of 1758, when the joys of
heaven so opened upon my soul, as I had never known before, which made me
willing to hope that I was near entering into the full fruition thereof. How
strong were my desires then to be dissolved, and to be with Christ for ever!
Ready to say, now let thy servant depart in peace* for mine eyes have seen thy
salvation! but I was not then accepted herein, neither was my mind afterward
free from some fears and doubts, that I had offended a gracious God, by an
over-anxious desire to be removed from a militant to a triumphant state. The
example of our Lord (though he was the only begotton Son) in addressing the
Father, is highly worthy to be ever remembered by us, in all our desires and
prayers, viz. Nevertheless, not my will, but thine be done! The above hints may
fall into the hands of some poor afflicted persons, to whom they may afford
comfort, by observing, they are not quite singular in their trials, and from
thence, through the divine blessings, receive some encouragement: which is my
reason for penning them, as well as many other remarks in the course of this
journal; even on my most inward and hidden trials. I have had great cause to
bless and praise the Lord, many times since, when I have observed the great
advantage of those very pinching seasons of affliction, how much they tend to
refine, and to establish the soul upon the rock of ages, yielding the peaceable
fruits of righteousness to those who are properly exercised thereby. I had very
little health from the time that I was taken beforementioned, for about two
years; yet was enabled, in 1757, to visit friends meetings in Kent, Sussex, and
some few meetings in Hampshire, etc. I set out from home the 12th of the 7th
month, and crossed the River Thames at Gravesend, where by appointment I met my
friend Joseph Tailor, and with him Joseph Wood, and Stephen Jackson, all from
London. We went that afternoon to Rochester, where about six in the evening we
had a meeting, there being a meeting house; though I think but one person
(then) a young woman, who made profession with us. Many others came, and there
was an openness to declare the doctrines of truth largely amongst them, which I
hope was not altogether in vain. From thence we all went to Canterbury, except
Stephen Jackson, who returned home. We had a meeting there, made up chiefly of
professors with us. The testimony of truth went forth in a close searching
manner, and, through mercy, it was exalted over all of a contrary nature. The
Lord had the praise, and his sincere followers satisfaction and comfort. We had
a meeting next at a place called Burchington, where there was a meeting house,
but none of our society living in that place; the people filled the house, and
a pretty many out of doors; they appeared, in general, a low ignorant people;
yet the Lord, with whom there is no respect of persons, opened the doctrines of
the gospel largely, and in a reaching affecting manner, by which many seemed to
be tendered. Next day we had a meeting at Drapers, near Margate, which was
small, and things low as to the life of religion. In a very small meeting in
the evening at Deal, I had some close service; after which, one person gave me
sufficient cause to see there was need of it. The next meeting was at Dover,
being on seventh-day in the evening, as I was desirous of being at Folkstone on
the day following. Truth opened doctrine and counsel for their help and
edification, there being some lately convinced of our principles, who appeared
tender and hopeful. I had good satisfaction amongst the few friends in that
place. At Folkstone the meetings were large, but the life of religion
mournfully low and borne down, not only with those things commonly called undue
liberties in many, but also, with the form of religion, without the power of it
in others. I had (as it were) a threshing instrument put into mine hands, and
was enabled to discharge the service required, to my great ease and relief; for
my spirit was exceedingly loaded and bowed down at that place. Oh! what pity it
is, that old professors, instead of being as pillars in the house of God, and
as Aarons and Hurs, bearing part of the Lord's great work (so happily and
gloriously begun in the earth) should be a means of obstructing the same, and
by the carnality of their spirits, burden and greatly depress the word of life
in the messengers of Christ, sent in order to carry it on amongst mankind:
thereby rendering themselves altogether unworthy to be named by his name, to
taste of his dainties, or to live under this latter, and as glorious a
manifestation of evangelical light and truth, as was ever extended to mankind!
Is not the great design of the Almighty obvious, in gathering us as a people
into his fold, to sit under his teachings, and consequently under his glorious
manifestation, showering upon us great plenty of rain from above, and heavenly
dew as upon Hermon's hills, viz. that we might be as the garden of the Lord,
full of fruitful plants and fragrant flowers, sending forth a sweet smell, yea,
to be as a fountain of gardens, and wells of living water, and streams from the
goodly beautiful mountains of Lebanon: for it is written, Out of the belly of
him that believes, shall flow rivers of living water. By which it plainly
appears, that the Lord's chosen people are like conduits, channels, or
water-spouts, to convey the water of life into the wilderness, that it may
become a fruitful field, and that the desert land may come to rejoice, and
blossom as a rose; also into the sea, viz. amongst the nations, languages,
tongues and people See Ezekiel xlvii.
, to heal the fishes that are in this sea, viz. the backsliders and distempered
of mankind. But oh, how slowly does this work go on! And what a little progress
it has yet made, to what was expected by those valiants, who first engaged
against Babylon in the morning of our day, and made that kingdom shake! But
many under the same profession in this day, are turned against the truth, and
at the same time they pretend to maintain its cause, they are supporting and
strengthening the kingdom of Babylon all in their power, which is exceeding
strange to think, and perhaps would not be believed by hundreds that really are
doing it. The reason is, they first of all have taken some draughts of the
wine, out of the whore of Babylon's golden cup, whereby they are so
intoxicated, as not to know what they are doing; so that, when they think they
are serving God, they are serving Satan. Were not the Jews drunk with this cup,
when they dreamed that God was their father, and at the same time were in
reality of their father the Devil, doing his works, when they thought they were
doing God's works? This woeful mistake has been, and is almost general amongst
mankind. When they suppress the measure of grace in themselves, and drink a few
draughts as abovesaid, they are then fit to follow antichrist whithersoever he
will lead them; but he will take care, not to have much cross to the will of
the flesh in his religion, lest they should be tempted to leave him; that being
the very reason of the violence they have offered to the divine witness, which
formerly rose up against them in their minds, viz. because they saw if they
followed that, the cross must be taken up, and self must be denied. At this
they have stumbled; and although little sense is at present retained thereof,
by reason of the intoxication before mentioned, yet when they are summoned
before the judgment seat of Christ, and the books come to be opened, all will
then see things as they really are, which do not at all change their natures,
though, by a defect in the capacity before described they be not seen or
understood.

It is worthy to be remembered, and deeply pondered by great numbers in our
society, that it was the rebellion and unfaithfulness of the children of
Israel, that was the cause of their being turned back again into a barren,
doleful, howling wilderness, when near the borders of the land of promise. They
doubtless might have then entered, subdued the idolatrous inhabitants, and
taken full possession thereof, had they believed in and obeyed that mighty
Jehovah, who with an outstretched arm had brought them out of the land of
Egypt, dividing the Red Sea in mercy to them, and for the destruction of their
enemies. But oh! what a long wilderness they had afterward, for about the
space of thirty-eight years, until all that people had fallen, except Caleb and
Joshua, men of upright hearts, whom the Lord honored with being the leaders of
an entire new people to possess the land. Cannot the empty formal professors
amongst us, who, under great pretensions, have suffered a heart of unbelief, a
rebellious heart, that has departed from the living God, and embraced this
present world, read their own condemnation in the beforementioned account?
Shall they ever enter into the heavenly Canaan? or be accounted worthy to carry
on his glorious work in the earth? No, verily; but they must fall into great
condemnation, except they repent, and redeem their misspent time, and another
people be raised to maintain this glorious cause, to whom the Caleb's and
Joshua's in our society will be as leaders and directors; like Priscillas and
Aquilas, to expound unto them (who enquire the way to Sion) the way of the Lord
more perfectly; for I am fully persuaded, our society will not cease to be a
people, nor the glory ever depart therefrom wholly, as it did from the Jewish,
and in a great degree the lapsed Christian church. I have no doubt, but that a
people will be preserved from generation to generation, to contend earnestly
for the faith once delivered to the saints, and to maintain the same with the
doctrine and principle resulting therefrom, so eminently revived in our
predecessors, and most surely believed by us. So that when it shall please the
Lord to awaken the nations, there will be no occasion to expect new
discoveries, or other manifestations, but the Lord will show where he feeds his
flock, and where they lie down at noon. I do not expect the present lethargy,
and almost universal indifference of all denominations of Christians about
religion, is to continue very long, for the Lord's soul abhors it. I am fully
persuaded he will arise in dreadful majesty, to shake terribly the earth; the
power, wisdom, policy, and splendour thereof, and not only the earth, but the
heavens also, that he may remove those things which can be shaken, that those
things that cannot be shaken may remain. Then shall people see how empty and
fruitless their religious pretensions have been. Then will their eyes and cries
be to the Lord, to show them the pasture of the flock of his companions. Then
will mankind receive a kingdom which cannot be shaken. But, oh! the bitter cups
that must be drank, and the phials of God's wrath that must be poured upon
nations and kingdoms, before mankind in general will be humbled enough, to
submit to the yoke of Christ, and to learn of him, who is meek and low in
heart. But he is Lord of lords and King of kings, and can turn and overturn,
until the inhabitants of the earth are willing that he should reign whose right
it is; for when the judgments of the Lord are in the earth, the inhabitants of
the world will learn righteousness.

Great and mavelous has been the Lord's condescension and goodness,
manifested for our help and preservation many ways; one whereof I cannot well
omit a short remark upon, viz. the reviving of ancient zeal for the promotion
of discipline and good order, which I find is almost general throughout the
society, that spirit of sound judgment, and the burning of that holy fire,
which the Lord does kindle in the hearts of the faithful, has never been wholly
extinguished, since we have been a people; though in some places, through the
neglect of many, it has burned rather faint and languid. This has of late been
much augmented, and the number of those who will not take bribes (that is,
through favor and affection pervert judgment) increased. I pray God, for his
great name's sake, and his people's preservation, this good work may prosper!
Public ministry, though a great blessing, help, and comfort to God's people,
may be shunned, evaded, and turned off by individuals: but the church cannot
easily lose ground, under a godly, impartial administration of sound judgment,
and dealing in the way of good order and discipline, as this brings judgment
home; thou art the man. Here individuals must condemn the evil, or be disunited
from the body, that it may not be infected or endangered by their defection. I
went from Folkstone to Maizam, where I had a meeting, and some close searching
labor, in order to awaken drowsy lukewarm professors. I had meetings also at
Ashford, Tenterden, and Cranbrooke, where I found things exceeding low as to
truth and friends, and but very little of the substance, or even form, to be
met with. My spirit was much affected with sorrow and mourning, in viewing the
deplorable estate of the society in this county; yet I endeavored with
patience to wade along in my service, and to discharge the duty required of me.

I then proceeded to visit Sussex. The first meeting I had in that county, was
Gardner-Street; I could find but very few, if any, truly alive in religion
there. I had hard close work with the unfaithful, in some important branches of
our Christian testimony, to which I was immediately led; for I knew nothing of
their state by outward information. I had meetings also at Jews,
Brighthelmstone, and Arundel. At all which places, I found the life of religion
much depressed. My service was close and searching; but alas! carnal professors
are very hard to be made sensible of their deplorable condition. From Arundel I
went to Chichester, where I had a meeting, and good open service, not only to
stir up the careless to more fervent ^^^our, but also to encourage and
strengthen some tenderhearted travelers Zion-wards. It was, through the holy
efficacy of truth, a blessed time, I went from thence to Alton, in Hampshire,
and attended their first day meeting. There is a large body of friends, amongst
whom, the great Master of our assemblies opened doctrine and counsel, suited to
their several states, and the blessed truth was in great dominion that day. The
next meeting I had was at Godalming, where I had very close heavy service,
being made sensible of much indifference and lukewarmness in some professors.
It was often my lot to labor for the stirring up and reviving of such: but
alas! it is hard work, yet sufficiently rewarded by the comfortable returns of
true peace, in a faithful discharge of duty. The next meeting I had was at
Stains, which was pretty open and satisfactory: being livingly engaged to
administer suitably to the several states of those present. I went from thence
to Uxbridge, where I had open thorough service, to good satisfaction. After
which I went to High-Wickham, and had a heavy laborious meeting. The same day I
had an evening meeting at Amersham, in which I had some service, though things
were very low. Next day I had a meeting at Jordans, where the blessed truth had
great dominion, and the testimony thereof flowed forth freely, in doctrine and
counsel, for the help and comfort of those present. After which I went to
London, where I staid the first day meetings over. I attended
Grace Church Street in the morning, where I had good service, and the testimony
of truth had great dominion. I went to Devonshire-House in the afternoon, where
I had also a good open time to declare the truth; finding much ease and peace
of mind. The service of this small journey being over, I returned home the next
day, having been out about four weeks, at 28 meetings, and traveled about 350
miles.

The next journey I have any account of, was chiefly in order to visit the
quarterly-meetings of Lincoln, York, Lancaster, and Kendal. I set out the 16th
of the 6th month, 1758, and, by appointment, met Joseph Tailor at Cambridge,
who was to be my companion as far as York. It being first day, we went to their
meeting in the morning, which was very small, and things exceeding low as to
the life of religion. We went in the afternoon about ten miles to a
general-meeting at a place called Over, which was large, and I was largely
opened therein, in close awakening service, tending to rouse careless
professors, of whom there seemed to be many at that meeting. We proceeded after
meeting as far as Erith, and next day got to Spalding, in Lincolnshire, where
we met our worthy friend Mordecai Yarnall from America, who was then on a
religious visit in this nation, and Samuel Neal from Ireland. The 20th in the
morning we set out for Lincoln quarterly meeting, which began the next day
about noon, and ended the day following. Truth is at a low ebb in this county,
and the discipline in the main but poorly managed, and the conduct of diverse
professors administers cause of offense; yet we were, through the extendings of
merciful goodness, favored with considerable openness, and pretty thorough
service for their help, and to our own ease in a good degree. After this
meeting was over, my companion and I proceeded on our journey toward York,
taking Leed's first day meetings in our way, which were large, very heavy, and
laborious. My proper business was to wade under a great weight, occasioned by
the indolent spirits of those who were unwilling to labor and bear their own
burdens, in an example of silence. Next morning was held their monthly meeting
of ministers and elders, where I had close service; and the same day that for
discipline, which was exceeding large, our society being very numerous
thereabout. The testimony of truth was greatly exalted therein, in treating
concerning Christ, the everlasting Rock upon which the church is built,
whereupon only it can stand firm, against all the attempts of a potent
adversary, and his emissaries. Next day we went to York, where the same evening
was held the quarterly meeting of ministers and elders. I had some open service
therein, particularly to ministers. We were divinely favored in the succeeding
meetings, both for worship and discipline, to our edification and comfort. From
York I went toward Kendal, and was, in my way, at a yearly meeting held on a
first day, in a large barn near Bingley; where (it was thought) were very near
a thousand people of other religious persuasions, besides many of our own
society. I was largely opened therein to preach the everlasting gospel, in the
authority and demonstration thereof. The people generally behaved in a sober
becoming manner, appearing well satisfied, which is too often the most we can
say in our day, concerning such memorable opportunities; whereas, our
predecessors might have added, perhaps, that several hundreds were convinced.
However, we must content ourselves with the state or condition of the fields of
the world, in our day: and although we cannot lift up our eyes as they could,
to behold the fields white unto harvest, yet let there be honest endeavors to
contribute all in our power, for the bringing them forward in this respect, and
leave the rest to the Lord, in whose hands alone are times and seasons. I had a
meeting at Skipton that evening, to good satisfaction. I went from thence to
Settle, and was at their monthly meeting, where I had good service, and so
proceeded, to Kendal, accompanied by diverse friends. The same day was held the
meeting of ministers and elders, wherein our ancient worthy friend James
Wilson, had excellent service, to our great comfort and edification. Their
quarterly meeting of business was held next day, wherein I had good service, in
the opening of gospel life and power. A blessed meeting it was. The Lord alone
had the praise, who is for ever worthy thereof! I attended Kendal meetings the
first day following, which were very large, and precious; the everlasting truth
and its testimony, being exalted over all of a contrary nature, to the great
comfort of the upright in heart. I went, accompanied by our friend James
Wilson, and many others, to their general meeting at Preston Patrick, which was
very large. My service therein was close, searching, and laborious; not only in
a sense of great lukewarmness and indifference in some, but also the
heart-burnings, disunion, and secret smitings one against another, of others.
It seemed to me, that spirit had subtly prevailed on some accounted of the
foremost rank, to their own hurt, and the wounding of the innocent life. My
spirit had been painfully affected with the same sense of the state of that
meeting, in degree, in my former visits to it; but never had so much power and
comfortable dominion over the same, as at this time, wherein truth mightily
prevailed, to the subduing, at least for the present, all that was of a
contrary nature. Near the conclusion of the said meeting, our worthy ancient
friend, beforementioned, publicly testified, that the eternal truth of God was
over all, exhorting friends highly to prize such blessed opportunities, and
carefully to improve thereby.

In relating what has been done, in mavelous kindness and condescension,
through me a poor weak instrument, toward the help and restoration of my
fellow-mortals, I do sincerely desire, if any good is done, the Lord only may
have the praise, honor, and glory; for he alone is worthy, and nothing belongs
to the creature, but humility, reverence, obedience, and laying the mouth as in
the dust. I would be so understood throughout the whole narrative, though not
always expressed in words.

I went from Kendal to Lancaster. The quarterly select meeting for ministers
and elders was first held; wherein our ancient friend James Wilson,
beforementioned, bore a noble, evangelical testimony, to the instruction,
edification, and great comfort of friends. Next day was held their
quarterly meeting for discipline, in which, through the efficacy of divine
power, I had some open weighty service. I cannot well forbear remarking the
great satisfaction and pleasure I had at this meeting, in beholding, and having
the acceptable company of three honorable, worthy, ancient friends, viz. James
Wilson, Lydia Lancaster, and Grace Chambers; who, I think, all bore living and
powerful testimonies therein, in a very affecting manner, to the holy efficacy
of that everlasting truth, which had been with them all their life long. Oh! it
was a time of much humbling encouragement, to see their greenness and
fruitfulness in old age. I looked upon them as patterns of primitive times and
friends. There is something wonderfully great and excellent, seen only by those
eyes which the Lord has opened, in the native simplicity of the truth, and
that estate into which it gradually brings a man, who, in a total denial of
self, has fully given up to be formed by it. This I take to have been very
much the case with friends in the beginning, which rendered them so very
obnoxious to the spirit of the world; than which, there is nothing more
opposite to a redeemed state: so that the more any are drawn out of the corrupt
ways and spirit of the world, the more they are hated by it. This is obvious,
when we consider the treatment which Christ our Lord, in whom the Godhead dwelt
bodily, met with. If many in profession with us are nearer in unity and peace
with the world now, than our friends were formerly, let it not be understood as
a token of their advancement in the nature and spirit of true religion; but the
contrary, viz. that they are fallen nearer thereunto, and become more like it
in spirit, though somewhat different as to the exterior part of religion, which
the world cares not much for, when it finds, that in the main, we are making
advances toward them. Our friends formerly delivered themselves in ministry
and writing, in a plain, simple style and language, becoming the cause they
were sincerely engaged to promote; chiefly aiming to speak and write, so as to
convey the power and efficacy of the pure truth, to that of God in the
consciences of men. It is no small glory to the righteous cause we are engaged
to promote, that it has made such a mighty progress in the world, upon a better
foundation than that of human helps and learned accomplishments. The very first
and most eminent instruments, raised to propagate the same, were illiterate
men, agreeable to what Paul delivers, 1 Cor. chap. i. ver. 26, 27, 28, and 29.
May these things be weightily considered by all those, who seem to aim at
seeking credit to the society, by means of those outward embellishments, from
which our worthy ancients were wholly turned, to seek and wait for that living
power and holy authority, which alone is able to carry on the work of man's
redemption to the end of time: the departure from which opened the door
effectually for the apostasy to overspread; then human wisdom and learning
became, in the estimation of degenerate Christians, essentially necessary to
make ministers of the gospel. But the early ministers and writers in the
Christian church, became very eminent another way, as we have great reason to
believe most of them were illiterate men; and such of them who had attained
human learning, when the power of the gospel was inwardly revealed, laid all
such accomplishments down at the feet of that power, to whom every knee must
bow, and every tongue must confess: so that we find them counting all that as
dross and dung, to which men, in their corrupt wills and wisdom, give the
highest place for usefulness, as above hinted. And I think, some amongst us
fall very little short of the same disposition of mind, though they do not care
to own it in words; for I have diverse times observed, some have but little
relish or taste for the substantial truths of the gospel, in a plain simple
dress; nor to read books, holding forth the same, unless they find some
delicacy in the style and composition. An honest substantial minister may wade
into the several states of people, in order to bring forth suitably thereunto,
in the native simplicity of the truth, and his labor herein be seen, gladly
owned and received, by the circumcised in heart and ears, where his lot is
cast; yet the sort of people amongst us abovementioned, of which I fear there
are many, do not know, nor much regard him, scarcely thinking it worth their
while to attend the meetings such a one is engaged to visit. But if they hear
of one coming who is noted for learning and eloquence, though perhaps far short
of the other in depth of experience, what following after him from meeting to
meeting! Enough, if the instrument is not pretty well grounded, to puff it up
with a vain conceit of itself, and to exalt it above measure. Some have with
sorrow observed, much hurt has been done amongst us, by such great imprudence.
I have often seen reason to conclude, popularity and common applause is no safe
rule to judge of the real worth of a minister. Therefore, when I have heard
much crying-up of any instrument, I have been apt to doubt its safe standing,
and holding out to the end; which it cannot possibly do, if the same desire
prevails to speak, as there is in such people to hear. I am persuaded, if such
keep upon a right bottom, they will, at times, find it their duty to starve and
disappoint such cravings after words.

I had an open satisfactory meeting at Lancaster the day after the
quarterly meeting, in which the holy virtue of truth greatly united friends in
the bond of love and peace. The 14th of the 7th month I set out, in company
with my kind friends Jonathan R^ine and wife, William Dilworth, and Tabitha
Ecroyd, and lodged that night at Watton, near Preston. Next morning I took my
leave of the above said friends in much near affection, except William
Dilworth, who accompanied me to Warrington that day. The next, being the first
of the week, I attended Penketh meeting in the morning, and Warrington in the
afternoon. At both which, my labor in the ministry was heavy and painful, on
account of the formal, lifeless state of too many, who, by their age and long
profession, might have been as pillars in the church; as well as the
chaffiness, and want of solid experience by their not yielding to the
visitation of truth, in many of a younger rank. Thus it is, when heavenly
blessings have been showered down upon people, not duly improving thereby, they
become more insensible than others who have not been so highly favored. I was
enabled to discharge the service required, in a searching, awakening manner, to
my own relief in a good degree. I went the next day to my worthy friend Joshua
Toft's, near Leek, who had then lost his sight, but seemed fresh and lively in
his spirit. We had great satisfaction in company and conversation with each
other. I staid one whole day with him and his brother, and then proceeded
toward Worcester, taking meetings at Dudley and Stourbridge. I had some open
satisfactory service at the first, and a very laborious painful time in
silence, at the other, where truth seemed to me much depressed by wrong things.
On seventh-day I went from thence to Worcester, and attended their first day
meetings, and was mournfully affected therein with a sense of lukewarmness in
many professors, finding it very hard for the life and power of truth to arise
into dominion, so as to make them sensible of their states. My labor was for
the most part in silence, though I had some close public service. I went after
the last meeting as far as Evesham, on my way to London, and from thence, the
next day home to my dear wife, and found her well; which, together with other
favors, I was, through infinite kindness, made a partaker of in this journey,
bowed my mind in humble thankfulness to the bountiful author of all blessings,
who is alone worthy of dominion and worship for evermore. I was from home about
five weeks and five days, and traveled, by account, 664 miles, and was at 37
meetings.

I have preserved no account in writing, of my traveling in the service of
truth, after I returned from the last-mentioned journey, until the fore part of
the year 1760, when I entered upon my journey, in order to visit the meetings
of friends in the nation of Ireland a second time; having had it weightily upon
my mind, at times, for some years. But when it drew near, I clearly saw the
time fixed to set out, which I did the first of the 3d month, in the aforesaid
year, and went to London. The 2d being on first day, I went to
Grace Church Street meeting in the morning. My business therein was to set an
example of silence. In the afternoon I had good open service at
Devonshire-House meeting. On second-day morning the 3d I went into the
West-Chester stage coach, and arrived at that city on fifth-day night, the 6th.
I went next day to Park-Gate, to inquire for a passage, where I found diverse
vessels ready to sail; yet the wind being contrary, it was uncertain when; some
having already waited near a month for a fair wind. I returned to Chester that
night, and next day was poorly of a cold, having, since my great illness, been
very tender in my lungs, and apt to be afflicted with an asthmatick disorder;
so that traveling, especially in cold foggy weather, became very unpleasant
for me to bear, having endured considerable hardships in my journey from
London, by such weather and the motion of the coach. But all was made up, in
the sweet enjoyment of that pure love, which makes hard things easy and bitter
things sweet. The 9th, being first day, I was at Chester meeting, the number of
friends being but small, and the life of religion very low; yet it pleased
divine goodness to extend merciful help, giving me openness in the springing up
of life, to administer suitably for their advantage, I hope, if rightly
improved. The 10th in the morning, having hired a guide and two horses, I set
out for Holy Head, in order to take a passage for Dublin in one of the packets,
and got thither next day about six in the evening. Here I found one of the
packets was to sail early next morning. I went on board the 12th, about six
o'clock in the morning, and landed at Dublin about six in the evening, the same
day, having had an easy passage and civil usage on board, and was kindly
received by my open-hearted friends Samuel Judd and family. I was pretty much
fatigued with traveling, being also afflicted with a cold upon my lungs, which
was aggravated by the thick sulphurous air of Dublin. Yet the pure virtue and
holy anointing of the precious truth, carried through and over all weakness,
both of body and mind. My soul being enabled to extol and magnify the God of my
salvation, for his gracious support every way; for indeed, humanly looking and
judging of things, it might not have appeared prudent, considering my weak and
infirm state of body, especially alone, to have undertook such a journey; but
the power of gospel love gaining the ascendency over all reasonings and
consultations with flesh and blood, made me willing to give up life and all, in
answering the Lord's requirings, and to pursue what he was pleased to call me
unto, as far as ability of body would admit. This is a great mystery to the
carnal man, but it has as real an existence in a redeemed mind, as that a
principle of self-love is the spring of action in an unredeemed mind. On
sixth-day, the 13th, I went to the week day meeting at Sycamore-Alley, where
humbling goodness was refreshingly near, and opened the doctrines of truth
largely and livingly, to the comfort of many hearts. On first day, the 16th, I
went to Meath-Street in the morning, where I had thorough service, to mine own
great comfort and ease; though my spirit was much grieved, to view the havoc
made amongst friends in that great city, by undue liberties; but most of all
under a mournful sense, that the dragon's tail had drawn some of the stars down
again into earthly pollutions, and caused a bad savor. This was offensive to
my soul, even as a nuisance in that meeting. May others harm and miscarriages
cause all the Lord's anointed to be very watchful. I went to Sycamore-Alley in
the afternoon, where the meeting was very large. Silent waiting upon God was my
service therein, in which I had peace and comfort; and toward the conclusion,
there was an awful solemnity, in a remarkable manner, over the meeting, wherein
the excellency of silent worship appeared. On second-day, the 17th, I went to
Baltibois and had a meeting there next day. I had close rousing service
therein; the testimony of truth went forth very sharp against haughty libertine
spirits. There I met my good friend Abraham Shakleton, who traveled with me
most of the time I was in that nation. Of him, I think, it may be said, as was
of Nathaniel, Behold an Israelite indeed, in whom there is no guile! He was a
great comfort and help to me, and though he did not appear publicly as a
minister; yet he would drop tender advice at times, in families, in a very
affecting manner. His whole conversation, looks, and deportment, was so
leavened and tempered with the good, that I looked upon him as a preacher of
righteousness wherever he came. I went with him, after the abovesaid meeting,
to his house at Ballytore, where next day I had a precious open meeting, and
good thorough service therein; the blessed unchangeable truth being in dominion
over all. The 20th I had a good serviceable meeting at Athy, and the next day
another at Rathanyon, in which there was a wonderful manifestation of the
divine power, and much clearness in opening the doctrines of truth; so that I
believe there were few, if any, but were sensibly affected therewith. I hope
such great extendings of favor will not be easily forgot. From thence I went
to Edenderry, and was at their meeting on first day, the 23d, which was a very
large meeting, and the power and wisdom of truth was eminently manifested, in
furnishing with ability, to divide the word aright to the several states in
that great meeting. It was in much dread and weight, not sparing any rank or
station in the society. All there, I believe, through divine favor, had some
share of that day's work: I hope not easily to be forgotten. May the Lord alone
have the praise! for he is the author of all the good that is, or can be done.
The 25th I had a large meeting at Mount-Melick, in which I had thorough
service. The labor was somewhat painful, in a sense of indifference, and the
insipid formal state of too many, as well as the pride and undue liberties of
others; both which have sorrowfully prevailed in that nation; yet I found great
ease and peace of mind, in the discharge of that weighty concern which was upon
me for their help and recovery, and which I hope had a good effect on many.
Next day I had a large meeting at Mount-Rath. I was enabled to discharge the
service required, in a searching manner, that careless professors might be
stirred up to their respective duties, and ancient zeal, ardour, and beauty
restored to the churches. From thence I went to James Huchinson's, where I had
an open serviceable meeting; I hope to the comfort and help of many. The 28th I
had a meeting at Ballinakill, where I had a good degree of openness, for the
help and encouragement of friends in the way of well-doing; but things were
very low there, as to the life of religion. I went after meeting to Carlow, in
order to attend the province six weeks meeting. Many friends, from the several
parts of the province, came to it. It was a large meeting, and considering the
low declined state of things, we were favored with wonderful extendings of
heavenly power, wisdom, and living virtue, in order to heal and restore
backsliding Israel. Great and mavelous is, and has been, the condescension
of the Almighty to his people, through all ages! The doctrine of the gospel
flowed forth freely to the several states of those present, and many were much
humbled, in an awful sense of the divine presence, which is the life and
strength of God's people. I had a large meeting at the same place on first day,
the 30th, it was a blessed opportunity of favor and saving help extended to
those present: surely, if these high benefits are not duly improved, great will
be the condemnation of those upon whom they are bestowed. I went from thence
home, with my kind friends Robert Lackey and wife, and had the next day a
precious open meeting and good service therein, at the house of our worthy
ancient friend Samuel Watson, of Killconner. I went from thence to Ross, where,
at the house of Samuel Ely, I had a low afflicting meeting, but little to be
felt of the life of religion. I was quite shut up as to ministry. From thence I
went to Waterford, where on the 3d of the 4th month, I had a large meeting; it
proved a time of close labor; yet I waded through to mine own ease, in a good
degree. On the 4th, I had an open precious meeting at Clonmell. Oh, how the
heavenly virtue did stream forth! in doctrine and counsel, for the help,
encouragement, and stirring up of friends and others, to their religious duty.
The great name of our God was adored and magnified. The 5th I went to Cork, and
attended their meetings on first day. They were large, and although the
declension from the life and simplicity of truth is very great and obvious
amongst friends in that city, and many under our name are much defiled with the
love of earthly gratifications, preferring their outward interest to that of
religion; yet great was the extendings of divine love and favor for their help
and recovery. The doctrines of the gospel were thereby largely and livingly
opened, I hope to the comfort and help of many, causing the hearts of a
sincere, upright-minded remnant amongst them greatly to rejoice with
thankfulness. On third-day, the 8th, I attended a very large meeting there,
both of friends and people of other religious persuasions; it being appointed
for the marriage of our friend Samuel Neal to a daughter of Joshua Beale, and
granddaughter of our worthy friend Joseph Pike, deceased. The fore part of
this meeting was very cloudy and painful, but the sincere travail of the
upright in heart prevailed with the Lord to arise; then his enemies were
scattered, and the glorious powerful truth shone forth in its beauty, whereby
the poor had the gospel to preach, in the blessed demonstration thereof. It was
a time not to be easily forgotten; made so by his refreshing presence, who
turned our water of affliction into the reviving wine of his kingdom; to whom,
for the multitude of his mercies to his church and people, be humble
thanksgiving, sincere obedience, and praises for evermore, Amen! I went from
Cork directly to Limerick, where on the 11th I had a thorough open meeting, and
the testimony of truth was greatly exalted, I hope to the comfort and help of
many. I often much admired the divine condescension, in the open visitations of
his unmerited love and long-suffering kindness, to a greatly revolted and
backsliding people. But what we finite creatures cannot comprehend, of his
unfathomable regard to the workmanship of his hands, we ought to adore and
worship him for, with reverence and awful fear. So be it, says my soul, both
in time and eternity. I went from thence to Killconnen-Moor, where on
first day, the 13th, I attended their meeting, which was but small, and my
service therein was very laborious. The testimony given to bear went forth very
sharp against wrong liberties, I was much afflicted, in a sense of the almost
desolate state of that meeting, which that worthy man John Ashton, being first
himself convinced in that remote place, was the instrument, in the Lord's hand,
by his savoury circumspect life and labor to gather. I had a meeting in the
afternoon at Birr, where there are but few of our society, but many of the
people called methodists, and soldiers came in. The gospel of life and
salvation was largely preached unto them. The necessity of the new birth was
urged and pressingly enforced. The nature whereof, from a degree of experience,
being set forth, the meeting appeared to be generally affected, and, I hope, it
was a serviceable time. Some of the methodists did in words express their great
satisfaction, after meeting, beyond what I choose to mention. On the 15th I had
a very painful exercising meeting at the Moat. Great indeed was the distress of
my mind, viewing the general hardness and insensibility, as well as the vain
frothy light spirits of some. I had very little openness, and scarcely any
thing to deliver, but under a sense of the Lord's anger being kindled against
them, by whom, if they do not repent, they will be rejected. Though, I hope,
there were some few had a degree of tenderness and good desires; but, alas! it
is a hard lot for such who have a sense of feeling, to be incorporated with a
people generally so insensible of the life of religion; but the Lord is
all-sufficient for those who put their trust in him. From thence I went to the
Freeman's, near Old-Castle, where, on the 18th in the morning, I had a meeting
held at their house, for our friends only, in which I had matter and utterance
given suitable to the states of the few present, who were pretty much affected
with the testimony of truth. In the afternoon I had a large meeting in friends
meeting house at Old-Castle. I understood after meeting, they were mostly
papists. I had a large opportunity to publish the truths of the gospel, with
considerable clearness; showing the necessity of obtaining victory over sin,
through the power and efficacy of living faith in Christ; by whom only, full
remission of sin is to be obtained, upon sincere repentance; showing, in some
measure, the great danger of supposing the Almighty has delegated the power of
forgiving sins to any man, or set of men whatever; that all who were desirous
to be freed therefrom, must know the work of God's spirit in their hearts, to
work that change, or to bring forth that new birth our Lord taught Nicodemus
the necessity of. The auditory were generally quiet and attentive, appearing to
depart well satisfied. One of the papists after meeting did to me express much
satisfaction with the doctrine delivered. But I understood one or two priests
were much offended therewith, yet they said nothing to me; so all passed off
quiet, as was my mind, having sweet comfort in the labor of that day. From
thence I went to Coothill, and the 20th was at their first day meeting, wherein
I was largely concerned in a close rousing testimony. It was very sharp against
the inordinate love of the world, which, and other undue liberty, seemed to me
to have almost laid that meeting waste. Their monthly meeting of business was
held that day, which to me was another token of their little regard to the
great cause of religion and virtue, that they could not find it in their hearts
to bestow another day for transacting the weighty affairs of the church, which
I have always observed to be the case, where friends are really alive in
religion, and not narrowed up by the love of the world. It has often appeared
wonderful to me, how the professors of truth dare offer such an indignity to
the infinite being, and his awful work, as to put it off until it suits them
best, and when they are likely to suffer the lead disadvantange in that respect
to their outward affairs. What is pointed out by the offerings under the law,
being of the first year and without blemish? And what is meant by offering the
first fruits to the Lord? Oh, how ungratefully do some act, as if any thing, or
any time, was good enough to offer unto him! I have observed in some places,
though I can with comfort say, it was but in very few, that they hold their
monthly and quarterly-meetings in the afternoon, and having thus limited
themselves for time, they seem as if they could spare but little of it in
silent waiting, to seek the Lord's blessed assistance, and in faith to look for
the pouring forth of the holy spirit promised in this gospel-day. But I have
observed them to enter on the business as they have come out of the world;
moving in these weighty affairs in man's natural abilities, whereby darkness
reigns, and the glorious light and life of truth is obscured, and they come to
be so benighted, as to see no necessity to wait for it. Thus all living zeal,
and every qualification for carrying on the Lord's work is lost, and vain man
thinks he can do without it. I am well assured, by living experience, as well
as the practice truth has led friends into in all places (a few excepted) that
it is the indispensable duty of our society, every where, to dedicate a
weekday, viz. a day when they are not debarred by the laws of the land to
follow their outward business, for transacting the weighty affairs of
discipline and good order; and to meet in the forepart thereof, men and women
together, then and there to wait upon the Lord, for the virtue of his holy
spirit; and when they have thus waited a proper time, then the men and women in
their separate apartments, with awful fear, and a weighty care upon all their
minds as in the presence of the Lord, to proceed in their respective parts of
this great work; which is the Lord's, and cannot possibly be profitably done
but by his immediate assistance. This I leave upon record, as my well-grounded
testimony for God and his church. I attended what they called their
monthly meeting, and by looking a little into the state of things, I found them
much out of order, and did not wonder at it, as I found they had dropped their
weekday meeting. At my request the women were desired to be present, when much
labor was bestowed for their help, particularly to revive their weekday
meeting; they agreed to endeavor for it, and made a minute for that purpose in
their monthly meeting book. But, alas! the life of religion seemed to be almost
lost; their state being confused and disorderly, by mixed marriages, and the
neglect of discipline. They appeared part one thing and part another; which, if
it was so offensive to God, and so distressing to his people under the old
covenant, how can it be less so now? But when people's views are carnal and
selfish, they regard none of these things, although the hazard is so infinitely
great. I had a small poor meeting at Castle-shane next day, where, to my great
sorrow and pain, I could not perceive any alive in religion. Some labor in
testimony was bestowed, but to outward appearance it took very little effect.
From thence I went to Thomas Greer's, at Dungannon, and on the 23d had a large
meeting at Charlemount, where I was concerned to declare truth, as utterance
was given, in a very close searching manner; not without sharp rebukes to such,
who, by defiling liberties, had brought an ill savor and caused the way of
truth to be evil spoken of. My mind was comfortably relieved after the service
of this meeting was over, being discharged of a heavy load. The next day I had
a very painful and exercising meeting at Ballyhagan. The appearance of the
professors was in general plain; but, alas! with respect to the life of
religion, they seemed, in my view, for the most part, like pictures or images.
Surely the blindness and stupidity must be exceeding great, if it be possible
for people in that state, to imagine or dream they are the people of God. I
was, through divine favor, enabled to clear myself of them, by a sharp
searching and close testimony, in the discharge whereof I had peace. The
meeting was very large, as to number. The 25th I went to the province meeting
of ministers and elders, held in Lurgan. My spirit was deeply affected therein,
with a sorrowful sense, that some of the leaders of the people had caused them
to err, and by their love for, and eager pursuit after worldly enjoyments, had
largely contributed to obscure the way of the Lord, so that the serious
inquirers after the paths which lead to peace, could not, by observing their
steps, find them out. Oh, what a deplorable state that is! I was favored with
living authority and clearness, to discharge my mind toward such with great
plainness, which seemed to fasten closely on some: may they profit thereby, and
the end will be answered. The province meeting was held next day, in which I
had weighty service. But, alas I they are far gone (a few excepted) from the
life and power of religion; yet I found much good will extended for their
recovery and help, and the heavenly power wonderfully opened my mouth, and
enlarged my heart, to deliver suitable doctrine to their conditions, in which I
had peace, and many were affected and reached therewith. Oh, how unwilling is
the Lord to give up the offspring of his people! I attended Lurgan meeting on
first day, the 26th, which, through the divine manifestations of heavenly
power, was indeed a very awakening time to the unfaithful, as well as of sweet
refreshment to the few mourners in and for Sion. I went after meeting to
Lisburn, and had a very open satisfactory meeting there next day. The testimony
of truth went forth in an affecting manner, to the tendering many hearts. It
was a time of humbling encouragement to the honest-hearted. The next day I had
a very poor afflicting meeting at Hillsborough, things being very low there.
The 30th I had a very large meeting at Ballenderry, in which I had thorough
service. The testimony of truth went forth with much clearness and
demonstration, being, through divine favor, an eminent time, and many states
spoke closely to, I hope to their advantage. On fifth-day, the first of the 5th
month, I had a meeting at Moyallen, which was a painful cloudy time. The
testimony delivered was very searching, in order to stir up careless
professors, some of whom seemed, in a great measure, to have deserted the cause
of religion, and to have too much embraced this present world. The 2d I set out
for Dublin, in order first to attend the province meeting for Leinster, and
then the half year's meeting, both to be held there in one week. I lodged that
night at an inn in Dunlere, and next day got to Dublin. On first day, the 4th
of the 5th month, I went to Meath-Street in the morning, where truth greatly
favored, in opening doctrine and counsel, to the edification and comfort of
many, as well as in caution and warning to the disobedient and lukewarm
professors. In the afternoon at Sycamore-Alley, it proved a laborious painful
time of silence, to which, perhaps, the expectation and desire of the people
after words might not a little contribute. On second-day, the 5th, was held
their province meeting of ministers and elders. It was a painful heavy time,
but, through divine favor, some relief was administered toward the
conclusion. Next day was held the quarterly meeting for Leinster province, in
which I had open thorough service, both in ministry, and also in relation to
good order and the discipline of the church. On fourth-day, the 8th of the 5th
month, third hour in the afternoon, began their national meeting of ministers
and elders, wherein the Lord was pleased to open profitable instruction, to the
great comfort and edification of many. Next day we had a meeting for worship in
the morning, wherein divine favor was plentifully extended, and the doctrine
of truth largely opened. The meeting of business for the whole nation was held
in the afternoon, in which a degree of divine wisdom and strength were
administered for our help in the management thereof. On sixth-day morning was
held a large meeting for worship at Sycamore-Alley, which was wonderfully
overshadowed with heavenly goodness, and the testimony of truth went forth
freely, being much exalted. In the afternoon the affairs of the church
continued; and on seventh-day, both fore and afternoon were employed in them.
Divine goodness was comfortably near, for the help and recovery of a declined
people, stirring up the hearts of some, as he did the heart of Nehemiah
formerly, to seek the prosperity and welfare of the city of God. I found a
considerable alteration for the better, by some reviving and growth in the life
of religion, amongst friends in this nation. That painful flatness and
insensibility, which I formerly mourned sorely under a sense of, did not appear
so generally to overspread the churches now, as then; though in some places it
was rather worse than better; yet I think, upon the whole, things were mended
in a religious sense. The Lord, in merciful kindness to them, not only sent
diverse substantial instruments from distant parts, to visit them; but also, as
before noted, moved upon the hearts of some amongst themselves, to labor for
restoring ancient comeliness, by visiting their monthly and quarterly, or
province meetings, for the promotion of good order and discipline; the reviving
whereof, in the wisdom which is from above, proves an effectual means to
increase and exalt the virtue and power of true religion. A concern of this
nature came weightily upon the national meeting at this time, in the feeling
whereof, under the holy influence of heavenly light, friends nominated a
certain number to visit the monthly meetings in Leinster province.

I cannot well omit making a remark upon appointments, as I apprehend some
have, by the subtilty of Satan, been prevailed upon to reject them: I believe
all such do not design an injury to the society; but he who deceives them,
intends thereby the obstructing that great and necessary engagement, of
maintaining good order and discipline. I ardently desire, that all who
undertake to move and act in the church of God, may be well informed what is
the spring of action to them, and moves them therein. If it be the spirit of
God, they dare do nothing against the truth, but all in their power in order to
promote it, that being their greatest delight. But if it be self, it will seek
its own honor, and be very fond of victory, and be disgusted when it cannot
rule and carry matters and things its own way.

On first day, the 11th, many country friends being yet in the city, we had, it
was thought, the largest meeting known at such a time, for many years, and, by
the blessed dominion of the everlasting truth, it was a time of great favor.
The sincere-hearted were sweetly comforted, the disobedient warned, and in the
free powerful opening of gospel life, much doctrine and counsel were
administered, tending to beget faith in the eternal power of God. The afternoon
meeting was, for the most part, held in an awful solemn silence. On second-day
was held a meeting of ministers and elders, wherein divine goodness was pleased
to open the free fountain of life and healing virtue; in whom we had to rejoice
with joy unspeakable and full of glory. His name was greatly exalted,
magnified, and adored amongst us. After this meeting, apprehending myself now
quite clear of any farther service, at this time, having, through infinite
kindness, been much favored and enlarged therein, through most parts of the
nation, but more especially at the late great meetings in Dublin, I was very
earnest in my mind to embark for England, and so to leave things whilst fresh
and well; always having an aversion to loitering amongst friends until they
flatten. But though there were several ships ready to sail for Parkgate, yet I
could not get away till after their weekday meeting, on third-day, in
Meath-Street; to which meeting, I must say, I went with considerable
reluctance, for the reason abovementioned. But we are very short-sighted
creatures; for this meeting, notwithstanding my unwillingness to be at it,
proved a memorable time: many country friends being still in the city, it was a
solemn taking leave one of another, in the precious flowing of the holy unity
by the one spirit. Next day about noon, in company with seven friends intending
for the yearly meeting in London, I embarked on board the Kildare, captain
M'Culloch, and landed at Parkgate about ten o'clock next morning, where we
hired horses and proceeded toward London. But when we had traveled as far as
Coventry, apprehending I might reach home, so as to have three whole days with
my family before the yearly meeting; and it being but about twenty miles more
riding, I concluded therefore to do so; my kind friend Robert Lackey agreeing
to bear me company. This being on seventh-day, the 17th, we got to Northampton
that night, and staid their meeting next day, which was small, and the life of
religion appeared to me very low there. The meeting was held in silence. I got
home on third-day, the 20th of the 5th month, 1760, finding my dear wife and
family in good health, to our mutual joy and thankfulness to the Lord, who
leads out, carries through, and brings home again in peace, those who trust in
him. Blessed and praised be his worthy name for ever! I was indeed largely
favored in the beforementioned journey, of which, for mine encouragement to
give up in humble confidence in the Lord's power, I had a clear foresight
before I entered upon it, which I esteemed a high favor. I was from home about
twelve weeks and three days, traveled in that time upwards of 1300 miles, and
was at about 58 meetings. Our friend Robert Lackey, myself and wife, went to
the yearly meeting in London, which began on seventh-day the 24th of the 5th
month, for ministers and elders. An establishment, which I hope will be of
great service throughout the society in these nations; as inquiries are made at
this meeting, by calling for answers from the several parts, to certain queries
agreed on, relating to the conduct of friends in the stations abovementioned;
and advice administered as occasion may require. Common reason will inform us,
that when the main pillars give way, the building must inevitably fall. It is
therefore prudent to take due care concerning them. An eminent servant of the
Lord wisely observed to this effect, viz. That there never was an apostasy from
the life and purity of religion, until the ministers and elders gave way. How
important then are their stations, and what great need have they themselves,
and likewise the church, carefully to observe whether or no they stand upright,
seeing so much depends thereon. On second-day following was opened the
yearly meeting of business, which continued, by adjournments, most or all the
week; being a solemn weighty meeting, of very great importance to the society:
careful inquiries are there made, into the state thereof, in order to
communicate such help, as in the wisdom of truth may appear proper and
necessary. I am free to give a short account here, of the beginning or rise of
one very important affair which came before this yearly meeting, as I shall
have occasion hereafter to make some mention of its progress and success, viz.
A nomination of friends, to visit all the monthly and quarterly-meetings of
friends in this nation, for their help, in promoting good order and discipline
in the several parts. Upon reading the answers to the usual queries from the
several quarterly-meetings, great slackness and unfaithfulness in diverse places
in some weighty branches of our Christian testimony appeared, notwithstanding
the great and earnest endeavors made use of by the yearly meeting from year to
year, by way of advice, caution, and counsel: the sense whereof deeply affected
some minds, who, in humble prostration before the Lord, were ready to say, What
will thou do for thy great name's sake, and to heal the backslidings of thy
people? A friend under this exercise, and an awful sense of the divine presence
which was near, stood up, taking notice of the apparent defection above-hinted;
and that as all the means hitherto used by the truly Christian labor of
preceding yearly-meetings, had not proved sufficient to stop the declension,
which seemed rather to increase; that now it behoved that meeting, deeply and
weightily to consider what remained yet to be done for the help and recovery of
the society, to its ancient purity and comely order, or to that import. This
seemed to open the way for our worthy friend Joseph White of Pennsylvania, who
was then upon a religious visit in this nation, to lay before that meeting what
he said had been much upon his mind most of the time since he landed, and which
seemed to increase in clearness and weight as that yearly meeting drew near;
and that he now found it was the proper time to deliver the same, viz. That the
yearly meeting do appoint a suitable number of solid, weighty, judicious
friends, to visit all the quarterly and monthly-meetings in England, therein to
use their Christian endeavors, in the love of God, for the promotion and
revival of wholesome discipline, and the comely order of the gospel in the
churches. Great was the awful solemnity which covered the meeting, during its
deliberation on this very important affair. The weight of the heavenly power
was so exceeding great and awful, that it was very hard for any contrary
spirits to appear; yet objections against appointments for such services were
advanced by some. It was therefore proposed, that friends who found a concern
on their minds to engage in the said undertaking, would give in their names.
The Lord's heavenly power being at work, like leaven, in the meeting, a
wonderful time of divine favor it was, wherein about fifty-eight offered
themselves accordingly.

Before I insert any account of the progress made in the abovementioned
service, I have to take notice of a journey into the West of England, which, in
company with my friend Richard Brewster, I entered upon the 9th of the 9th
month this year. We went to Plaistow monthly meeting, where, unexpectedly, I
had some pretty close service. Next day, being joined at London by my esteemed
friend Thomas Corbyn, we proceeded on our way, in order to attend the circular
yearly meeting for the western counties, to be held at Wotton-under-Edge, in
Gloucestershire, which began on first day, the 14th of the 9th month, and ended
on the third-day following. Many of our society from diverse parts, attended,
and a vast concourse of other people, who generally behaved in a becoming
manner, carrying themselves very respectfully to friends, and I hope the
meeting was in the main, serviceable; yet the heavenly power was not exalted to
so high a degree, as those whose life and all is in it could have desired. It
is that alone which is able to open people's way rightly to our Sion; not the
finest and most consistent set of principles, curiously set forth and displayed
without it. All ministers should therefore upon all occasions, eye that divine
power as the only thing we stand in need of, otherwise the work will be marred.
We went from Wotton to Ann Young's, at Earthcott, and had a close searching
meeting at Thornbury on fourth-day. Things were very low there as to the life
of religion. We had a meeting next day at Earthcott, wherein the testimony of
truth went forth very sharp against dry, formal, and disorderly professors. Our
friend Isaac Sharpless was at this meeting. We went from thence to Bristol, and
attended their meeting on sixth-day, where truth and its testimony was excited
over wrong things; and unfaithful, disorderly walkers, were, in the dominion
and authority thereof, warned, and the humble, sincere traveller Sion-ward,
comforted: it being, through the divine blessing, a good, profitable time. In
the afternoon was held their meeting of ministers and elders, wherein we had
some very close work with a troublesome imposter, who had given friends there
much uneasiness, by his unsavory and unsanctified public appearances. The
judgment of truth was set over him, though he was very unwilling to submit
thereunto. On first day, the 21st, we attended three meetings there; and
notwithstanding the mournful declension so visible amongst friends in that
city, yet the Lord graciously appeared for their help and recovery; opening the
doctrine of truth in a clear and plentiful manner to their several states, with
which many appeared pretty much affected. And although there is yet much cause
to lament their degeneracy in too general a way, yet I hope and believe there
has been a considerable reviving in the best sense, amongst some of them,
especially the youth, since I was there before. On second-day morning we had a
thorough rousing meeting at Portshead in Somersetshire, and in the afternoon a
large meeting at Clareham; the latter was exceeding cloudy and afflicting for a
considerable time; but at length, it pleased the Lord to arise and to give the
word, with understanding to divide the same in a plain, powerful manner, and a
very awakening time it was; it went forth very sharp against indifferency and
empty formality, which greatly depressed the true seed in that meeting: I hope
it was a profitable time. On third-day we had a very open, serviceable meeting
at Sedcott; the testimony of truth flowed forth freely to the several states of
those present. After meeting we went to Bridgwater. On fourth-day was held the
quarterly meeting for Somerset. In the forenoon we had a large meeting for
worship, both of friends and others; some previous endeavors, I understood had
been used, to invite the neighbors, which, I think, was not well judged,
neither should I have encouraged it at such a time, had I been consulted. The
leadings and pointings out of truth should be always minded, in calling or
inviting people of other persuasions to our meetings; for I have sometimes
thought them a bar in the way of dealing suitably with professors of the truth,
and therefore it is my judgment, they should not be called to our meetings,
unless those who travel in the service of truth signify their desire to have it
so, to those who have the care of appointing meetings. The power of the gospel,
opening and exalting the doctrine thereof, was livingly and comfortably
extended in that meeting; yet I apprehended, other people were then rather in
the way of our handling the state of some professors there, in a manner truth
would have led to, had friends been by themselves. The meeting of business
followed, and was adjourned till the afternoon, wherein truth appeared to the
help of those who know their sufficiency to be of God. We who were strangers,
had good service therein. Next morning we parted with my friend Thomas Corbyn,
who returned home, and my companion and I proceeded on our journey. We had a
meeting at Taunton, on fifth-day morning, and at Milverton in the evening. At
both which I had close service, tending to stir friends up to more lively zeal
and religious concern of mind. On sixth-day we had a painful laborious meeting
at Wellington. The testimony of truth went forth very close and sharp against
those, who, under the profession thereof, bow down to the world, and its
perishing enjoyments. It appeared to me, the life of religion was much
depressed in that meeting. On seventh-day we had a meeting at Cullumpton, which
was a cloudy trying time most of the meeting; yet toward the conclusion, truth
obtained the victory, and considerable dominion over things of a contrary
nature to itself. We went after meeting to Exeter, and on first day, the 28th,
were at two meetings there; and although their number appeared considerable,
yet that holy living sense and weight of divine virtue which is the crown and
diadem of all our religious assemblies, was very low, and little felt, through
the too general slackness and lukewarmness of professors, consequently, not
much could be done toward exalting truth's testimony amongst them. On
second-day we went to Bovey, and had a poor, laborious meeting, there being
very few, if any, that I could find, truly alive in religion. When that is felt
to be the state of any meeting, oh! what pain and anxiety covers the hearts of
poor travelers in the service of the gospel! The next day we went to
King's-bridge, and on fourth and fifth-day attended the quarterly meeting for
Devonshire held there; wherein the great master of our assemblies graciously
condescended to their very low, weak, and unskilful state, opening doctrine and
counsel for their help; furnishing with close admonition to such in high
stations, who either indulged themselves or families in undue liberties,
tending to lay a people waste, whom the Lord, by an outstretched arm, gathered
out of the fashions and changeable customs of a vain world, to himself the
unchangeable fountain of good. On sixth and seventh days we traveled through
Plymouth and sundry other towns, to Penryn, in Cornwall, and had two open,
precious meetings at Falmouth, on first day, the fifth of the 10th month. On
second-day, accompanied by many friends, we went to Penzance, where, on
third-day, was held the quarterly meeting for Cornwall. Truth wonderfully
appeared in that meeting, considering their low, weak, and unfaithful state.
The testimony thereof was much exalted, and went forth with clearness and good
demonstration to their states, and the meeting appeared to be much affected
therewith. There was also something very encouraging to the honest-hearted; I
hope it was a time of awakening and profit to many. In the evening we had what
was called a select meeting, for ministers and elders; but it was so far from
select, that the service seemed to be wholly obstructed, by the crouding in of
many who were not fit to be admitted into such meetings; where ministers and
elders may, and often are concerned to use such freedoms, in advice, caution,
and counsel, as would be altogether unsuitable for those who are raw and
inexperienced to be privy to, as they might be likely to make improper use
thereof. I laid before friends the hurt and disadvantage of such a promiscuous
gathering, upon that occasion, and advised them to be careful not to lay waste
the service of those meetings for the future; for I found myself much
straitened, as I could not, with prudence, deliver what seemed to appear before
the view of my mind at that time, for the reason abovementioned. On
fourth-day, the concluding meeting was held at Market-Jew, wherein truth and
the testimony thereof was comfortably exalted. But, alas! sorrowful is the
declension of the society in those parts, both as to number, and a holy living
zeal; yet merciful goodness was largely and affectingly extended for their help
and recovery. From thence we took the following meetings in our return to
Plymouth, viz. Austel, Li^kard, and Germans, where I found the life of religion
mournfully low and depressed; yet the Lord was pleased to open the way to some,
I hope profitable endeavors for their reviving, in the exercise whereof I had
peace. I attended Plymouth meetings on first day, the 12th. This was a very
painful, laborious time, as but very little of the life and holy efficacy of
true religion had place, most under our profession having made large advances
toward the world, and but few endued with Christian courage to make a stand
against prevailing undue liberties. The state of a meeting being thus, oh, how
does death, darkness, and insensibility gain the ascendancy! My spirit was
deeply afflicted at that place, yet I was, through divine favor, enabled to
clear myself of the service required; whereby I had some relief. We traveled
from thence directly to Exeter, and on third-day attended a meeting there,
appointed for the accomplishment of a marriage. Truth mercifully opened the way
to some satisfaction, in the discharge of the service required, to the
advantage of the meeting. From thence we went to Chard, and had a very small
poor meeting there on fifth-day morning, and was deeply affected with their low
weak state. I had a pretty thorough serviceable meeting in the afternoon, at
Ilminster; though I felt much pain of mind there also, in a sense of that which
has almost laid our society waste in some, and exceedingly hurt it in most
places, viz. the inordinate love of earthly things; and resting satisfied in a
profession of religion only. We took the following meetings in our way to Bath,
viz. Yeovil, Long-Sutton, Grinton, Shepton-Mallet, Froome, Hallawtrow, and
Belton; where things, as to the life and true feeling sense of religion, appear
but low in general; yet merciful kindness was extended, in a lively, open,
large, and powerful manner, both immediately and instrumentally, in order to
quicken, restore, and turn again backsliding Israel. On first day, the 26th of
the 10th month, we attended two meetings at Bath, which were indeed painful and
very afflicting, as the grandeur, friendship, and vain customs of this world,
seem to have almost erased from most of their minds, the desire of seeking
happiness in another: yet merciful condescension was remarkably extended, in
some earnest and awakening endeavors, to bring them to a right sense of
things. On second-day morning we set our faces homewards, where, to my great
satisfaction I arrived on fourth-day in the evening, and found my dear wife and
family well; having been out this journey seven weeks and two days, in which
time, by account, we traveled upwards of 800 miles, and were at about 51
meetings.

Pursuant to the direction and appointment of the yearly meeting 1760, for
visiting the monthly and quarterly meetings of friends in this nation; on the
11th day of the 1st month, 1761, my esteemed friends, John Emms, Matthew
Mellor, Thomas Corbyn, and Joseph Tailor, joined me at Chelmsford, we having
before agreed (by divine permission) to visit the monthly and
quarterly-meetings of friends, in Essex, Suffolk, Norfolk, Cambridgeshire,
Huntingtonshire, the Isle of Ely, Hertfordshire, and Bedfordshire. The next
day, being the 12th, our monthly meeting was held, wherein the abovenamed
friends had good service, tending to promote discipline and good order amongst
us. The blessed efficacy of the living word accompanied their honest labors,
which rendered the same very acceptable to some, and I hope of general
advantage for the promotion of truth. The 14th we visited Felsted
monthly meeting, held at Stebbing; the state of which appeared very low and
weak, through the defection and lukewarmness of many members, whereby the life
of religion was greatly depressed; yet the Lord was graciously pleased to
arise, for his great name and people's sake, in whose living power and wisdom
much labor was bestowed for their help and recovery; a few sincere-hearted
members amongst themselves, joining with us herein. The 16th we visited
Thaxsted monthly meeting, and by inquiry made, it appeared, many of their
members were very slack and defective in diverse branches of our Christian
testimony; and most of the active members had but little experience in the
essential qualifications for effectual service in the church, which must all
proceed immediately from the great Father of lights and spirits. It would be
very absurd to imagine a less or inferior ability to administer justice and
sound judgment, were necessary under this higher and more glorious
dispensation, than was received by those who judged and ruled for God in the
Israelitish church; it being evident the Lord was pleased to put his spirit
upon those who had the weight of the affairs of that church upon them, both in
their wilderness state of probation, and after they quietly possessed the
promised land. But the supernatural endowment, so essential as above hinted, is
not within our reach as men, neither is it given to us, until we are emptied of
our own wisdom, and divested of all dependence upon human accomplishments.

Our holy head was pleased to furnish us with wisdom and strength, suitable to
the state of that meeting, for their information and help; and the blessed
virtue of truth prevailed, to the tendering of their spirits. The next
monthly meeting visited was Coggeshall, on second-day, the 19th, but as I did
not attend that meeting, I cannot say further concerning it, than that I
understood it was a serviceable time; much weighty advice and counsel being
administered, to mutual satisfaction and comfort. The 21st we visited
Colchester monthly meeting, where, though the life of religion appeared low,
and several disorders had crept in, yet divine goodness was extended in a
powerful manner for their help, enlightening the spirits of some to search the
camp, and to point out how to proceed in restoring that which had been turned
out of the way. The 22d, Manningtree monthly meeting was held at Colchester, in
which, through the pure efficacy of heavenly love and wisdom, much fervent
labor was bestowed, for the awakening and stirring up the several members to a
faithful discharge of their respective duties. But, alas! through the great
unfaithfulness of many, discipline was but little maintained, in a manner
agreeable to its dignity and worth; consequently the life of religion was very
low. From Colchester we went to Edmund's-Bury, in Suffolk, and visited their
monthly meeting the 24th. It was a time of remarkable favor extended, truth
bowing the spirits of friends into an humble, teachable state, and, at the same
time, affording plenty of suitable counsel, which was kindly received by diverse
members of that meeting, with whom we had near union and great satisfaction;
several being willing to engage in the work of reformation, which appeared
necessary. The 26th we visited Woodbridge monthly meeting, in which the Lord,
according to his wonted merciful kindness, appeared not only in spreading the
awful canopy of his divine power over the meeting, but also, in graciously
condescending to be a spirit of judgment and counsel, for the help and recovery
of a declining people; under the enjoyment of which divine favor, much labor
was bestowed, and (as far as appeared) was well received. The 28th we visited
Beccles monthly meeting, where things appeared very low and much out of order;
the spirit and wisdom of man appeared much to rule and act amongst them, which
is fond of smoothing over, and daubing with untempered mortar, crying, Peace,
when there is no peace. In this difficult mournful state of things, the divine
helper, in whom our only dependence remained, was near, giving judgment to
assign the living child to the proper mother, and to judge down wrong things,
in whatever stations they appeared. The 29th we visited Tivetshall
monthly meeting, in Norfolk, in which, though large, as being composed of many
members, yet very great slackness and unfaithfulness appeared in diverse
important respects; notwithstanding which, we had, with thankful
acknowledgments, to experience the awful presence of the Lord, who is the only
strength and sufficiency of his little ones; under the blessed influence
whereof, great and deep labors were bestowed, for the reviving our Christian
discipline, and promoting the good order of the gospel; the testimony of truth
being maintained against wrong things in that meeting, with authority and
clearness; the power thereof subjecting (for the present at least) all of a
contrary nature to itself. On the 2d of the 2d month, we visited the
monthly meeting of Wymondham, wherein, on the usual inquiries, things appeared
very afflicting, through the great defection of many; the few who were
concerned for good order, were weak and much discouraged, so that very little
was done to maintain our wholesome discipline, by visiting and laboring with
the unfaithful and disorderly walkers: yet the Lord, in great condescension,
appeared wonderfully for their and our help, extending much advice and counsel,
and giving us wisdom and strength to contend earnestly for the faith once
delivered to the saints; which faith is to be demonstrated by works consistent
therewith. The testimony of truth was greatly exalted over all such, as through
a mean compliance with wrong things, had mournfully deviated therefrom. The 3d
we visited their meeting of ministers and elders at Norwich, where the state of
the members was inquired into, by means of queries proper to such meetings;
solid and weighty advice was given, where any deficiency appeared. Although I
have not before now distinctly mentioned our visits to select meetings, yet we
had such opportunities in most or all the monthly-meetings where such meetings
were settled. On the 4th of the 2d month, we visited the monthly meeting of
Norwich, which was very large, consisting both of the men and women friends; it
being our method, during our labors at the monthly-meetings, to have the
company of both sexes. Through the over-shadowing of divine power, it was a
solemn awful time, of which friends in general appeared to be sensible, as a
remarkable stillness and patience was abode in, for the space of about six
hours and a half, being the time of the meeting's continuance; though a motion
was made sooner for our women friends to withdraw, lest some weak constitutions
might be injured by long sitting, etc. yet their spirits being so stayed and
bowed down under a sense of heavenly good, they did not accept the liberty
given, but continued to the breaking up of the meeting. We found a valuable
body of friends in that city, and discipline, in the main, well supported; yet
there appeared great danger of the prevalence of earthly-mindedness, in some,
and grandeur and wisdom above the simplicity of the truth, in others; which, if
not guarded against, might intrude itself to act and govern in the church; of
which friends were warned, and through the effectual opening of the fountain of
wisdom and knowledge, much caution and counsel were administered, to mutual
edification and comfort. On the 6th of the 2d month we visited the
monthly meeting of North-Walsham, where we found an honest sincere remnant
concerned to maintain the principles of truth, by a conduct consistent
therewith; yet a great defection appeared in some important branches of our
Christian testimony; the monthly meeting not having discharged its incumbent
duty, by way of admonition and dealing with such members. Truth opened our way
in much plainness and close labor, in order to bring the unfaithful to a right
sense of their states, and to revive and promote our Christian discipline, as a
means to restore ancient beauty, and a good savor amongst men. The path of the
just, in which our worthy predecessors carefully walked, was clearly opened
before friends in that meeting; the judgment of truth being set over those who
had erred and strayed therefrom, in this day of outward ease and liberty. The
9th we visited Wells monthly meeting, in which humbling goodness prevailed, to
the great comfort and strength of the upright-hearted; in a living sense of the
free extendings whereof, much labor was bestowed to restore good order and
discipline in every part, by first endeavoring to remove those impediments
which appeared in the way. It was a time of sweet comfort in a faithful
discharge of duty. The 11th we visited Lynn monthly meeting, wherein our
spirits were deeply afflicted under a cloud of darkness, which seemed to
over-shadow that meeting, occasioned by the prevalence of wrong things in many
of the members, and their great neglect of the due execution of wholesome
discipline. Much labor was bestowed in order for a regulation, but, alas!
great weakness and unskilfulness appeared; neither was there that openness to
receive help, which we could have desired in the general; may also add, we had
fresh occasion to say, that nothing but an understanding renewed from above, is
capable of laboring successfully for the maintaining our Christian discipline.
Oh! that this important point was duly considered by all active members. The
13th we visited the monthly meeting of Wisbeach, in the Isle of Ely; it was a
small meeting, as but few members belong thereto. By inquiry, it appeared,
slackness and disorder had prevailed on some, and things in general were but
low; yet an openness was felt to receive proper advice and counsel, which,
through the gracious extendings of heavenly help, was freely and largely
communicated. We had cause to believe truth was at work in the hearts of a few,
in order to prepare them for service; having ease and satisfaction in our
labors amongst them, and hoping this visit would prove of considerable help to
that meeting. The 17th we visited the monthly meeting at Ives, wherein we had
painful labor, and found things much out of order, which had caused darkness
to be felt, and an ill-savour; some of the active members did not appear to us
rightly to know what spirits they were of; however, we found they were not one
with us in our service, which was indeed very close and searching to all
stations in the church, as it appeared all had need of help, and to look more
narrowly to their standing. Divine goodness was graciously with us, and carried
us through, to our ease and satisfaction in a good degree. But, alas! we have
sometimes cause to see, that our discipline does not prosper when managed with
unsanctified hands. The 18th we visited Hadingham monthly meeting, and found
things very low, as to the life of religion, consequently as to good order and
discipline; yet some appeared hopeful, tender, and desirous of a proper
regulation in the affairs of the church, with whom we had good satisfaction in
our labors for their improvement, which I hope was not in vain. The 20th of
the 2d month, we, visited the monthly meeting of Royston, in Hertfordshire; the
state of which appeared much out of order; discipline was in the main
neglected. Very deep and painful was our labor, under a mournful sense of that
gross darkness which had prevailed, by reason of unfaithfulness; yet the Lord
was graciously with us, and the testimony of truth was exalted over the heads
of disorderly walkers, and all those, who, by a mean temporizing spirit, had
violated some principal branches of our Christian testimony. We were
unanimously of opinion, that the monthly meeting of Royston, in its present
state, was too weak to manage the weighty affairs proper to a monthly meeting,
and therefore proposed their being joined to Baldock and Hitchin; which, upon a
solid deliberation, was agreed to, and has been since effected, to the great
satisfaction of friends who have the prosperity of truth at heart. The 23d we
visited Hertford monthly meeting, in which heavenly wisdom and merciful help
(as at other places) were largely extended, to the encouragement of a few
sincere laborers amongst them, as well as to the warning and stirring up of
careless, unfaithful professors: for indeed, there appeared much slackness in
too many, in not improving those talents God had given them. The 24th, we
visited those under our profession at Coterhill-head, called a monthly meeting;
but, alas! upon inquiry, we found but very little done of the business proper
to a monthly meeting; neither was it held in due course, but rather
occasionally, for some particular purposes; and when the state of the members
appeared, we did not marvel thereat, seeing most of them were unfaithful in
regard to that important testimony, against tithes and other antichristian
demands of that nature: other great disorders also had crept in, nor can any
other be reasonably expected, where persons are so void of a right
understanding, as to sacrifice that noble testimony; they have not strength to
maintain other branches in a consistent efficacious manner, so that where this
defection has prevailed, we have observed the most essential part in religion
(amongst us as a people) has fallen with it: meetings for worship and
discipline are neglected, and if sometimes held by such, they are to little
good purpose; plainness and self-denial are departed from: this hard, dark,
tithe-paying spirit is so blind, as to see but little in any branch of our
testimony, wherein there is a cross to the carnal mind. Upon solid
consideration we did not think, that using endeavors to regulate that meeting,
in its situation at that time, would answer any good purpose; but the great
thing pointed out to us in the light of truth, was its being dissolved, and
that the members thereof might be joined to Hertford monthly meeting; which had
been endeavored for several years, both by their quarterly meeting, and also
several committees of the yearly meeting, which had not, till now, proved
successful, as the consent of most of the members could not be obtained* but
this meeting, through divine favor, was wonderfully overshadowed with a solemn
weight of heavenly power, which awed and tendered their spirits, and at the
same time mercifully enabled us clearly to demonstrate, that they contended
only for the name of a monthly meeting; seeing the service of such a meeting
was not answered, scarcely in any instance. They at length generally yielded,
and a minute was made to propose a junction with Hertford, which is since
effected, to the great ease and satisfaction of friends. I cannot well avoid
remarking here, the very great hurt and obstruction to the progress of truth,
which I have diverse times, with sorrow of heart, observed to arise by some
active members from private views, strenuously withstanding the pointings of
divine wisdom, for the help and preservation of the body, which doubtless is in
the Lord's sight, a crime of a very offensive nature; therefore all should
greatly dread being in any degree guilty thereof. Let us therefore, at all
times, carefully examine what ground we act upon in the church of God, whether
we always preserve the single eye, being clothed with that pure charity which
seeks not her own, and filled with that universal spirit, that carefully
promotes the good of the whole, without respect of persons. The 25th we visited
Hitchin monthly meeting, where we found a valuable solid body of friends, and
discipline well maintained in most of its branches. Heavenly goodness
over-shadowed that meeting, whereby understanding was given to administer
suitable caution and counsel; particularly to point out the great danger of
sitting down at ease, in a becoming decent form, even after being eminently
favored, both with the dew of heaven and the fatness of the earth;
notwithstanding which, there must be a persevering in an earnest labor for
daily bread, seeing nothing beyond this can be attained by us, whilst in a
militant state. On the 27th we visited the monthly meeting of Ampthill, in
Bedfordshire, the Lord's awful presence being near, as, through infinite mercy,
was generally the case; this opened the way for a close and diligent inquiry
into the state of that meeting. Things appeared low and pretty much out of
order; the active members having here, as in many other places, too much
neglected a deep and painful labor for a better regulation. Endeavors were
used, in order to stir up and provoke to love and good works, by diligently
extending a care over the whole flock, that so all might be brought into the
comely order of the gospel. On the 28th we visited Luton monthly meeting; it
was small, slackness and the want of right zeal appeared; also some disorders
crept in, yet there seemed openness in the minds of friends to receive advice
and counsel, which, through divine aid, were largely administered; and I hope
the labor of that day was beneficial to diverse of the members, and may prove a
lasting advantage to that meeting. The 2d of the 3d month, we visited Alban's
monthly meeting, held at Charley-wood, where, on the usual inquiries, things
appeared very low and much out of order; yet divine favor was largely and
livingly extended for their help and recovery; in an humble sense whereof, much
endeavors were used to promote a better regulation; first, by the active
members taking heed to themselves, that they might be endued with ancient zeal
and fervor of mind; then they would take the oversight of the flock, not by
constraint, but willingly: this willingness, through a neglect of seeking that
divine power which alone can bring it forth in the mind of man, has been much
lost or departed from, by many, and appears to be greatly wanting in most
places; this, without doubt, is one principal cause that so general a defection
has prevailed. Had the foremost rank stood faithful in the authority of truth,
they would have been as a bulwark against undue liberties, and happy
instruments to have preserved the body healthy, and in beautiful order. But,
oh! how shall I set forth, and sufficiently admire, the mavelous
condescension of infinite goodness, which so eminently manifested itself in all
the meetings we were concerned to visit, in order to bring back again the
captivity of his people, to build up the waste places, and to beautify the
house of his glory. May such evident tokens of his merciful regard make deep
and lasting impressions on all minds, lest the Lord be justly provoked to cast
many off, and move such to jealousy by those who are now no people. One very
sorrowful instance of much degeneracy, being an inlet for many other wrong
things to creep into our society, was the great neglect of divine worship,
especially on week days; some weekday meetings being wholly dropped, and in
many places where they are kept up, attended by few; and by what appears, many
do not seem to think it their duty to attend them at all, nor even first day
meetings, when small difficulties present. This discovers remarkable ignorance
of the great importance of that indispensable duty, as well as of the great
need all have, of a daily supply from the Lord's bountiful hand. As these
opportunities of inward retirement and humble bowing before God, have, by
experience, been found times of unspeakable refreshment, which flows from the
presence of the Lord, who has graciously promised to be with those who meet in
his name, even where the numbers are but two or three, hereby strength is
administered, which enables us to stand our ground in the Christian warfare. It
is no marvel therefore, that the neglect of so important a duty, is a cause of
much weakness, depriving people of a necessary defense against numerous and
potent enemies which war against the soul. Here he that goes about like a
roaring lion, and also as a creeping subtle serpent, prevails, in order to lay
the society waste; and whilst many are asleep in carnal security, he finds
opportunity to sow tares amongst the wheat. Very deep and servent were our
labors in this visit, to promote diligence in this most important duty, as a
great means, under the divine blessing, for the restoring ancient beauty and
comeliness throughout the society. This opportunity at Charley-wood, finished
our present visit to monthly-meetings; we having requested the
quarterly meeting to which they belonged, to adjourn, in such order, as to be
visited in course by us at one journey, to begin in Luton, for Bedfordshire,
which accordingly was held the 8th of the 4th month, 1761, John Emms, Thomas
Corbyn, Samuel Scott, Joseph Row, and myself attended the same, and laid before
the quarterly meeting, in writing, the state of their monthly-meetings, as the
same appeared to us by their answers to the quarterly meeting queries, and
other inquiries made in our late visit, with sundry remarks thereon; and
through the over-shadowing of heavenly power, we were fervently concerned to
bring the weight of the declined state of the society there, upon the meeting,
wherein an engagement of mind was revived for a reformation: may the same
continue and increase. On the 10th of the 4th month we visited Hertford
quarterly meeting; where our friend Joseph Tailor, who had been indisposed,
joined us. Having previously drawn up the state of their monthly-meetings, as
the same appeared to us in our late visit, with remarks thereon, we laid it
before the meeting, which they took into their solid consideration, and a
solemn time it was: the Lord's power being livingly felt, it made a remnant
willing to arise, that the breaches made in that excellent hedge of discipline,
set by divine wisdom about us as a people, might be repaired; that the heritage
be not laid waste. On the 14th of the 4th month, we visited the
quarterly meeting at Ives, for Huntingtonshire, Cambridgeshire, and the Isle of
Ely; where, having drawn up the state of their monthly-meetings, as the same
appeared to us in our late visit, with some remarks thereon, we laid the same
before them, with earnest labor to awaken the active members, to a lively
sense of the sorrowful declension found within their borders. It was a painful
exercising time, great insensibility having prevailed over many; yet I believe
it was a season of comfort and relief to a living remnant, who travail for the
prosperity of truth amongst them; may their number increase! We had the returns
of sweet peace in the discharge of our duty, and departed with cheerfulness of
mind. On the 21st of the 4th month, we visited the quarterly meeting for the
county of Norfolk, held in the city of Norwich; where, as usual, having drawn
up the state of their monthly meetings, with remarks thereon, the same was
solidly laid before the meeting; wherein divine goodness was manifested; in the
wisdom and strength whereof much earnest labor was bestowed, in order that
all, the active members especially, might be stirred up to an exertion of godly
endeavors, for restoring comely order and discipline, in diverse very weak
meetings within their county; not to be at ease in their ceiled houses, whilst
the ark of the testimony of God was exposed to reproach, by the defection of
many under the same profession. It was a good time, and I hope serviceable to
some; yet we could not help lamenting, that the memorable opportunity we lately
had at Norwich monthly meeting had not made greater impression than appeared by
some not very agreeable instances in this meeting, relating to their fully
uniting for the county's help, as there was apparent necessity for the same.
The 24th of the 4th month, we visited the quarterly meeting of Suffolk held at
Woodbridge, and laid before them in writing the state of their
monthly-meetings, as the same appeared to us in our late visit, with some
remarks thereon. Much labor was bestowed in the free extendings of divine
love, which was comfortably shed abroad in that meeting, that friends might be
thereby stirred up to use endeavors for a general reformation, in which
fervent labor was bestowed, and close admonition extended to such as knew not
their own spirits subjected by the spirit of Christ, but dared to presume to
move and act in the affairs of the church of God, by the strength of their own
understandings as men: these, not having true zeal, can wink at wrong things,
great disorders, and flagrant unfaithfulness, smoothing all over, and blending
all together deceitfully, crying Peace, and all is well, when it is evidently
otherwise. Oh, how does the Lord abhor such unsoundness! surely then his people
should see the weight and authority of his power standing over such. A
principal cause of desolation and waste in the house and heritage of God, is
the want of more prepared stones for the building, hewn and polished in the
mountain. But great inconveniency arises, when some are made use of as stones
for the building, in their natural state, which renders them unfit materials to
erect a house for the glory of God to abide in; so that what such build, is
nothing but a habitation for antichrist to dwell in; for he will content
himself in any form of religion, whilst he can keep the power out of it. His
first subtle working in the mystery of iniquity is, to persuade the minds of
men, there is no need of any more power and wisdom than they have as men; that
if they will exert their endeavor, they may be useful members; thus
withdrawing gradually from the fountain of living water, to hew out cisterns to
themselves which will hold no water. Oh, how dry and insipid are all their
religious performances! and what they do, is only to beget in their own image,
carnal lifeless professors like themselves; these are very apt to be doing,
being always furnished; but the true laborers must, in every meeting, and upon
all occasions that offer for service, receive supernatural aid and the renewed
understanding, by the immediate descendings of heavenly wisdom and power, or
they dare not meddle. Where there are but two or three in each monthly meeting,
carefully abiding in an holy dependence upon God, to be furnished for his work,
great things may be done by his mighty power, in and through them. This is
evident, by observing the state of meetings where such dwell, though all is not
done they could ardently desire, as praised be the Lord, there are many yet up
and down, who know and experimentally feel their sufficiency for every service
in the church to be of God. The 28th of the 4th month, we attended the
quarterly meeting I belong to, held at Coggeshall, for the county of Essex.
Having drawn up the state of the several monthly-meetings in writing, with
remarks thereon, it was laid before this meeting; much solid and weighty
endeavors being used for a general reformation, by the earnest labor of our
friends on the visit, which was very edifying and comfortable to the
honest-hearted amongst us. We drew up a summary account of the state of the
society in the counties beforementioned, and our satisfaction in that solemn
undertaking; with thankful acknowledgment of the Lord's gracious assistance
through the whole, which was read in the yearly meeting, 1761. Before I close
this account, it may not be amiss to say, that such was the effect of our
labors in most or all the monthly-meetings, that committees were appointed of
their own members, to visit particular meetings, and also individual members,
for their help, as occasion might require. The quarterly-meetings also
appointed large committees to visit their monthly-meetings and others, as they
found freedom, for their assistance. A few days after the yearly meeting in
London, 1761, Thomas Corbyn, Joseph Row, and myself, set out, in company with
diverse other friends, on their return from the yearly meeting, in order to
visit the monthly and quarterly-meetings of friends in Yorkshire, Lincolnshire,
Nottinghamshire, Derbyshire, and Leicestershire; Matthew Mellor joined us at
Oatby, near Leicester; Joseph Tailor having concluded to meet us in Yorkshire.
On the 24th of the 5th month, we visited Balby monthly meeting, held at
Sheffield, and found, to our comfort, a living body of friends therein; yet
much slackness and defection appeared in many members or most ranks. Truth
opened and largely furnished with wisdom and strength, to lay before them the
dangerous consequence of some prevailing and undue liberties. Those advanced in
age and profession, were entreated and labored with in much earnestness, to be
more zealous and diligent, in a godly care over themselves and the flock; as
those that must shortly give an account to the great shepherd. The 25th we
visited Pontefract monthly meeting, held at Highflats. Here was a very numerous
body of friends, whose outward appearance was very becoming our self-denying
profession; and I really believe this plainness, in a considerable number
amongst them, was the genuine product of a well regulated mind; yet I fear, in
too many, it was more the effect of education, which, however, I would not
condemn, where people are not prevailed upon by the subtilty of Satan to take
their rest therein; since the form must follow the power, and not the power
follow the form. We had close labor, in order to rouse those who had settled
down in a false rest, and also to promote a better regulation in some respects;
yet I think it might be said that discipline, in most of its branches, was
pretty well maintained in that meeting. It was a time of high favor; counsel
and admonition were plentifully extended. The 27th we visited Brighouse
monthly meeting, held at Bradford: here Jonathan Rain and William Hird joined
us. This meeting was exceeding large; some slackness and defection appeared,
yet in the main, discipline and good order were well supported, in diverse
branches. This was indeed a time of signal savor, as the canopy of divine
power and love overshadowed this large assembly, wherein much fervent labor
was extended, that all might be brought into, and preserved in, that humble
self-denying way which leads to lasting peace and happiness; and that none
might rest satisfied in a form of religion, without the daily quickenings of
heavenly life, whereby only the daily sacrifice can be offered, and the
abomination that makes desolate kept out of the holy places, viz. the heart of
man made and preserved holy by the powerful presence of God; no longer can it
be so, than his presence is there. The 29th we visited Knaresborough
monthly meeting, held at Rawden. This was also very large, perhaps near five
hundred of both sexes attended, and near as many at each of the
beforementioned meetings. Here we found a weighty, solid body of friends, who
were zealously concerned to preserve discipline and good order on its ancient
bottom; yet there was also a very heavy, clogging, lifeless body, at rest in a
profession, in whom little or no living concern appeared, to keep undue
liberties out of their families, and to show exemplary diligence in religious
duties. Divine goodness, as at other times, was eminently manifested, in which,
abundance of sound advice, caution, and counsel, were freely administered,
wherewith many hearts were deeply affected, being made willing to arise, in
order to promote a reformation where things appeared out of order. The 1st of
the 6th month, we visited Settle monthly meeting; a laborious exercising time
it was, in a deep and painful sense of the numbness and formality of too many
members, and the great decay of primitive zeal; yet, through the merciful
arising of heavenly power and wisdom, ability was received to administer
suitable advice, warning, and counsel, in order to awaken the careless,
lukewarm professors, as well as to extend comfort and relief for the
encouragement of a sincerely concerned remnant amongst them; that so, what
appeared out of the holy order of the gospel, might be regulated. The 3d of the
6th month, we visited Richmond monthly meeting, held at Aisgarth; the number of
members here was very considerable, yet the life of religion seemed at a low
ebb; that sorrowful mistake, of imagining themselves God's people without the
real sense of the indwelling of his holy spirit, and of being the children of
Abraham without the faith and good works of Abraham, having, I fear, very much
prevailed upon the posterity of faithful worthies who are gone to their rest.
In those parts, great slackness and defection in some very important respects
appeared in many, who, through the powerful efficacy of the everlasting word,
were closely and very pressingly admonished to more care and diligence. Great
endeavors were used, that our Christian discipline might be more duly put in
practice; a living remnant amongst themselves, heartily joining with us in our
deep labors for promoting that salutary end. The 5th, Thirsk monthly meeting
was visited by us; Joseph Tailor joining us here. We were now seven in number,
which we did not find too many, the work we were engaged in being very weighty
and laborious. In this meeting, a remnant were sincerely concerned to maintain
discipline and good order, in the spirit and life thereof; yet great
lukewarmness and many deficiencies appeared; an earthly carnal spirit having
much the ascendency in parents; rawness, insensibility, and a deviation from
plainness, in diverse of the youth; which caused us deep and painful labor;
yet, through the descending of heavenly virtue, we were enabled to speak
closely to their states, which, I hope, had a good effect on some of them. This
opportunity afforded much relief to our spirits, and we went away with peace.
The 8th we visited Gisborough monthly meeting, held at Kirbymoorside; where a
very large number of members attended, with an outward appearance becoming our
holy profession, and we found a truly concerned remnant amongst them: but at
this, as well as at other places, we had, with sorrow of heart, to view the
great desolation that an enemy had made in the time of outward ease and
liberty, which could not prevail upon our worthy predecessors, by depriving
them of their liberty, in jails and stinking dungeons, separation by banishment
and otherwise, of those in the nearest ties and connection of life; nay, the
loss of all their outward substance, and the lives of many, could not deter
them from maintaining their testimony for God in public worship, and other
things; yet he has mightily prevailed on many of their inconsiderate
offspring, who seem to have very little besides the husk left to feed upon.
Divine goodness was wonderfully extended, in which much fervent labor was
bestowed, and an awakening time it was. The foundation of the builders upon the
sand was shaken, and Jesus Christ, the everlasting rock and sure foundation,
was exalted, as the only safe rest and defense of his people. The 11th we
visited Malton monthly meeting; the state whereof appeared very low, and things
relating to our discipline much out of order; divine goodness being near, our
minds were strengthened, and our mouths opened, in earnest endeavors for their
help and recovery; a small remnant amongst themselves joining with us herein. I
hope it was a profitable time to some. The 13th we visited Scarborough
monthly meeting, held at Whitby, where, although we found a sincere remnant
with whom we had unity in spirit, and they had a satisfactory sense of our
close and earnest labors in that meeting; yet many under the same profession
were greatly backslidden, and revolted from the primitive power and purity of
that undefiled religion, which the faithful amongst us have been, and are led
into: divine counsel was eminently manifested, in order to heal their
backsliding, and to bring them into a due sense of the weight and great
importance of those testimonies to the blessed truth, given to us as a people
to bear, which made good impression on some; but others seemed at so great a
distance, that it was hard to make them rightly sensible of their true
interest. We departed from thence with ease and peace of mind. The 14th,
Bridlington monthly meeting was held, which was very small, and the life of
religion very low; but little ability and judgment to manage the affairs of the
church appeared; it was therefore our opinion, they were too weak to subsist
honorably as a monthly meeting, and that it would promote the general good, to
join them to some other monthly meeting. The 17th, Oustwick monthly meeting was
held at Hull. Upon the usual inquiries it appeared, that much lukewarmness and
defection had crept in; and for want of a godly zeal in most of the active
members, discipline had not been strictly and impartially maintained, so that
darkness and weakness had prevailed. In this mournful state of things, our
labors were painful and exercising; yet, through divine assistance, the
testimony of truth in its several branches was exalted, and judgment set upon
those who had violated the same. The few sincere-hearted laborers amongst them
were earnestly advised and encouraged to bear the ark of the testimony of the
Lord as upon their shoulders, in the people's sight, which I hope had a good
effect. The 19th, we visited the monthly meeting of Cave. The appearance of the
members was plain, yet we found great deadness and insensibility amongst them,
which must be the case, where people are contented in an empty form of
religion, without the power of it. Much Christian labor was bestowed in order
to kindle a living zeal; but, alas! little impression was made on some, yet I
hope this visit was of considerable service to others, and may tend to general
benefit; but all the increase is of the Lord. The 21st we visited York
monthly meeting, wherein appeared much want of a lively sense of truth on the
minds of active members, and diverse deficiencies and some disorders, had crept
in, and remained, by a neglect of proper dealing, and an exercise of sound
judgment. Here we had cause to see, as well as at many other places, that a
literal knowledge of our discipline, without heavenly life influencing the
minds of those exercised therein, brings nothing effectually to pass, to
God's glory, and the edification of his church and people. Great and deep was
our labor, under a weighty sense of the divine power, and also of the low,
languid state of the church in this city, desiring she might be favored to
arise and shake herself from the dust of the earth, strengthening the things
which remain. This finished our visits to the monthly-meetings in this county;
and though I have not particularly mentioned the opportunities taken by us in
select meetings of ministers and elders, yet we had such opportunities in most
or all the monthly-meetings; where their queries were read and answered;
advice, caution, counsel, and reproof also, were administered as we found
ourselves led and influenced thereunto. The 24th of the 6th month, their
quarterly meeting was held in York. We had drawn up the state of their
monthly-meetings, being fourteen in number, as the same appeared to us from
their answers to the usual queries, and other inquiries made by us in our late
visit to them, with sundry remarks thereon, particularly on the great and
mournful slackness in, and neglect of, divine worship; especially on weekdays,
which discovers an indifference and lukewarmness much to be lamented. Earnest
labor was bestowed in that great meeting, to fasten the weight and great
importance of qualified members, coming more earnestly and feelingly under a
deep sense of the care of the churches; that so an increase of zeal and
diligence may be exercised throughout; in warning the unruly, comforting the
feeble-minded, and in supporting the weak. It was a solemn time, the members
being sensibly affected with the great need of a better regulation in diverse
respects; a large committee was appointed to visit and assist the monthly, also
particular meetings, as they saw cause, in order to help forward the necessary
work of reformation. The monthly-meetings also, except one, in consequence of
our visit appointed committees to visit particular meetings and individuals, as
their way might open, for the better putting in practice our Christian
discipline. In this city, our friend John Hunt of London, joined us; and here
we parted with Jonathan Rain, Matthew Mellor, and William Hird. We went next
into Lincolnshire, and on the 29th of the 6th month, visited their
monthly meeting, held at Gainsborough: here John Oxley of Norwich met us.
Things appeared very low and defective, as to the discipline and good order of
the church in this place; the members, in too general a way, being by
indifference and weakness, insensible of its great worth and usefulness. Our
spirits were deeply baptized into a sense of their states, and we received
ability, with great plainness to lay before them the dangerous consequence of
such an unsavory unfruitful condition, and the great duty which the members of
society owed to God, themselves, and to one another, in a religious capacity,
which for the present seemed to affect their minds; may the impression be
lasting! We had also some things to offer by way of encouragement, to a few
sincere, though weak ones amongst them. The 2d of the 7th month, we visited
Wainfleet monthly meeting, finding things distressingly low and much out of
order; and but few who had the cause of truth at heart, so as to mourn because
of the great desolation and waste made in the society there, by
earthly-mindedness and other fleshly liberties. Our minds were deeply engaged
that truth might break through, and soften the minds of those dry, carnal
professors, who, instead of helping forward the necessary work of discipline,
were great clogs and hindrances thereunto, being as dead weights and burdens
on the more lively part of the body. Through the holy efficacy of that pure
life, which graciously attended us from place to place, we were enabled to
discharge our consciences at that meeting, in much plain-dealing, to our own
peace and the comfort and relief of the few upright-hearted there. The 4th we
visited Spalding monthly meeting; much disorder and slackness appeared also at
this meeting, in some; others, who would seem to be something in religion, were
but too much like the unfruitful fig tree, on which, when it came to be nearly
examined, nothing was to be found but leaves; having, like Ephraim and Demas,
forsaken the dew and tenderness of their youth, and embraced this present
world. Such, though they retain something of the outward resemblance, cannot
prosper in religion, as they are dry and insipid. in this low, mournful state
of things, truth arose, and furnished with suitable matter and utterance, in
plain dealing with formal professors, and proper encouragement to some hopeful
youth and others, to come up in a more lively zeal and concern for God's cause,
than had been maintained of late at that meeting, which I hope was of good
service. The 6th we visited Lincoln monthly meeting, held at Broughton. This
meeting appeared in a very low condition, as to a lively sense of truth;
consequently, the discipline thereof was not rightly managed, as being done too
much in the will, wisdom, and temper of man. Some appeared hopeful and tender,
especially of a younger rank, to whom, I hope, our deep and earnest labor
amongst them was profitable.

The 8th of the 7th month, the quarterly meeting was held at Lincoln; before
which we laid in writing, the languid and disorderly state of the society in
that county, with sundry close remarks thereon, pointing out, in some measure,
the cause of the great declension found amongst them. This was accompained with
our joint and earnest endeavors, to bring the weight of those things upon the
members, that they might feel a proper engagement of mind to arise, and repair
the breaches made, which had a good effect on some minds, and a committee was
appointed in order to promote the work of reformation; which was also done at
most, or all their monthly-meetings. From Lincoln, John Hunt and Joseph Row
returned home to London, and John Oxley to Norwich; Thomas Corbyn, Joseph
Tailor, and myself, went into Nottinghamshire. The 13th of the 7th month we
visited Retford monthly meeting, as it was called, wherein we found a few
tender and hopeful, and had some openness to administer counsel and advice,
tending to their help and improvement, which appeared to be well received, and
some minds were affected therewith; yet very little was discovered by us of
discipline being put in practice, but almost every thing relating thereto was
neglected. It therefore was our judgment they ought to be joined to some other
monthly meeting, yet their situation rendered that somewhat difficult; however,
we concluded to lay the case before their ensuing quarterly meeting. The 14th
we visited Mansfield monthly meeting, which also appeared very low and weak;
but very little of the business of a monthly meeting properly done, as the
number was very small that generally attended them, and in most of them the
essential qualification for service in the church of Christ much wanting. It
was therefore our judgment, that it would be for the general good, that
Mansfield monthly meeting should be joined to that of Chesterfield, except Oxon
particular meeting; which from its situation might better be joined to
Nottingham. The 15th we visited Chesterfield monthly meeting, wherein divine
goodness was livingly manifested, in order to administer proper assistance, by
way of advice, counsel, and encouragement, to this small, weak meeting, wherein
discipline, in diverse of its branches, was much neglected; yet there appeared
an openness in the members to be instructed and helped forward in that weighty
work, which, through the strength and efficacy of divine love, was largely
extended to them, in which we had satisfaction of mind. The 16th we went to
Breach, called a monthly meeting, but we found it, in that respect, almost
desolate. The testimony of truth, so precious to their ancestors in that place,
was by them suffered to fall, in most of its branches; but few of those who
were active members, appeared clear in its support. Darkness had greatly
prevailed over their minds, yet our deep labor, under the influence of
heavenly good, had a tendering effect upon some of them. One thing aimed at by
us, was, that the members of that meeting might be joined to the
monthly meeting of Nottingham, they being unfit to remain in their present
condition, which was consented to by them, a minute made, and some of their
members appointed to propose the same to Nottingham meeting. The 17th we
visited Nottingham monthly meeting; the number here was pretty large, but the
pure virtue of heavenly goodness, (without the sensible experience whereof
there can be no prosperity in the truth,) seemed to be much depressed and
obstructed by earthly-mindedness, covered over with a form of religion in some
heads of families, by whom undue liberties were winked at in their offspring:
such not having zeal enough to suppress wrong things in their own families, are
not like to promote good order and discipline in the church. We found some who
united with us in a deep and earnest labor for a better regulation, and much
sound admonition, caution, and counsel, were administered, which seemed (at
least for the present) to have an awakening effect on some. On the 20th of the
7th month the quarterly meeting was held at Nottingham, and, as we understood,
a junction of that, and the quarterly meeting of Derbyshire, was agreed on
between them, and shortly to be completed. We drew up the state of the
monthly-meetings in both the said counties, as the same appeared to us in our
late visit, with sundry remarks on the mournful declension found amongst them;
pointing out to them, in some measure, what we apprehended to have been the
cause thereof, that those concerned might both examine themselves and be more
watchful, in order to prevent such consequences for the future: which was read
in this meeting, and endeavors used verbally also, that the meeting might come
under a solid sense of the state of their monthly-meetings, that proper
assistance might be extended for a general reformation. But, alas! there were
but few amongst them enough devoted, heartily to engage in so good and
necessary a work; however, we were enabled to clear ourselves, by leaving the
weight of things upon them, and to depart with ease and sweet peace of mind.
All praises and humble thanksgivings to our holy head, for his gracious and
comfortable support, in our deep exercises and labor from place to place. For,
alas! we should soon have fainted under the weight of that painful service, had
he been pleased to withdraw, even but for a little time; but we found him a
never-failing fountain of all we stood in need of, and when our service for
this time was over, we could not say we lacked any thing. The 21st of the 7th
month we visited Castle-Dunington monthly meeting in Leicestershire, wherein
divine favor was largely extended, in which we received strength to labor
earnestly, for the reviving of a living concern in the members, that discipline
and good order might be better maintained, which, through the indifference of
some, and the backward, cowardly disposition of others, was but poorly
supported in sundry respects; yet this opportunity seemed to have a good
effect, by a considerable reach upon many of their minds, and I hope may prove
of great advantage to that meeting, as the members thereof seemed rather weak
than wilful. The 24th we visited Hinkley monthly meeting, which, as to the
support of discipline and gospel order, appeared to us almost desolate. Our
earnest labor for their help and recovery had little visible impression on
some of their members, the insensibility was so great; though others were
awakened to a degree of feeling and tenderness, who, I hope, received some
benefit thereby, The best expedient that appeared to us, was their being joined
to Leicester monthly meeting, which was accordingly recommended. The 25th we
visited Dalby monthly meeting; and as it appeared in the same state as that of
Hinkley last mentioned, I shall refer to that account, and only say, we advised
it should be joined to the monthly meeting of Castle-Dunington, except a small
branch thereof, which lay contiguous to Leicester. The 27th we visited Oakham
monthly meeting, where much slackness and indifference appeared, too many of
the active members being at ease in a profession, whilst wrong things
prevailed, and death instead of life, overshadowed their meetings. The Lord
engaged us in a deep and fervent labor, to stir them up, that they might arise
and shake themselves from the dust and clogging things of the earth, to receive
the eye salve of God's kingdom, whereby they might come to see their own state
as individual members, and also the general state of the church. Oh, how
ashamed would some then be, of their poverty and nakedness! We found a few
amongst them in a humble, teachable frame of mind, with whom we had good
satisfaction, hopeing this opportunity might tend to their help and improvement
in the best things. The 28th we visited Leicester monthly meeting, in which we
found some honest laborers for Sion's prosperity, and truth opened our way, as
at other places, to look carefully into the state of things, and to apply
suitable counsel and advice, as the same immediately opened, for the restoring
good order and wholesome discipline, which appeared too much neglected; and I
hope that opportunity was of good service to that meeting.

On the 29th of the 7th month the quarterly meeting for the county was held at
Leicester, before which, we laid in writing the state of their
monthly-meetings, as the same appeared to us in our late visit, with such
remarks thereon, as seemed to us proper and necessary; and were deeply
concerned, to bring the weighty sense of their great declension upon the
spirits of the active members, and the great necessity of a speedy exertion of
their Christian endeavors for a regulation, lest a general desolation should
ensue. But, alas! the stupefaction was so great in this as well as other
places, that it was hard laborious work; yet not without hope of a revival, as
some concerned members were, by the overshadowing of divine power, made willing
to give up their names, to contribute their endeavors for carrying on the
necessary work of reformation, so happily begun in the yearly meeting. Here
ended our visit to monthly and quarterly-meetings for the present; and I have,
with deep reverence, humbly to acknowledge, that a remarkable evidence of
divine approbation attended us throughout; making us of one heart, by the
baptism of his unerring spirit, so that scarcely a difference of sentiment from
one another appeared during the whole journey. Another thing which appeared to
me a token of divine favor attending, was the open reception we met with,
notwithstanding the plainness used by us, in very close searching inquiries and
remarks upon many disorders. I hope my usual freedom, in laying open the states
of the monthly-meetings, will give no just cause of offense to any who wish
well to Sion, since nothing is more likely to strike the minds of succeeding
generations with fear and care, than to have the lukewarmness and defection of
many* who have been so wonderfully favored, set in a true light before them,
together with such a remarkable account of the Lord's compassion and
condescending kindness, in seeking their restoration, and offering his mercy to
heal all their backslidings. How can any, without being somewhat affected with
fear, read the sorrowful degeneracy of some Christian churches, even in the
apostles days; like the first fruits in the gospel vineyard; particularly that
of the seven churches in Asia Minor, discovered to the beloved John, in his
state of banishment for the word of God and the testimony of Jesus Christ, and
by him with great plainness committed to writing, as a call and warning from
God to them, and to remain, for the same end, to all succeeding generations? I
have no other end in what I have written concerning the state of our society;
for whose help and preservation I have been freely given up in body, soul, and
spirit, as well as in what outward substance the Lord has bountifully favored
me with, to contribute my small endeavors, that her light may go forth as
brightness, and her salvation as a lamp that burns.

A summary account of this visit and service was drawn up by us, and read in
the yearly meeting 1762, as was done the year before, when engaged in a service
of the like nature. A like visit was also performed by other friends, who had,
since the yearly meeting 1761, engaged therein in different parts, whereby it
appeared, all the monthly and quarterly-meetings, in that part of Great Britain
properly called England, had then been visited; which, as far as appeared, had
been performed to general satisfaction. The yearly meeting then recommended to
the friends appointed in 1760, the care of extending the same brotherly
assistance to the meetings of our friends in Wales, Scotland, and Ireland, as
their way might open in gospel freedom. Neither did the yearly meeting omit
sending a warm, lively epistle to those already visited, to corroborate,
revive, and strengthen the great labor bestowed, that the same might be made
effectual. I shall now close this narrative with just adding, that I have found
by solid experience, that it was a blessed work, and greatly blessed in the
carrying on. May it be so in the fruits arising therefrom, is the sincere
desire of my soul!

The 21st of the 8th month, 1762, I set out, in order to visit London and some
other parts, and on first day the 22d, I went to Ratcliff meeting in the
morning, where I had close, thorough service; truth and its testimony having
considerable dominion; it was an awakening time to careless professors, and of
refreshing consolation to Sion's travelers, of whom I believe there was a
considerable number there; I had with satisfaction to believe that meeting was
on the improving hand. I went in the afternoon to Horslydown; this was a time
of deep travail and painful labor, as the life of religion seemed to be
greatly depressed, by much indifference of mind in many, and the prevalence of
fleshly liberties in others; yet through infinite condescension, at length the
power and virtue of truth arose, whereby the testimony thereof was exalted over
wrong things. On the second-day following I attended the morning meeting, and
went on fourth-day to their monthly meeting at the Peel, in which, through the
extending of heavenly good, I had open, edifying service; friends being
favored with a degree of that holy leaven, which, as it is abode in, preserves
the several members of one heart and one mind. Oh, then the work goes sweetly
on, the body edifying itself in love, as well as with one voice giving forth
sound judgment against wrong things! On first day, the 29th, I went in the
morning to Westminster, which was a very open good meeting, the testimony of
truth went forth freely and largely, wisdom being given to divide the word
aright, so that the disobedient were warned, and the mourners in Sion
comforted. I went in the afternoon to the Peel meeting, which was large and
very laborious, in a suffering silence throughout; which, in sympathy with the
depressed seed of God's kingdom, and for an example to the professors thereof,
appeared to be my proper business at that time. I attended the morning meeting
on second-day, and went on 3d day to Plaistow weekday meeting, in which I had
some close service; but things, as to the life of religion, appeared to me low
there, where the professors of truth neglect a constant labor for daily bread.
I spent that afternoon and the next day, chiefly on a visit to our worthy
friend John Hayward, who appeared green in old age. On fifth-day, the 2d of the
9th month, I went to Tottenham; there being two considerable friends schools,
one for boys, and the other for girls. By the free opening of the living
fountain, it was a very precious, comfortable meeting, doctrine and counsel
being plentifully handed forth, suitably adapted to the childrens weak
capacities, as well as to those of riper age: through the divine blessing, it
was a time of high favor and humble refreshment to the upright in heart. That
afternoon I had a very comfortable reviving time with our friend Josiah Forster
and family, he being in a very poor state of health, in appearance not likely
to continue long in this world; he, with much tenderness, expressed great
satisfaction in that opportunity. On sixth-day, the 3d, I went (...)
Gracechurch-Street meeting, which was low and laborious; it appeared my proper
business to sit in silence. On first day, the 5th* I went to Gracechurch-Street
in the morning, where the meeting was exceeding large, and for a time, very
trying and painful; yet in the latter part, it pleased the Lord to arise, and
his enemies were scattered; then was truth exalted, and its testimony went
forth freely, having great dominion. In the afternoon, I went to the Peel
meeting, where I had large, open service, and truth was over all; it being a
time of much comfort and relief to the sincere-hearted. Next day I was at the
monthly morning-meeting of ministers and elders, so called because the members
more generally attend, especially the women. It was a blessed time, wherein I
had open good service, showing the great difference between the ministers of
the letter and those of the spirit: that the letter without the spirit, though
of the holy scripture itself, kills that which is begotten of God in the hearts
of people; but that it is the holy power, efficacy, and demonstration of the
eternal spirit, that renders the holy scripture, outward ministry, and all
other means ordained of God, for the comfort, help, and preservation of his
people, effectual. I had to observe, that the ministers of the letter were most
of all concerned for the external appearance of their ministry, viz. that the
words and doctrine may be curiously adapted, not to disgust, but rather to
please those who have itching ears; on the contrary, the ministers of the
spirit are least of all concerned about the outward appearance of their
ministry; having no doubt, if they are careful in the spring, ground, and
moving cause, which they know should be the constraining power of the holy
spirit, that will also be agreeable thereunto; seeing that power is able to
render the most low and simple expression, in man's account, exceedingly
efficacious. On third-day, the 7th, I set out, accompanied by several friends,
in order to have a meeting that afternoon at Charleywood; it was a time of
awakening labor, not easily I hope to be forgot. On fourth-day, the 8th, I had
a precious, open, serviceable meeting, at Jordan's in the morning; it was a
time of general awakening, at least to a present sense of duty: that afternoon
I had a painful laborious meeting at Uxbridge, and what made it more
afflicting, was, that the gospel endeavors used for the help and recovery of
lukewarm professors, seemed to take very little effect upon their minds. On
fourth-day, the 8th, I went to Stains meeting, which, in the forepart, was a
time of very heavy, painful, silent labor; in which, as at many other times on
the like occasion, I fully expected the cloud and distress would remain, till
we separated one from another; yet near the conclusion, through infinite
condescension, truth arose and obtained a complete victory over wrong things;
their states being spoken to with great plainness; but, alas! things, as to the
life of religion, seemed but low amongst most of all ranks there. I went next
day to a meeting at Godalmin, which proved a time of much favor, in the sweet
and precious enjoyment of the consolating streams of that river, which makes
glad the whole city of God; in the blessed efficacy whereof, the doctrines of
truth were largely opened, setting forth the nature of faith, hope, and
charity; but the greatest of all is charity, as faith will be swallowed up in
open vision, and hope in the full enjoyment; but charity never fails nor
changes its nature, being the same in time and in eternity. On first day, the
12th, I was at Alton meeting, in Hampshire, where we had a very large and
precious baptizing meeting; in the morning, the testimony of truth had great
dominion, and the living members were sweetly comforted together. The afternoon
meeting there was very heavy and laborious, and held in silence. I had a very
open satisfactory meeting at Esher, on third-day the 14th, and another at
Wandsworth the next day; after which I went to London, and the next day, being
the 16th of the 9th month, I returned home, finding my dear wife and family
well: having, through infinite kindness, been much favored in my service this
small journey, and found more openness in the city of London than heretofore.
It was with great comfort I had to see a growing hidden remnant in that city,
who will be exalted in Israel in the Lord's time; who has, and will yet open a
way more and more, for his pained traveling children to exalt his name and
truth, by removing the stumbling blocks and other impediments which yet remain
in their way, and hinders them in some measure, from taking the rule and
government, which is their due and right in the kingdom of Christ; and usurpers
shall see, none can sit with Christ upon thrones, but those who faithfully
follow him in the regeneration, agreeable to his gracious promise, viz. Mat.
xix. 28. and Luke xxii. 30.

To this period of time, being now in the fiftieth year of my age, I have
continued an account of diverse occurrences of my life, labors, and experience;
with sundry observations on the state of the Christian society of which I am a
member; and though done in a way of plain dealing, yet in truth and sincerity,
as my mind has been immediately led and opened thereunto. Let none therefore
take any undue advantages thereby to reproach the same: no society of
Christians, that I have ever had any knowledge of, has any advantage of this
people, either in principle or practice. Here I intend to lay aside my pen, not
knowing that time or ability will be given to add any more, which is all in the
Lord's hand; to whom I humbly commit this, with my soul and body, for
preservation, during the short space of time he may be pleased yet to lengthen
my days; beseeching his blessing may attend what is done; without which, our
endeavors are fruitless, for all the increase is in and by him, who is
glorious in holiness, and fearful in praise. To whom be dominion and glory,
through all ages and generations. Amen.

From the year 1762, to the 7th month 1765, I have preserved no particular
memorandum of my travels and service that I can at present find, and although I
traveled no considerable journies, yet, as I always thought it my incumbent
duty, from my first acquaintance with God's everlasting truth, I diligently
attended meetings when at home and well, both first and week days, also the
quarterly and yearly-meetings, as they fell in course; as well as some adjacent
quarterly and other meetings. In the year 1764, I attended the yearly-meetings
of Colchester, Woodbridge, and Norwich, to good satisfaction and comfort, being
favored with free open service therein, especially the two last. In the same
year, having an inclination to visit London and some parts adjacent, as my way
might open; and likewise having a manuscript by me, which I had written about
two years before, entitled, Some Brief Remarks upon sundry important Subjects,
etc. diverse friends whose judgment I valued, having perused it, expressed their
unity therewith, generally apprehending there might be a service in making the
same public; being thus encouraged, I laid it before the second-day morning
meeting of London, as is usual in such cases; I attended the revising of it for
the most part: friends agreed it should be printed, which was accordingly done.
It was afterward reprinted here, in Ireland, and in America.

Having had a view, for several years, of visiting friends in the American
Colonies, as I waited with earnest desires to be rightly directed in so solemn
and weighty an undertaking, both as to the thing itself and the proper time to
enter thereupon, I was favored with clear and full satisfaction, in both
respects; and had seen, for a considerable time, that I should embark for that
service soon after our yearly meeting 1765: this I esteemed a particular
favor, as I had thereby the better opportunity to order my outward affairs
timely, so as I might, with more freedom and ease, leave them so long a time;
yet, except to my wife and two or three friends, who were enjoined secresy, I
kept all to myself, till about the time it became necessary to lay my concern
before the monthly meeting of which I was a member: which I did, and readily
obtained their concurrence, and a certificate very fully expressive of their
unity; which certificate I carried to our quarterly meeting, laying the same,
with my said concern, before that meeting; I also obtained their ready
concurrence, signified by an indorsement on the monthly meeting certificate;
which certificate and indorsement, together with my concern, I laid before the
yearly meeting of ministers and elders in London, and after a time of weighty
consideration, friends drew up and signed a certificate of their full unity
with me, and my intended undertaking. The ready and unanimous concurrence of my
much esteemed friends, was a great strength and comfort to me in my entering
upon and throughout this solemn engagement. I was very sensible it was of such
a nature, that the whole body of friends were deeply interested in the right
and proper performance thereof; and therefore found my mind much resigned to
the divine will, and to the determination of his people. I returned home from
the yearly meeting, to complete the settlement of my outward affairs, having
partly concluded, with divine permission, to embark in a ship likely to sail in
two or three weeks. I went to our quarterly and yearly meeting at Colchester:
where, being taken very ill of a fever, I returned home with my wife in a
post-chaise, being unable to ride on horseback. I was confined to my chamber
about ten days; this put an entire stop to all preparations for my intended
voyage; which, on account of my illness, I had wholly given over the
expectation of, as to the beforementioned ship; but when I recovered, so as to
be able to move a little about, my mind did not seem easy to let that ship go
away without me. I thereupon wrote to the merchants or owners, who I knew were
desirous I should go in her, to know what time they could allow me to get
ready; their answer was, about ten days: the time was short, and I was very
weak in body, and had some affairs of consequence to settle which would take
some time; however, the will being good, I set about them in earnest, and
beyond expectation succeeded therein, recovered strength apace, and got through
my affairs in time to satisfaction. I could not help looking upon this a
providential success, as it was far beyond human probability: the Lord, in his
dealing with us his poor dependant creatures, sometimes brings us very low,
baffling all our skill and contrivance, that he may clearly show us, that our
success in spiritual things, and even in temporals also, is by his providence.

On the 9th day of the 7th month, 1765, I took leave of my dear wife and
family, and accompanied by several friends, went to meet the ship at Gravesend,
where we were met by about fifteen or sixteen friends from London; we dined
together, and lodged there that night. Next day, being the 10th of the 7th
month, I took leave of friends in much tender affection, and went on board the
Carolina, James Friend master, bound for Philadelphia. We got under sail about
eleven o'clock, but it was near a week before we took our departure from the
Land's-End of England. We had, for a few days, a pretty fair wind, and a good
set-of from the land; yet on our passage we had a great deal of contrary winds,
and often a head sea. About the 9th and 10th of the 8th month, and for some
time before, things had but a very discouraging aspect, having got but a little
on our way for about twenty days; most of the company seemed to be affected
with sadness on that account: at the same time I had a strong persuasion of
mind, that the wind would turn in our favor before night, and had almost an
inclination to have told them so, in order to cheer their spirits, but was
fearful of presuming too much upon the certainty of what had presented to my
view, lest I should prove a false prophet, and thereby bring dishonor to the
good cause; however, it proved true, and held favorable to us a considerable
time, so that we sailed next day seven or eight miles an hour the right way.
The 21st of the 8th month we found ourselves upon one of the banks of
Newfoundland, having about twenty-eight fathom water. It was some satisfaction
to find ourselves so far on our way; I was favored with very good health, and
a good appetite all the time, and, through divine favor, generally with a
quiet resigned mind, having full satisfaction that I was in my place. The
captain was very steady, and well qualified for his station, and very kind to
me; the passengers also were generally civil in their behavior, though they
often burdened and wearied my spirit with their trifling, vain, empty
discourses, in which I could not join, but was rather a reprover and a weight
against them, which I am persuaded they frequently felt, and I am sensible I
was a considerable awe upon them; yet I thought it was prudent, as we were
confined in one another's company, to uphold a family respect. I often reproved
their vanity and corrupt conversation, and was enabled, in a good degree, to
bring judgment over them, so that some would own I was right. Alas, I had
sorrowfully to observe, by their manner of conversation, how empty, vain,
trifling, and even corrupt, the conversation of those esteemed the genteel and
polite part of mankind, in our day, is become; little or nothing to be found
therein, that conveys solid, profitable instruction, either in things relating
to this life or the next, but in general it tends to deprave and corrupt: yet
many thus void of self-denial and government of their tongues, pretend, with
great assurance, to lay undeniable claim to the holy and undefiled religion of
Jesus Christ; surely, they do not give themselves any time to think seriously
about the nature of that religion, and must conclude, the name and profession
without the spirit and life, is all they are to look for, except adhering to a
few exterior observations: such gross darkness and stupefaction is much to be
lamented, but very hard to be helped when they are so ignorant of their own
states.

It was the 10th of the 9th month, early in the morning, that we first saw
land, which proved to be Cape Henlopen; about six o'clock we got a pilot on
board, who was a native Indian; about nine we entered the Capes of the
Delaware, with the tide beginning to make in our favor; about eleven our ship
struck the ground three times, but soon got off. We had fine wind and weather,
which made it exceeding pleasant sailing up the bay and river; we got up with
that tide, within about six leagues of the city. Next day, about eleven
o'clock, we came to an anchor before the city of Philadelphia. I soon landed
and went directly to my old quarters, being very kindly received as formerly,
by my much esteemed friends Isaac and Sarah Zane. I was about nine weeks on
board the ship in all, and about eight from land to land. I attended their
weekday meeting on fifth-day, and had some good open service therein. I went
on first day to the great meeting, where perhaps was present, near, if not
quite, 1500 friends, or those under our profession; my business among them at
that time seemed to be to set them an example of silence. I had, with secret
lamentation, to view their remarkable declension from a true spiritual
exercise, which appeared to me but too general, looking for words to feed upon;
I found that craving was to be disappointed and famished, and therefore was
often shut up from public service amongst them, especially at the great house,
though I had some very clear, open, powerful times, in the blessed light and
life of the everlasting gospel, there also. On sixth-day, the 20th of the 9th
month, I crossed the river Delaware, and went to Haddonfield quarterly meeting,
which was very large, and I was largely opened to declare the truth amongst
them with good authority. I returned next day to the city, and attended the
yearly meeting of ministers and elders; things seemed but low: this
yearly meeting, which was very large, concluded on sixth-day. It was in a good
degree favored with divine wisdom and strength, wherein friends were enabled
to consider and conclude some weighty affairs with unanimity and brotherly
love. The Lord was graciously with me, affording wisdom and strength to be
serviceable at this meeting, both in ministry and discipline, wherein I had
sweet peace and comfort. I went the first day following to Springfield-meeting,
in Chester county, where I had very open weighty service, and the blessed truth
prevailed. In the evening I had a comfortable meeting with a sick friend at
Derby, who soon after departed this life. I then returned to Philadelphia, and
attended both their weekday meetings, which were painfully laborious in a
silent travail. On sixth-day went to their monthly meeting, and was livingly
opened therein, to show the reason why the church of Christ is compared to a
human body, consisting of many and various members; I had good service also in
the meeting of business. Their number is very large, but many appeared to me
weak and unskilful as to the proper qualifications of active members in the
church, some of them did not appear to be redeemed from fear, favor, and
affection in judgment. I had great comfort in the labor of this day. On
third-day, the 1st of the 10th month, I had a very large meeting at
Haddonfield, in West-Jersey; the word was given with clearness and gospel
authority, and I had to show the power and efficacy of true faith, and the
weakness and insufficiency of an historical or implicit faith: it was a good
time, and the glorious truth was exalted. I then went to Chester; the meeting
was very large, and I had close, thorough service therein, on the subject of
self-denial and taking up the daily cross. On fifth-day, had a very large
meeting at Evesham, and had therein weighty service, on the nature of that
new birth, without which no man can see the kingdom of God; most of the
auditory seemed much strangers thereto, which made the labor heavier, yet
wisdom was mercifully given to divide the word to this numerous assembly, about
the space of two hours. Next day I had a very thronged meeting at Mount-Holly,
in New Jersey; my labor in the ministry was very close and searching, to good
satisfaction. On first day, the 6th of the 10th month, was at Burlington
meeting, and had an open time; also at their monthly meeting on the second-day
following, which was very large; I was livingly opened upon these words, Pray
without ceasing, and in every thing give thanks; also showing, that the power
of the word of life ought to be the spring of action in the church of Christ.
On third-day, accompanied by diverse friends, I crossed the river Delaware, and
had a meeting at Bristol, in Pennsylvania; it was a small poor meeting, I
labored according to ability received, to stir up the members to a more lively
concern, but things appeared very low. On fourth-day I had a large meeting at
the Falls; it was very laborious, under a sense of a dry, lifeless state in too
many, and the inconsistent conduct of others; especially in that of excessive
drinking, which I felt to cause a very ill savor: I was informed after, it had
greatly prevailed upon many in that meeting, and that diverse of them who were
there that day, had been disowned on that account. Next day I had a large
meeting at Wright's-town; I was opened therein, to show the similarity between
the travels of the soul toward spiritual Canaan, and those of the Israelites
toward the outward Canaan. It was a close awakening time to dry, formal
professors. On sixth-day, I had an exceeding large meeting at Buckingham; to
this great gathering the everlasting gospel was powerfully preached, and the
end and design of true ministry set forth; this was a blessed time of divine
refreshment, to the rejoicing of many hearts, and rousing, I hope, of the
lukewarm, in a good degree. After this meeting, I felt it in my mind to speak
to Thomas Ross, a friend in the ministry of that county, to bear me company to
the southern provinces, which he, after due consideration and obtaining his
friends concurrence and certificate, complied with; and not only that journey,
but also to New England, etc. so that I was favored with the agreeable company
of this valuable friend, through most of my American travels, which was to my
great comfort. On first day, the 13th of the 10th month, I was at North Wales
meeting, which was very large, and was favored with a thorough open time, to
the tendering of many hearts. The day following had a large meeting at
Plymouth; I was opened upon that passage, Believe not every spirit, etc. had
close work with libertines, such as are commonly called free-thinkers, and was
carried over them: truth and its testimony was greatly exalted and triumphed
over that spirit, and other wrong things. On third-day, had a large meeting at
Horsham, and was powerfully opened on the words of the prophet Joel, viz. I
will pour out my spirit upon all flesh, etc. with some close remarks to those
who rest satisfied with a mere profession. After meeting, came a seventh-day
Baptist to the friend's house where I was; and if I had suffered it, would have
led me out into a wide field of argument, for which I had neither time nor
inclination; he advanced several points, but I kept him so close to some of
them that he was soon foiled, he found my method of arguing so different from
his; he being for a multitude of words and a great deal of ramble, and I was
for but a few words close to the point, backed with clear scripture proof, so
we had quickly done; he seemed willing to drop it, and so was I, for such are
so full of notion and so fixed therein, that the clearest reasoning seems
thrown away upon them. On fourth-day had a very large meeting at Abington, the
place which I belonged to in my youthful days, and where I was first, through
infinite mercy, brought to the knowledge of the ever-blessed truth; and where
my mouth was first opened above thirty years before, in a public testimony. A
dark cloud seemed painfully over the meeting in the fore part, yet at length
truth prevailed, and utterance was largely given to declare the doctrine
thereof, showing that the children of Israel feared the Lord all the days of
Joshua, and of the elders that outlived him. It was a very awakening time, and
many appeared to be pretty much affected. Next day I had a small meeting at
Frankfort, things appeared very low and dark for a time, yet at length, wisdom
and utterance were given upon these words, Man being in honor, and abiding not
therein, is like the beast that perishes. There seemed a want of a living
concern in the general. Next day had a large meeting at German-town, this was a
dark painful time in the fore part; truth measurably arose, and the word was
given, viz. Let God arise, that his enemies may be scattered. Went after
meeting to Philadelphia, and on 1st day, the 20th of the 10th month, over
Schuylkill, to Merion meeting; things appeared exceeding low, as to the life of
religion; I was concerned to call them to work while it is day, and it was a
close searching time. On second-day I went to the burial of a valuable friend
at Derby, the same with whom I had a meeting beforementioned; the meeting was
very large, and there was great openness to declare the truth with clearness
and divine authority, even to the confounding libertines and gainsayers, of
whom I fear there is a considerable number in that place: this seemed to me the
most favored time I had had since I landed, and being also at the meeting I
formerly belonged to for many years, it was a precious renewal of that sweet
unity some of us had enjoyed together many times formerly in that place. Next
day I went to Philadelphia; and the first day following to Newtown meeting, in
Chester county, where I had very searching laborious service; things appeared
to me mournfully low, as to the life of religion, many being at ease in a
profession thereof. I went next day to the monthly meeting at Providence, and
had some good edifying service to the poor in spirit; things appeared very low
and heavy in the meeting for business. On third-day I had a large meeting at
Radnor, and labored to convince them that there is something in religion
besides the form and outward profession, but few seemed to me alive therein. On
fourth-day went to Haverford meeting; I was opened upon the words of the
apostle, viz. Great is the mystery of godliness; God manifested in the flesh.
It was a good time, though the professors are but few, and in a poor weak
state. I went on fifth-day to the monthly meeting at Derby, the life of
religion seemed very much depressed; I was silent as to ministry, but had some
service in the meeting of business, and returned to the city that night. I had
been indisposed some days past, and in much pain with a kind of flux; took some
medicine on sixth-day, and was soon better. Next day I went to their
quarterly meeting of ministers and elders, where I was livingly opened on that
passage, Him that overcomes, I will make a pillar in the house of my God, etc.
Showing, that the beast and the false prophet must be overcome, before we can
stand with safety and approbation in the great work of the ministry. This
quarterly meeting ended on third-day, at the several sittings of which I had
good open service, particularly at the Bank meeting on first day afternoon,
showing that those who are more willing to receive than to make suitable
returns, are neither so honest nor grateful as they ought to be; and on
third-day, at the great house, being the youths meeting, which was very large,
concerning the nature and necessity of Christ's baptism with the Holy Ghost and
fire; there was great flowing of love and enlargement of heart to the young
people that way. On fourth-day I was at a meeting appointed for the poor
negroes, and had open good service amongst them, in the free flowing of
universal love, wherein I was enabled to open unto them the way of life and
salvation; diverse of them appeared to be affected and tendered; it was a
comfortable time. On fifth-day I was at a marriage in the city, and largely
opened upon these words, viz. The blessing of God makes truly rich, etc.
Showing, there is no real happiness in any station of life without it. It was a
good time, for truth prevailed.

I set out on sixth-day, the 8th of the 10th month, on my intended journey
toward Maryland, Virginia, and Carolina; and went that night to my
brother-in-law, Micajah Speakman's, at Concord. Next day began their
quarterly meeting: through divine favor, I had thorough service at the three
meetings held there: on seventh-day, at the meeting of ministers and elders, I
was livingly opened upon these words of Christ, The disciple is not above his
master, nor the servant above his Lord; also, concerning what was declared of
Christ, That in his humiliation, his judgment was taken away, etc Acts viii. 33.
. That it is not to be wondered at, if our judgment in the truth is taken away
at times, that we may see who is the giver of it; it was an effectual reaching
time. On first day I was mournfully affected with a distressing sense of the
apostasy of many in that meeting, from the life and power of religion; I had a
very close awakening time, and truth mercifully prevailed. On second-day I was
largely opened with good authority, on these and other words, He that comes
after me, must first deny himself, etc. Great weakness and want of living
concern was felt in that exceeding large meeting, and too much leaning to their
own understanding, yet a faithful remnant is preserved; I was favored to be
serviceable in the meeting of business. I took Birmingham and Kennet meetings,
in my way to the quarterly meeting at London-Grove; these were very large, and
I had deep searching service at them; but, alas! the life and power of religion
is mournfully departed from by great numbers in that highly favored land. On
seventh-day, the 16th of the 11th month, I went to the quarterly meeting of
ministers and elders at London-Grove; it was a very painful distressing time;
great barrenness and carnality appeared to have prevailed in too many in those
stations, which was cause of sore lamentation: my public service amongst them
was in much close plain-dealing, showing, that to be carnally-minded is death;
and that the natural man understands not the things of the spirit of God.
Here my intended companion, Thomas Ross, met me. On first day the meeting was
very large; I had a close searching time, particularly to some who stood in the
foremost rank; my spirit was much distressed in viewing the great desolation
made by the prevalence of many evils. On second-day I had large thorough
service to the various states of the members, and also in the meeting of
business, which appeared to be well conducted; some skilful members being
principally engaged therein. On third-day the meeting was very large, and
through divine favor, I was raised in much strength and clearness to divide
the word amongst them; showing, That the children of Israel feared the Lord all
the days of Joshua, and of the elders that outlived Joshua, who had seen the
wonders of the Lord. I was opened largely upon the degeneracy of our society,
and with great weight and dread, I had to signify, that the judgments of the
Lord would be poured out upon them, and that what they had yet seen, was but
like the beginning of sorrows, that the stroke would fall upon their idols,
their worldly enjoyments. It came before me many times, that the fruits of the
earth would be smitten, whereby there would be a sore famine in the land, and
that judgments, much heavier than they had yet known, would fall upon them; it
seemed to me various ways, of which the sword would be one. It was an exceeding
awful deep-searching time as ever I knew; I hope not easily to be forgotten.
Next day I went to Sadsbury monthly meeting, where I had satisfactory service,
both in the ministry and discipline. On sixth-day we had a meeting at
Lancaster; diverse not under our name came to it; my concern therein was to
endeavor to open to the understanding of the people, what true religion is: we
had a pretty satisfactory meeting at Isaac Whitelock's in the evening. On
seventh-day, we crossed Susquehanna, at Wright's-Ferry, and next day went to
Newbury meeting; second-day to Warrington; third-day to Huntington; fourth-day
to Monallen; at all which places, I had close thorough service; found things,
as to the life of religion, very low amongst friends; yet a remnant was
preserved sensible from whence good comes. We went from thence into Maryland,
and had small meetings at Pipe-Creek, and Bush-Creek; friends were few in
number, and seemed low in religious experience. From thence, fording over the
great river Patowmack, we entered the province of Virginia, and on third-day,
the 3d of the 12th month, we had a very large meeting at Fair-fax: truth opened
doctrine and counsel largely, showing, that two things are essential to the
very being of a true Christian, viz. The saving experimental knowledge of God,
and the knowledge of ourselves; the last being the natural consequence of the
first: it was a highly favored time, and the living were sweetly comforted.
Next day I had a large meeting at Goose-Creek; it was an exceeding dark
afflicting time: my mind was deeply impressed with a sense of a corrupt,
blasting ministry being amongst them; and the people having itching ears, loved
to have it so; this was so strong upon my mind, that I feared for some time I
should have been under a necessity of declaring it publicly in the meeting; I
was an entire stranger, and did not know by any outward information, that they
had any who appeared in public. After meeting, I took some of the elderly
friends aside, and told them how it had been with me, as above, for I was
silent the whole meeting; I was informed afterward, that there was a forward
unruly man, who had given sensible friends much trouble in several places, and
had been much labored with by way of advice, to refrain from his public
appearance; that he had for some time settled within the compass of that remote
meeting, and was encouraged by many of the members, to the great uneasiness of
some others. That afternoon I put what was upon my mind in relation thereto,
with a few remarks thereon, in writing, and sent it to some friends of that
meeting, but never heard what effect it had. In our way to Opeckan, we had a
small meeting at a place called the Gap, where gospel doctrine, showing the way
and means of salvation by Jesus Christ, was freely and largely preached. On
first day, the 8th of the 12th month, we went to Hopewell meeting; it was an
exceeding dark, afflicting time; great insensibility and lukewarmness appeared
in almost a general way; I was led in as close, plain-dealing, and searching a
manner, as ever I remember. The third-day following we had a large meeting at
Crooked-Run, both friends and many others attended. My mind was exceedingly low
the morning of that day, being lately set out on a great journey, and my horse
was fallen very lame, and it seemed unlikely that I could be supplied with a
suitable one in those back parts: what to do I could not tell; the more I
thought about my distressed condition, the more I sunk and was perplexed. In
this disconsolate state, I went to the meeting: to see such a number of other
societies, and some of them of high rank by their appearance, still added to my
distress in this weak state, greatly fearing the blessed truth should be
dishonored through me; yet as I endeavored to look singly to the Lord, he was
graciously pleased to be a present help in the needful time, and appeared to my
soul, as it were in an instant, as a clear morning without clouds. An heavenly
time I had, upon these words. Trust in the Lord, and lean not to thine own
understanding; showing clearly, that the soul's salvation way of God and not by
human ability: the oil of gladness ran sweetly. Next day, my horse being
unexpectedly recovered of his lameness, we set out on our long journey toward
Carolina, and he continued well all the time. I write this for the
encouragement of some poor travelers into whose hands this may fall. After
three days traveling, we had two poor small meetings, where the life of
religion seemed to be almost, if not wholly lost, viz. Camp-Creek and
Fork-Creek; we had but little satisfaction in our gospel labors, and
endeavors to revive true religion in these poor places. From Fork-Creek, to
the first meeting we had in the back settlements of North Carolina, was about
235 miles. In our way thither, we had four small poor meetings, viz. Jenito,
Amelia, and Bannister, and a meeting at Kirby's, on the banks of Dan-River: to
some of them, many of other societies came, and gospel doctrine was opened
largely for their help and information; in which labor there was good
satisfaction; but alas! few under our name in those parts, let the true light
shine before men, but were most of them as stumbling blocks in the way of
serious inquirers: we were enabled to clear our minds to them, and proceeded on
our journey. On the 29th of the 12th month, we went to New-Garden meeting, in
North Carolina, which was very large, and mostly of professors with us: a
thick, dark cloud over-shadowed the forepart of that meeting, and it was a
painful, distressing time; most of them seemed as asleep, (1 These. v. 6, 7.) in
the night; yet at length, through merciful kindness, truth prevailed in a good
degree, and a close awakening time it was, and many seemed to be reached and
tendered by the virtue of truth, and I found great ease and liberty of spirit
after meeting. On second-day we had a large meeting at Deep-River, mostly of
professors with us, but they appeared so generally void of a spiritual concern,
that there appeared to me no room for truth to arise into dominion. I found it
my place to sit the whole time in silence, which, I believe, was no small
disappointment. On fourth-day, there being a marriage, we went to New-Garden
again; wisdom and utterance were given to speak largely and with good
demonstration, in a very searching manner to their states. On fifth-day we had
a meeting at Center; it was extremely cold, and, as some observed, the like had
not been known there in the memory of man; and being quite an open
meeting house, and very little of any thing to be felt amongst them of
religious warmth, it was really a distressing time inwardly and outwardly; yet,
through divine favor, I was preserved in a good degree of resignation. Next
day we had a small meeting at Rocky-River. I could find very little of the
wrestling seed therein; we sat the whole meeting silent, yet a friend had
something to offer very suitable to their states. On seventh-day we went to
their monthly meeting at Cane-Creek; this was large, but most of the members
seemed void of a solid sense and solemnity; a spirit of self-righteousness and
contention was painfully felt; the leaven of the Pharisee seemed to prevail,
and the few living sensible members were borne down and discouraged: most of
the meeting of worship was held in silence; yet toward the conclusion, some
very close remarks were delivered to their states, and very plain dealing in
the meeting of business. It seems to me, that when affairs of importance come
before such a meeting, they are very likely to be perplexed and made worse by
ill management, which I have reason to believe has been much the case in that
meeting. I am persuaded many of those under our name have removed out of
Pennsylvania and other places to those parts, in their own wills, having taken
counsel of their own depraved hearts, and when they have got thither, have set
up for something in the church; but it seemed to me most of them were very
unfit for the spiritual building, not having been hewn in the mount. We went to
their meeting on first day, but there was much darkness and death over them; I
found it my duty to sit the whole meeting in silence. On second-day we went to
the Spring-meeting; I was led therein largely to speak upon the subject of
water baptism, which I wondered much at, as not knowing of any being there who
did not profess with us; for as people in general in those parts, clothe in a
mean way, the difference is not great in their dress and appearance. After
meeting, I understood that the Baptists gained ground much that way, and even
had prevailed on some of our society to join with them, and that their teacher
was there; and also a woman brought up amongst us, who thought it was her duty
to be baptized, but her husband opposed it; and that the Baptist preacher took
her and her husband into the meeting house, when the people were gone, to undo
(as it was supposed) that day's work, or to prevent its having effect upon the
woman: it was a time of great favor, and the one saving baptism was exalted
above all types, signs and shadows. Next day we had a small, poor meeting at
the Hawfield's; and on fourth-day we had a meeting at Eno, which was the last
we had in the upper settlement: this was a laborious meeting, by close,
plain-dealing with wrong spirits, for which, we understood afterward, there
was a cause. On the 9th of the 1st month, 1766, we set out, having two guides,
for the lower settlements of North Carolina, being about 200 miles, and had but
two small meetings in the way, viz. Richsquare, and at one Stephen's; at the
first, many of other societies came in; the gospel was freely declared with
good authority and clearness, to the reaching of diverse present: at the other
place there seemed to be very little, either form or substance; we were quite
shut up as to ministry. We got to our friend Thomas Newby's, at Pineywoods, on
third-day, the 14th, being pretty much fatigued, we rested a few days there. On
seventh-day we went to the funeral of a woman friend, and had a meeting; after
a time of deep wading, the word was given in counsel and searching doctrine, to
their states, who seemed mostly to be settled in a mere form and profession:
after meeting we went to our friend Thomas Nicholson's. The first day following
we were at Little-River meeting, which was large, but very low and dark in the
forepart; the professors we felt were much at ease and in a state of
indifferency; yet at length, in great mercy, the blessed power of truth arose,
and afforded counsel and doctrine suited to their state. It was a searching
time, I hope not easily to be forgotten. On third-day had a large meeting at
Simon's-Creek; through divine favor gospel truths were opened there, with
clearness and good demonstration, to the affecting of many hearts. Next day had
a meeting at Newbegun, which was pretty large and open. On fifth-day we had a
very large meeting at Oldneck, near the center of friends in this settlement,
and others came together in abundance. I was shut up the whole time in silence,
which I apprehended they had not been much used to. Next day we had a large
meeting at Wells, in which I had a close searching time; but, alas! it seemed
to me that the professors of truth here-about, are many of them far gone from a
lively sense of true religion, and are become harder to reach than people of
other societies. On first day, the 26th of the 1st month, we had a very large
meeting at Ringwood's, it being the last we were to have in Carolina; some
friends came to it, I believe, from all the other meetings, with many of other
societies: at first it was a time of painful travail, but at length the great
Master was pleased to give wisdom and strength, in gospel authority to open the
state of the society in those parts, and to divide to them severally; also to
show, that in every dispensation of God to man, he was pleased to give to those
who are sincerely attentive, clear evidence of his will, and approbation of
their obedience; it was a highly favored time, which, I hope, will not soon be
forgotten. Next day we traveled into Virginia, and on third-day had a meeting
at Somerton's; the doctrine of truth was largely opened, and some very close
remarks on the state of our society; many others also being present: the
testimony had a considerable reach. Next day we had a large meeting at the
Western Branch of Nancemund: those under our profession appeared too generally
unacquainted with the work of religion upon their hearts; many weighty truths
were closely delivered, but did not seem to take so much effect upon the minds
of many, as could have been desired.

On fifth-day we had a large meeting at Black-Water; the greatest number of
Negroes were at it that I ever saw at a meeting not appointed on purpose for
them: this was a highly favored time; the everlasting gospel was preached with
clearness and good demonstration, showing, that the inward and spiritual
knowledge of God, is the substance of true religion; and that, according to the
prophet, this knowledge was to cover the earth as the waters cover the sea. I
had great satisfaction and comfort in the labor of that day. We went from
hence to the quarterly meeting at Black-Creek; the number here was large, but,
alas! great deadness, insensibility, and darkness were felt to prevail amongst
them; close labor, in great plainness, was used, showing the cause thereof:
amongst other things, that which appeared none of the least was their keeping
the negroes in perpetual slavery. I was often concerned to use plainness in
families where I went, in respect to this matter, and am satisfied truth will
never prosper amongst them, nor any others, who are in the practice of keeping
this race of mankind in bondage. It is too manifest to be denied, that the life
of religion is almost lost where slaves are very numerous; and it is impossible
it should be otherwise, the practice being as contrary to the spirit of
Christianity as light is to darkness. Through divine favor, the testimony of
truth prevails against it in most of the American colonies, especially in
Pennsylvania and the Jerseys. We took meetings from this place at Burleigh,
Petersburg, at Curl's, over James's River, Wain-Oak, John Crew's, Black-Creek,
and the Swamp; most of which were very laborious, in a sorrowful sense that the
life of religion was too generally departed from; yet in all of them, except
Wain-Oak, a degree of wisdom and utterance was given, to labor in the love of
the gospel for their help and recovery; which I hope was not altogether in
vain. The next meetings we went to were Cedar-Creek, and Caroline, being the
last we had in Virginia, they were large; not only those under our profession
attended, but also many others, as was often the case in these parts. I think
it may be truly said, these were memorable meetings: the gospel was preached in
the demonstration of the spirit and with power, which appeared to reach and
tender many if not most present, and my mind was comfortably relieved from that
painful weight of death and darkness which mostly attended it in these greatly
corrupted colonies. On fifth-day, the 13th of the 2d month, we set out for
Maryland, crossing Rappahanock-River at Port Royal, and Patowmack, about three
miles over, at How's-Ferry. We got to West-River meeting on first day, the 16th
of the 2d month. We found very little if any thing in that meeting, of that
simplicity and self-denial so conspicuous in our ancients; but a conformity to
the fashions and corrupt customs of a vain world. The gospel power arose,
giving ability to set forth the nature of Christianity, and how far the
professors had deviated therefrom in life and practice. The judgment of truth
was set over libertines and unfaithful professors thereof. The next meetings we
had, were at Indian-Spring, Sandy-Spring, Elkridge, Patapsco, Gunpowder,
Little-Falls, Bush-River, and Deer-Creek; we were also at Deer-Creek
monthly meeting next day: in all which meetings, ability was mercifully given,
to divide the word suitably to the various states, which seemed, in a general
way, much out of the order, and from under the government of truth; yet the
labor tended to solid satisfaction and peace; I hope it may be remembered by
some to advantage.

Thus having visited the western shore of Maryland, we crossed the great river
Susquehanna, and went to the house of our friend John Churchman, near East
Nottingham. On first day, the 2d of the 3d month, we went to that meeting,
which was very large, the professors of truth being numerous hereabout; to this
great assembly, the gospel of life and salvation was powerfully preached,
showing the force of truth, how it gained the general assent of people, yet few
were concerned to know the same in experience or practice. It was a highly
favored time, and the meeting seemed to be generally affected. From Nottingham
we went to the following meetings, viz. New-Garden, Hockesson, Center, and
Kennet, which were mostly large, abundance flocking to them from adjacent
meetings. The travail of spirit in these meetings was very deep and painful;
much distressing flatness and insensibility were felt; yet, through merciful
help, truth prevailed and largely opened doctrine and counsel suitable to their
states; showing, there is not the least grounds to hope for happiness in a
future state, unless true religion becomes the principal concern of the mind;
and abundance more, in the free extendings of gospel life and power, to the
reaching of many hearts: everlastingly adored, reverenced, and worshipped, be
infinite condescending love. Amen!

From Kennet I went home with my sister Speakman to Concord, and staid there
one night, and next day to Goshen monthly meeting, which was very large; there
was a great body of friends, generally under a plain appearance; but, alas! it
proved a painful, gloomy time of silent travail to me, the whole time of
worship; and through the meeting of business, though in a good degree regularly
and decently conducted, the cloud still remained; this I am persuaded was
occasioned by the lukewarm careless state of many members; there is great want
of that living concern and holy ardour of soul, which the Lord is often pleased
to own in our religious meetings. The members engaging in his work, without his
presence to animate and endow with heavenly wisdom, cannot fail of causing
thick darkness, which may be felt by those who are truly alive and have their
spiritual senses exercised. After meeting, my valuable companion, Thomas Ross
and I parted for the present, he returning home, and I staid Goshen meeting, on
first day, the 9th of the 3d month. It was very large, and in the forepart low
and cloudy; yet at length I was favored with a degree of faith, which enabled
me to stand up, and as I continued in patience, I found an increase, with
considerable enlargement to speak closely to their several states, from these
words, Trust in the Lord with all thy heart, and lean not to thine own
understanding. But, alas! very many of them seemed to be far gone into the
spirit of the world, and at ease in a profession; so that instead of Goshen
being a land of light, darkness has prevailed in a sorrowful degree, and many
are not sensible of it to lament it. I went from thence to Philadelphia, taking
Derby meeting in my way; got thither on sixth-day, the 14th of the 3d month,
having been on this journey about four months. I was received with affectionate
kindness by my friends in that city, and attended three meetings on the
first day following; at two of which I was silent, as was often my lot there, I
believe to disappoint and famish the unsanctified desires and cravings of many
after words. I attended their weekday meetings, and had considerable service
therein. On seventh-day began their general Spring-meeting, which ended on
third-day following; some of those large meetings were held mostly in silence.
I had then, as has often been the case, a deep travail upon my spirit, that the
people might be led by the example of ministers and elders, to find the comfort
and advantage of true silent worship, every one coming to sit under their own
vine and under their own fig tree, where none could make them afraid. I had,
notwithstanding, at some of them, good, open, public service. I staid in the
city till their monthly meeting was over on sixth-day, where I had some close
service, and then went to the yearly meeting at Wilmington, and was at four
meetings in two days. At three of them, the truths of the gospel were largely
and with clearness declared, to much satisfaction and comfort, I returned
toward the city, attending Derby monthly meeting in my way, where things
appeared mournfully low; some of the active members seeming very unskilful in
the management of the discipline: earnest labor was bestowed, but I thought it
had very little effect. On sixth-day I went to the children's meeting in the
city; I suppose there were about 200 in all, of both sexes. On first day, the
6th of the 4th month, in company with several friends, I crossed Delaware, at
Gloucester-Point: the wind blowing very hard, it appeared dangerous; yet the
boatmen being very careful, through mercy we got well over, and went to
Woodbury meeting, which was very large, and the gospel power livingly arose,
wherein many weighty truths were delivered, showing the great use of that
propensity in man of seeking after happiness, if rightly directed; also,
wherein true happiness consists, and how to attain the same. It was a good
time, through the gracious extendings of merciful regard. I went home with my
near friend Isaac Andrews, who bore me company this journey, three or four
weeks in the Jerseys; we had meetings that week at Upper Greenwich,
Piles-Grove, at the head of Alloway's-Creek, Salem, and Alloway's-Creek; these
meetings were mostly large; great lukewarmness and insensibility were painfully
felt, many seeming to rest in only professing the religion of their education;
for these I had a deep concern and travail of mind, that they might come to
know Christ formed in them. The Lord was graciously pleased, in great kindness
and condescension, to furnish with matter and utterance in an awakening manner,
in order to make them sensible of the nature and importance of true religion
and worship: may it not be in vain! On first day, the 13th of the 4th month, we
went to Greenwich meeting; the glorious gospel-power eminently manifested
itself that day, by clearly opening diverse weighty points of doctrine, suitable
to the various states of that large auditory; among other things, showing that
the true and saving knowledge of God, whereby we obtain the right knowledge of
ourselves, is essential to the very being of a real Christian; and by what
means that knowledge is obtained. It was a highly favored time, for the Lord's
heavenly power was over all, and the people appeared to be generally affected.
Next day we had a large meeting among the Presbyterians, at a place called
New England Town; their minister having condescended to give notice the day
before from the pulpit, of a meeting for us; he attended it himself, with, I
suppose, most of his hearers, who behaved solid and respectful. The universal
love of God, through Christ, to mankind, was largely set forth, and people
directed from outward observations, to the substance, whereby victory might be
obtained over sin: it was a favored time, and the people seemed generally well
affected and very loving, though diverse things were delivered which are usually
controverted between us and those people; there was no visible opposition, but
all passed off quiet and peaceable. On fourth-day we traveled a day's journey
through the Pine-barren wilderness, to Cape-May; we had one meeting there, and
two at Great Egg-Harbour. We found the number of professors small, and things,
as to the life of religion, low; yet we were enabled to administer suitably to
their states for their help and recovery, and had a good degree of satisfaction
and peace therein. On third-day, the 22d of the 4th month, we had a large
meeting at Little Egg-Harbour; after a time of trying poverty and deep travail,
gospel life and power mercifully arose, in which, doctrine and counsel flowed
forth freely to diverse states, particularly to a libertine* youth. Next day we
had a meeting in a new Presbyterian meeting house, near Barnagatt; it was a
large meeting, and held more than an hour in silence, which the people were not
accustomed to. At length the word was given with authority and clearness,
showing the necessity and advantage of silence in worship, and distinguishing
Christians of the letter from Christians of the spirit, as also ministers of
the letter from ministers of the spirit; and that those who are always ready to
preach, must either have the spirit at command, or act without it. It was a
great and good time; the people appeared to be generally affected, and all
passed off quietly, without any opposition. We traveled on by the seaside, to
a place called Good-Luck, where we found a large meeting house erected though
not quite finished, by one Thomas Potter, intended by him, it seems, for all
preachers to make use of who would preach freely, except Papists, who would not
be admitted even on those terms; we had a meeting in it, but notice not coming
timely, nor Thomas Potter being at home himself, it was small and to little
satisfaction. We met him that afternoon on his return, he seemed sorry he
happened to be out at that time; he sees beyond hireling ministry, and I
understand, inclines most to friends of any, but joins to none. On sixth-day we
had a poor, low meeting, at Monesquan; I doubt, but very few therein were alive
in religion; some gospel-labours were bestowed for their help. We went after
meeting to Shrewsbury, intending to be at their quarterly meeting, which begun
on first day, the 27th of the 4th month. It was exceeding large; some solid
friends were present, also many loose, libertine people under our name, and of
other societies. In that sad mixture, the life of religion was exceedingly
depressed, and my mind in sympathy with it: I could not wade through to get
ease and satisfaction that day, though I labored very hard. Next day the
meeting was very large, the power of truth in mavelous kindness arose, and
the gospel was preached with good authority and clearness, to the various
states of that great auditory. The meeting of business followed; there seemed
but little judgment to maintain good order and discipline: unity appeared not
so general as could have been desired. On third-day abundance of people flocked
to meeting, perhaps with much expectation; but my way was shut up as to
ministry, and but very little from any other; I found peace and satisfaction by
abiding in my place. On fifth-day I went to Chesterfield monthly meeting; it
was very large, and I had deep and painful wading therein, in my public
service, showing what man is by nature, whatever mode or form of religion he
decks and adorns Himself withal; for that which is born of the flesh is but
flesh, and cannot see the kingdom of God. I got through at last to a pretty
good degree of satisfaction, but found much close labor in the meeting of
business, and saw great deviation from the right thing, in some high ruling
members, who had carried an affair through that meeting against the most lively
part of the body, which they themselves had sufficient cause to repent. On
sixth and seventh-days, I had meetings at Upper-Freehold, and New-Springfield,
and on first day, the 4th of the 5th month, had a very large meeting at
Mansfield in the morning, and another at Borden-Town in the evening. The people
seemed full of expectation from one come so far; but it pleased the great
Master, without whose gracious aid the poor servant can do nothing to
advantage, to shut me wholly up as to ministry, in both places, to the great
disappointment of many; but there was no remedy; I durst not contrive or form
any thing for them: however, I have no doubt, but silence was the most
profitable lesson for those meetings. I went next day to Burlington
monthly meeting, it was large and divinely favored; the doctrine of truth
flowed forth freely, showing what it is to be a fellow-citizen with the saints
and of the household of faith. On third-day I had a laborious meeting at
Ancocas, yet had some good, open service toward the latter-end, which seemed
to fasten on diverse minds. I got to Philadelphia next day, and on fifth-day,
the 8th of the 5th month, went to the marriage of John Pemberton, and Hannah,
the daughter of my worthy friends Isaac and Sarah Zane. It was at the great
meeting house, being large, and there appeared too much desire and expectation
after words, which often hurts meetings and blocks up the way of ministers,
which seemed the case now for a while; yet at length some, I hope profitable
labor was bestowed, from the words of our Lord, Blessed are they that hunger
and thirst after righteousness. On first day, the 11th of the 5th month, I
attended three large meetings in the city, in all which, I thought it my duty
to set an example of silence. Near the close of the evening meeting, it was a
sweet refreshing time; the thirsty soul had to drink of that river that makes
glad the whole city of God; in the enjoyment whereof, there was comfortable
solacing rest from the painful labor of that day, and full satisfaction, with
thankfulness that I had been preserved in my place. I staid their weekday
meeting on third-day, which was large; the power and wisdom of truth opened
deep counsel and doctrine, pointing out the different states of professors in
that city, that some of the true wrestling seed dare not choose or contrive for
themselves, which way to be fed; whether immediately by the great Shepherd's
own hand, or instrumentally by his servants; and that there were many others
anxiously choosing to be fed with testimonies and outward declarations, which
state ought to be famished; also, that the time would come, when the word of
the Lord, by way of ministry, would be very precious, and he would command the
clouds to rain no rain upon such; that it was already a time of parching
drought, because of idolatry; yet the Lord would open springs to the seed of
Jacob, in the midst of the valleys, and in his own time bring them to Rehoboth.
It was a great and good time, and the meeting was much affected. I set out next
day for New England, and had meetings in my way to Long Island, at Byberry,
Middletown, and Stonybrook, where my old companion Thomas Ross, met me: my
service was very close and searching at these meetings. Alas! how has an
indolent spirit prevailed on the professors of truth; a small remnant excepted,
who are preserved in most places, to rejoice in the deep painful labors, in
great mercy yet continued to the churches. We, in company with several other
friends proceeded on our journey, in order to attend Flushing yearly meeting,
on Long Island for the government of New York. On fifth-day, the 22d of the 5th
month, we attended the monthly and quarterly-meetings of ministers and elders
at Flushing; in the latter I had comfortable open service, upon the blessing
pronounced by our gracious Redeemer to the poor in spirit, showing the
necessity and usefulness of that state; and also setting forth the essential
qualifications of a gospel minister. It was a blessed time, and the
upright-hearted were sweetly comforted. Next day was held the
quarterly meeting, which was small, and things, as to the life of religion,
were felt to be very low; a painful gloominess having spread itself, through a
want of living concern in many of the members, and from some presuming to act
in the church, too much in their own will and wisdom; yet the Lord who waits to
be gracious, afforded doctrine and counsel suitable to their states; showing,
there is one body and one spirit, and that all the members who act profitably,
must know a being baptized by that one spirit into the one mystical body. I
found great numbness in the meeting of business; my spirit was deeply baptized
into suffering therein, and constrained to lay their condition before them by
very close searching observations, which appeared to take some impression, and
my mind was much relieved thereby. On seventh-day morning the yearly meeting of
ministers and elders was held, which was small, and the vital part of religion
seemed to be much obstructed; some close remarks were delivered, which afforded
considerable relief: at eleven came on the first public meeting for worship,
the time of which was taken up very unprofitably by an unskilful appearance;
after which, the business was entered upon, and was a painful distressing time;
the forward, busy, active spirit of man was let loose in a few elderly persons,
who had placed themselves at the helm of government there, and who seemed to
have got such an ascendancy over the meeting, as to bear down whatever appeared
in the right line of tenderness and truth's simplicity, when they did not see
fit to promote it. The attempt was to lay aside the necessary queries to be
answered by inferior, to superior meetings; I was favored with a degree of
wisdom and strength to withstand that spirit, and to show the necessity of
proper queries, in order that the state of the society might be better
understood: how else could suitable advice be administered? But through the
cowardice of many present, I was left to engage much alone; yet have cause to
believe, that the weapons given both in the meeting and afterward in private
conference, wounded that spirit deeply, and gave honest friends a clearer sight
of it than they had before. Things in the succeeding meetings were managed with
more harmony and peace, and the meetings for worship were very large; wherein
the everlasting gospel was preached with clearness and demonstration: many were
deeply affected, and the great Author was humbly worshipped and adored, who is
worthy for ever!

We went from Flushing, and had a large meeting at Cow-Neck, in which truth
opened gospel-doctrine largely, to the tendering of many hearts. Next day we
had an exceeding large meeting at Westbury: as there was general notice,
abundance of people came from several parts of the island, so that there was
near as large a concourse, as at the yearly meeting; their expectations were
much after words, but they had none from me, being shut up in silence the whole
time: the monthly meeting of business was held at the close thereof. We had
very large meetings afterward, on this island at Matinicock, Oyster-Bay,
Bethphage, and Sequetague; and notwithstanding the low, languid state of the
society, gospel truths were largely delivered, and livingly opened in them. We
then traveled toward the east end of the island, on our way to Rhode Island,
and on third-day, the 3d of the 6th month, went on board a vessel about eight
o'clock in the morning, taking our horses with us, and landed safe at Gratten,
opposite to New London in the colony of Connecticut, about one o'clock the same
day. We got that night to our friend Peter Davis's, in Rhode Island government,
about twenty-two miles. We had a meeting next day at Westerley, the governor of
the province was at it and behaved kindly, inviting us to his house; but it did
not suit us to go.

In order to fill up our time before the yearly meeting, we had meetings at a
new meeting house near James Perry's, South Kingston, Greenwich, Neshantecut,
and Providence; and though we found some honest travelers for Sion's
prosperity, yet, for the most part, things, as to the life of religion,
appeared mournfully low, indifferency prevailing in many, and diverse undue
liberties in others. I was much afflicted at some of the meetings with the dark
principles of deism, and was favored with ability to lay open the wickedness
and gross absurdity of such principles, warning friends and others to shun the
conversation of those tinctured therewith, as they would a poisonous serpent.
On fifth day, the 12th of the 6th month, the yearly meeting for New England
began at Portsmouth on Rhode Island: this meeting was very large as to number;
but, alas! it was a dark gloomy time of deep suffering: the glory and diadem of
our religious assemblies seems to be sorrowfully removed from these people, and
instead of the meeting being covered therewith, it was overspread with
darkness. Here I met our friend Thomas Gawthrop, who was upon his third visit
to friends in America; we both sat the whole meeting in silence.

The meetings following, both for worship and discipline, were held at Newport,
and continued till second day was over. The public meetings were exceeding
large, both friends, and abundance of other people attended most of them; it
was supposed there were 2000 people. To these great assemblies it pleased the
gracious fountain of all good, to open much gospel doctrine in the
demonstration of the spirit and with power, which appeared to be generally well
received, and was to the great comfort and relief of those engaged therein; but
the meetings of ministers and elders, and those for discipline, were for the
most part very heavy and distressing; great weakness and want of living
concern, were painfully felt therein; little of that divine wisdom which alone
can build the house, was attended to, and formality prevailed. Ability was
graciously afforded to use plainness of speech, endeavoring to make them
sensible of the loss they had sustained, by forsaking the fountain of living
waters, and hewing to themselves cisterns, broken cisterns, that would hold no
water: yet we found a few sincere laborers amongst them, whose hands I hope
were in some degree strengthened; but things in general were very low. On third
day we had a large satisfactory meeting on Connanicut Island, to which many
from Newport went; and next day we had a very large meeting at Newport, which
was the last we had there. In this meeting wisdom and utterance were given to
declare the truth to their several states, in much plain-dealing, endeavoring
to show them from whence they had fallen, and how vain it was for them to
imagine they were God's people in the state most of them were then in: there
was also encouragement to the few sincere-hearted. On fifth day we had a very
large meeting at Portsmouth, to which came great numbers from Newport. It was a
time of great darkness and deep suffering with the oppressed seed: the young
people are mostly gone into the air, and undue liberties; and those more
advanced (a few excepted) are gone into the earth; having so much to do in
government affairs, many of them got into the offices, friendships, and
parties, as well as into the profits of this world. Next day we went off the
island, and had meetings in our way to Nantucket yearly meeting, at Tiverton,
Little-Compton, and Accoakeset. The two last were very large, especially
Accoakeset; the gospel was largely and with good authority declared in them to
much satisfaction and comfort, there being considerable openness, many of other
persuasions attending. On second day, being their monthly meeting at
Aponiganset, and notice having been given before of our intention of being at
it, it was exceeding large, even like a great yearly meeting; it was supposed
there were 2000 people present. In this large assembly the everlasting gospel
was preached in the demonstration of the spirit, and with power; wisdom being
mercifully given to divide the word suitably to the various states: the meeting
appeared to be generally affected, and the minds of those engaged greatly
relieved. Early next morning we embarked for Nantucket, in company with about
twenty friends, and landed on the said island about five o'clock in the
afternoon of the same day. On sixth day the yearly meeting began, and was very
large: a becoming plainness appeared in the general; but, alas! the life of
religion was very much departed from by numbers in that once truly amiable
place, so much noted for a family of love. I went on the island as a stranger
to their present state, though I had been there twice before, a witness of
better times: much distressing anguish was felt in this meeting, and for some
time I expected the current of life would have been wholly obstructed; but at
length, through divine mercy, truth arose with gospel authority, setting forth
what a great and wonderful manifestation of evangelical light and truth sprung
up in the last century after a dark night of apostasy and error; when the
heavenly power being embraced, brought forth the nature and spirit of religion;
but endeavors now are too often used to support the same principles in a
formal way, by the strength and wisdom of man; the Lord therefore will not own
a people in that state. Many things were delivered upon this subject with great
dread, and I felt the Lord's power go forth as a fire amongst the briars and
thorns; many were struck with sadness and fear, and the everlasting name was
exalted: Thomas Gawthrop was there also, and had good service. The meeting
ended on second-day, much gospel labor having been bestowed in the several
sittings thereof. Notwithstanding the general state of friends on that island
appeared truly deplorable, yet I believe a remnant are and will be preserved
fresh and lively in religion. May their number increase!

We left the island on third-day, the 1st of the 7th month, and landed that
evening at Seconnesset, on the continent, being about fifty in number. We had a
small meeting on fifth-day, at a meeting house near the place of our landing,
and went forward to be at Sandwich quarterly meeting. On sixth-day we went to
their monthly meeting, where was a burial of a friend that died suddenly. There
were many Presbyterians present: the gospel power arose with considerable
strength and clearness, with the words of the apostle: Give diligence to make
your calling and election sure; with remarks on the great importance of the
work, how necessary to be assured of its going forward, and that a certainty
thereof may be obtained, by the spirit of God bearing witness with our spirit,
according to the apostolic testimony. This exhortation contradicts the dark
opinion of absolute and unconditional election and reprobation; seeing this
pressing advice to make it sure, implies something to be done on man's part,
which may be omitted, and he thereby may miss the election of God's grace;
whereas, according to that, the election is made so certain, even from the
foundation of the world, by an immutable decree, that all man's endeavors will
make no alteration, seeing one cannot possibly be added to the number of the
elect, nor one diminished: the great absurdity of this doctrine was exposed,
showing how it reflected much dishonor on infinite mercy and goodness; and
some of their strongest arguments in favor of that doctrine were answered.

I was also opened upon infant baptism, so called, setting forth how
unreasonable it is to uphold types, signs, and shadows, unless we expect
another and higher dispensation: that types always pointed to the antitype or
substance, and seeing most acknowledge the substance is come, how weak to keep
up the sign. It was a good time, for truth was exalted and the meeting pretty
generally affected; and although these disputable points were closely handled,
yet there was no opposition, nor the least disgust appeared. On seventh-day the
quarterly meeting was held, in which we had some, I hope profitable service, in
a close, searching way; things appeared very low, yet there were some sincere,
honest laborers. We went after meeting about twenty miles to Plymouth, where
it is said the first colony of English landed and settled. The next day, being
the first of the week, we went to Pembroke meeting, which was but small of
friends, but a pretty many of other societies came in, considering the short
notice; the truths of the gospel were largely delivered amongst them, which
seemed to be well and kindly received. We set out after meeting, intending to
pass through Boston, and as far to the eastward as we proposed to visit
friends, leaving notice as we went, at the several meetings, to take them in
our return. We had very large meetings at Cachechy, and Dover; and although we
found but little living concern amongst friends, yet the blessed truth favored
and opened the way for much gospel labor suited to their states, in order to
revive ancient zeal and ardour. The weather was extremely hot and the meetings
crowded, so that at times it seemed as if I should have been overcome, and
faint; but by divine favor, I was mercifully carried through, to a
considerable degree of satisfaction and peace. We returned to their
quarterly meeting at Hampton, which began for ministers and elders, on
seventh-day, third hour, the 12th of the 7th month: we were sorrowfully
affected to find so little of a living concern amongst the leaders of the
people: Next day, being the first of the week, we had two large meetings,
composed of friends and others: a religious labor for heavenly bread seemed
almost lost, even amongst those advanced in age and profession of the truth;
yet in mavelous condescension, the gospel power and life sprung up and
extended to their various states, with great strength and clearness, even as a
flame of fire against the wood, hay, and stubble; showing, what a great and
glorious thing Christianity is; how complete victory and dominion may be
obtained by it over sin; and the soul of man be endued with sublime virtues:
but to view the notion of Christianity people in general appear now to be
contented with, it would seem as if little real religion remained on the earth.
In the afternoon I was led to set forth, that there is one body, one spirit,
one Lord, one faith, and one baptism; that by this only people come to be truly
initiated, being buried with Christ by his saving baptism into his death, and
thereby witnessing with the apostle, the measure of the sufferings of Christ
which are yet behind, fulfilled in us; if so be that we suffer with him, that
we also may be glorified together: the deep mystery of man's redemption through
Christ, was largely opened, it being a time of great favor, and the people
were generally affected. Next day forenoon was held their meeting of business;
but as the power of truth, the main spring of action in the weighty affairs of
the church, appeared to me sorrowfully wanting, little could be done to good
purpose; some close remarks were made upon the declining state of that meeting,
wherein we had very little comfort or satisfaction. In the afternoon we had a
very large concluding meeting, wherein Christ was freely set forth as the true
light, that enlightens every man that comes into the world; that as the light
of the outward sun is necessary for transacting the affairs of this life, so
the light of the Sun of righteousness is no less necessary to show us how to
perform the great work of our soul's salvation: it was a good time. We then had
meetings at Aimsbury, Newbury, Salem, Lynn, and Boston. At Lynn in the
afternoon, being first day, I found it my place to set an example of silence;
at the other meetings I was largely opened in the service of the gospel, to
good satisfaction and comfort. From Boston we traveled to Dighton, and dined
on the way at Taunton. Our guide being acquainted with a shopkeeper in that
town, we were invited to dine with him: after dinner we entered upon much
reasoning about religious principles, and a close dispute ensued. I was,
through divine assistance, enabled to stand my ground therein, and to maintain
our principles, to the comfort and satisfaction of my own mind, and I believe
in a good degree to his; who I unsterstood had been accounted a very zealous
Presbyterian, and had entertained an unfavourable opinion of our principles: he
confessed they never had been cleared up so much to his satisfaction before,
and seemed to be a good deal affected; we parted in love and friendship. We
then had meetings at Free-town, Long-plain, Rochester, and Akushnet; in these
we found things very low and languid, as appeared generally the case in
New England; our society, like others, having too much dwindled into form and
profession. The last meeting was very large, but my way was quite shut up as to
ministry; had in the others close searching service. On first day, the 27th of
the 7th month, we had a very large meeting at Swanzey, to which came friends
from many parts, some even from Newport; the power of the everlasting gospel
arose in this large assembly; wisdom and utterance were given to declare the
truth very largely, from these words, To know thee the only true God, and Jesus
Christ whom thou have sent, is life eternal. The meeting was much affected; the
Lord's heart-melting goodness was sweetly enjoyed by a remnant. Next day we had
a large meeting at Smithfield; the nature of true religion, from the apostle
James's definition of it, was copiously treated of in this meeting: it was a
favored time, and the meeting was generally affected. On third-day we had a
meeting at Wainsoket, great numbers of loose, libertine people came, who, I
suppose, rarely attended any place of worship; such came rather out of
curiosity, expecting something; and indeed those, for the most part, who
profess with us there, seem as if they knew little of the nature and importance
of religious worship; but it was my duty in this large meeting, to sit in
silence. Next day we had a very large meeting at Mendam, to which came many of
our profession, and a great number of such as being dissatisfied with the
established worship, and an hireling ministry, had separated and held meetings
in one another's houses, having such as thought it their duty to preach freely
amongst them: to this meeting the gospel was largely preached, which seemed to
have a general reach. After meeting came a predestinarian, and a young man, a
preacher among those separatists beforementioned, who are quite averse to that
dark opinion: these two, it seems, had been engaged in a dispute in the
meeting house when all were gone, upon some points of doctrine delivered that
day concerning original sin and the opinion beforementioned; and as they could
not settle the points, at length they agreed to come to my quarters, to ask me
a few sober questions, by way of further explanation of some things delivered.
When they informed me of the reason of their coming, I told them I was very
willing to afford them all the satisfaction in my power, but was not very fond
of disputes, which seldom tended much to edification as they were generally
managed. The old man signified he had no intention of entering into any
disputes; however, one thing brought on another, till we got very closely
engaged: the young man, the preacher, was on my side, and, I think, had as
remarkable a memory in the scriptures as I ever knew, and was favored with a
considerable understanding in the mystery of them. The poor old man, though I
suppose as well furnished as most upon such a bad subject, was entirely
vanquished and confounded to that degree, that his spirits appeared to be sunk
with sorrow, because he could not support his principles better. The young man
and I, with other friends, withdrew into another room, and had a religious
conference, particularly upon the nature of gospel ministry and worship; he
appeared to be much enlightened and not far from the kingdom; but I fear he had
entered into the ministry too soon. This opportunity afforded my mind a good
deal of satisfaction. I found many of those high professors in New England, in
rather an unsettled state* fond of flocking to our meetings, and they seemed to
hear the doctrines of truth with satisfaction, and there was great openness
amongst them in many places. But what sorrowfully affected my mind was, that
there is so little of the life of religion held up as a standard to those, by
our society in those parts; yet I believe there will be a gathering to Shiloh,
in the New England colonies. The difference appears very great in their esteem
and regard to our friends, to what it was formerly, though perhaps that in part
may be owing to many in our society being more like them, than our friends were
in early times; yet I believe the case is otherwise with many, and that it
arises from their good opinion of most of our principles.

On fifth-day, the 31st of the 7th month, we set out, accompanied by two
guides, through the back parts of Connecticut, toward the Oblong in the
government of New York, being about 140 miles through a Presbyterian country;
they generally carried themselves civilly, and we had some religious
conferences to good satisfaction. The weather was very hot, and the roads
stony, rough and mountainous, and the entertainment but mean in many places, so
that the journey was attended with fatigue to our bodies and horses. We went to
New-Milford meeting on first day, the 3d of the 8th month; I had nothing to
offer by way of ministry, yet in still quiet waiting, I was favored therein
with the first clear satisfactory glance of my being at liberty, toward the
latter end of this year, to return home, which I fully believed, but kept it to
myself. After meeting we ascended to the Oblong, and a long ascent it was, of
near a mile to the summit of that called Quaker-Hill; the weather being
extremely hot, I feared it would have killed my horse, and I was not able to
relieve him by walking. On third-day we had a very large meeting at a
commodious house built by friends on that hill; they who attended were
generally professors of the truth as held by us, and mostly plain and becoming
in their outward garb; yet, alas! when they came to be viewed in the true
light, they appeared dry and formal; many, I fear, having clothed corrupted
nature with a form of religion, and in a plain dress fit in their religious
meetings like dead images. After a time of deep suffering in spirit with the
oppressed seed, the word was given with good authority, and went forth like a
flame of fire, against the wood, hay, and stubble, to the rousing, I believe,
and awakening of many for the present. The condition of man in the
transgression as set forth by the inspired writers, that he is in a state of
enmity to, and separation from God, consequently, he must experience a very
great change, before he can be acceptable to his Maker: the way was opened,
showing how this change was to be effected, and that the operation necessary
thereunto, makes indelible impressions on the minds of all who are so happy as
to experience the same, that none can be true Christians without it; truth had
great dominion that day. We had a very large meeting next day at the Nine
Partners, and had close service therein. Next day we had a very painful
afflicting meeting at Oswego; I was quite a stranger to them, and did not know
by any outward information, that they had any one who usually appeared in
public among them; yet my mind was strongly impressed with a sense, that the
meeting had been much hurt by a wrong ministry, and for that reason chiefly, my
mouth was shut up there in that respect: it seemed as if the very person was
shown to me in the meeting, though I had never seen him before that I know of;
but I found afterward, it was a true sense, and I told friends in his hearing,
how things appeared to me in that meeting, which seemed to strike him, and he
struggled a little, but I left it upon him: may the great and gracious helper
of his people, have the praise of his own works, says my soul, now and for
evermore! On first day, the 10th of the 8th month, we were at the Oblong
meeting again; my travail the whole meeting was in suffering silence. From
hence, in our way to New York, we had the following meetings, viz. Peach-Pond,
North-Castle, the monthly meeting at the Purchase, Momarineck, and
West-Chester; at most of which, the gospel power was largely manifested, by
opening doctrine and counsel, in a close, searching manner, to the various
states of the people. On first day, the 17th of the 8th month, we were at two
meetings in the city of New York; in the morning I was silent; in the
afternoon, truth opened the way to public service, showing the beautiful order
and economy of human life; all seeking for some mansion, possession, or
settlement, and agreeable to the laws of prudence and justice, endeavoring to
increase their store, that they may have something of their own against the
time of need: if prudence requires to provide the necessaries for this short
and uncertain life, how much more incumbent is it upon us, in regard to the
immortal part: and that our eyes should be turned to view the order, harmony,
and beauty of the new creation, and to seek an inheritance in the holy city? It
was a blessed time, and many hearts were tendered. I had a good deal of
satisfaction among friends in that city, and hope there is a growth in the best
things experienced by diverse. On second-day we crossed the Bay, and
Staten-Island; ferried from thence at Elizabeth-town Point, and went to Rahway.
On third and fourth-day we went to the quarterly and monthly-meetings at
Woodbridge; was enabled to labor largely in a searching way, with much
plainness and gospel authority, for their help and recovery from a weak,
languid, unconcerned state; yet we found some solid, valuable friends amongst
them. From thence we proceeded on our way to my companion's house in
Pennsylvania, and had large meetings at Plainfield and Kingwood, wherein the
gospel was preached with great openness, to good satisfaction. On seventh-day
evening, the 23d of the 8th month, having crossed Delaware at Howell's-Ferry,
we got to my companion's house, and attended two meetings at Wright's-Town,
where he belongs; the next day there was a considerable number of professors,
but spiritual idleness was felt sorrowfully to have prevailed over too many,
craving to be fed with words; I found it my duty to be silent at both the
meetings. Having taken a very great cold after some of the late large and hot
meetings, I was much indisposed, and staid at my companion's till fifth-day,
and then went to the quarterly meeting for the county of Bucks, held at the
Falls, which was exceeding large: truth greatly favored that meeting, in
opening doctrine and counsel, for the help, reproof, and encouragement of many,
beginning with these words, It is especially worthy to be noted, that the
inspired writers, both in relating their own experience, and in administering
advice and counsel to others, on a religious account, lay the whole stress of
religion upon the inward, saving, and spiritual knowledge of God: it was a
great time, and many hearts were tendered. The youth's meeting was held next
day at Bristol; it was a low, poor time, and I had nothing to offer by way of
ministry. On first day, the 31st of the 8th month, I went to Makefield meeting,
it was an exercising time; a careless, earthly spirit was felt to be very
prevalent; I had some service there, in a very close, searching manner. In the
afternoon I had a very large meeting at John Beaumont's, wherein much gospel
doctrine flowed to the people, upon the nature of self-denial and bearing the
yoke of Christ; many, not of our society, were present and pretty much
affected; it was a favored time. Next day I went to Buckingham
monthly meeting, which was very large, a numerous body of friends living in
those parts; I had great openness for public service therein, showing, that the
promises of God in him, are yea and amen for ever; yet we are not entitled to
them but upon certain conditions, that is, being in those states to which they
are applied. It was a great and good time, truth being exalted. On third-day I
had a large meeting at Plumstead, many attending from Buckingham and other
places. The word was given with authority and clearness, to declare to this
numerous auditory, upon the nature of true religion and worship, showing, that
it principally consisted in an inward exercise of the soul toward God, and
especially depended on a spiritual acquaintance with him; it was a highly
favored time, and many hearts were tendered. For some time past I had been
indisposed, being, through the extremity of the heat, much afflicted with a
rash, called the prickly heat; and having taken a great cold, my asthmatic
disorder was much increased; yet, through merciful help supporting soul and
body in the great work to which I was called, I was enabled to proceed on my
journey, having a strong desire to visit some meetings in the back parts of
Bucks, Philadelphia, and Chester counties, before the approaching
yearly meeting for Pennsylvania and the Jerseys, to be held in Philadelphia
toward the latter end of the 9th month: apprehending if I could accomplish
that, I should have little to do after, except on the eastern shore of Maryland
and in the lower counties upon Delaware. Here my valuable friend Zebulon
Heston, joined me for a companion to the back parts. We traveled next day to
Richland, and the day following had a large meeting there, mostly consisting of
those under our name: great lukewarmness and want of a living concern was felt;
yet it pleased divine goodness to favor with ability to labor in the gospel
with plainness, in a very awakening manner, which seemed to have some tendering
effect in the general, at least for the present. We traveled next day to Oley,
alias Exeter, and went to their meeting on first day, the 7th of the 9th month;
they appeared to me mostly ignorant of the importance of that worship and
service which they pretended to meet about, and as if the chief waiting was to
hear what the poor servants had to say: they were disappointed in respect to
me, finding it my place to sit the whole meeting in silence. We afterward went
to Maiden-Creek, and had a large meeting there the next day. I believe there
were some valuable friends, but many appeared in a state of indolence as to
religion, looking for words; there was a considerable space of silence; at
length, truth arose and obtained dominion, and the gospel was freely preached;
showing the nature of the work of man's salvation by Christ, and the great
danger of a neglect thereof. On third-day we had a meeting in Reading
Courthouse, to which many came, not of our society, being mostly Germans, who
behaved in a solid, becoming manner; the word of the gospel was given, and
ability to declare it with good authority and clearness for a considerable
time, to the tendering of many hearts. Next day we crossed Schuylkill, and had
meetings at the Forest, Nantmill, Providence, and Pikeland, in all which,
ability was given to labor in the gospel, for the stirring up professors to a
more lively sense of religion, which indeed was felt to be at a low ebb amongst
them, as in many other places; such causes there are of mournful complaints,
where people go no deeper into religion than what comes by education or outward
conformity: many in these parts have entered into the outward possessions and
profession of their worthy ancestors, at a very easy rate; yet the Lord, in
great mercy, is causing his trumpets to found very loud, to awaken such to a
sense of their danger. On first day, the 14th of the 9th month, we went to
Uwchlan, which was a very large meeting of itself, and friends came to it from
most of the adjacent meetings; the fore part was a time of deep travail and
silent labor, in a painful sense that many present were at ease in a bare
profession of the truth; at length the word was given with considerable weight
and gospel authority, showing what a powerful efficacious thing Christianity
was, when it made its first entrance into the world, and so continued for a
considerable time, mightily prevailing by its own force and efficacy, against
all opposition and worldly interest, until the world smiled upon its
professors: it then spread as to the name, but gradually losing the power and
life, many disorders, great corruptions, and desolating contentions about
trifles, got in. Close application was made to the states of the inhabitants of
this highly favored province, earnestly pressing the auditory to seek after
the substance of religion. The afternoon meeting was solid and comfortable in
silence. On third-day we had a large meeting at East-Caln, in which I had
thorough service, to good satisfaction; and next day we had a very large
meeting at Bradford, in the Forks of Brandy-wine; things were felt to be much
out of order, and religion to be at a very low ebb amongst them, yet, through
infinite condescension, gospel authority was given, with much clearness in
doctrine, showing, that in order to possess a valuable religion, man should be
feelingly and experimentally convinced, that in matters of religion, he must
wholly resign his will to God, and give himself up to be guided by a
supernatural principle; until then, he cannot say, with acceptance to his
Maker, Thy will be done in earth, as it is done in heaven. It was, through
divine mercy, a highly-favoured baptizing time, and the blessed truth was in
dominion over hard, unmortified spirits. I went home from hence with my
brother-in-law, Micajah Speakman, to Concord, where I rested quietly three
days, after long fatigue of traveling and hard labor; yet all was made easy
through the efficacy of that heavenly power which mercifully attended from
place to place, filling my soul, at times, with true contentment and perfect
resignation to the Lord's will, either to do or suffer; in which happy state,
my peace flowed as a river, On first day, the 21st of the 9th month, I went to
Middle-town meeting, but had no public service therein. I went on second-day to
Philadelphia, attended their weekday meeting next day, and on fifth-day I went
to Haddonfield, in West-Jersey, to the burial of Thomas Redman, a public friend
in good esteem, who formerly told me he was first reached or convinced through
my ministry, in the Bank-meeting at Philadelphia, about thirty years ago: the
meeting was very large, consisting both of friends and those of other
societies, a priest and his family being there; the truths of the gospel were
largely declared, with clearness and good demonstration; the auditory being
very solid and attentive, truth had good dominion to the comfort of many. In
the afternoon was held their quarterly meeting of ministers and elders; it was
a low time. Next day was held their quarterly meeting, which was very large;
there seemed to be great expectations and looking out after words, as is
sorrowfully the case with many in these parts, especially if the poor
instrument had been favored before, and it pleased them: this sometimes tends
to deprive them of that which they so anxiously seek after, which I believe was
now the case, for I was quite shut up as to public service, but had some good
service in the meeting of business. On seventh-day, the 27th of the 9th month,
I went to the yearly meeting of ministers and elders at Philadelphia, for
Pennsylvania and the Jerseys; it was large, I had some service therein, and
informed friends that I expected liberty to return home that Fall, requesting a
few lines by way of certificate, to my friends in England, according to the
good order used amongst us; this was the only one I requested on the continent
of America, yet friends, of their own accord, sent certificates from most or
all the parts I visited. A certificate was readily granted, and signed by a
great number of ministers and elders, testifying their unity with my gospel
labors and conduct while among them. I diligently attended the several
sittings of this yearly meeting, both for worship and discipline, and had some
weighty service in them. On first day, the 5th of the 10th month, I went to
Fair-hill meeting, and returned to the evening meeting in the city. On
third-day, the 7th of the 10th month, I set out in order to attend the
yearly meeting on the eastern shore of Maryland, being accompanied by Samuel
Eastburn; we had meetings in our way at George's-Creek, and the head of
Sassafras; truth made way for close, weighty service, to the states of those
present. We went, the 11th of the 10th month, to a small poor meeting for
ministers and elders, at Cecil, in Maryland; and next day being the first of
the week, the yearly meeting began there, to which came many people of diverse
sorts, most of whom seemed loose, and void of a solid, religious concern. Death
and darkness were felt to reign in the general, yet the gospel power, in great
mercy, broke through, and opened suitable doctrine to their states, showing the
general consent of all ages and nations, to that of the immortality of the soul
and future rewards and punishments; and although the professors of Christianity
were favored with more clear apprehensions thereof, than others, yet numbers
of them live as if they had no such belief, or, as if they did not look upon
themselves to be accountable creatures. The succeeding meetings, both for
worship and discipline, were, I hope, through divine assistance, profitable to
many. The yearly meeting at Chop-tank began on seventh-day, the 18th of the
10th month, and ended on fourth-day afternoon; many of the meetings were very
large, and the truths of the gospel powerfully declared in them, and the
everlasting unchangeable truth was exalted over all of a contrary nature to
itself: this yearly meeting afforded great relief and satisfaction to my mind.
We set out on fifth-day, in order to attend the yearly meeting to be held at
Little-Creek, in Kent-County, on Delaware; the meeting began on first day, the
26th of 10th month, and held two days; I had very open service therein. After
this meeting I found myself at liberty to seek a proper opportunity to return
to my native land and outward habitation, and so went from hence directly
toward Philadelphia; I attended their monthly and quarterly meeting there,
wherein I had good open service. By inquiring, I found a vessel bound for
London, the captain intending to sail about the middle of the 11th month. I
went on board, accompanied by diverse friends; we sat a while in the cabin, in a
solemn silence; my mind was deeply engaged to be rightly directed; and finding,
as I thought, rather a freedom to go in that ship, I therefore signified to the
captain and the owners, that I intended to embark in her, which they appeared
to be well pleased with. I then went to Chester-County, to take leave of my
relations and friends, and to attend the quarterly meeting at Concord; which I
did, and had large open service in the several meetings, to great satisfaction
and comfort. On third-day I went to a large meeting at Chester; death and
darkness seemed to reign the whole time, so that I had no power to move, as to
ministry. I got to Philadelphia next morning, the ship being to sail from
thence the next day. On sixth-day, about nine o'clock, I took a solemn leave of
sundry valuable friends in the city, and set out for Chester to meet the ship;
many friends from thence and Derby, accompanying me thither; where, after
dinner, in near affection we took leave, never expecting to see each other
again. I then embarked on board the ship Phebe, Capt. Mungo Davison; we got
under sail about two o'clock next morning, and on first day, the 16th of the
11th month, about four o'clock in the afternoon, we got to sea.

I find this remark amongst my memorandums, written, I suppose, after I had
been some time at sea, viz. "It is fit to be remembered, in humble and awful
acknowledgment, that the Lord has been with me ever since I came on board this
ship, in love and mercy unspeakable, causing sweet peace to flow as a river in
my soul, so as to make me forget all my former anguish. For the former things
are all passed away, so that, through infinite condescending love, I have
learned to sing the song of Moses and the song of the Lamb, and even upon the
mighty foaming unstable ocean, to speak in myself in psalms, and hymns, and
spiritual songs, making melody in my heart to the Lord, who has been pleased
to preserve me through many, oh! very many heights and depths; heights in my
service and affections of my friends and others, I hope from being lifted up or
exalted above measure, by the revelation I have been favored with; and through
the deep baptisms I have experienced, in sympathy with the precious depressed
seed, borne down and pressed by the sins of mankind, as a cart is pressed with
sheaves; the Lord enabling me to be resignedly contented in that state: whether
in suffering or rejoicing, silence or words, he mercifully gave me this support
by the power of his own spirit, and now is so gracious, as to reward my mind
with sweet peace for abiding in that station wherein he alone preserved me. I
was, through unspeakable kindness, when I sat down in a meeting, mostly enabled
to say, "Thy will be done, whether in making use of me as thy instrument to
sound an alarm to the people, or to set them an example of silent waiting upon
thee." What shall I say or return to the Lord of everlasting loving kindness
for preservation, by sea and by land, in many perils; I am at a loss for
expressions to set forth his bountiful goodness, and the greatness of his love
and mercy to those who trust in him. I therefore humbly desire with silent
reverence, or otherwise as ability is afforded, to magnify, worship, and adore
him, who is glorious in holiness, and fearful in praise, working wonders, who
alone is worthy now and evermore! Amen."

We had a strong new ship which had been at sea but one voyage before; she was
very tight in the river and bay, but we had not been a week at sea before she
sprung a leak to that degree, as to require much labor to clear her of water.
This seemed to affect the captain and the passengers pretty much, not knowing
but the leak would increase, and we being but poorly manned, the captain having
been deceived in some whom he had taken in for good hands, proving of little
use, nay, one of them rather a burden. In this gloomy time, through merciful
help, I found a blessed support to my mind, in humble confidence, that he who
is Lord of all (in whose counsel I apprehended I was there) would conduct me
safe to my outward habitation; yet I was sorry for such an addition of work to
the sailors, as we were obliged to keep one hand at least at the pump night and
day all the passage, which was stormy and rough, and very unpleasant to the
body. The captain and passengers were very civil and obliging to me. It was the
19th of the 12th month, before we found ourselves in soundings on the English
coast. After we had sailed a considerable way up the Channel, the wind came
ahead of us, so that we beat about therein for several days, and were once in
great danger of being shipwrecked upon the Island of Alderney. On the 25th of
the 12th month, in the evening, we put into the safe port of Dartmouth. I then
resolved to leave the ship, being about 230 miles from home, where I arrived
the last day of the year, 1766, having been upon this journey one year and a
half, lacking a few days. I understood it was six or seven weeks before the
ship arrived at London, after I left her.

As I have already far exceeded in largeness, what I intended to leave behind
me in the way of Journal, so I must forbear adding much more; yet may just
hint, that in the year 1768, I went to the quarterly-meetings of York, Kendal,
and Lancaster. I had diverse other meetings in the North, and, accompanied by my
worthy friend Samuel Fothergill, had several meetings in North Wales, in
town-halls, where none under our name resided. I passed afterward through a
part of England, into South Wales, and so to Bristol; from thence I returned
home; having passed through, in England and Wales, about twenty-five counties,
and attended sixty-three meetings, and traveled about 1016 miles.

In the 4th month, 1770, I set out, accompanied by my wife, intending to be at
the circular yearly meeting, to be held this year at Ormskirk, in Lancashire.
We were at Manchester meetings on first day, and attended a very large
monthly meeting on the second-day following, at Warrington. Truth and its
testimony was exalted, and had great dominion therein over libertine spirits,
to the joy of the upright in heart. The yearly meeting before mentioned began
the 17th of the same month, and held three days: there was a very convenient
booth erected for the purpose, which, it was thought, would accommodate 2000
people; yet it was not sufficient to contain the numbers who came, so that
other meetings were held out in the open air at the same time. The people in
general behaved with civility and respect; there was considerable openness, and
the meetings were well conducted. We returned from thence homewards, taking
Warrington meeting on first day: the journey was very satisfactory* the whole
being about 488 miles.

In the year 1772, I went, in company with my friends Sarah and Deborah Morris
of Philadelphia, to the yearly meeting at Bristol; it was large and divinely
favored. I attended, this year, four other yearly-meetings, to very good
satisfaction and comfort, viz. London, Colchester, Woodbridge, and Norwich,
accompanied by my wife to the last four, as well as by the two friends
beforementioned, who were in this nation upon a religious visit.

Being now in the sixtieth year of my age, and having labored twelve or
fourteen years, at times, pretty much under an asthmatic complaint, which has
caused riding to be frequently painful to the body, which difficulty age is
likely to increase, I expect therefore, traveling of any considerable journies
will of course cease: and having written so much already, I here intend to lay
down my pen, committing myself, and what is done, to the providence and
blessing of God, in whose power alone it is to grant patience, resignation, and
perseverance, to his poor, helpless servants, and an increase of their gospel
labors: So be it!

FINIS.

