AN EPISTLE TO FRIENDS Concerning the Present and Succeeding TIMES.

Being a Faithful Exhortation and Warning to all Friends, who Profess the
Truth, to beware of the manifold Wiles of the Enemy, and to stand Armed in the
Light of the Lord God of Heaven and Earth, (against his Assaults) that so they
may be ready to Answer the Call and Requirings of the Lord.

Also something signified of the Misery of the Succeeding Times, that all may
be Prepared, and that the Evil Day may not overtake any unawares, but such as
turn away their Ear from Counsel.

By one who is a Traveller in the way of Peace, and has Good will toward all
Men, and more especially to the Household of Faith, STEPHEN CRISP.

Let him that has an Ear, hear what the Spirit says to the Churches. LONDON:
Printed in the Year, 1666. And now Reprinted (being the Sixth Edition) and
Sold by J. Crukshank in Market-Street, Philadelphia. 1780.

An Epistle to Friends, concerning the Present and Succeeding Times.
Dear Friends,
YOU whom the Lord has reached unto in this the Day of his Love, and has made
known the way of Truth and Righteousness unto you, through the raising up of
that Holy living Witness of himself, that long lay hid and buried in you, and
has brought you to a secret feeling of something in you, that is worth the
minding and regarding; and the Lord causing this to Appear in the Day of
yourseeking, as a Light, discovering Darkness, and its Power, by which ye were
formerly holden, and given you by his Spirit a sense and secret Hope, that in
this Light, the way of Deliverance was to be attained unto; this Hope made you
not ashamed of the Light which before you hated, but you came to know and
embrace it, even while others still hated it, and you for its sake; yet your
Hearts being affected with the Hope that did appear therein, could not but join
unto it, as to make public Profession of it for its own sake; and for no other
ends or designs, or interest at all, but with resolution in that Light, to wait
for the Salvation of God. Dear Friends, it is you aforementioned that both now,
and for some Days and Weeks my Heart has been deeply exercised concerning,
even Night and Day; and the aboundings of the Father's Love does often overcome
me, and draws me forth now to say and write these things unto you for your
Admonition and Establishment; and indeed it is you who did thus rightly own the
way of Truth, and knew your Believing to be the Gifts and Mercy of God to your
Souls, that I do aim at; for those that have taken up the Profession of the
Precious Truth upon by-respects and sinister ends, and but for Reasons
propounded in their Carnal Minds; though I do pity them, yet I have not much at
this time to say to them but this, The Day shall declare them, and their
Garments shall not hide them.

But you, Oh my Friends! who had Fellowship with us, in the deep Travels of our
Beginnings, and did come to Truth the same way, and have known the Power and
Virtue of it, many times overcoming you in your Inward man, which has made you
cry out, Lord, evermore give us of this Bread; and has made you as a watered
Garden: Oh Friends! how shall I express or signify unto you those Longings,
those ardent Desires and earnest Breathings of my Soul, that you, even you,
might abide to the end of all Trials and Tribulations, Adversities, and might
inherit that Crown of Immortality that is in Christ Jesus our Lord, and might
not by any means be bereft thereof; this is singly my Travel in body and
Spirit, that you might be kept and preserved out of all the subtle Snares of
the wicked One, which haunts for the Soul, even of those that have Believed;
and therefore in dear and tender Love, I have a few things to write unto you
for the clearing of my Conscience, and discharging my Duty in the sight of the
Lord; and the Lord give you all a tender and an understanding Heart, that both
you and I may yet have cause Daily to Praise the Lord in the glorious Light of
his Salvation, which he has manifested among us by the Revealing his Son Jesus
Christ, to whom belongs Dominion, Honor and Glory for Ever, Amen.

And first, Dear Friends, it is in my Heart to put you in remembrance of that
by which we were called and convinced, which as a Foundation Principle was laid
in and among you, and it being unchangeable and unalterable in it self, does
therefore admit of no alteration or change in those that are rightly kept to it.

It was a Light which arose in our Hearts, and shined forth from God, the
Father of Lights, carrying in its Appearance the Nature and Property of God,
both in its Condemning Evil, which the Enemy had Sown or Planted in us; and
owning, allowing, and justifying every thing that was good and honest, just and
equal; even those Thoughts in our Hearts which were of turning toward the
Lord, and seeking his Righteousness; these Thoughts were justified and
encouraged by the Light, and all the contrary discovered and judged, as they
were brought to it to be tried. Now this Light did our Souls Rejoice in, as
they had good cause. though it took away our former Rejoycings; our Pleasures in
Vanities and Iniquity died, our Glory in this World withered, our Friendship
with the Sons of Men decayed, and we stood in the Light and saw all these
things, and were not sorry at it, but waited daily to see these things more and
more brought to pass; neither was there a permitting our Thoughts to go out,
how we might prevent those Damages, or repair these Losses, but the Cross of
Christ was indeed our Glorying or Rejoicing; and the Hope that was before us,
did make us despise the Pleasures, Treasures and Honors, Friendship and
Delights of this World; and in those Days you grew into a feeling of the
Heavenly Joy, where the Hundredfold was witnessed in your Bosoms, and the Zeal
of the Lord was kindled by his own Spirit in you, against whatsoever this Light
of Jesus in the Conscience did witness against; and the Lord beheld your
Integrity, and Blessed you, and Multiplied you, and added to your Strength and
Stature, and then did the Fruits of this Glorious Work abound among you, in
three more general and special Effects; by which effects, or by their
continuance among you, let all now come to search and try themselves, that so,
Dear Friends, those that have continued Faithful in them all, may persevere in
like manner to the End: And those, who upon true search do find, that they have
failed, and fallen short in all or any of them, may make haste to Repent, and
to turn to that which was the Root of them all, that they may not be found as
Fruitless and Withered Branches in the Day that comes, lest they be cut off,
and utterly Consumed, and blotted out from among the Living Branches of the
Vine; for a Day comes that Truth will look into the Fig Tree for Fruit, and
Leaves will not defend it from the Curse and Blasting.

The three especial Fruits that did spring forth from this Blessed Root, and
were and are to continue and increase in us and among us to the end, are these.

1. Purity, manifested in a Godly Conversation.

2. Unity, manifested in dear and tender Love one toward another.

3. Faithfulness, manifested in bearing a constant and faithful Testimony to
the thing we had received and believed, though it were unto great Loss and
Sufferings.

And against all these does the wicked one Appear, to see if he can make you
Barren concerning them, and that with diverse Wiles and Subtilties, that he may
prevail on you, and not be known to be the Enemy, but might so overcome you, as
that you might both submit to him, and then plead for him and his Snares and
Wiles, as being Just, Right, Lawful, Prudent, Convenient, etc. But, Oh Dear
Friends! let all be watchful and diligent to wait in the sense and true feeling
of that Seed that never fell nor was beguiled; and you will (even the least of
you) see and comprehend his Workings and Transformings, and be delivered from
them.

1. Purity and Holiness was a Fruit in you, which does yet flourish in many
(blessed be the Lord) who are as watchful and careful to approve themselves in
obedience to the Light of Truth in their Inward Parts, as ever, and find as
great a necessity both of trying and judging with its Judgment as ever; these
having thus waited, have renewed their Strength unto this very Day, and do
mount up as upon the wings of an Eagle; these are neither Weary in Running, nor
Faint they in their Walking; But alas! Friends, even these do know with how
great and manifold Assaults they have been Assaulted, and know and see with
Sorrow of Heart, how the Assault has prevailed upon some, by working into the
Mind a secret Liberty, and supposed Enlargedness, whereby a Carelessness has
entered some, and they have no Keeper, but the Measure of Light revealed in
their Hearts and Consciences, so soon as they came to be persuaded to slight
the Reproofs of that, they soon erred; and this supposed Liberty entered, That
now, after so many Years Strictness and Circumspection, they should not need
now to stand so straightly to try Things and Words as at First, because now a Day
of more Liberty was come; and this Liberty secretly prevailed against that pure
fear that once was placed in their Hearts, and against the very obedience of
Truth, Inwardly in the subjection of the Mind, and then it became manifest
Outwardly; the Actions sometimes Blameworthy, the Words and Speech again
Corrupted, and run into the old Channel of the World, like them again, and the
Single Pure Language, learned in the Light, in the time of their Poverty and
Simplicity, almost lost and forgotten, and so the work of God which he wrought,
in a manner laid waste; and then, when this Liberty is entered, and made use
of, as aforesaid, oftentimes a secret subtilty arises against the judgment of
Truth, either from within, or from any outwardly, that are grieved with this
loose and careless kind of Speaking or Acting, which subtilty leads to contend
for it against the Judgment, telling the Creature, Why these things are but
small things, and little things, and what, we must not strain at a Gnat, and
such like. Oh my Friends! beware of these evil Suggestions of the wicked one:
How came they to be small and little things, seeing they were great things with
us in the beginning? And how comes an offense in this Nature to be light now,
seeing it was heavy in the beginning? Oh let not the greatest Mercies of our
God so fill us, as to make us flight or forget the least obedience, but rather
let the continuance of his Mercy the more quicken you up unto a Zeal for his
Name and Truth in all things, to be found doing and speaking according to the
Rule of Righteousness, which ye learned in the Light, in the Day of your being
low and little, and then nothing will rise up and be exalted in the Multitude
of God's Mercies, but that Holy Birth which lives in Purity when it is at
highest; and so that Life of Righteousness will shine forth more and more,
which Glorifies God and seeks his Honor. Dear Friends, that ye might be kept
so unto the end, is the Breathing and Travel of my Soul: And that where this
Neglect has entered, and this aforesaid Corruption either in Speech or Action
is to be found, that ye would receive the Word of Exhortation in Meekness and
Fear, in which it was written unto you, and may redeem the time, for the Days
are and shall be Evil, and none will hold the Mystery of the Faith (that saves
from falling in the Evil Day) but such as do keep the Pure and Undefiled
Conscience, which none can do but by persisting and continuing in the Daily
Sanctification of the Spirit, and Belief and Obedience of the Truth.

A second Fruit that was brought forth from this good Root, was Unity and Love
one toward another; which Blessed be the Lord, is preciously preserved in and
among many to this very Day; who are so sensible of the diverse operations of
Truth in them, to be all by one Spirit, that they are still kept of one Heart
and Mind, given up freely to serve the Lord in singleness of Heart in their
Generation; and are in this good work as Strengthners and Encouragers of one
another; but notwithstanding the Enemy has been exceeding busy to lay waste
and destroy this blessed effect also, and that under diverse Pretenses, which
the Lord still discovered by his own Light and Spirit in his People, who have
singly waited upon him; but many have been his Wiles, sometimes fitting and
preparing Vessels to rise up in the Fleshly and Sensual Wisdom, and to Traduce
and bring in Corrupt and Evil Doctrines, to try who were not sound in the
Faith, that they may draw them aside, into a Heat and Zeal for something which
had not its Root in the Truth, and which they that abode in the Truth could not
own, but Judge and Condemn in the Name of the Lord; which when such saw, they
took thereat occasion of striving to Propagate and Promote that which they saw
withstood; so having lost Subjection to the Spirit of Truth in themselves,
which would have kept them in Unity in the Body; and having also lost and laid
by their subjection to them that were over them in the Lord, they then grew
Stubborn and Wilful, and proceeded in more Zeal for that which stood in
Opposition to the Truth, than ever they did for the Truth it self; and these
sometimes have prevailed to the Subverting whole Households, and have turned
several from the Faith and Simplicity that is in the Gospel, who, as well as
those that Subverted them, have lost the Fellowship of the Saints, and the
Savor of Life, either in themselves or others, and then the Enemy persuaded
them, all are Dead to the Life but themselves; and so they grow to have a
tickling Joy in what they do and say, in obedience to that perverse and
singular private Spirit, and so grow up to speak Evil of Dignities, and are
unruly, and dare to speak against Heaven, and them that Dwell and Inhabit in
it, whom God makes to shine as Stars in the Firmament of his Power; but alas
for them! my Soul Pities them, when I see how they sport themselves with their
own Deceivings; but the Day of the Lord is among his People, which has and
does make them and their Spirit manifest, and their Fruits also have made them
manifest.

Another Way that the Enemy seeks to break the Unity, and dissolve the Bond of
Amity, is, by Sowing a Seed of Jealousy and Prejudice in the Hearts of such in
whom he can get an Entrance; that so they may cease from the true and unfeigned
Love, and that upon a pretended Reason, because of this or that, which is
supposed or imagined, in the Evil Parts in themselves, against others; giving
heed to Evil Thoughts or Surmises, which break forth many times in Whisperings
and Tale-bearing; which though the thing supposed to be Evil, were really so; yet
this is not to be allowed or given way to among you, but to use plainness one
toward another, and single-heartedness; and to shut out the Evil One in this
his subtle Appearance also. Oh Dear Friends! Remember how the Lord has dealt
with you, and deal you so one by another; he has not sought Occasions against
you, but has long born and suffered, and exercised much Patience and
Tenderness toward you; yet plainly Reproving the Evil in you, and not
Treasuring it up against you. On Friends! be like-minded one toward another,
that the Enemy of your Peace and Concord may be defeated, and you preserved
entire to one Head, even to Christ Jesus; and ye may be one, and the Name of
the Lord may be one among you; and that which tends to the making cold your
Love, may be Judged in all; and so Brotherly Love will continue with you to the
End.

Another way which the Enemy works to scatter, and to bring from this Unity,
is, by leading some, who have Believed, into some Sin and Iniquity, which the
Body (that are in the Truth) are constrained to appear in Judgment against for
the Truth's sake; and yet notwithstanding the Party so Sinning, being above the
witness in themselves, which would bring them to own the Judgment of the Spirit
of Christ in his Church, they exalt themselves above the Judgment and seek to
gain to them such whom they can enter by their Words and Complaints, to take
part with them against the Judgment, and those that passed it. Such were those
whose Words did Eat (the Apostle said) as a Canker, of whom the Believers in
those Days were to be aware; for commonly such as have gone from the Power,
that should have kept them Clean and Upright, they will also turn against the
Power in those that abide in it, especially if they be drawn forth to Reprove
and Rebuke them: But let all such know, that is not the way to be Renewed; and
let all that take part with any that work Iniquity, know, that they do but
defile their own Souls thereby, and do but rend themselves from that Body which
they cannot Prosper out of. And therefore, Dear Friends, beware of joining with
that, in your selves or in others, which the Power goes against, let the
Pretenses be what they will; for that which does Evil, will always be aptest to
sow Evil Complainings of others; and such as are in the unsatisfied Murmuring
against Judgment passed upon them, are much to be feared; for they thereby
render themselves to be the more Guilty, and yet the further from Repentance.
But, Dear Friends, watch unto that which gives you a living feeling of the
living Body, which is the Church, that in all things you may demean your selves
as true Members of it, serving one another in Love, and submitting your selves
one unto another for the Lord's sake: That in all Plainness and Singleness, as
becomes the Truth, you may seek to preserve the Unity which the Enemy of Truth
and Peace does Envy; so shall ye continue to strengthen one another hand in
every good Work, and this shall tend to the weakening of the Hands of your
Enemies, who seek to divide you, that they might Rule over you. Many other
Designs does the wicked one try, daily to break and divide, more than can now
be named or here inserted; but they are all out of the Light, and if you be in
it, you will see them, and that will preserve you; for it is one, and did make
us one, and will keep us to be of one Heart and Mind to the End, if we abide in
it.

3. The Third good Effect which Truth did work in the beginning, in them who
did truly receive it, was Zeal and Faithfulness to God, in bearing the
Testamony to what was manifest, though through great Sufferings; in which, as
Friends abide in the Root, they do daily increase in Power, to fulfill the same
Testimony: for the Mercy of the Lord does engage them, and his Answer of Peace
in the midst of their Trials, does Arm them, and Encourage them, and they do
hold out to the end; and for such the Lord has always made a way, better than
they could have made for themselves. Yet the Enemy has in this matter also
been very busy, and has prevailed with some under diverse Considerations, or
rather Consultations, which he has propounded unto them. But, Oh Friends, be
ye all watchful, and take heed lest any of the Testamonies of Truth be laid
waste; for that which leads to be weary of bearing Witness to the Truth, and to
lay it waste, the same will lay thee waste, and bring thee into such a State,
as thou will want the Truth to bear witness for thee; and though it be hard for
Flesh and Blood (which has no Kingdom but here) to fall into the hands of
Unreasonable Men, yet it is a more fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
Living God; and therefore, let all Lukewarm ones, who are neither Hot nor Cold,
be now awakened, and all that have gone Backwards be Warned to return to their
First-Love, else the Lord will come against them, and the Day hastens that will
divide such their Portion among Hypocrites, except they Repent.

But to touch at some of the Reasons or Arguments, which he that abode not in
the Truth himself, uses to draw others into this kind of Treacherous
Backsliding

First, He Appears to some to Persuade them, That their former Testimony was
born more from an imitation of others, than from a work of the Power of God in
themselves; and that now, they not finding the Thing required of them, they may
leave off their Testimonies, or may do such things as they have denied
formerly; this Snare does the Enemy make use of in these Days. But mark who it
is that he has caught with it; none but such who sometimes were low in their
Minds, and dare not grieve the Spirit of God in themselves, nor others, but for
the Truth's sake could give up all things, rather than their Testimony; but in
time growing Careless and Loose in Waiting, lost that subject State, and grew
High and Exalted in their Minds above the Cross that should have Crucified the
betraying Wisdom; and so having lost the true Exercise of the Power, and the
feeling of the Excellency and Worth of the Truth, they knew not the Requirings
of the Lord; and the Earthly Mind got up, that placed a greater Esteem upon
Earthly Things, than upon Things that are Eternal; and so Things that once thou
offeredst up to God, thou take again into thine own Hand, and so Robbest the
Lord, and growest Careful about Outward Things, as other Gentiles are; and to
cover thy Shame therein, the Enemy then Tempts thee to belly the Power that once
wrought in thy Heart, and made thee afraid to Act against this Light, or to
deny the Testimony of God in such things as was manifest, and then say, thou
did it by imitation; but thou shall know thy Covering is too Narrow in the
Day that hastes upon thee.

Another Temptation that the Enemy presents, is, That though thou art Convinced
what to do, or what thou should deny, yet the Trials are so hard and so
many, and Persecutors wax worse and worse, so that thou shall not hold out to
the End; and where he can get Entrance with this Bait, he presently causes an
Evil Heart of Unbelief and Doubting to arise, which takes away even the
Strength which the Lord did give, and so Feebleness does enter the Mind, and a
Spirit of Bondageleads thee to Fear again; and then comes the Dispute in thy
Heart, whether thou shall Stand with the Power of God, in the Obedience, or
whether thou shall Fall under that Power that arises against God, and his
Truth and People? And in this Combat thou have a Subtle Enemy, using many
Devices to Betray thee, and a part in thy self, not yet Mortified, that is
ready to say, Pity thy Self, Pity thy Wife, Pity thy Children, and Pity thy
Relations; which it may be sometimes, are all as so many Instruments of Satan
to Seduce thee, and lead thee into Darkness, that thou may not see so great
necessity in thy bearing up thy Testimony as indeed there is, nor so great a
Danger in the contrary as indeed there is.

Oh Friends! at such a time as this, where is there any help but in the Lord?
Where can thou find a Savior, but in that Light which gives to distinguish
of the several Voices? Now it is good for thee to Remember, that If thou
walk after the Flesh, thou must and shall surely Die and Wither. In such a
time Flee, Flee to the Lord, wait in his Dread to feel thy Strength but Renewed
at the Present, and take no care for Strength next Month, next Year, or next
Trial, for God is God, and changes not, and will be the same to thee in
Seven-Tryals as in Six, if thou Believe and Wait on him-in uprightness; and
therefore fear not Man, but trust in the Lord, all ye that have known and felt
his Power, and let not in the Enemy of your Souls by the Door of Carnal
Reasoning, but keep that shut; and rather consider, how the Enemy makes thee as
a rejoicing among his own Children, and Strengthens that Hope in them, of their
overcomeing all others, as well as thee; which Hope is Cursed, and shall be
Confounded: And consider, that if thou let Fall thy Testimony, which thou
have once born for the Lord, thou make the Heart of the Righteous sad, and
make their Travail through that Testimony the harder for them, by reason of
thy Encouraging their Adversaries by the Hope aforesaid. And whatever thou
do. They must go through to the End, who will Inherit the Crown of
Immortality. And again consider. It may be that thy Backsliding, or Cowardly
drawing away the Shoulder, may prove a Discouragement to others, and they may
Stumble in thy Stumbling, and Fall with thee, and never be able to Rise, and so
thou bring their Blood also upon thee. Oh! Remember also that Servant of the
Lord, who could say, Psalm cxix. 157. My Persecutors are increased, but my
Heart does not Decline thy Testimonies. That was a noble Spirit becoming the
Soldiers of Christ; yea, though Persecuted by Princes, as he says, Verse 161.

Dear Friends, Let your Minds be stirred up to be Zealous for the Lord, in this
the great Day of Controversy with Darkness and its Power. Who has God to bear
Witness to his Name but you? Among whom has he made it known as among you? Who
have given up themselves to the Lord as you have done? Well, Blessed are they
that keep Covenant with the Lord, for they shall see his Glory.

One more subtle Snare of the Enemy in this matter is in my Heart to mention,
that is this, viz. To Persuade thee for once, sometimes to do that which the
Light has made Manifest, with a purpose afterward to be more Faithful. Oh
Friends! In the Name and Fear of the Lord, I Exhort and Warn you all to take
heed of this, for this will prove but a false Confidence, thou will find this
kind of going out of the Guidance of Truth, to be a dear Out-going to thee; for
if ever thou do return, it will be very hardly, and with bitter Anguish of
Soul. Oh! do not Tempt the Lord on this wise, lest it do prove impossible upon
thy Sinning willingly to Renew or Restore thee again by Repentance; thou will
have thy Po^tage, but wilt lose the Blessing, though thou may seek it with thy
Tears; for while thou wentest out, behold, thy Way became Hedged up, and the
Thorny Nature got up in thee, and so thou art Debarred and Fenced out from
Enjoying thy former State; Sin being entered, Death soon follows. Oh! Remember
Sampson, who when he had disclosed the token of a Nazarite, in which state he
stood in Covenant with God; yet thought to have shaken himself, and to have
gone forth in his Srength, as at other times, but was mistaken, Judges xvi. 20.
For the Lord was departed from him, though he knew it not. And so, though thou
have known the Lord's Presence and Power in thy Vessel, yet take heed of
letting in that Treacherous Spirit, to lead thee to Unfaithfulness, and to
betray the ^east of his Trust and Testimonies committed to thee, though it be but
for once; for thereby thou will render thy self unworthy to be found a Witness
of his Power another time; for the Lord will leave that Vessel, and often does,
and chooses other Vessels to manifest himself in, that will be more True and
Faithful.

So, Dear Friends, in true and tender Love I have laid these things before you,
that ye might all be stirred up and provoked to Love, and to good Works, that
ye might abound in the Grace committed to you; and none of you who have known
the Truth, might be entangled with the Wiles of your subtle Enemy, and that you
that have begun well, might not lose the things that ye have wrought, but might
persevere in Well-doing till ye have finished your Course in Peace. And
Friends, this is the Joy and Delight of those that Labor among you in the
Lord, and hereby is our Hand Strengthened, and our Hearts Refreshed, when we do
find ye such as we desire ye should be, even steadfast in the Truth; and then
also do you find us to you-ward, such as ye desire we should be, even a
Refreshing in the Fellowship of Life unto you, and our God Comforts us
together, in the mutual Joy and Comfort of his Holy Spirit, working in us, and
you.

And Friends, I am the more drawn forth at this time to visit you with an
Epistle, because the Lord has given me some sight of his great and dreadful
Day, and Workings in it, which is at hand, and greatly hastens, of which I have
something to say unto you, that ye may be prepared to stand in his Day, and may
behold his wondrous Working among his Enemies, and have Fellowship with his
Power therein, and may not be dismayed nor driven away in the Tempest, which
will be great.

And as concerning those succeeding Times, the Spirit, of the Lord has
signified, that they will be Times of Horror and Amazement, to all that have,
and yet do reject his Counsel: For as the Days of his Forbearance, Warning and
Inviting, has been long, so shall his Appearance amongst those that have
withstood him, be Fierce and Terrible; even so Terrible, as who shall abide his
Coming? For the Lord will Work both Secretly and Openly, and his Arm shall be
manifest to his Children in both.

Secretly he shall raise up a continual Fretting Anguish amongst his Enemies,
one against another, so that being Vexed and Tormented Inwardly, they shall
seek to make each other Miserable, and delight therein for a little Season; and
then the Prevailer must be Prevailed over, and the Digger of the Pit must Fall
therein; and the Confidence that Men have had one in another shall Fail, and
they will Beguile and Betray one another, both by Counsel and Strength; and as
they have banded themselves to break you, whom God has Gathered, so shall they
band themselves one against another, to Break, to Spoil and Destroy one
another; and through the Multitude of their Treacheries, all Credit or Belief,
upon the account of their solemn Engagement, shall Fail; so that few Men shall
count themselves, or what is their's, safe in the Hand of his Friend, who has
not chosen his Safety and Friendship in the pure Light of the unchangeable
Truth of God; and all the secret Counsels of the Ungodly shall be brought to
naught, sometimes by the means of some of themselves, and sometimes by
Impossibilities lying in their Way, which shall make their Hearts fail of ever
accomplishing what they have determined; and in this State shall Men fret
themselves for a Season, and shall not be able to see the Hand that turns
against them, but shall turn to Fight against one thing, and another, and a
third thing, and shall Stagger, and Reel in Counsel and Judgment, as Drunken
Men that know not where to find the way to Rest; and when they do yet stir
themselves up against the Holy People, and against the Holy Covenant of Light,
and them that walk in it, they shall but the more be Confounded; for they shall
be helped with a little help, which all the Ungodly shall not hinder them of,
to wit, the secret Arm of the Lord, Isa. 8.
maintaining their Cause, and Raising up a Witness in the very Hearts of their
Adversaries to plead their Innocence, and this shall make them yet the more to
vex themselves, and to go thorough hard-bestead; for when they shall look
upward to their Religion, to their Power, Policy, or Preferments, or
Friendships, or whatsoever else they had trusted in, and relied upon, they
shall have cause to Curse it; and when they look downwards to the Effects
produced by all those things, behold, then Trouble, and Horror, and Vexation
takes hold on them, and drives them to Darkness; and having no help but what is
Earthly, and being out of the knowledge of the mighty overturning Power of the
Lord God Almighty, they shall Despair and wear out their Days with Anguish; and
besides all this, the terrible Hand of the Lord is, and shall be openly
manifested against this Ungodly Generation, by bringing grievous and terrible
Judgments and Plagues upon them, tumbling down all things in which their Pride
and Glory stood, and overturning, overturning, even the Foundations of their
Strength; yea, the Lord will lay waste the Mountain of the Ungodly, and the
Strength of the Fenced City shall Fail, and when Men shall say, We will take
Refuge in them, Nabum iii. 12, 13. they shall become but a Snare, and there
shall the Sword Devour: And when they shall say, We will go into the Field, and
put trust in the Number and Courage of our Soldiers, they shall both be taken
away; and this Evil also will come of the Lord, and his Hand will be Stretched
out still, and shall bring Confusion, Ruin upon Ruin, and War upon War; and the
Hearts of Men shall be stirred in them, and the Nations shall be as Waters,
into which a Tempest, a swift Whirlwind is entered, and even as Waves swell up
to the dissolution one of another, and breaking one of another, so shall the
swellings of People be: And because of the Hardship and Sorrow of those Days,
many shall seek and desire Death rather than Life.

Ah! My Heart relents, and is moved within me in the sense of these things, and
much more than I can Write or Declare, which the Lord will do in the Earth, and
will also make haste to accomplish among the Sons of Men, that they may know
and confess, That the Most High does Rule in the Kingdoms of Men, and pulls
down and sets up according to his own Will: And this shall Men do before
seven times pass over them, and shall be content to give their Glory unto him
that sits in Heaven.

But, Oh Friends! while all these things are working, and bringing to pass,
repose ye your selves in the Munition of that Rock that all these shakings
shall not move, even in the knowledge and feeling of the Eternal Power of God,
keeping you subjectly given up to his Heavenly Will, and feel it Daily to Kill
and Mortify that which remains in any of you, which is of this World; for the
Worldly part in any, is the changeable part, and that is up and down, full and
empty, joyful and Sorrowful, as things go well or ill in the World: For as the
Truth is but one, and many are made partakers of its Spirit; so the World is
but one, and many are partakers of the Spirit of it; and so many as do partake
of it, so many will be straightened and perplexed with it; but they who are single
to the Truth, waiting Daily to feel the Life and Virtue of it in their Hearts,
these shall rejoice in the midst of Adversity; these shall not have their
Hearts moved with Fear, nor tossed with Anguish because of Evil Tidings, Psalm
cxii. 7, 8. Because that which fixes them remains with them: These shall know
their entrance with the Bridegroom, and so be kept from Sorrow, though his coming
be with a noise; and when a midnight is come upon Man's Glory, yet they being
ready and prepared, it will be well with them, and having a true sense of the
Power working in themselves, they cannot but have Unity and Fellowship of it in
the Earth, and will not at all Murmur against what is, nor wish nor will what
is not to be; these will be at rest till the Indignation passes over, and
these having no Design to carry on, nor no Party to promote in the Earth,
cannot possibly be defeated nor disappointed in their undertakings.

And when you see Divisions, and Parties, and Rendings in the Bowels of
Nations, and Rumors and Tempests in the Minds of People, then take heed of
being moved to this Party or to that Party, or giving your Strength to this or
that, or councelling this way or that way; but stand single to the Truth of
God, in which neither War, Rent nor Division is; and take heed of that part in
any of you, which trusts and relies upon any sort of the Men of this World, in
the Day of their Prosperity; for the same Party will bring you to suffer with
them in the time of their Adversity, which will not be long after; for
stability in that Ground there will be none; But when they shall say, Come join
with us in this or that, remember you are joined to the Lord by his pure
Spirit, to walk with him in Peace and in Righttousness, and you feeling this,
this gathers out of all Buslings, and Noises, and Parties, and Tumults, and
leads you to exalt the Standard of Truth and Righteousness, in an Innocent
Conversation, to see who will flow unto that; and this shall be a Refuge for
many of the Weary, Tossed and Afflicted ones in those Days, and a Shelter for
many whose Day is not yet over.

So dearly Beloved Friends and Brethren, who have believed and known the
blessed Appearance of the Truth, let not your Hearts be troubled at none of
these things: Oh! let not the things that are at present, nor things that are
yet to come, move you from Stedfastness, but rather Double your Diligence, Zeal
and Faithfulness to the Cause of God: For they that know the Work wrought in
themselves, they shall Rest in the Day, of Trouble, Yea, though the Fig Tree
fail, Hab. iii. 16, 17.
and the Vine brings not forth, and the Labor of the Olive Tree cease, and
the Fields yield no Meat, and the Sheep be cut off from the Fold, and there be
no Bullocks in the Stall, yet then may thou Rejoice in the Lord, and Sing
Praises to the God of thy Salvation.

A POSTSCRIPT.
Dear Friends and Brethren,
I Have something farther in my Heart to communicate unto you, in dear and
tender Love, and in desire of your Preservation out of the Snare of your
Adversary; and that is. To Exhort you all to dwell in the pure Judgment of the
Truth, which is a Defense upon your Glory; and let none bereave you of this,
under any pretense whatsoever; but as you come to a true feeling of the Life in
your selves, to which alone the certain Judgment appertains, so let this Life
have freedom, and stop it not from the Judging all that which is at Enmity with
the Life, and tends to the hurting of the true Plant of God; for I have seen a
Harm has come to many who have parted with their Judgment, and so have become
Unarmed, and the Enemy has prevailed upon them, (under a pretended Tenderness)
to permit or suffer such things as were hurtful to themselves and others; and
though the Lord has given them Judgment and discerning in the Matter, yet were
bereaved of that Gift, and so by little and little became Beguiled.

Oh dear Friends! Consider these Days are Perilous Times, and it is needful for
every one, to watch in that same Eternal Light to which you were first turned,
that by his Righteous Judgment ye may be Perserved from every thing in your
selves that appears contrary to that precious Life of which you have tasted:
And when you have so done, then to take heed, that the Enemy do not do that by
an Instrument which (through your watchfulness in the Light) he could not do
without; and all beware of that affected Tenderness that cries out, Be tender
to all, and Pray for all, and mind the Good in all, and Love all, and Judge
none, but leave Judgment to God, etc. I say, Heed not the plausible words of
that Spirit which being Guilty, to save its own Head from a Stroke, would
bereave you of you* Judgment, which God has given you; and is in (...) truly
his Judgment, and is to be Administered in his Wisdom and Power, for the
cleansing and keeping clean his Sanctuary; for such as have no Judgment in
their goings, are they that know not the true way of Peace, but make them
crooked Paths, He that goes in them shall not know Peace, Isai. lix. 8.

But some may say, Was not Christ Meek and Lowly? and ought not all to be like
unto him?

It Is true, my Friends; but there is a difference between the Seed's Suffering,
and its Reigning, and there are times for them both: And when it does please
God to permit the Hour and Power of Darkness in the open Persecutors, to exalt
it self against his Seed and People, by Persecution and such like; they are led
by his Spirit to appear in Meekness and Quietness, as a Sheep before the
Shearer. But what is this to suffering Bad and Perverse Spirits, that appear
under Pretense of the Truth, and yet are out of the Truth, and Enemies to its
Prosperity, striving to exalt and set up another thing instead of the Truth?
Such as these the Lord does not require you to use only Patience and Meekness
toward; but if that will not Reclaim them, they must know the Judgment of the
Truth, and you in it must stand over them; for in this case the Day of the
Exaltation of Christ is come, and God is crowning Truth with Dominion over
every False Spirits and Corrupt Practice thereof.

And therefore, dear Friends, Eye the Lord in his goings forth, and as you feel
his Life in you to witness against any Evil and Corrupt Thing or Practice, use
Plainness, and keep Sincerity, and turn not Judgment backwards; for that which
is unwilling to be Judged, and cries out, Judge none, leave all to God, etc.
The same will take upon it both to Judge and Rule, but not in the Wisdom of
God; and those that cry out so much for Tenderness, and against Truth's
Judgment, the same are most dangerous to be drawn out from the Patient
Suffering in the Spirit of Christ Jesus, when they ought to appear in the most
Meekness, and to appear Rough and Wrathful in the Striving and Fighting Nature,
and are most apt to be tempted into a Spirit of Revenge, as has been seen by
sad Experience, for they that lose the Exercise of that by which all should
keep Dominion over Deceit, they lose that Strength by which they should be
enabled to suffer all things for the sake of Christ Jesus.

So, Dear Friends, in that which keeps out the Desiler and the Betrayer, all
wait upon the Lord, that you may have your Armor on, and be Fortified with the
Strength, with the Might, and with the Judgments of God, and keep that under in
every place, which under Pretense of Tenderness and Forbearance would make Void
the Testimony of Truth, or make the Offense of the Cross to cease in any thing
wherein you have been Instructed from the Beginning, that the Lord may behold
and see Judgment Established, and be Pleased, Isaiah lix. The Lord tooked, and
there was no Judgmont, and it displeased him; for thereby Deceit got up, with
which it is to be kept down.

So the Lord God of Power and Wisdom preserve you Faithful, and fitted for
every good Word and Work; the Strong to watch over the Weak in Singleness; and
the Weak to be subject to the Strong in the Lord, that so the pure Plant of
Righteousness and Truth may grow in and among you all, to his Praise that has
called you; To whom be Glory and Honor for ever, Amen.

S. C.


