A CONCISE REFUTATION OF THE CLAIMS OF New Hampshire and Massachusetts Bay, TO
THE TERRITORY OF VERMONT; WITH Occasional REMARKS on the long disputed Claim of
NEW YORK to the same.

WRITTEN BY Ethan Allen and Jonas Fay, Esq'rs.

And published by Order of the GOVERNOR and COUNCIL of VERMONT. BENNINGTON, the
first Day of January, 1780. JOSEPH FAY, Sec'ry.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN.

A Concise Refutation, etc.
THIS government, Astonished at the late extraordinary claims of New Hampshire
and Massachusetts Bay to the territory of Vermont, and the following remarks
having been omitted in any piece heretofore published on the subject, find
themselves under the disagreeable necessity of publicly exposing the
imbecility, and depravity of those governments, whose candor, on the very
first attempt, should have suggested to them, that in prosecuting such claims,
they would unavoidably become accomplices with the government of New York, in
their many aggravated and long continued oppressions of the people of this
State. This government sensible of the devices of certain leading gentlemen of
the government of New York against them, and being apprised that they had
sometime since proposed to certain leading gentlemen in the States of
New Hampshire and Massachusetts Bay, to divide this State among the three
States aforesaid, which are now actually claiming it severally, and sensible
likewise of our danger from the frontier situation to the Province of Quebec,
and of the influence which the government of New York (especially if
corrobarated by those of New Hampshire and Massachusetts Bay) might have in the
Congress of the United States, in which we have not been represented. These
apprehensions excited this government to remonstrate at the General Courts of
New Hampshire and Massachusetts Bay, against their making and prosecuting such
claims, which, in their nature and tendency, are cruel, unjustifiable and
without any reasonable foundation for their support: -- And having received
several acts of Congress of the 24th of September last, among which is
contained a recommendation to the several States of New Hampshire,
Massachusetts Bay and New York, to pass laws expressly authorizing the Grand
Council of America to hear and determine the differences which have subsisted
between them, on one part, and the inhabitants of a district of country called
the New Hampshire Grants (as they are pleased to term them) on the other, on
the first day of February next; and a citation (only) to the inhabitants of the
latter to choose Agents and otherwise prepare for the hearing aforesaid; have
therefore thought it expedient to exhibit to the world, and to the honorable
Congress, as a very respectable part of it, the apparent impropriety of those
claims.

AND firstly, we shall consider the pretension; of Massachusetts Bay. It is
admitted that previous to the adjudication of the boundary line in 1739,
between New Hampshire and Massachusetts Bay, the latter had claimed a
considerable part of the present jurisdiction of New Hampshire, from the
atlantic ocean on the east part, (which claim did equally interfere with the
territory now in dispute) and in longitude through the main land to the south
sea, on the west part, as described in the charter of the Colony of
Massachusetts Bay. This antiquated claim of Massachusetts Bay was refered to
the King and Council, by an appeal from a Court of Commissioners previously
authorized by the same authority to determine, and mark out the boundaries
between the said two Provinces; as may appear from the following extract of the
settlement of that line, viz.

AND whereas appeals from the determination of the said Commissioners, have
been said before his Majesty, by the Agents for the respective Provinces of the
Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire; which said appeals have been heard before
the Committee of Council for hearing appeals, from the plantations, who, after
having considered the whole matter, and heard all parties concerned therein,
did report unto his Majesty as their opinion, that the northern boundary of the
said Province of Massachusetts Bay are, and be, a similar curve line, pursuing
the course of Merimack River at three miles distance on the north side thereof,
beginning at the Atlantic ocean, and ending at a point due north of a place (in
a plan returned by said Commissioners) called Pantucket Falls; and a straight
line drawn from thence due west cross the said river till it meets with his
Majesty's other governments; which said report of the Committee of Council, his
Majesty has been pleased with the advice of his Privy Council to approve, and
to declare, adjudge and order, that the northern boundary of the said Province
of the Massachusetts Bay are and be a similar curve line, pursuing the course
of Merimack River at three miles distance, on the north side thereof, beginning
at the atlantic ocean, and ending at a point due north of a place in the plan
returned by the said Commissioners called Pantucket-Falls; and a strait line
drawn from thence due west cross the said river, till it meets his Majesty's
other governments. This adjudication was made in 1739, which was forty years
ago, and the government of the Massachusetts Bay have regulated their
jurisdiction accordingly ever since; which is too notorious to be disputed, and
may be further illustrated by a variety of acts of their own, as well as of the
British government; one of them respects Fort-Dummer, which was built by the
Massachusetts Bay Province in 1724, and garrisoned at their expense a number of
years; but upon its being excluded from their jurisdiction by the settlement of
the boundary line aforesaid, the Bay Province represented to the government at
home, that the said district of land claimed as aforesaid, and Fort-Dummer,
having been determired to be the property of New Hampshire, they were no longer
obliged to garrison and maintain it; and praying, that as it was necessary for
the defense of that part of the country, that New Hampshire might be directed
to support it. In consequence of which, an order passed the King and Council in
1744, as follows, viz. That the Governor and Commander in Chief of New
Hampshire should forthwith move the Assembly, in his Majesty's name, to make a
provision for that service; and at the same time informing them, that in case
they refused to comply with so reasonable and necessary a proposal, his Majesty
would find himself under the necessity of restoring that fort, with a proper
district of land contiguous to it, to the province of the Massachusetts Bay,
who cannot (with justice) be required to maintain a fort no longer within their
boundary. In consequence of this requisition New Hampshire did actually
maintain Fort Dummer, and paid a demand of arrears for its previous support, to
Massachusetts Bay; and the receipt thereof remains in the Secretary's office of
New Hampshire to this day.

AFTER these solemn governmental transactions, and actual compliance of
Massachusetts Bay to the said royal adjudication, their pretensions to the
jurisdiction of Vermont appears to be not only impertinent but arbitrary; and
should such a precedent take place, would make an end to all jurisdictional
limitations through the United States, as well as those of Vermont; as in this
case no ancient settlement of boundary lines respecting them could be valid,
and consequently, the greatest confusions and disorders would necessarily
ensue. Furthermore, if there be any thing in those pretensions of
Massachusetts Bay, they equally affect the actual jurisdiction of New Hampshire
to the eastward of Connecticut river, over which eastern part, when
Massachusetts Bay shall exercise their jurisdiction, it will be early enough
for them to do the same over an equal width of the jurisdiction of Vermont.
After all, provided there be any reality in those pretensions, there is a great
deal in them, as they are founded on a charter right, and consequently
challenge the right of soil. This the principal gentlemen of their court gave
our Agent to understand, that they demanded, with jurisdiction; which opens
another scene of expense to the inhabitants (provided their pretended claim
takes place). This will undoubtedly be displeasing to the present occupents,
their lands having been (the greater part of them) already granted by
New Hampshire and New York; but there is no probability of satisfying the many
unwarrantable and avaricious claims of the several contending governments, the
citizens of Vermont, therefore judge it reasonable to reject them.

THIS government have such a sacred regard to the occupency of land within
their jurisdiction, that they would not wish to have the possessors and
occupents disturbed in their possessions: notwithstanding such lands may have
been appropriated by either of the contending governments (New York not
excepted).

WE come now to the consideration of the pretensions of New Hampshire to the
jurisdiction of Vermont, by introducing the settlement of the boundary line
between them and New York, as follows, viz.

At a Court at St. James's, the 20th day of July, 1764;
PRESENT.
The KING'S most Excellent Majesty, Lord Stewart, Earl of Sandwich, Earl of
Halifax, Earl of Powis, Earl of Harcout, Earl of Hillsborough, Mr. Vice
Chancellor, Gilbert Elliot, Esquire James Oswald, Esquire
WHEREAS there was this day read at the Board, a report made by the Right
Honorable the Lords of Committee of Council for Plantation affairs, dated the
17th of this instant, upon considering a representation from the Lords
Commissioners for Trade and Plantations, relative to the disputes that have
some years subsisted between the provinces of New Hampshire and New York,
concerning the boundary line between those provinces. His Majesty taking the
same into consideration, was pleased, with the advice of his Privy Council, to
approve of what is herein proposed, and does accordingly hereby order and
declare, the west bank of the river Connecticut, from where it enters the
province of the Massachusetts Bay, as far north as the forty-fifth degree of
northern latitude, to be the boundary line between the said two provinces of
New Hampshire and New York, whereof the respective Governors and Commanders in
Chief of his Majesty's said provinces of New Hampshire and New York, for the
time being, and all others whom it may concern, are to take notice of his
Majesty's pleasure hereby signified, and govern themselves accordingly.

Wm. BLAIR.

PROBABLY the advocates for the pretensions of the claim of New Hampshire to
this territory, will advert to the 47th and (...) pages of our vindication of
the right of the inhabitants of Vermont, to form into an independent State;
where we show the nullity of the said adjudicated line of 1764, in consequence
of the declaration of independence of the United States, and the annihilation
of the British government in America; asserting, that in consequence of our
arguments alluded to as aforesaid, they open a door for the claim of
New Hampshire to take place, by making void that line, in order to defeat the
claim of New York. The attention of the reader is requested very particularly
to the following observations, viz. The territory of Vermont, until the
people's declaration of independence, was extra-provincial land, and the
governments of New Hampshire and New York claimed the jurisdiction of it by
turns, merely (...) the sovereign will and pleasure of the King, as neither of
these governments were possessed of any charter right, as a body politic, which
they could call their own, or challenge in their own right. Had New Hampshire
been possessed of such a charter-right, their claim would have been more
respectable and permanent, and would have operated against the adjudication of
1764 aforesaid, provided such boundaries had been previously ascertained: But
this disputed territory being in those times crown lands, and without the
limits of any of the (then) colonies or plantations, the King's authority over
it was therefore absolute; and while this power remained in being, the last
royal decree was valid and binding, which was that of 1764 aforesaid, which
extended the jurisdiction of New York over the said territory; at which time
the claim of New Hampshire to the premises became extinct and finished; nor is
it in their power to renew their claim to this government, being wholly
destitute of any charter right thereto, and having lost it by the same
arbitrary power by which alone they acquired it, and therefore ought to be
finally silent about it, as well as on account of their own relinquishing of
such claim, and not affording the inhabitants any protection or jurisdictional
support for a succession of years; but since the declaration of the
independence of this State, have not only relinquished their said claim by
their governmental transactions, explicitly acknowledging the independence of
this State: The proper credentials of this last fact will be exhibited in the
following sheets, with some further illustration: -- Being at present impatient
to observe, that as the claim of New Hampshire to this territory was nullified,
and became extinct, in consequence of the royal decree of 1764 aforesaid, as
before argued; and as the claim of New York to this territory was equally
deficient as that of New Hampshire, to any charter right as a body politic, or
inherent constitutional jurisdiction; the claim of New York therefore only
survived that of New Hampshire from the arbitrary decree of 1764, to the
glorious era of AMERICAN LIBERTY and INDEPENDENCE, which was declared the
fourth day of July 1776, and then expired also, to the inexpressible joy of the
free citizens of Vermont, who, in consequence thereof, reverted to a state of
nature, and have since formed government on the true principles of liberty.

THIS royal arbitrary line in the time of the kingly power was in the nature of
it incompatible with the rights of a free people as they were thereby divested
of the inestimable privilege of choosing their own form of government, and of
electing their chief magistrates; nor were they in such circumstances, in any
condition, to know what form or alteration of government might next take place,
as the King and his creatures were the sole arbitrators of it. In fine, this
people have suffered every indignity and oppression, that prodigal and
lucrative governors, and their swarm of hungry dependants could invent, and
carry into execution; and it is surprising, that any persons that live in these
days of liberty, still entertain any idea that the said boundary line should
operate in favor of the claim of New York. From this short review of the
claims of Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire, they cannot effect the claim of
Vermont to independence; which may be further illustrated by a two fold
argument, viz. provided those adjudicated boundary lines of 1739 and 1764
aforesaid, be deemed authentic and valid, their claims to Vermont must be
considered as nugatory and abortive; but on the other hand, if those
adjudicated lines, be considered as null and void, in this case the claim of
Vermont to the jurisdiction of this territory, would be much better grounded,
than these of Massachusetts Bay or New Hampshire, inasmuch as their government
has for a long time been formed by the authority of the people at large, or
their legal representatives, who under God have a natural and indisputable
right to form their own governments; so that the claims of Massachusetts Bay
and New Hampshire to this territory, are barred either by the aforesaid
adjudication, or in consequence of the legal establishment of the government of
Vermont, nor is it possible for any one, or both of those governments, to set
up a third principle, whereby they can deduce a legal or just claim to any part
of this government; for if their claims are not founded on the lines formerly
ascertained by the British government, or the free consent and mutual
association of the people of this territory, their pretensions are frivolous,
or tyrannical. This two fold argument is not viewed as being absolutely
necessary in order to defeat the claims of those governments to the said
premises; but was introduced by way of supererogation, sufficient it is in
order to vindicate the claim of independence of the State of Vermont, against
those of Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire; that these governments have for a
series of years conformed to those settlements of 1733 and 1764 in their
legislative and executive capacities, and acted uniformly agreeable to those
limitations, till within a few months last past. Sundry years before the
commencement of the present British war with the colonies, the people of this
territory repeatedly solicited both of those governments, at different times,
to extend their governmental protection to them, and prevent the ruin with
which they were threatened by the oppressive iron rod of the government of
New York, but could obtain none. But it appears by their late claims, that they
have since altered their minds, although their motives herein (it is presumed)
are far from being honorable -- for it is a great fundamental and universal
principle in all free governments, that government and protection are
inseperably connected together; so that without protection, or at least an
attempt to extend it when earnestly solicited as aforesaid, government
naturally and necessarily ceases to be; or in other words, such a refusal of
protection implicitly disavows any right of jurisdiction, or forfeits any
supposed right either by neglecting such claim, or refusing such protection:
From whence we may infer, that all pretenders to government, which have not
ultimately the good of the governed in view, and do not afford, or endeavor to
afford protection to those over whom they pretend such claims, should instead
of the respects due to legislatures, courts and the like, be esteemed and
treated as enemies to society and the rights of mankind. Thus it appears from
the great and most universally received maxim in all free governments, that the
citizens of Vermont are and ought to be independent of the three governments
which lay claim to them; and that every of their said pretensions are dating
usurpations and insults on the liberty of an independent, brave and free
people, who have never received any governmental protection or benefit from
either of them; but instead thereof, have every thing to apprehend from their
venality and usurpation.

HAD New York succeeded in their various and insiduous attempts to subjugate
the people of Vermont, the recent claims of those other governments would never
have been mentioned, and the jurisdiction of New York over this territory
would, at this day, have been indisputable; so that Massachusetts Bay and
New Hampshire have taken advantage of the controversy between New York and
Vermont, and even of the bravery of the latter in defending their natural
rights and liberties, as the only possible ground of laying their frivilous
claims. They have furthermore taken the advantage of the bravery of the United
States in general, and Vermont likewise, in bringing about the present
revolution, by which means they dare extend their pretended claims, which it is
presumed they would not have had the hardiness to do under the British
government, over the head of those royal adjudications of 1739 and 1764
aforesaid; and it is worthy a remark, that these claims have been started about
three years since the declaration of the Independence of the United States.
Still the people of Vermont, legally speaking, remained under the British
government (over which Governor Philip Skeene was commissioned chief
magistrate, and next to this government, has the best claim to the jurisdiction
of Vermont,) from the 4th day of July 1776, to the 15th day of January next
following, and then in a solemn manner disavowed the British government, and
rejected the pretensions of Mr. Skeene, and all other pretenders to the
jurisdiction of this territory, and declared themselves a FREE and INDEPENDENT
STATE; and have, as they humbly conceive in their various struggles for
liberty, fairly merited the enjoyment of it. This they consider as the ultimate
reward of their many expenses, labors, toils, battles, victories and hazards,
and for the attainment of which they have cheerfully suffered such an uncommon
series of concommitant evils.

THE following exhibits will set the pretensions of the claim of New Hampshire
in a true light. Not long after the settlement of the jurisdictional line in
1764, between New York and New Hampshire, Governor Benning Wentworth, who then
presided over the latter, issued his proclamation, the principal import of
which is, That whereas it was the King's pleasure that this territory should be
under the jurisdiction of New York -- That New Hampshire paid a ready
obedience; furthermore advertising such persons as held either civil or
military commissions (in this district) under the authority of New Hampshire,
to surcease from any further administration. At the same time directing the
inhabitants to conform to the government of New York. We likewise find the
following extract, in a letter from the governor of New Hampshire to governor
Tryon, of the 19th of October 1771, viz. "That he had invariably recommended"
to those inhabitants, implicit obedience to the law of the province of
New York, and upon all occasions positively disavowed any connections with
those people.

WE nextly exhibit the minutes of the Council of New Hampshire, viz.

PROVINCE of NEW HAMPSHIRE. AT a Council held at Portsmouth, by his
Excellency's summons, on Thursday the 8th day of January, 1772.
PRESENT,
His Excellency John Wentworth, Esquire Governor etc. Theodore Atkinson, Esquire Daniel
Warner, Esquire Peter Levius, Esquire Jonathan Warner, Esquire Daniel Rindge, Esquire Daniel
Pearce Esquire George Jeffery, Esquire Daniel Rogers, Esquire Peter Gilman, Esquire Tho. W.
Waldren, Esquire
HIS Excellency the Governor having laid before the Council for their advice,
two letters from his Excellency Governor Tryon, of New York, dated October
1771, and December 23, 1771, the latter enclosing a proclamation, also a copy
of his Excellency's answer to the first letter. The premises being read, it is
considered, that by his Majesty's order in Council of the 20th of July, 1764,
the western banks of Connecticut River was then commanded to be the west bounds
of this Province; and that this government has been, and is entirely obedient
thereto. Therefore, the said proclamation relating wholly to matters and things
without the boundaries of this province, it is advised that the publication
therefore, by the authority of this province, is extra provincial, and
therefore in our opinion improper, and that his Excellency is further advised
not to issue any proclamation relating to the premises. Secondly, that it is
not expedient for the government in any wise to interfere with, or concern in
running the lines between his Majesty's Province of New York and Canada, which,
by His Excellency Governor Tryon's letter of the 23d December 1771, is already
begun, by Commissioners appointed for that service, agreeable to his Majesty's
instructions, wherein it does not appear that this province is referred to or
mentioned.

A true Copy from the Minutes of Council. Attest, GEO. KING, Deputy Secretary.

THE following is a copy of a letter from the President of the Council of
New Hampshire to the (then) Secretary of this State, viz.

Exeter, July 19, 1777. SIR,
I was favored with yours of the 15th instant yesterday by express, and laid
the same before our General Court who are sitting, who had previous thereto
determined that a quarter part of the militia of twelve regiments shall be
immediately drafted, formed into three battalions, under the command of
Brigadier General John Stark, and fourthwith sent into your State, to oppose
the ravages, and coming forward of the enemy; and orders are now issuing and
will all go out in a few hours to the several Colonels for that purpose.
Dependence is made that they will be supplied with provisions from your State,
and I am to desire your Convention will send some person or persons to No. 4,
by Tuesday next, to meet General Stark there, and advise with him relative to
the rout and disposition of our troops, and to give him such information as you
may then have, relative to the manoevres of the enemy

In behalf of the Council and Assembly, I am, Sir, your most obedient and
humble Servant, MESHECH WEAR, President.
Ira Allen, Esquire Secretary of the State of Vermont.


COPY from President Weare's letter to Governor Chittenden, (dated)

Exeter, August 22, 1778.
A PAPER has been laid before the general assembly, attested by Thomas Chandler
jun. as secretary of the State of Vermont, to receive into union with that
State, sixteen towns on the east side of Connecticut river; and leave, or
rather an invitation to any towns contiguous to those, to enter into the same
union; on which I am directed to represent to you, and to desire it may be laid
before the representatives of your people, the intimation in the said resolve,
that the said sixteen towns are not connected with any state with reflect to
their internal police, is an idle phantom, a mere chimera, without the least
shadow of reason for its support. The town of Boston in the Massachusetts Bay,
or Hartford in Connecticut (if disposed) might as rationally evince their being
unconnected with their respective States, as those sixteen towns their not
being connected with New Hampshire.

WERE not those towns settled and cultivated under the grant of the governor of
New Hampshire? Are they not in the (...) thereof as settled by the king of
Great Britain, prior to the present era? Is there any ascertaining the
boundaries between any of the United States of America but by the lines
formerly established by Great Britain? I am sure there is not. Did not the most
of those towns send delegates to the Convention of this State in the year 1775?
Have they not from the commencement of the present war applied to the State of
New Hampshire for assistance and protection? It is well known they did; and
that New Hampshire, at their own expense, has supplied them with arms,
ammunition, etc. to a very great amount, as well as paid soldiers for their
particular defense and at their request, as members of this State: Whence then
could this new doctrine that they were unconnected with us originate? I
earnestly desire that this matter may be seriously attended to, and I am
persuaded that the tendency thereof will be to anarchy and confusion.

WHEN I consider the circumstances of the people west of Connecticut river; the
difficulties they encountered in their first settlement; their late endeavor
to organize government among themselves, and the uncertainty of their being
admitted as a separate state into the confederacy of the United States; I am
astonished they should supply their enemies with arguments against them, by
their connecting themselves with people whose circumstances are wholly
different from their own, and who are actually members of the State of
New Hampshire.

I BESEECH you, Sir, for the sake of the people you preside over; and the
people, for the sake of their future peace and tranquillity, to relinquish every
connection, as a political body, with the towns east of Connecticut river, who
are members of the State of New Hampshire; entitled to the same privileges as
the other people of the said State, from which there has never been any attempt
to restrain them.

Signed, MESHECH WEAR, President of the Council of New Hampshire.

To the Hon. Thomas Chittenden, Esquire

THE foregoing letter was laid before the General Assembly of this State, at
their session in October 1778, agreeable to President Weare's request, and a
joint committee was thereupon appointed from the Council and Assembly, and the
said union was dissolved; and President Weare's demands fully and amply
adjusted and settled, at the then next adjourned session of Assembly held at
Bennington, on the 12th day of February 1779; as will appear by the following
extract of the report of said Committee, and the resolution of the Assembly
thereon, viz.

STATE OF VERMONT. Bennington, 12th February, 1779. TO THE HONORABLE THE
GENERAL ASSEMBLY,
YOUR Committee, appointed to propose a draught relative to dissolving the
union with sixteen towns east of Connecticut river, with this State, beg leave
to report as follows, viz.

WHEREAS in consequence of a representation made to the General Assembly of
this State, at their session held at Windsor in March 1778, by a committee,
consisting of seven persons, inhabiting several towns lying contiguous to the
east side of Connecticut river, that a number of inhabited towns east of said
river were then unconnected with any State, in regard to their internal police;
and on said committees application to the General Assembly that the said towns
might be admitted into union with this State, orders were issued by the General
Assembly to the representatives constituents, for instructions in the premises.

AND whereas in consequence of such instructions, the representatives of said
constituents (when met at their adjourned session at Bennington, on the
eleventh day of June last,) did receive into union with said State, sixteen
towns east of said Connecticut river, and grant leave for other towns to unite
if they should choose.

AND whereas the General Assembly of this State did, at their session at
Windsor, in October last, agree on certain methods (contained in the report of
the grand committee of both houses) to settle and adjust the dispute with
New Hampshire.

AND whereas your committee have just grounds to apprehend that the said
sixteen towns are of right included within the jurisdiction of New Hampshire;
they are therefore of opinion, that the said union ought to be considered as
being null from the beginning.

JONAS FAY, Chairman of Com.

IN GENERAL ASSEMBLY. Bennington, 12th February, 1779.
THE above draught being read, was accepted, and this Assembly do thereupon
RESOLVE, That the said union be and is hereby dissolved and made totally void,
null and extinct.

Extract from the Minutes, M. LION, Clerk.

IT is presumed that from the settlement of the boundary line between New York
and New Hampshire in 1764, to the date of President Weare's letter of the 22d
August aforesaid, which is more than fourteen years, that New Hampshire (during
this period) had given up, in the most explicit and public manner, all
pretensions to the jurisdiction of any and every part of the lands comprehended
in this State. -- Governor Benning Wentworth's proclamation aforesaid, sets
this matter in a clear light, soon after the alteration of jurisdiction,
directing the settlers under New Hampshire to conform to the laws of New York.
The letter from the Governor of New Hampshire to Governor Tryon, of the 19th of
October 1771, speaks the same language, viz. That he had invariably recommended
implicit obedience to the laws of New York, and upon all occasions positively
disavowed any connection with those people. The Governor and Council of
New Hampshire the 8th day of January 17, 2, wholly renounced their claim to the
premises: It is considered that by his Majesty's order in Council of the 20th
of July 1764, the western banks of Connecticut river was then commanded to be
the west bounds of this province; and that this government has been entirely
obedient thereto. President Weare's letter to Ira Allen, Esquire proceeds still
further, and positively conceeds to the independence of this State. It appears
that the Court of the State of New Hampshire, by their President, address him
in his official character, viz. as Secretary of the State of Vermont; and in
the contents of the letter, when writing to the Secretary of this State, not
less than three times gives it the appellation or style of "your State;" and
observes in the finishing clause of the letter, In behalf of the Council and
Assembly, I am, etc. From all which it appears, that the said letter has the
authority of the General Court of that State for its support; and which, in the
most express terms, acknowledges the independence of this State, which is of
itself a final bar to the claim of New Hampshire: For, if governments can
relinquish their claim of jurisdiction when they please, and assume it again at
pleasure, the whole notion of governmental jurisdiction is reduced to a mere
romance, and nothing permanent, obligatory or binding in it; and therefore such
a precedent is inadmissible, as it would, if admitted to become general,
destroy all order and decorum in the universe.

IT should be acknowledged that the court of New Hampshire, through the channel
of their President's letter to Governor Chittenden, before inserted, offered a
number of reasons relative to the impropriety of this State's taking into union
sixteen towns east of Connecticut river; which reasons are equally conclusive
against the claim of New Hampshire to the westward of the same river. Says Mr.
Wear, their President, Is there any ascertaining the boundaries between any of
the United States of America, but by the lines formerly established by the
authority of Great Britain? I am sure there is not. This being admitted, we are
equally sure New Hampshire has no right to any territorial jurisdiction to the
westward of said river. Notwithstanding it appears that the court of New
Hampshire, in the first place, plead the settlement of the line in 1764, as the
main ground of their title to those sixteen towns aforesaid, (west of the Mason
line) by which means they are included in their jurisdiction, and in a few
months afterward break over the said line or 1764, and lay claim to the State
of Vermont; when at the same time nothing can be more apparent than that the
same arguments by which they establish their claim to those said sixteen towns
east of the river, effectually bass their claim to the westward of the same
river, and leaves the contested territory to be disputed between New York and
Vermont. I am surprised, says the President, that "they," speaking of the
inhabitants of this State, should supply their enemies with arguments against
them, by their connecting themselves with people (having reference to those
sixteen towns) whose circumstances are wholly different from their own, and who
are actually members of the State of New Hampshire. This last clause affirming
that the inhabitants of those sixteen towns were actually members of the State
of New Hampshire; at the same time implicitly affirms that the inhabitants on
the west side of the said river were not; which is fully explained in the
preceding part of the same paragraph, viz whose circumstances are wholly
different from their own, that is, the members of the State of Vermont; which
is still further explained from another paragraph of the same letter, when,
after stating the facts relative to the aforesaid union with those sixteen
towns before frequently mentioned, says, on which I am directed to represent to
you, and to desire it may be laid before the representatives of your people. As
this was addressed to the Governor of Vermont, from the court of New Hampshire,
to be laid before their representative body, or General Assembly, in which the
claim of New Hampshire is clearly set up, and their right vindicated to a
number of towns, over which Vermont on a mistaken and wrong representation had
encroached; upon the representation whereof, the General Court of the State of
Vermont dissolved the union as aforesaid; and agreeable to the claim and
request of the Court of the State of New Hampshire, relinquished every
connection, as a political body, with those sixteen towns east of Connecticut
river: And thus the respective governments of New Hampshire and Vermont, having
mutually settled their boundary line on the west banks of Connecticut river,
agreeable to the adjudication thereof in 1764, between New York and
New Hampshire, cannot fail of operating as a final bar against any subsequent
claim of New Hampshire to any part of the State of Vermont: For, New Hampshire
madetheir claim, and Vermont very readily closed with them, and gave them their
whole demand, in which the minds of both governments met, and the dispute
naturally and necessarily ended; and it is but childrens play for New Hampshire
to make a second demand on the State of Vermont; for if one settlement is not
decisive and binding, neither would a second, or a third, and so on ad
infinitum.

PREVIOUS to the claims of Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire to Vermont, the
simplicity of the inhabitants of this government, and their veneration for
Congress was so great, that it is highly probable that they would have very
frankly submitted the long controversy between them and New York, to the final
decision of the Congress of the United States; though at the same time they
were far from an opinion that Congress had any legal, inherent or
constitutional right (exclusive of their own consent and approbation) so to do:
But, the recent claims of Massachusetts Bay and New Hampshire, in concert with
New York, and it is suspected in confederacy with each other to divide this
State among those three governments, has excited their apprehensions; for
though it may not prove a triple league as is imagined, it is at least a strong
combination of interests, which will undoubtedly agree in the ruin of this
State, whatever disputes may happen between themselves relative to the
jurisdiction thereof. And as to the States of Virginia, North Carolina and
South Carolina, whose territories are immensely large, and whose interests it
is to maintain their respective sovereignty's over their extensive claims,
which may in natural probability influence their delegates in Congress to
oppose the independence of Vermont; as it may in future operate as a precedent
to divide those large territories into different States, (not that it is
apprehended by us that there are any similarity in the circumstances of this
tract of country to any other part of America;) and thus from views of their
own particular interests, be very partial and biassed judges of the right of
Vermont to independence; and instead of judging on the principles of justice
and equity which respects Vermont, as opposed to the claims of Massachusetts
Bay, New Hampshire and New York, may rather determine the matter agreeable to
their own ambition and interest; so that were Vermont to calmly submit their
indubitable claim of independence to Congress, though they are as respectable a
body as the world ever produced, it would be by no means certain that Vermont
could have an impartial trial; as there may be many connections of interests
very prejudicial to them, which at present we cannot conceive of, and which is
out of our power to come at the knowledge of, as this State is not represented
in Congress. These things being premised, and as the freemen of this State have
never had any voice in electing, forming or creating Congress, as a political
body, or had any representation therein; but have been rather misrepresented.
And whereas this State hold their charter of liberty from heaven, and not of
man, or of the will of man, have upon a full and candid examination and
consideration determined not to submit HEAVEN-BORN FREEDOM to the arbitrament
of any tribunal below the stars, which through infirmity might deprive them of
it: But, as they have closely embraced it in the most critical and hazardous
times, are determined to hold it fast, except it be torn from them by the hand
of power; which resolution we trust will be justified by the court of heaven
and commended by all true friends to the liberty and happiness of mankind.

THE following is an extract from the proceedings of the General Assembly of
Vermont, at their sessions in October last, viz.

STATE OF VERMONT. IN GENERAL ASSEMBLY, Manchester, October 20th, 1779.
AGREEABLE to the order of the day, the Governor, Council and House of
Representatives were resolved into a Committee of the whole, to take into
consideration the letter of the 25th ult. from his Excellency John Jay, Esquire
late President of the Congress of the United States of America, enclosing
certain acts of Congress, for an equitable settlement of all differences
subsisting between the States of New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay and New York,
on the one part, and this State on the other. The Governor resumed the chair,
and after mature deliberation, the following resolutions being read several
times, were agreed to, viz.

RESOLVED UNANIMOUSLY, That it is the opinion of this Committee, that this
State ought to support their right to INDEPENDENCE at Congress and to the
world, in the character of a FREE and INDEPENDENT STATE.

RESOLVED, That this Committee recommend it to the General Assembly to make
grants of all or any part of the unappropriated lands within their
jurisdiction, that does not interfere with any former grants, as their wisdom
may direct.

Extract from the Minutes, JOSEPH FAY, Clerk.

IN GENERAL ASSEMBLY, Manchester, October 21st, 1779.
THE Committee of the whole reported, that they had come to the foregoing
resolutions, which the Clerk was ordered to read, and on motion being made, it
is unanimously RESOLVED by this Assembly that they agree thereto.

Extract from the Journals, ROSWELL HOPKINS, Clerk.

RESOLVED, That five persons be chosen by ballot, Agents in behalf of the
freemen of this State, to appear at the Congress of the United States of
America, on the first day of February next, and they, or any three of them, are
hereby fully authorized and empowered by the freemen aforesaid to vindicate
their right to Independence at that honorable Board.

And furthermore, our said agents, or any three of them, are hereby amply
empowered to agree upon and fully to settle articles of union and confederation
in behalf of this slate, which shall be valid and binding on us, on our
constituents and our successors; and our said Agents are hereby further
empowered to transact all other political affairs of this State at Congress, as
a FREE and INDEPENDENT STATE, and report their proceedings to this Assembly as
soon may be.

Extract from the Journals, ROSWELL HOPKINS, Clerk.
Sent up for Concurrence, IN COUNCIL, Manchester, October 22, 1779. Read and
Concurred, Attest, JOSEPH FAY, Sec'ry.


