MR. Howard's ELECTION SERMON.

MAY 31, 1780.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE HONORABLE COUNCIL, AND THE HONORABLE HOUSE OF
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS BAY, IN NEW ENGLAND, MAY 31, 1780.

BEING THE ANNIVERSARY FOR THE ELECTION OF THE HONORABLE COUNCIL.

BY SIMEON HOWARD, A. M. Pastor of the West Church in BOSTON.

N. B. Several passages omitted in preaching are now inserted in the
publication of this discourse.

BOSTON, NEW ENGLAND: Printed by JOHN GILL, in COURT-STREET.

MDCCLXXX.

STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS BAY. IN COUNCIL, JUNE 1, 1780.
ORDERED, That Moses Gill, Henry Gardner, and Timothy Danielson, Esquires, be
and hereby are appointed a Committee to wait upon the Rev. Mr. Simeon Howard,
and return him the Thanks of this Board for his Sermon delivered Yesterday
before both Houses of the General Assembly; and to request a Copy thereof for
the Press.

True Copy, Attest. SAMUEL ADAMS, Secretary.

AN ELECTION SERMON.
EXODUS 18. 21. -- Thou shall provide out of all the people, able men, such as
fear God, men of truth, hating coveteousness; and place such over them to be
rulers. --
ALMIGHTY God who governs the world generally carries on the designs of his
government by the instrumentality of subordinate agents; hereby giving scope
and opportunity to his creatures to become his ministers for good to one
another, in the exercise of the various powers and capacities with which he has
endowed them. Though for the vindication of his honor, to dispel the darkness and
give a check to the idolatry and vice which overspread the world, and in order
to prepare mankind for the reception of a Savior to be manifested in due time,
God was pleased to take the Jewish nation under his particular care and
protection, and to become their political lawgiver and head; yet he made use
of the agency of some of that people in the administration of his government.
The legislative power he seems to have reserved wholly to himself; there being
no evidence that any of the rulers or assemblies of the people had authority to
make laws. But the judicial and executive powers were entrusted with men. At
the first institution of the government, Moses seems to have exercised the
judicial authority wholly by himself. In this business he was employed from
morning till evening, when Jethro, his father in law, the priest and prince of
Midian came to visit him. This wise man, for such he surely was, observed to
Moses, that this business was too heavy for him, and what he was not able to
perform alone; and therefore advised him to appoint proper persons to bear the
burden with him, provided it was agreeable to the divine will. Moses it is
said, in the context, hearkened to the voice of his father in law, and did all
that he had said. There can be no doubt but that God approved this measure,
though it was first suggested by a pagan, otherwise it would not have been
adopted. It seems indeed to have been highly expedient, and even necessary.
From whence it appears, that even in this government which was so immediately
the work of God, room was left for men to make such appointments and
institutions, as by experience should be found necessary for the due
administration of it. The general plan was laid by God, and he was the sole
legislator. This was necessary in that age of darkness, idolatry and vice.
Mankind seem to have been too ignorant and corrupt to form a constitution, and
a code of laws, in any good measure adapted to promote their piety, virtue and
happiness. But God left many smaller matters to be regulated by the wisdom and
discretion of the people. This is agreeable to a general rule of the divine
conduct; which is not to accomplish that, in a supernatural or miraculous way,
which may be done by the exertion of human powers.

IT is said, in the context, that in compliance with the advice of Jethro,
Moses chose able men -- and made them rulers. But it is generally supposed that
they were chosen by the people. This is asserted by Josephus, and plainly
intimated by Moses in his recapitulary discourse recorded in 1 chap. of Deuteronomy.
where he says to the people, "I spoke unto you, saying I am not able to bear
you myself alone -- take ye wise men, and understanding and known among your
tribes, and I will make them rulers over you". So that these officers were
without doubt elected by the people, though introduced by Moses into their
office. And indeed the Jews always exercised this right of choosing their own
rulers; even Saul and David and all their successors in the throne, were made
kings by the voice of the people. (see 1 Samuel 11, 15. 2 Samuel 2, 4, 5, 3.) This
natural and important right, God never deprived them of, though they had shown so
much folly and perverseness, in rejecting him, and desiring to have a king like
the nations around them.

THE business for which Jethro advised, that these rulers should be chosen was
to decide the smaller and less difficult matters of controversy that arose
among the people; while causes of greater consequence were to be brought before
Moses: So that they were a sort of inferior judicial officers, or judges of
inferior courts. Though they were not officers of the highest dignity and
authority in the state, yet the midianitish sage advised, that they should be
"able men, such as fear God, men of truth hating coveteousness; judging that
such men only were fit for the office. He has here in a few words pointed out
to us what sort of men are proper to be put in authority, whether in an higher
or lower station; for if such qualifications are necessary for this inferior
office, they must surely be more so, for the higher and supreme offices in
government. And the consideration of these qualifications, is what I
principally intend in the following discourse: But before I enter upon this, I
would give a little attention to two or three other points. Accordingly I shall
consider, I. THE necessity of civil government to the happiness of mankind. II.
THE right of the people to choose their own rulers. III. THE business of rulers
in general.


These particulars being finished in a few words, I shall then, IV.
PARTICULARLY consider the qualifications pointed out in the text, as necessary
for civil rulers.


After which, the subject will be applied to the present occasion.

I. LET us consider the necessity of civil government for the happiness of
mankind. Men have in all ages and nations been induced by a sense of their
wants and weaknesses, as well as by their love of society, to keep up some
intercourse with one another. A man totally separated from his species, would
be less able to provide for himself than almost any other creature. Some sort
of society, some intercourse with other men in necessary to his happiness, if
not to his very existence.

SUPPOSE then a number of men living near together, and maintaining that
intercourse which is necessary for the supply of their wants, but without any
laws or government established among them by mutual consent; or in what is
called a state of nature. In this state every one has an equal right to
liberty, and to do what he thinks proper. The love of liberty is natural to
all: It appears the first, opperates the most forceably and is extinguished the
last of any of our passions. And this principle would lead every man to pursue
and enjoy every thing, to which he had an inclination. Several persons would no
doubt desire and pursue the same thing, which only one could enjoy. Hence
contests would arise; and, no one else having a right to interfere, they must
be settled by the parties: But prejudice and self-love would render them
partial judges, and probably prevent an amicable settlement; so that the
dispute must at last be ended by the strongest arm; and thus the liberty of the
weak would be destroyed by the power of the strong. Every unsuccessful
competetor would think himself injured by another's seizing that to which, in
his own opinion, he had an equal right, and would endeavor to obtain
compensation: This would provoke retaliation, and naturally lead on to an
endless reciprocation of injuries. The injured who found himself unable to
contend with his adversary, would call in the assistance of some more powerful
combatant, to avenge his cause: The aggressor too would endeavor to strengthen
himself for defense by associates; and thus parties would be formed for rapine,
devastation, and murder; and the peaceful state of nature soon be exchanged for
a number of little contending tyrannies, or for one successful one, that should
swallow up all the rest. This would generally be the case where men should
attempt to live without laws or government; nor can they any way secure
themselves against all manner of violence and injuries from bad men, but by
(...) together in society, agreeing upon some universal rules to be observed by
all; -- that controversies shall be determined, not by the parties concerned,
but by disinterested judges, and according to established rules; that their
determinations shall be enforced by the joint power of the whole community
either in punishing the injurious or protecting the innocent. Man is not to be
trusted with his unbounded love of liberty* unless it is under some other
restraint, than what arises from his own reason or the law of God. These, in
many instances, would make but a feeble resistance to his* lust or avarice; and
he would pursue his liberty to the destruction of his fellow creatures* if he
was not restrained by human laws and punishment.

Let us next consider,

II. THE right of the people to choose their own rulers.

No man is born a magistrate, or with a right to rule over his brethren. If
this were the case, there must be some natural mark by which it might be known
to whom this right belongs, or it could answer no end: But no man was ever
known to come into the world with any such mark of superiority and dominion. If
a man by the improvement of his reason and moral powers becomes more wise and
virtuous than his brethren, this renders him better qualified for authority
than others: But still he is no magistrate or lawgiver, till he is appointed
such by the people.

NOR has one state or kingdom a right to appoint rulers for another. This would
infer such a natural inequality in mankind as is inconsistent with the equal
freedom of all. One state may indeed by virtue of its superior power assume
this right; and the weaker state may* be obliged to submit to it, for want of
power to resist. But it is an unjust encroachment upon their liberty, which
they ought to get rid off as soon as they can: It is a mark of tyranny on one
side, and of inglorious slavery on the other.

THE magistrate is properly the trustee of the people: He can have no just
power but what he receives from them. To them he ought to be accountable for
the use he makes of this power. But if a man may be invested with the power of
government, which is the united power of the community, without their consent,
how can they call him to account; what check can they have upon him; or what
security for the enjoyment of any thing which he may see fit to deprive them
of? They must in this case be slaves: But as every people have a right to be
free, they must have a right of choosing their own rulers and appointing such
as they think most proper; because this right is so essential to liberty, that
the moment a people are deprived of it, they cease to be free. This, as has
been already observed, is a right which the Jews always enjoyed; they elected
their kings, generals, judges and other officers; though in some few instances
God did expressly point out to them the person whom they ought to choose; which
however, he has never done to any other people.

Let us now consider,

III. THE business of rulers in general.

AND this is, to promote and secure the happiness of the whole community. For
this end only they are invested with power, and only for this end it ought to
be employed. The apostle tells us, that the magistrate is God's minister for
good to the people. This is the sole end for which God has ordained, that
magistrates should be appointed, that they may carry on his benevolent
purposes, in promoting the good and happiness of human society; and hence their
power is said to be from God; that is, it is so, while they employ it according
to his will. But when they act against the good of society, they cannot be said
to act by authority from God, any more, than a servant can be said to act by
his master's authority, while he acts directly contrary to his will. And no
people, we may presume, ever elected a magistrate for any other end, than their
own good; consequently when a magistrate acts against this end, he cannot act
by authority from the people; so that he acts, in this case, without any
authority either from God or man. He cannot by any lawful authority act
against, but only for the good of society. This in general is the business of
civil rulers: But there are a variety of ways and means by which they are to
carry on this business and accomplish the important end of their institution,
which it is quite beyond my present design particularly to point out, though
there may be occasion to suggest some of them in the progress of my discourse.

Let us now consider,

IV. THE qualifications pointed out in the text, as necessary for rulers.

1. They must be able men. God has made a great difference in men in respect of
their natural powers both of body and mind: To some he has given more, to
others fewer talents. Nor is there perhaps a less difference in this respect,
arising from education. And though their are none but what may be good members of
civil society as well as faithful servants of God; yet every one has not
abilities sufficient to make him a good civil ruler. Woe unto thee, O land,
when thy king is a child, says Solomon; hereby intimating that the happiness of
a people depends greatly upon the character of its rulers, and that if they
r^^^mble children in weakness, ignorance, credulity, fickleness, etc. the
people will of course be very miserable. BY able men may be intended men of
good understanding and knowledge; men of clear heads, who have improved their
minds by exercise, acquired an habit of reasoning, and furnished themselves
with a good degree of knowledge: Men who have a just conception of the nature
and end of government in general, of the natural rights of mankind, of the
nature and importance of civil and religions liberty; a knowledge of human
nature; of the springs of action and the readiest way to engage and influence
the heart; an acquaintance with the people to be governed, their genius, their
prejudices, their interest with respect to other states, what difficulties they
are under, what dangers they are liable to, and what they are able to bear and
do. These things are ever to be taken into consideration by legislators, when
they make laws for the internal police of a people, and in their transactions
with, or respecting other states. It would be going too far to say, that an
honest man cannot be a good ruler, unless he be of the first character for good
sense, learning and knowledge; but it will not be denied, that the more he
excels in these things, the more likely he will be to rule well: He will be
better able to see what measures are suited to the temper and genius of the
people, and most conducive to the end of his institution; how to raise
necessary supplies for the expenses of government in ways most easy and
agreeable to the people; how to extricate them out of dificulties in which they
may be involved; how to negotiate with foreign powers, how to prevent or
mitigate the calamities of war, by compromising differences or putting the
people into a condition to defend themselves and repel injuries: In a word, how
to render them happy and respectable in peace, or formidable in war. These
things require a very considerable degree of penetration and knowledge.

As it is of great importance to the community, that learning and knowledge be
diffused among the people in general, it is proper that the government should
take all proper measures for this purpose; making provision for the
establishment and support of literary schools and colleges: But ignorant and
illiterate men will not be likely to be the patrons of learning; unacquainted
with its excellency and importance, and seeing no comeliness or beauty in it;
they will reject and despise it, as the Jews did the great teacher of wisdom
who came from God. It would not be strange if such men entrusted with the
government of a people should wholly neglect to make any provision for the
encouragement of literature. It is therefore proper that rulers should be men
of understanding and learning, in order to their being disposed to give due
encouragement and support to the teachers and professors of the liberal arts
and sciences.

IT may be further observed, that weak and illiterate men at the head of a
government, will be likely to place, in inferior and subordinate offices, men
of their own character, merely because they know no better.

BUT by able men, may be intended men of courage, of firmness and resolution of
mind: Men that will not sink into despondency at the sight of difficulties, or
desert their duty at the approach of danger; men that will hazard their lives
in defense of the public, either against internal sedition or external enemies,
that will not fear the resentment of turbulent, factious men; that will be a
terror to evil doers, however powerful, and a protection to the innocent,
however weak: -- Men that will decide seasonably upon matters of importance and
firmly abide by their decision, not wavering with every wind that blows. There
are some men that will halt between two opinions and hesitate so long, when any
question of consequence is before them, and are so easily shaken from their
purpose, when they have formed one, that they are on this account very unfit to
be entrusted with public authority. Such double-minded men will be unstable in
all their ways; their indecision in council will produce none but feeble and
ineffectual exertions. And this doubting and wavering in the supreme authority
must be prejudicial to the state, and, at some critical times, may, be attended
with fatal consequences. Wise men will not indeed determine rashly, but when
the case requires it, they will resolve speedily, and act with vigor and
steadiness.

BY able men may be further intended men capable of enduring the burden and
fatigue of government; men that have not broken or debilitated their bodies or
minds, by the effeminating pleasures of luxury, intemperance or dissipation.
The supreme government of a people is always a burden of great weight, though
more difficult at some times, than others. It cannot be managed well without
great diligence and application. Weak and effeminate persons are therefore by
no means fit to manage it. But rulers should not only be able men, but

2. Such as fear God. The fear of God, in the language of scripture, does not
intend a slavish, superstitious dread, as of an almighty, arbitrary and cruel
Being; but that just reverence and awe of him, which naturally arises from a
belief and habitual consideration of his glorious perfections and providence;
of his being the moral governor of the world, a lover of holiness and a hater
of vice, who sees every thought and design, as well as every action of all his
creatures, and will punish the impenitently vicious and reward the virtuous: It
is therefore a feat of offending him productive of obedience to his laws, and
ever accompanied with hope in his mercy and that filial love which is due to so
amiable a character.

IT is of great importance that civil rulers be possessed of this principle. It
must be obvious to all, that a practical regard to the rules of social virtue
is necessary to the character of a good magistrate. Without this, a man is
unworthy of any trust or confidence. But no principle so effectually promotes
and establishes this regard to virtue, as the fear of God. A man may indeed
from a regard to the intrinsic amiableness and excellency of virtue, from a
mere sense of honor, from a love of fame, from a natural benevolence of temper,
or from a prudent regard to his own temporal happiness, follow virtue, when he
is under no strong temptation to the contrary. But suppose him in a situation,
where he apprehends that temporal infamy and misery will be the certain
consequence of his practicing virtue, and temporal honor and happiness the
consequence of his forsaking it, without any regard to God, as his ruler and
judge, and can we expect that he will adhere to his duty? Will he sacrifice
every thing dear in this life, in the cause of virtue, when he has no
expectation of any reward for it, beyond the grave? Will he deny himself a
present gratification, without any prospect of being repaid either here or
hereafter? Will he expose himself to reproach, poverty and death for the sake
of doing good to mankind, without any regard to God, as the rewarder of virtue
or punisher of vice? This is not to be expected. We all love, and we ought to
love ourselves, and all wish to be happy. Why then should a man give up present
case and happiness for suffering and death, in the cause of virtue, if he has
no expectation that God will reward virtue? This would be acting against the
principle of self-love, which is generally too powerful to be counteracted

BUT suppose a man to be habitually under the influence of this principle, that
is, to believe and duly consider God, as his ruler and judge, who will
hereafter reward virtue and punish vice with happiness and misery respectively,
unspeakably greater than any to be enjoyed or suffered in this world, and he
may then upon rational principles and in consistency with his self-love, forego
the greatest temporal good, and expose himself to the greatest temporal evil,
in the cause of virtue; and we may reasonably expect that he will. Virtue will
be his chief good: He will be attached to it, as to his very being, with all
the strength and ardor of his love and desire of happiness. The fear of God
therefore is the most effectual, and the only sure support of virtue in the
world.

MEN invested with civil power are not to be sure less, but generally much more
exposed to temptations to violate their duty than other men: They h^ve more
frequent opportunities of committing injuries; and may do it with less fear of
present punishment; and therefore stand in need of every possible restraint to
keep them from abusing their power, by deviating into the paths of vice.

IT is further to be considered, that the practice of piety, which is comprised
in the fear of God, has a powerful tendency to enoble and dignify the mind and
beget in it an abhorrence of every thing mean and base; to inspire a
magnanimity and fortitude of spirit that will support and carry it through the
greatest dangers and difficulties; to refine and purify the heart, to disengage
it from the vanities of the world, and beget that good will and benevolence
which are the brightest part of a virtuous character. Contemplating daily the
perfections of the Deity, as displayed in the creation, government and
redemption of the world, must naturally tend to exalt the affections and fix
them upon divine things, to make us love and desire to imitate the moral
character of God; and consequently to weaken the force of those lusts which are
so apt to draw men aside and entice them into sin; -- to enliven every
principle of virtue, and make us perfect, even as our father in heaven is
perfect.

IT is also to be observed, that the human mind is liable to mistake and err,
that circumstances often occur, especially to those who are concerned in
government, in which more wisdom is necessary than they are possessed of, even
though they may be able men. In such cases we are directed to look up to God,
the original and inexhaustible source of wisdom. Nor have we any reason to
suspect that such applications will be in vain. God perfectly knows the human
mind, and all the ways in which its views and determinations can be influenced:
And he may without infringing upon its moral liberty, by a powerful, though
imperceptible operation, put it into such a train of thinking, as may give it a
juster view, and lead it to a wiser determination, than it would otherwise have
formed. There is, I apprehend, nothing in this supposition, inconsistent with
the principles of rational theology and natural religion. Nor without supposing
that God does thus interpose, is it easy to conceive how that part of the
divine government which is in the hands of civil rulers, should in all cases be
adapted to the various circumstances of particular persons. But there is little
reason to think that this light and direction will be granted to men who have
no fear of God before their eyes; because though they lack wisdom, they will
not ask it of God, who gives to all men liberally and upbraideth not. And
rulers being without this divine counsel, it will not be strange, if, merely
for this reason, their conduct is wrong and ill-judged, calculated in many
instances, not for the good, but the hurt of the people; and it may be, at a
critical time, for their utter destruction.

THERE can be no doubt, but God often brings distress and ruin upon a sinful
people, through the ill-management of their rulers, given up to error and
blindness. In the 19th chapter of Isaiah we have a prophesy of the overthrow of
the kingdom of Egypt. And the infatuation of their rulers is mentioned as one
of the immediate causes of this calamity. "The spirit of Egypt," says God,
"shall fail; and I will destroy the counsel thereof." It is afterward added,
"Surely the princes of Zoan are fools, the counsel of the wise counselors of
Pharaoh is become brutish." And in the 29th chapter of the same book, God
threatens his own people, that for their hypocrisy and other wickedness, "the
wisdom of their wise men shall perish. and the understanding of their prudent
men shall be hid." In the same way, is reasonable to suppose, God often brings
his judgments upon other nations. And therefore i^ a people desire to have
rulers of wise and understanding hearts, counseled and directed by heaven,
they should take care, that they be men who fear God.

LET me observe once more, that it is of great importance to their happiness,
that religion and virtue generally prevail among a people; and in order to
this, government should use its influence to promote them. Rulers should
encourage them not only by their example, but by their authority; and the
people should invest them with power to do this, so far as is consistent with
the sacred and unalienable rights of conscience; which no man is supposed to
give up* or may lawfully give up, when he enters into society. But reserving
these, the people may, and ought to give up every right and power, which will
enable him more effectually to promote the common good, without putting it in
his power essentially to injure it. He ought therefore to have power to punish
all open acts of profaness and impiety, as tending by way of example to destroy
that reverence of God which is the only effectual support of moral virtue; and
all open acts of vice, as prejudicial to society: He should have power to
provide for the institution and support of the public worship of God, and
public teachers of religion and virtue, in order to maintain in the minds of
the people that reverence of God, and that sense of moral obligation, without
which there can be no confidence, no peace or happiness in society.

WITHOUT such care in government, there is danger that the people will forget
the God that is above, and abandon themselves to vice; or, to say the least,
impiety and vice are much less likely to become general, where such care is
taken, than where it is not. And God having in the constitution of nature made
religion and virtue conducive, and even necessary to the happiness of human
society, he has thereby plainly taught us, that it is the duty and business of
society as such, or of the civil magistrate to do every thing to promote them,
that may be done without injuring the rights of conscience. And no man who has
full liberty of inquiring and examining for himself, of openly publishing and
professing his religious sentiments, and of worshipping God in the time and
manner which he chooses, without being obliged to make any religious
professions, or attend any religious worship contrary to his sentiments, can
justly complain that his rights of conscience are infringed. And such liberty
and freedom every man may enjoy, though the government should require him to pay
his proportion toward supporting public teachers of religion and morality.

TAKING this care of religion appears to be so plain and important a duty, that
the government which should wholly neglect it, would not only act a very unwise
and imprudent part with respect to themselves; but be guilty of base
ingratitude and a daring affront to heaven. By such conduct they would, as a
community, in effect adopt the language of the profane fatalists mentioned by
Job, who "say unto God, depart from us; for we desire not the knowledge of thy
ways. What is the Almighty that we should serve him! And what profit shall we
have if we pray unto him?" Now although it is possible, that rulers who have no
religion themselves, may enact proper laws to support it among the people, yet
it is to be remembered, that their example will have great influence, and, if
that be irreligious and vicious, will, in some measure, defeat the good effects
of their authority, and do more to spread corruption, than that will to prevent
it. It is therefore highly proper in order to promote piety and good morals
among the people, that rulers be men who fear God; who have a just sense of
religion on their own minds, and conform to it in their lives.

IT may be proper to add, that though the fear of God may exist, where there is
no knowledge or belief of christianity; yet that the scheme of doctrines
contained in the gospel, is much better calculated than any other known to the
world, to produce and strengthen that divine principle. The plan of redemption
which i^ un^olds for the fallen race of men, exhibits the Deity in the most
amiable light, as the perfection of love and benevolence: "The solemn scenes
which it opens beyond the grave; the resurrection of the dead; the general
judgment; the equa distribution of rewards and punishments to the good and bad;
and the full completion of divine wisdom and goodness, in the final
establishment of order, perfection and happiness," afford such motives to the
love and reverence of God, and to the practice of all holiness and virtue, as
can be drawn from no other scheme of religion: And therefore a belief of the
gospel of Christ may justly be considered, as an important qualification for a
civil ruler.

I might observe further under this particular, that impious, immoral men at
the head of government, and having authority to appoint subordinate officers,
will probably make choice of men of their own character, and in this way be a
means of spreading corruption, and of much injury to society: But I must pass
on to consider another qualification of rulers. For

III. They must be men of truth.

THIS means men free from deceit and hypocrisy, guide and falsehood: Men who
will not by flattery and cajoling, by falsehood, and slandering a competitor
endeavor to get into authority: And who when they are in, will conscienciously
speak the truth in all their declarations and promises, and punctually fulfill
all their engagements.

IN treating with other states, they will act with the same integrity which
honest men do in their private affairs, and promise nothing but what they
intend, and think they shall be able to perform. Engagements already made to
other powers, they will honestly endeavor to fulfill, so far as it belongs to
their department, without seeking or pretending a cause for failure, when no
such cause exists.

THEY will show the same integrity and fidelity in their conduct toward
individuals. They will not promise to any one, what they have reason to think
they cannot, or do not intend to perform. Promises of government already made,
the execution of which belongs to them, they will look upon themselves bound to
fulfill, if possible, that no man may be a sufferer by confiding in the public
^aith.

CIVIL rulers generally bind themselves expressly, and always implicitly by
accepting their office, ^a^thfully to discharge the duties of it. And a man of
truth will pay a sacred regard to this engagement. He will not content himself
with receiving the honors and emoluments of his off^ce, while he neglects the
duties of it: Considering, that he has solemnly bound himself to do this
business, he will give the same care and attention to it, that a prudent man in
a private station does to his own particular concerns. A man of truth will not
undertake an office, for which he thinks himself incapable; because this would
be promising to do, what he is conscious, he is incapable of doing; nor will he
be instrumental of appointing others to offices, for which he thinks them
unqualified; this would be acting falsely; because by the appointment he
declares, that he thinks them qualified. Having solemnly engaged to use his
power for the public good, he will never employ it in encouraging and
supporting the enemies of his country, or to carry on, under the mask of
patriotism, measures to promote his own selfish and private views, or to screen
and protect from public justice, offenders against society. He will not employ
his abilities to impose upon the understandings of others, and make the worse
appear the better reason, in order to disguise truth, and pervert justice. He
will not suffer one man, or one part of the community to be injured and robbed
by another, when his office enables him to prevent it; because this would be
violating his promise. In a word, he will to his utmost endeavor to answer the
end of his institution by performing the duties of his station, and manifest by
all his conduct that he is an honest, upright man. He will make no false
pretenses, he will put on no false appearances, but ^ver act with christian
simplicity, and godly sincerity.

SUCH will be the conduct of men of truth: And such men only are proper to be
entrusted with authority over a free people. Rulers of this character will be
honored, beloved and confided in by their countrymen, and respected by other
nations; their subjects will be easy and happy, united together in the bonds of
truth and love, and by their union able to defend themselves against invaders;
their government resting on the basis of truth and justice, will be firm and
stable, revered and honored both at home and abroad. Whereas that deceit and
hypocrisy, that falsehood and insincerity, that dissimulation and craftiness,
which have so often dictated the measures of government in most of the nations
of the earth, and which are expressly recommended to rulers by Machiavel, and
inculcated among other immoralities, as necessary parts of a good education, in
the celebrated and much admired letters of a late british nobleman to his son,
Lord Chesterfield
however they may sometimes succeed and procure some temporary advantages, will
almost always weaken and disgrace the government which practices them, There is
no safety where there is no strength, no strength without union, no union
without justice, no justice where faith and truth in accomplishing public and
private engagements is wanting.

Sidney's discourses concerning government.


by sapping the foundation of public credit, producing uneasy jealousies,
disaffection, divisions and contempt of authority among the people, and leading
them by example to the practice of the same insincerity, falsehood and
dishonesty toward one another, which they see in their rulers; and by
rendering them infamous in the eyes of other nations, and perhaps raising up
enemies to punish their perfidy.

AND it may without doubt be asserted with truth, upon the principles both of
natural religion and revelation, that that government, which is directed by
truth and integrity, will bid the fairest to secure and promote the happiness
of the community, however contrary this assertion may be to the principles and
practices of modern courtiers and politicians. But I must proceed to the other
qualification of a good ruler, mentioned in the text which is

4. Hating coveteousness. Coveteousness, you all know, is an inordinate desire
of riches; such a desire as will make a man pursue them by unlawful means, and
prevent his using them in a right manner. Hating coveteousness is a strong
expression to denote a freedom from this vicious temper, and a sense of its
unreasonableness and turpitude.

THAT it is of great importance that civil rulers have this qualification will
be evident upon a little reflection.

COVETEOUSNESS is a fruitful source of corruption. A man governed by this
appetite will be guilty of any enormity for the sake of gratifying it. "They
that will be rich, fall into temptation and a snare, and into many foolish and
hurtful lusts which drown men in destruction and perdition: For the love of
money is the root of all evil." Almost all the oppression, fraud and violence
that has been done under the sun, has owed its rise and progress to
coveteousness. The indulgence of this vice debases the mind, and renders it
incapable of any thing generous and noble, contracts its views, destroys the
principles of benevolence, friendship and patriotism, and gives a tincture of
selfishness to all its sentiments: It hardens the heart and makes it deaf to
the cries of distress and the dictates of charity; it blinds and perverts the
judgment and disposes it to confound truth and falsehood, right and wrong.

A CIVIL ruler under the direction of this principle will oppress and defraud
his subjects, whenever he has it in his power; he will neglect the duties of
his office, whenever he can promote his private interest by the neglect; he
will enact laws to serve himself, not the community, and he will enact none
that he thinks would be prejudicial to his private interest, however beneficial
they might be to the public, however necessary for the support of justice and
equity between man and man; he will pervert justice and rob the innocent for
bribes; he will discourage every measure that would occasion expense to
himself, however salutary to his country; rather than part with his money, he
will see the arts and sciences, which are so ornamental and friendly to a
community, languish, erudition starve, and the rising genius which promised
glory to his country, nipt in the bud by the cold hand of poverty; yea religion
itself, the greatest honor and blessing of society, he will see languish and
die, rather than impart any thing to support its cause; and having long looked
upon riches in the same light that good men do upon religion, as his chief
good, and feeling the same attachment to them which they do to that, he may, if
required, by laws already made, to pay any thing for its support, absurdly
plead, that it is against his conscience, strangely mistaking his love of money
for the love of God, and his coveteousness for his conscience; supposing, with
those corrupters of religion mentioned by the apostle, "that gain is
Godliness." If he has a voice in the appointment of subordinate officers, he
will sell his vote to the highest bidder, and appoint such as will be most
subservient to his private interest, however unqualified for the office: In a
word, all his conduct, all his reasoning and votes will be tinctured by his
selfish spirit; and in a critical time when great expense is necessary for the
public safety, he may by his parsimony be a means of the ruin of his country.

BUT a ruler who hates coveteousness will conduct in a very different manner.
-- He will never oppress or wrong the community; the public interest will be
always safe in his hands; he will freely expend his time and his estate, in
discharging the duties of his office for the good of his country; he will be
ever ready to promote good laws, though they deprive him of opportunities of
making gain, and involve him in expense; he will devise liberal things, and
cheerfully bear his part in the expense necessary to carry on every measure,
that promises advantage to his country; he will do all in his power to promote
the liberal arts and sciences, manufactures and all useful inventions, to
encourage men of learning and genius, and to aid the cause of religion and
virtue: In promoting m^n to places of trust, he will be influenced by no
selfish, private views, but by a regard to the public good; no bribe will
purchase his vote for an unfit man, and hating coveteousness himself, no
consideration will induce him to give it for a sordid, avaritious wretch; he
will neglect no measures necessary for the public safety and happiness, for
fear of parting with his money. In fine, all his conduct will bear the marks of
his nobleness and liberality of sentiment, of his disinterestedness and public
spirit.

I HAVE now considered the several qualifications of a good ruler mentioned in
the text: And they all appear necessary to form that character, whether in the
legislative, executive or judicial department: Nor is it easy to say in which,
they are most necessary; though it is not difficult to see, that the want of any
one of them in either, must be prejudicial and dangerous to the community. But

I must now make some reflections upon the subject, and apply it to the present
occasion. And

1. WHAT has been said of the necessity of government for the peace and
happiness of mankind, may lead us to reflect with shame upon the selfishness
and corruption of our species, who, with all their rational and moral powers,
can no otherwise be kept from injuring and destroying one another, than by
superior force, or the sear of temporal sufferings and punishment; and with
whom you are no longer safe, than it is unsafe for them to hurt you. This is a
very humiliating consideration: And, so far as we know, there is no other order
of creatures through out the boundless universe, who, if left to their natural
liberty, would be so mischievous to one another as men.

2. This may also lead us to reflect with pleasure and gratitude to God, upon
the steps which have been taken by this people to frame a new constitution of
government; and that a plan has been formed which appears in general so well
calculated to guard the rights and liberties, and promote the happiness of
society; and which it is to be hoped will soon be the foundation of our
government, instead of that antiquated insecure basis upon which it now rests.

3. WE may likewise fee from what has been said, how much it is the duty and
interest of a people to pay due submission to the orders of government, and to
endeavor unitedly to support its authority. Both rulers and subjects are
perhaps too apt to consider their respective interests as distinct and
separate: Whereas they are in truth one and the same, -- the prosperity and
happiness of the whole community. Every thing done by subjects in obedience to,
and support of, the just authority of government is conducive to their own
happiness; and every thing done by governors, that is beneficial to the
governed, is likewise so to themselves: And it is from the mutual endeavors of
both to serve each other, that the prosperity of society must result. If rulers
abuse their power, they may destroy the happiness of the community; but this
may be done as effectually by the subjects refusing to obey and support the
authority of government. Nor may any people expect to enjoy all the blessings
of society, unless their government is preserved in due force and vigor.

4. WE are reminded of the gratitude which we owe to God, that he has not
permitted the natural and important right which every society has of electing
its own rulers to be wrested out of our hands, as is the case in some other
countries. Had Great Britain carried on, without opposition, the measures she
was pursuing with us, we should probably in a little time have been wholly
deprived of this privilege. She had already assumed an absolute right of
appointing too branches of the legislature. These would have had the
appointment of all judicial and military officers: And upon the same ground
that she robbed us of the election of a Governor formerly, and of Counsello^s
lately, she might have annihilated the House of Representatives; or if she had
not done this in form, she might by bribery and corruption, have rendered that
house a mere ^ool to the servants of the crown, as is the case in that country.
It is therefore owing to the opposition which his people made to the measures
of the British court, and to the blessing of God upon that opposition, that
they have now a voice in appointing their own rulers; otherwise our government
might now have been in the hands of the weakest and most profligate favorites
of that corrupt and infatuated cour^.

5. WE are reminded how much it is the duty and interest of a people, who are
in the enjoyment of this right, to exercise it with prudence and integrity. The
people's appointing their own rulers will be no security for their good
government and happiness, if they pay no regard to the character of the men
they appoint. A dunce or a knave, a profligate or an avaricious worldling will
not make a good magistrate, because he is elected by the people. To make this
right of advantage to the community, due attention must be paid to the
abilities and moral character of the candidate. This is a consideration that
concerns this people at large, as all have a voice in the election of our
rulers, either personally, or by their representatives. But upon this occasion
it is proper to observe, that it especially concerns the members of the
honorable Council and house of Representatives here pr^^^^t, by whom the
counselors for the ensuing year are this day to be elected. And I shall not, I
hope, be though it to go beyond my line of duty, if I say; that the electors ought
not to give their votes at random, or from personal or private views. They act
in this business in a public character, by virtue of power delegated to them by
the people, to whom, as well as to God, the origin of all power, they are
accountable for the use they make of it. Nor can they answer it to either, or
even to their own consciences, if through interested or party views, they advance
to the Council Board, men unqualified for the important duties of that station.
At such a critical time as the present, the want of wisdom or integrity in that
house may be attended with the most fatal consequences. The advice of Jethro in
the text, demands the consideration of all those who are to bear a part in the
elections of this day. "Provide out of all the people, able men, such as fear
God, men of truth, hating coveteousness." There never was a time when such men
were more necessary at that board than the present. Nor would I entertain an
opinion so dishonorable to my country, as to suppose there are not such men in
it; though I cannot at the same time entertain an idea so flattering, as to
suppose there are not many among us who fall far short of this character. It
belongs to the present electors to distinguish, so far as they can, these
characters, one from the other, and to give their votes only for the former.
Whoever considers the part which this Board has in legislation, their authority
in directing the military and naval force of the state, their being invested
with the supreme executive power, and in some important cases with a supreme
judicial power will be sensible that great wisdom, integrity and fortitude are
necessary for the right management of these powers. Should they be committed to
men of small abilities and little knowledge; men unacquainted with the nature
of government, and with the circumstances of this state; men void of integrity,
of narrow, contracted views, governed by ambition, avarice or some other
selfish passion; men of no fortitude and resolution, of dastardly effeminate
spirits; should such men, I say, be entrusted with the great and important
powers vested in the Council, what could be expected, but that their public
conduct would bear the marks of their ignorance, weakness; effeminacy and
selfishness, to the great injury and dishonor, if not to the ruin of the common
wealth. And though such men may be as fond of this station, as those who are best
qualified for it, and perhaps much fonder, yet it would be so far from
rendering them truly honorable, that it would only render them the more
infamous, by bringing into public view their vices and defects; while the
electors of such men, would fix an indelible stain upon their own characters,
and inherit the curses of the present and future generations.

BUT men who have themselves been honored by the unbiased suffrages of their
country, must surely be too wise and virtuous, thus to prostitute their votes;
and it may, I hope, be taken for granted, that knowledge and integrity, the
fear of God, and a public spirit, will govern in the ensuing election, and such
men be raised to the Council Board as will do honor to that respectable
station, to their electors and themselves.

I now beg leave, with all due defference and submission, to suggest a few
things that may reasonably be expected of a General Court, composed of such men
as the text describes, by the people who have invested them with this power and
authority, And,

IT may be expected, that they will give due attention to the public affairs
committed to their care. By accepting a seat in either house, a man does,
implicitly at least, solemnly engage to attend to the business, which is there
to be transacted. Nor, do I see how he can with any propriety be called a man
of truth, who after such engagement, neglects that business, for the sake of
going to his farm, his merchandise or his pleasure. It appears to me, that such
neglect argues great unfaithfulness in the delinquents, and it may be attended
with very pernicious* consequences. Individuals may and often do plead in
excuse for this, that the business may be done without them: But they ought to
remember, that every one has an equal right to excuse himself by this plea, and
if all should do so, the concerns of the public must be wholly neglected. But,

IT may be justly expected that our civil rulers will take due care to provide
for the public defense. Notwithstanding the great exertions we have already
made, and the great things which God has done for us, we must still contend
with the enemies of our rights and liberties, or become their abject slaves.
And it depends, in a great measure, upon our public rulers under God, whether
we shall contend with success, or not. It is by their seasonable and prudent
measures that an army is to be provided and furnished with necessaries, to
oppose the enemy. And it must be the wish of every true American, that nothing
may be omitted which can be done to support and render successful so important
a cause: a cause so just in the sight of God and man, which Heaven has so
remarkably owned, and all wise and good men approved; a cause which not only
directly involves in it the rights and liberties of America; but in which the
happiness of mankind is so nearly concerned: For in this extensive light I have
always considered the cause in which we are contending. Should our enemies
finally prevail, and establish that absolute dominion over us, at which they
aim, they would not only render us the most miserable of all nations, but
probably be able by the riches and forces of America to triumph over the arms
of France and Spain, and carry their conquests to every corner of the globe;
nor can we doubt, but that they would carry them, wherever there was wealth to
tempt the enterprise: The noble spirit of liberty which has arisen in Ireland
would be instantly crushed, and the brave men, who have appeared foremost in
its support, be rewarded with an ax or a halter: The few advocates for this
suffering cause in Britain would be hunted and persecuted as enemies to
government, and be obliged in despair to abandon her interest: And in every
country where this event should be known, the friends of liberty would be
disheartened, and seeing her in the power of her enemies, forsake her, as the
disciples of Christ did their master. So that our being subdued to the will of
our enemies, might in its consequences be the banishment of liberty from among
mankind. The heaven-born virgin seeing her votaries slain, her altars over
thrown, and her temples demolished, and finding no safe habitation on earth,
would be obliged like the great patron of liberty, the firstborn of God, to
ascend to her God and our God, her Father and our Father, from whom she was
sent to bless mankind, leaving an ungrateful world, after she had like him,
been "rejected and despised of men," in slavery and misery, till with him she
shall again descend to reign and triumph on earth. Such might be the
consequence, should the arms of Britain triumph over us. Whereas, if America
preserves her freedom, she will be an asylum for the oppressed and persecuted
of every country; her example and success will encourage the friends, and rouse
a spirit of liberty through other nations; and will probably be the means of
freedom and happiness to Ireland, and perhaps in time to Great Britain and many
other countries. So that our contest is not merely for our own families,
friends, and posterity; but for the rights of humanity, for the civil and
religious privileges of mankind. We have surely then a right to expect, that
the government of this state will neglect no measure that is necessary on their
part, to aid so interesting a cause, whatever difficulties or expense may
attend it. And, I hope, it may with equal confidence be expected, that the
people will cheerfully lend their arms, and bear the expense that may be
required for so glorious a purpose. Great expense must without doubt be
necessary to carry on our defense: But whoever is disposed on this account, to
give up the dispute, proves himself totally unworthy of the liberty for which
we are contending.

As the support, or rather the recovery of the public credit, is absolutely
necessary to our having a respectable army in the field, as well as to our
internal peace and prosperity; it may be expected that this government will not
be wanting in any measure for this purpose, which wisdom and sound policy can
suggest.

IF by means of the depreciation of our paper currency, and any law of this
state, many persons have suffered, and are still liable to suffer great injury;
if this injustice falls principally upon widows and fatherless children, and
such others as are least able to support themselves under the loss* this surely
is an evil that ought speedily to be redressed; and, if it be possible,
compensation should be made to the sufferers, by those who have grown rich by
this iniquity. And as the General Court of the last year, did with great
justice make an allowance, for the depreciation of the currency, in fixing
their own wages, and in some other instances, it may justly be expected that
the honorable Court of this year, will go on to extend this justice to every
part of the community, and order the same allowance to be made in discharging
all debts and contracts, however their private interest may be thereby affected.

THE large taxes now levying and to be levied, make it peculiarly proper that
great care should be taken in fixing the proportion which the different parts
of the community are respectively to pay; and we have a right to expect, that
our honored fathers who are to guard the rights of the whole, will not require
any particular part to bear a greater proportion of this burden than is just,
considering its ability and circumstances.

LIBERTY and learning are so friendly to each other, and so naturally thrive
and flourish together, that we may justly expect, that the guardians of the
former will not neglect the latter. The good education of children is a matter
of great importance to the commonwealth. Youth is the time to plant the mind
with the principles of virtue, truth and honor, the love of liberty and of
their country; and to furnish it with all useful knowledge. And though in this
business much depends upon parents, guardians and masters, yet it is incumbent
upon the government to make provision for schools, and all suitable means of
instruction. Our College justly claims the patronage and assistance of the
state, in return for the able men with which she has furnished the public; not
to observe, that her present suffering and low state renders her an object of
pity: By the well known depreciation, she, as well as many of her sons in the
ministry, have lost a great part of their income; she and they having in this
respect, had the same hard lot with widows and orphans. Nor will I suppose that
we shall ever have a General Court of so little love to their country, or so
little sensible of the importance of literature to its virtue, liberty and
happiness, so barbarous and savage, as to suffer her, or any of her family to
languish in poverty, or to want what is necessary to their making a decent and
honorable appearance.

IF any thing can be done by government to discourage prodigality and
extravagance, vain and expensive amusements, and fantastic foppery, and to
encourage the opposite virtues. we may reasonably hope it will not be
neglected. The fondness of our countrymen, or, shall I say, country-women, for
showey and useless ornaments and other articles of luxury, has been remarked by
a gentleman in Europe, of great eminence for political wisdom, as very
unbecoming our present circumstances. This is a folly that bodes ill to the
public; and it must be the wish of every wise and good man, that it were laid
aside. Men in authority, if they can do no more, may, at least discountenance
it by their example; and this will not be without its good effect.

FINALLY, our political fathers will not fail, to do all they can, to promote
religion and virtue through the community, as the surest means of rendering
their government easy and happy to themselves and the people. For this purpose
they will watch over their morals, with the same affectionate and tender care,
that a pious and prudent parent watches over his children, and by all the
methods which love to God and man can inspire, and wisdom point out, endeavor
to check and suppress all impiety and vice, and lead the people to the practice
of that righteousness which exalts a nation. If any new laws are wanting, or
more care in the execution of laws already made, for discouraging profaness,
intemperance, lewdness, extravagant gaming, extortion, fraud, oppression or any
other vice, they will take speedy care to supply this defect, and render
themselves a terror to evil doers, as well as an encouragement to such as do
well. They will promote to places of trust, men of piety, truth and
benevolence. Nor will they fail to exhibit in their own lives, a fair example
of that piety and virtue, which they wish to see practiced by the people: They
will show that they are not ashamed of the gospel of Christ, by paying a due
regard to his sacred institutions, and to all the laws of his kingdom.
Magistrates may probably do more in this way, than in any other, and perhaps
more than any other order of men, to preserve or recover the morals of a
people. The manners of a court are peculiarly catching, and, like the blood in
the heart, quickly flow to the most distant members of the body. If therefore
rulers desires to see religion and virtue flourish in the community over which
they preside, they must countenance and encourage them by their own example.
And to excite them to this,

I MUST not omit to observe, that though the fear of God, a regard to truth and a
hatred of coveteousness, are necessary to form the character of a good ruler,
they are, if possible, still more necessary to form the character of a good
man, and secure the approbation of God, the Judge of all. For to him
magistrates in common with other men are accountable. Nor does he regard the
persons of princes any more than of their subjects. If they are impious and
vicious, if they abuse their power, they may bring great misery upon other men,
but they will surely bring much greater upon themselves. The eye of heaven
surveys all their counsels, designs and actions; and the day is coming, when
these shall all be made manifest, and every one receive according to his works.
Happy they, who in that day shall be found faithful, for they shall lift up
their heads with confidence, and amidst applauding angels enter into the joy of
their Lord: While those who have oppressed and injured the people by their
power, and corrupted them by their example, shall be covered with shame and
confusion, and sentenced to that place of blackness and darkness, where there
is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth!

LET me now conclude, by reminding this assembly in general, that it concerns
us all to fear God, and to be men of truth hating coveteousness. The low and
declining state of religion and virtue among us, is too obvious not to be seen,
and of too threatening an aspect not to be lamented by all the lovers of God
and their country. Though our happiness as a community, depends much upon the
conduct of our rulers; yet it is not in the power of the best government to
make an impious, profligate people happy. How well soever our public affairs
may be managed, we may undo ourselves by our vices. And it is from hence, I
apprehend, that our greatest danger arises. That spirit of infidelity,
selfishness, luxury and dissipation, which so deeply marks our present manners,
is more formidable than all the arms of our enemies. Would we but reform our
evil ways, humble ourselves under the corrections, and be thankful for the
mercies of heaven; revive that piety and public spirit, that temperance and
frugality, which have entailed immortal honor on the memory of our renowed
ancestors; we might then, putting our trust in God, humbly hope that our public
calamities would be soon at an end, our independence established, our rights
and liberties secured, and glory, peace and happiness dwell in our land. Such
happy effects to the public, might we expect from a general reformation.

BUT let every one remember, that whatever others may do, and however it may
fare with our country, it shall surely be well with the righteous; and when all
the mighty states and empires of this world shall be dissolved and pass away
"like the baseless fabric of a vision", they shall enter into the kingdom of
their father which cannot be moved, and in the enjoyment and exercise of
perfect peace, liberty and love, shine forth as the sun forever and ever.

CORRECTIONS.
Page line from read 12 7 bottom in this 23 7 top it is 7 bottom power to the
magistrate, 24 5 bottom profession 25 3 and 4 top is so plain and important 34
4 bottom insecure basis 35 3 bottom two branches 36 9 top this people.

Some slips in spelling and pointing are omitted.


