A DEFENSE OF RELIGIOUS LIBERTY, COMPREHENDING

I. The INTRODUCTION; containing a true State of the Matters judged upon by the
late CONSOCIATION, from their Rise until laid before that venerable Body.

II. PROTESTATION against the Doings and Procedure of CONSOCIATION at
WEST-STAFFORD, with the Reasons of it at large.

III. STRICTURES on the REPORT of a certain anonymous COMMITTEE.

Concluding with An ADDRESS to the Reverend ELDERS Of the late CONSOCIATION at
STAFFORD, AND An Address to the PEOPLE of CONNECTICUT.

By ISAAC FOSTER, A. M. Pastor of the Church in WEST-STAFFORD.

My Brethren have dealt deceitfully as a Brook, as the Stream of Brooks they
pass away.

JOB. Who art thou that judges another Man's Servant? To his own Master he
stands or falls.

ST. PAUL. Since Religion is the Means of procuring us Acceptance with GOD, it
necessarily follows, that every Man has an undoubted Right to judge for himself.

DR. FOSTER. No Bishop or Presbyter, no Synod or Council, no Church or Assembly
of Men, since the Days of Inspiration, has Power derived to them from GOD, to
make Creeds or Articles of Faith for us, and impose them upon our
Understandings.

DR. WATTS. MASSACHUSETTS BAY: WORCESTER, Printed by ISAIAH THOMAS. MDCCLXXX.

ADVERTISEMENT.
IT is proper to inform the Public that at the time of the gathering the Church
at West-Stafford, which was done by the Council that ordained me, neither
myself nor the Church adopted Say-Brook Platform, or any other of human
composition; though both Say-Brook and Cambridge were taken under
consideration; but agreed to receive the Bible as the only authentic and
infallible rule of faith and discipline: And proceeding upon this divine
Platform, we have ever enjoyed the greatest harmony until our peace was broke
in upon by the contentious and disobedient, aided and abetted by our brethren
of the vicinity; and when our former christian love and concord will again be
restored, we leave with the meek and peaceable Jesus, whom we acknowledge as
our lawgiver, king and judge, while we endeavor to keep the unity of the
spirit in the bond of peace, that we may be called the children of God.

Previous to the Session of the late Consociation at West-Stafford, the Church
in this place came to the following resolve, viz.

At a meeting of the second Church of Christ in Stafford, at the meeting house,
October 20th, 1779:
It was put to the Church to signify, by their vote, whether they were now of
the same mind respecting the Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, as
expressed in their covenant drawn up and subscribed to, at the time of the
gathering of this church, in which are these words, "We take the scriptures of
the Old and New Testament to be the only infallible rule of our faith and
practice, submitting ourselves to Jesus Christ, as only Lord of conscience,
calling no man in this sense master and lord, for one is our master and lord
who is in heaven:" That as you have never admitted any rule of doctrine, or
platform of discipline, but God's word, so you never will; but constantly
reject whatever shall be proposed to you by any man or body of men, that has
nothing better for its authority than the opinion of men, though of the
greatest name and fame, that your faith may stand, not in the wisdom of men,
but in the power of God. Fully agreeing in that well known protestant opinion,
as clearly founded on the word of God, that no man, or number of men, separated
or united in council, since the time of Christ and his Apostles, have any right
to decide in matters of faith: That it is inconsistent with the respect due to
Christ for any to attempt it.

Voted, In the affirmative, Nem. Con.

A true copy of record, Attest. ISAAC FOSTER, Pastor.

The above vote of the Church, with the reasons of my protest against the
jurisdiction of Consociation, were laid before that body.

A DEFENSE OF RELIGIOUS LIBERTY, etc.
I. INTRODUCTION: Containing a true State of the Matters judged upon by the
late Consociation, from their Rise until laid before that venerable Body.
FROM the time of my first settling with the people in West-Stafford, (which
was October 31, 1764) until the year 1778, I lived as happily with them as any
Minister upon the Continent with his people, perhaps: I loved the people, and
to serve their best interest in public and private, in sickness and health, was
my delightful employ; while I received, in return, many testimonies of their
cordial and sincere regard to me, and for the truth's sake which I preached
unto them; which, in many instances, appeared to have a good effect upon them:
On which account I had reason to rejoice that I had not run in vain, nor
labored in vain among them.

In 1778 my salary, which according to agreement was sixty pounds lawful money
annually, by the depreciation of Continental money, was become almost nothing;
so that I found myself obliged to ask for some allowance to be made me. In
March 1778, a meeting of the society was called to see if they would afford me
any help. At this time those who were betrusted with the prudentials of the
society were chiefly strangers, newly come to reside in the place, and by
rendering themselves popular had got into places of trust: An error this in the
people which I would caution all other societies against. The Committee opposed
any thing's being done for me in a parish way; that which they chiefly urged,
was that it would oppress the poor, etc. -- The society, which had been used to
peace before, seemed much surprised to see a fire kindled; and to put out the
same, a number of the principal inhabitants proposed to me, at the time of the
meeting, to accept of a subscription for that year, to which I consented in
case it were adequate; to bring this about they desired an adjournment of the
meeting, which was granted. At the adjourned meeting I signified my acceptance
of what was subscribed, and so the difficulty seemed to subside for the
present. Nevertheless I could often hear of the Committee's telling one and
another, that it was unreasonable to allow me any more than the nominal sum,
and whatever they did more was over and above their contract with me; that they
were under no obligation to do it, and the like. Toward the close of this
year, the Committee, without being desired by me, came to my house and told me,
they understood that I was uneasy with my salary and wanted some help from the
people; and as there would be business enough on the annual meeting without
that, they thought it best, if I was willing, to have a meeting called on
purpose to settle the matter relative to my salary. I told them I was willing
if they though it best, and had mentioned it to one of them some time before, that
I had thoughts of desiring an interview with the Committee; they then asked me,
what my request was? I told them that they knew the whole affair as well as I,
a bare support was all I asked for; I was willing to bear an equal part of the
burdens of the present day, and would give up one quarter of my salary, if the
parish would make the rest good, giving me forty-five pounds as good as it used
to be. One of them, upon this, asked me how I would have the warning drawn? I
told him that it was not my business to make warnings, they knowing the affair,
were quite able to do that. Another spoke and said, we must warn the society to
come together, to see what addition they would make to the salary. I told them
I thought it not proper to talk of addition to the salary, when I offered to
give up one quarter of it. They told me that sixty pounds was sixty pounds, and
if the society paid that, they fulfilled their agreement with me, and if they
allowed me any more it would be by way of addition. I asked them, if they
thought sixty pounds Continental money was equivalent to the society's
agreement with me? They told me they thought it was: and two of them said they
should never hold up their hands for my having any more, and added that they
believed that the greater part of the parish was of their minds: The other
said, it did not belong to them to determine the matter, the parish might do as
they saw fit. I told them that if the society was of their minds, I should be
glad to know it, that I might know what to do, and accordingly desired a
meeting; they therefore warned a meeting to see what the society would add to
my salary. I wrote to the society, which was read in the meeting, showing them
that I did not want an addition, but was willing to give up a quarter part, as
I had told the Committee: The event was that the society refused to act upon
the warning. The annual meeting soon came; the society dropped these men, and
put in a new Committee; at which they appeared extremely offended both with me
and the people: And now they began to fault my preaching, and to form a party
in the parish. No stone was left unturned to disaffect all they could influence
toward my preaching; and whatever I said in public was perverted and condemned
as heretical and damnable. One of them left the communion. A few days after,
being at my house, I asked him the reason of his conduct in withdrawing from
communion? He told me it was owing to his being offended with me and the
church: I asked what we had done to offend him? He told me that I preached
doctrines he thought were false, and the Church received them. I told him he
was wrong in leaving the communion until he had given me and the church notice
of his uneasiness and endeavored to set us right, if wrong; and would never be
justified in doing as he had, and read to him some passages in Cambridge
Platform, which he professed to like, and which condemned such practice. He
then told me he had done nothing without advice from a neighboring Clergyman,
who told him he could not be blamed for leaving the communion when he pleased.
I discoursed with him two several times, and labored to convince him of his
error; but all was in vain, he supported himself upon the advice of this
Clergyman, but refused to tell me his name, though I have since discovered who
the Clergyman is; he lives in a neighboring town, and was a member of the late
Consociation. This delinquent member, nevertheless, has had the audacity to
deny that I ever faulted him for withdrawing from communion. In June last the
Association set at my house, a few days before which Solomon Bixby brought a
paper to me containing ten articles of charge against my doctrines, which he
said he intended to lay before the Association, desiring me to read the same,
and say whether I owned them or not; I read them, and observed to him that they
were generally false as they lay in the charge, and not one of them expressed
as I had expressed myself upon those matters: He then desired me to draw a
complaint myself, that I would be willing to own, as he depended upon me for
proof; I told him, I was willing to do it, but had not time then. The
Association met, and he appeared and presented his complaint as he had shown it
me before, without any signers but himself, though in behalf of others: Upon
the Association's insisting that the others referred to should subscribe said
complaint with him, he procured three others, viz. Samuel Fuller, Zephaniah
Alden, and Benjamin Ellis. The Association asked me whether I owned the charge?
I told them that in general it was wrong, but that there were some things so
near the truth, that I thought it would be dishonorable to deny them. I was
then desired to point out what I owned; I did so, which were four of the
articles. The Association then went into the consideration of what should be
done; I told them that I supposed they had no cognizance of the case -- one of
the members told me I was mistaken, and added, "I had a hint of this, and
therefore put the Platform in my pocket," and taking it out read a passage
about heresy, etc. -- I told him I had not the same notions of heresy that he
had: Another replied, "why all error is heresy:" I then concluded to leave them
to proceed as they pleased without making any opposition at that time. They
soon resolved upon a committee to meet on future time to confer on matters, and
proposed the same to me; I told them that as I had been publicly accused, I
chose to defend myself in public, should therefore choose that the Consociation
be convoked if they judged the matter cognizable by them; but that was
declined: I then told them that I would not converse with the committee, but if
they desired it, would send them, in writing, a defense of what I owned of said
charge. Accordingly the Committee was appointed to meet at the Rev. Mr.
Perry's, September 1. -- I wrote them according to promise. They advised to
calling the Consociation, but referred that matter to the next Association, in
October. The Association advising a convocation of the Consociation, letters
were accordingly issued out for that purpose, and their session appointed to be
the first Tuesday in November, at the house of Ebenezer Gay at Stafford. A few
days before the session of said Consociation, I received an open paper
informing me of the approach of that venerable body to hear and pass judgment
on my creed, and requiring me to appear before them, signed " Theodore
Hinsdale, Charles Backus, members of Consociation." On the day appointed about
one half the Consociation met at the time and place.

II. PROTESTATION against the DESIGN and PROCEDURE of CONSOCIATION at
WEST-STAFFORD, with the REASONS of it at large.
AS soon as the Consociation was opened I desired, and with great difficulty at
length obtained, leave to read them a paper, in which I denied their
jurisdiction and right to judge on articles of faith, or make a creed for me;
reminded them that the divine displeasure had been always testified against
those who had presumtuously undertaken to frame creeds, judge on articles of
faith for others, and impose subscription. I complained also of injurious and
abusive treatment in the paper sent me, notifying me to appear before
Consociation as judges; and plainly told that venerable body, that unless they
explicitly disavowed those words judge and require, It is very plain in the
original of the notification sent me, that the word require, was first written
request: But it seems this word was too gentle, pacific and humane, to suit
with the haughtiness and arrogance of the subscribers, and therefore was
changed, on second thought, for the word require.
in their notification, I should consider myself in duty bound to publish it as
approved by them, that the United States of America might be sensible what they
had yet to expect from the dying struggles of the man of sin. I told them I
should never meet them again when required so to do; but should always be ready
and cheerful to wait on them, when desired with decency as a brother and equal.
That I could not submit to them as judges of my faith, without denying the
kingly authority of Jesus Christ, until they should produce a commission, with
the seal of Heaven affixed to it, constituting them infallible dictators in
matters of religion. I desired and even challenged a public disputation with
them, on any points of religion wherein they were pleased to differ from me:
And finally put the following questions to them, for a resolution, viz.

I. Have you any authority to judge of doctrines, respecting their agreement or
disagreement with the gospel, that we have not?

II. Is your judgment, as such, in any measure binding on us?

III. What authority have you to require us to appear before you, and answer to
a complaint that we teach and hold doctrines contrary to the gospel?

IV. Have we not the same authority, upon report made to us by vile informers,
that you teach doctrines contrary to the gospel, to require you to appear
before us, and make answer to charges, that you have to require us to appear
before you?

I then observed to Consociation, that such lust for power and domination, as
but too evidently appeared in them, would illy suit such a free air as we
breathed in this country; and that they unhappily came into existence too late
for the exercise of spiritual tyranny: And then retired, assuring Consociation
of my readiness to wait on them at any time, if treated with civility, as a
brother and equal.

Consociation, before their leaving the meeting house, where they were when
this paper was exhibited, voted that it was no bar in the way of their
proceedure: And adjourned to the house of Mr. Ebenezer Gay.

My paper was exhibited November 2, the first day of the session of
Consociation, toward night. The next day, about two o'clock, P. M. I received
the following paper from Consociation, signed by Aaron Church, Scribe,
containing a reply to my questions.

"The Consociation, taking into consideration the matters contained in the Rev.
Mr. Isaac Foster's paper, publicly read yesterday, make answer to his
questions, as follows,

"Question I. Have you any authority to judge concerning doctrines, respecting
their agreement or disagreement with the gospel, that we have not?

" Answer. You as pastor and church, have a sole right to judge for yourselves
what doctrines agree with the gospel; before you consociated with these
churches you had a right to judge for yourselves, whether the doctrines we
professed so far agreed with the gospel, that you could consistent therewith
have christian and ministerial communion with us. You have now undoubtedly a
right to judge for yourselves, whether the laws of Christ permit you to
continue in fellowship with us. We only claim to ourselves as pastors and
churches the same rights with respect to you.

"Question II. Is your judgment, as such, with regard to doctrines, in any
measure binding on us?

" Answer. No further than it agrees with the word of God.

"Question III. What authority have you to require us to appear before you, and
answer to a complaint that we teach doctrines contrary to the gospel?

" Answer. None at all that implies in us, as Pastors and Churches, any
pre-eminence of rank or order above the pastor and church in West-Stafford. All
the authority we claim is founded, First, In that endearing relation between
all christian pastors, as fellow servants of the same Lord, and members of the
same body; which necessarily implies a mutual care for, and watchfulness over
each other. Second, That christian love which inclines us to perform that duty
toward you, which is required by the relation aforesaid. Third, On the right
we claim to judge for ourselves with whom Christ permits us to hold communion,
and from whom he charges us to withdraw for the sake of our own purity and
preservation. Fourth, The example of the church at Jerusalem with regard to
unsound doctrine taught in the Gentile churches, Acts xv. and the exhortation
given to Timothy to charge some at Ephesus that they teach no other doctrine,
1. Tim. i. 3. Fifth, Your union with us as a church consociated by your
particular consent, founded in the foregoing christian principles, and
signified and ratified by your long practice of sitting and judging with us in
similar cases: In the forms of which Consociation it is agreed, 'That all cases
of scandal that fall out within the circuit of any of the aforesaid
Consociations, shall be brought to a council of the Elders, and also the
messengers of the churches within the said circuit. That when any case is
orderly brought before any council of the churches, it shall there be heard and
determined; which shall be a final issue, and all parties therein concerned
shall sit down and be determined thereby.'

"Question IV. Have we not the same authority upon report made to us by vile
informers, that you teach doctrines contrary to the gospel, to require you to
appear before us and make answer to charges, that you have to require us to
appear before you?

" Answer, In the answer to the first question.

"With regard to the exceptions taken against the words require and judge,
contained in the citation sent to Mr. Foster, we claim no other respect nor
authority than what is founded in the forementioned principles of the communion
of churches, and expressed in the constitution of consociated churches, which
you, as well as we, have adopted. Nor do we mean to impose our judgment, in
matters of doctrine, in any sense or measure as binding on you, otherwise than
as warranted by those principles, and that constitution. The Council do
therefore hereby only signify to you, that they desire and expect you to attend
and pay that regard, and no other, which is due to brother pastors and sister
churches, consociated with you and the church under your pastoral care for the
purposes of Christian and ministerial communion."

This is said, "A true copy from the minutes," and is attested by " Aaron
Church, Scribe."

Here follow the replies to what the Consociation was pleased to call answers
to my questions.

[Note. What is put into notes under this head of replies to the Consociation's
answers to my questions, was not exhibited to Consociation, but is now added.
Want of time and opportunity, during the session of Consociation, obliged me to
be as concise as possible in my replies to their pretended answers to my
questions.]

I. Reply to your first answer.

1st. I do not suppose that any Christian or society of Christians have right,
from the New Testament, to withdraw communion from an individual Christian,
whether preach^^^ professor, or from a Christian church, except in the two
instances of heresy and scandalous immorality; nor did I ever imagine that you
was warranted by the constitution of Connecticut churches to deny Christian
fellowship on any other accounts. Your Platform, if I can understand it, gives
you no such right, but forbids any such thing. Confession of faith, chap. xxi.
sect. 2. Preface p. 6. This right of private judgment and decision, both you
and your Platform acknowledge. Now Christ has never given individuals, nor
churches, any right or privilege, the conscientious use of which will
unavoidably subject them to the inconveniences and hardships attending a denial
of Christian fellowship and communion: For then it would follow, that a man, by
his fidelity to Christ, would, by Christ's rules, be debarred the communion of
Christians! Indeed we shall never act right, nor according to the mind of
Christ in these matters, until we determine not to withdraw communion from any
individual, or Church, except they either believe or act contrary to express
scripture, i. e. are heretical or immoral. If we as individuals, or in council,
should have certain doctrines and tenets referred to us, that were evidently
not contrary to express scripture, purely that we might have opportunity to
give our opinion concerning their agreement or disagreement with implicit or
doubtful scriptures; we might, warrantably enough give our opinion, and tell
our sense of the scriptures referred to in said doctrines and tenets: But when
we say, we will not read, pray, preach or commune at Christ's table with those
who differ from us in the interpretation of implicit or doubtful scriptures, we
go on forbidden ground, and treat our fellow men injuriously. I would observe
further upon this answer to my first question, that it is really no answer at
all. My question is, 'Have you any authority to judge concerning doctrines,
respecting their agreement or disagreement with the gospel, that we have not?'
' Answer. You, as pastor and church, have a sole right to judge for yourselves
what doctrines agree with the gospel?' Is this an answer to the question? It
stands thus, 'Have you a right we have not?' Answer. 'You have a sole right.'
The answer proceeds, 'Before you consociated with these churches you had a
right to judge for yourselves, whether the doctrines we professed, so far
agreed with the gospel, that you could, consistent therewith, have Christian
and ministerial communion with us.' I ask again, is this a reply to m^
question? 'Have you a right, etc. we have not?' Answer. 'You had a right to
judge whether you could consistently have Christian and ministerial communion
with us.' The answer yet goes (...) You have now undoubtedly a right to judge
for yourselves, whether the laws of Christ permit you to continue in fellowship
with us' Again the question is, 'Have you authority or right we have not, to
judge of the agreement of doctrines with the gospel?' Answer. 'You have a right
to judge whether you can consistently continue in fellowship with us.' The last
clause of their answer is, 'We only claim, as pastors and churches, the same
rights with respect to you.' What do these words 'with respect to you,' refer
to? Certainly they refer to the judgment respecting the consistenc^ or
inconsistency of comm^ning, having fellowship, etc. For they cannot refer to
the f^^ (...) of the answer; for it would be nonsense to say, 'You have a sole
right, etc. and we claim only the same right with respect to you.' A sole right
in one man does not, as I know of, have any respect to a sole right in any
other man. But there is nothing about communion of fellowship in the question.
These words therefore, 'with respect to you,' refer to judging on something
foreign to the question, viz. the consistence or inconsistence of communing.
Therefore, neither in the whole, nor in any part of this answer of the
Consociation, is there to be found any answer to my question: No^ should I ever
have suspected it was designed a^ an answer, had I not (...) the word, Answer,
wrote at the beginning of it. It has been easy for these Gentlemen to have
given a direct answer to my question, if it had been consistent with the design
of their convention at Stafford.


Gentlemen, if I perfectly understood what you intended by withdrawing
communion; the utmost you pretend a right to do, it might possibly ease me of
many present difficulties.

2dly. I never supposed, neither before nor since my consociation with you,
that you held any doctrines, which forbid ministerial or Christian communion
with you.

II. Question 2d. "Is your judgment, as such, with regard to doctrines, in any
measure binding on us."

Answer. "No further than it agrees with the word of God."

Pray, Gentlemen, is the above a reply to the question? The question is this,
Is your judgment, in point of doctrine, binding upon us? You say, or seem to
say, So far as it agrees with the word of God. But who is to be judge of this
agreement or disagreement of your judgment with the word of God? Am I to judge
for myself, or are you to judge for me? Again, granting your judgment agreeable
to scripture: Am I to receive and embrace it out of deference to to your
judgment, or from a sacred regard to the divine authority? And, if from a
sacred regard to the divine authority, should my judgment respecting the
interpretation of implicit or doubtful scriptures differ from yours, does this
give you a right to do it, or would it justify you in withdrawing communion
from me? My second question is this, 'Is your judgment, as such, with regard to
doctrines, in any measure binding on us?' Consociation answer, 'No further that
it agrees with the word of God.' Here, as in their answer to my first question,
they evidently evad^ giving a direct and pertinent answer. I did not ask them
whether their judgment, if it agreed with the word of God, was binding on us;
but whether their judgment, as such, was binding


III. Question 3d. 'What authority have you to require us to appear before you,
and answer to a complaint that we teach doctrines contrary to the gospel?'

Answer. 'None at all that implies in us, as pastors and churches, any
pre-eminence of rank or order above the pastor and church of West-Stafford.' If
you, as pastors and churches, have no authority that implies any pre-eminence
of rank or order above the pastor and church in West-Stafford; you certainly
have none at all. Yet you seem to think you have some, or you would not have
undertaken to give the grounds of it.

1st. For your first ground of authority. Does this 'endearing relation you
speak of; or this care and watchfulness implied in it,' give one pastor a right
to decide for another in matters of faith, or not? That it does, is neither
self-evident, nor allowed by all men. Here you will allow me to wait for proof.
If it does not give any right to decide in matters of faith, then I cannot see
the pertinency of its being mentioned in this manner. The grand question is yet
undecided.

2dly. Is the 'duty required,' an exercise of a right in one pastor to decide
in articles of faith for another? The grand thing in question is yet undecided.

3dly. The things which are essential to Christian communion and fellowship are
either left to be decided by man's judgment, or they are decided by Christ,
either expressly or by indubitable consequences of what is expressed. If these
essentials of Christian communion be left to be decided by human judgment, then
one man has as good a right to judge what and how many they are, as any other
man. And if every man has an equal right, etc. then no man has any right to
impose his judgment concerning these essentials, etc. on any other man: Because
the right any one man has to impose his judgment on another, supposes this
other to have no right to judge for himself. Then also no public body of men
have a right to impose their judgment, concerning the essentials of Christian
communion on any other public body, or on any individual: Because the
imposition destroys the idea of a right in the public body, or the individual
imposed upon, to judge in this case, contrary to the supposition. The right any
public body has to impose their judgment, is certainly made up of the sum total
of their individual rights. If no individual therefore has any right to impose
his judgment on any man, then no public body has: For ever so many ciphers
will not amount to a sum. By this it is undeniably evident that the essentials
of church communion are not left to be decided by men. If these essentials,
etc. are decided and determined by Christ, whether it be expressly or by the
indubitable consequences of what is expressed; the matter is plain, and mankind
are not subjected to any of those great inconveniences attending the various
and differing decisions of fallible men.

4thly. To this reply several things.

First. The doctrines taught by those who went from Judea to Antioch did not
concern the essentials of Christian communion, at that time, nor of salvation,
Acts, xv. 11, 21. Burkitt and Henry on the 21st verse.

Second. No withdrawing of communion was so much as dreamed of by either side
in this dispute.

Third. If the doctrines taught by those men had regarded the essentials of
religion, the council at Jerusalem had sufficient authority to decide upon
them; verse 28. Their decrees were of divine authority, dictated and directed
by the Holy Ghost. When the Consociation, now convened in this place will be
pleased to show their authority to preface their result with these words, "It
seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us," I shall readily acknowledge the
pertinency of mentioning the council at Jerusalem, as a precedent for their
convention and procedure; until then I must view it altogether impertinent: And
do really judge the Consociation would view it so too, had they scriptures to
mention that were pertinent to their purpose. Mr. Heart, in his remarks on a
late Pamplet wrote by M^. Hobart,etc. says, p. 4. "And he," i. e. Mr. Hobart,
introduces Dr. Increase Mather, as answering such as enquire* Where have we an
institution for synods? That, we have scripture example for a synod, referring
to the case of the disputants at Antioch, agreeing that Paul and Barnabas
should go up to Jerusalem, to the Apostles and elders about that question which
so much perplexed them. But with submission, this referrence of this case was
not to a synod, or council of churches, but to the Apostles and Elders at
Jerusalem. And if I knew where to find a church, in which there were any of the
holy Apostles yet living, I should be for an immediate referrence of all
questions and controversies about doctrines to them, as invested by Christ
himself, with a decisive authority. The most that can be made of this example
is, that it carries in it an intimation to particular ministers and churches,
not to be willful in their controversies among themselves; but when they find
their debates cannot bring them to a mutual agreement, in any cases of
difficulty, that it is expedient for them to seek light and counsel from other
ministers, or churches, or other wise Christians.


To the quotation 1 Timothy i. 3. Gentlemen, is it an article in the charge
exhibited to you, that the pastor of the church in West-Stafford, entertains
his people with "fables and endless genealogies," etc. I am perfectly ashamed
to see scriptures thus quoted! and I beg, Gentlemen, you would never let it be
known, out of your own body, that these texts were used under these
circumstances.

5thly. "Answer." -- I am utterly ignorant of any union I ever formed with you,
which was signified and ratified by my long practice of sitting and judging
with you in similar cases, since I have no remembrance that a similar case ever
came under the consideration of the Consociation since I commenced a member:
For other matters, besides religious opinions and articles of faith, have ever
been under consideration whenever I have attended Consociation, so far as I am
able to recollect.

As to the article in the administration of church discipline you refer to, if
the article has respect to cases of heresy and scandal, we object not: But
would observe that it is nothing to the purpose for which it is cited. If it
has regard to religious sentiments and articles of faith, we utterly disclaim
it. First, Because it at once annihilates the right of private judgment; erects
an infallible tribunal on earth; and gives men liberty to usurp Christ's
throne. Second. It would involve the compilers of the Platform in a gross
contradiction; see Confession of Faith, chap. 21. Sect. 2d. As to the third
article to which you refer, respecting cases of scandal, etc. I would ask, How
is this to your purpose? Do you suppose it is a scandal, a shame and disgrace,
for a man to believe for himself? i. e. a censurable evil? Is one man's
differing from another in his creed, a scandalous thing, and does it render him
unfit for Christian communion? This cannot be: For then we should all, in this
respect, be scandalous creatures; since, perhaps, it would be impossible to
find two men who believed just alike in religious matters. Yet, if we grant
that two men might thus agree, they might nevertheless differ from a third man,
which would be a shame to them. Further, the worthy compilers of the Confession
of Faith did not look upon it scandalous for a man to be allowed liberty of
conscience and right of private judgment; see Confession of Faith, Chap. xxi.
Sect. 2d. Hence you see the Platform is not a volunteer in your service, but
draughted. By this the Gentlemen of the Consociation may be sensible how they
have misinterpreted our venerable ancestors, the compilers of the Platform.

You are so far from taking up the words require and judge, that what you
observe is rather an avowal of your right and authority to use and apply them
in the form you have done. But be entreated, Gentlemen, to give yourselves time
for reflection. The term require imports authority the requirer has over the
required. Now I ask, Who gave you this pre-eminence in point of authority? From
what source did it derive? Is it 'from Heaven, or of men?' If from Heaven, it
is in the Bible; and if in the Bible, pray point me to the grant and form of
investiture. If of men, Have not the popish and episcopal churches the same
authority, and derived from the same source?

I include both terms, as the authority in exercise both in requiring and
judging must be the same.

These replies were sent to, and received by, Consociation while sitting in
West-Stafford; but never answered. From the above answers and reply, every
reader of discernment will see, First. That the pretended answers of
Consociation to my questions, are in reallity no answers but evasions; and
evasions greatly studied and labored. Second. That plain, pertinent, express
answers to said questions, such as an honest, upright man would have given to
them, would at once have divested Consociation of all that authority they saw
fit to assume; left them without any pretense whatever, to vindicate the high
popish claim, on which they grounded their proceedings, and obliged them to
evacuate their quarters, and retreat without planting their standard.


A public disputation, oral or by writing, upon any points of doctrine, in
which I differed from Consociation, was often requested by me and a committee
of the church in West-Stafford, and as often refused by Consociation.

WHEN Consociation were together in the meeting house, the first day of their
sessions, Nov. 2d, 1779, and had heard the paper read by the Rev. Isaac Foster,
containing his denial of their jurisdiction, etc. the Rev. Dan Foster, a member
of Consociation, entered his protestation against the design and procedure of
Consociation, and desired liberty to offer his reasons for said protestation
publicly, and at that time; but was prevented offering them then, by reason of
objections made to it by several members of Consociation. In the evening
following, however, liberty was obtained to read the paper, containing the
reasons of the protestation, to Consociation, though in a much more private way
than that in which it was desired to be read, and in which the protestation had
been made. For this reason, among others, the paper is now made public. What is
in the text only was read to Consociation; the notes and quotations in them
have been added since, as a confirmation of the sentiment; or at least to show
that, if the author errs in sentiment, he does not err alone, but in company,
and in very respectable company too.

Gentlemen of this venerable Consociation,

I had, the other day, the disagreeable opportunity to read a citation sent to
the Rev. Isaac Foster, Pastor of the second church in Stafford; which is as
follows,

Reverend Sir,
Representation having been made to the north Association in Hartford county,
that you teach sundry articles of doctrine, as contained in a paper, dated May
25th, 1779, signed by Solomon Bixby and others, members of the second society
in Stafford; which doctrines they look upon as dangerous and contrary to the
Gospel: Upon which also they desired the advice and direction of the
Association. The Association having taken opportunity for inquiry and
information in the case, have advised, that it is highly expedient that the
Consociation of this district be convened as soon as may be with convenience,
to hear and judge on the premises.

This is therefore to desire and require you to appear before said
Consociation, to be convened at the house of Mr. Ebenezer Gay, in said second
society in Stafford, on the first Tuesday in November next, at 10 o'clock, A.
M. to answer to the charges contained in the paper before mentioned.

THEODORE HINSDALE, CHARLES BACKUS, Members of the Consociation; in the absence
of the last Moderator.

Dated Windsor, October 20th, 1779.

That one ambassador of Jesus Christ should be required by another, to appear
before an earthly tribunal, to answer to charges respecting doctrines and
articles of religious faith, certainly savours strongly of spiritual tyranny
and despotism. Have these Gentlemen really espoused that old, trite,
unreasonable, anti-scriptural, bloody, persecuting, popish maxim, "That the
church," or any body of men on earth, "has a right to decree articles of
faith!" No. And is it imagined, that the decrees of an ecclesiastic council
concerning doctrines and articles of faith imposed upon an American, will be
readily received and acquiesced in?

Will Americans, true and genuine sons of the fair Goddess Liberty; who have
been for several years, and still are, struggling with all the horrors of war,
facing the blazing cannon, encountering nameless perils, difficulties, dangers
and deaths, to establish her on the throne of these United States, and confirm
her salutiferous, balmy regency in this land: Will these, I ask, subscribe
creeds, articles of faith, and confessionals, drawn up and imposed on them by
the clergy and ecclesiastic councils and synods! Will they, who neither fled
nor submitted at the roar of cannon, and the sound of martial arms in the day
of battle, be terrified and awed into submission by the baneless and innoxious
thunder of the vatican! Gentlemen, I certainly do not mean to speak
diminutively of the clergy, or of ecclesiastical conventions: But I affim, that
no clergyman, or number of clergymen, or ecclesiastic council, of whatever
denomination, have right to make religious creeds, canons, or articles of
faith, and impose them on any man, or church, on earth, requiring subscription
to them.

As an evidence, yea, a demonstration of the negative of this question, let it
be observed, that the business of creed-making never did any good in the
church, never promoted the truth, or suppressed heresy; but always, without
exception, had the contrary effect.

Some of the peculiar tenets of Arius were esteemed by the Emperor Constantine
the Great, and some part of the Christian church, perhaps, heretical and
dangerous. Upon this letters missive were issued out by the moderator of the
first general ecclesiastic council, Constantine, to the bishops of the several
provinces of the empire, to meet at Nice in Bythinia, A. D. 325. Accordingly
great numbers of the bishops convened together at time and place, with great
punctuality, gravity and solemnity! The fulsom encomiums given this august and
venerable assembly of bishops, presbyters, deacons, etc. by some partial
historians of the court-party of that day, I shall never undertake to repeat:
But only to enquire what good this convention did, and whether they suppressed
the Arian heresy, and prevented the rising of others, or not? And I know not
that I can do this better than by reciting the words of President Dickison
concerning this council, as I find him quoted. "The synod of Nice did indeed
impose subscriptions; but what was the consequence, but horrible schisms,
convulsions and confusions, until the church was crumbled into parts and
parties, each uncharitably anathematizing one another? Never was the church
infested with such a swarm of heretics and heresies, as sprang from that
corrupt fountain of imposition and subscription. The Arians were not only
strengthened in their heresy, and increased in their numbers by their
persecution; but there was quickly added to them the black catalogue of
Eustathians, Macedonians, Anomoioi, Eunomians, Photinians, Luciferians,
Anthropomorphites, Apollonirians, Dimeritae, Massiliani, Antidicomorianitae,
Collyridiani, Me^angismonitae, Psathirians, Eutychians, Seleuciani, Patriciani,
with a long and almost endless et caetera. All which heresies rose out of the
bottomless pit, in about seventy years space, in the same church. Whence one
council was convened after another, to draw up new creeds, and impose new
subscriptions, until almost every article of Christianity was both condemned
and established. This was the mark set by providence upon the first
subscription of this kind, that was ever imposed in the world; and this the
defense and propagation that followed from it. The churches of New England have
all continued from their first foundation non-subscribers; and yet retain their
first faith and love. From all this I think, it naturally follows, that
subscription is not necessary for the being, or well-being of the church;
unless hatred, variance, emulation, wrath, strife, seditions and heresies are
necessary to that end." Thus far the judicious and learned President concerning
the consequences of creed-making and subscription practiced by this venerable
council. And whoever will be at the pains of searching ecclesiastic history
for the consequences of the other six general synods, will certainly find, that
heresies innumerable, strifes, divisions and sub-divisions, with an endless
train of evils, followed them all. The consequences of creed-making and
subscription practiced in the church of Christ, presented to the reader in the
following faithful abstract of ecclesiastic history for the space of four
hundred years.

The council of Nice, the first ecumenical or general council, condemned the
religious tenets and sentiments of Arius, A. D. 325. Prodigious troubles
immediately arose. Some held with the council, others with Arius. A. D. 330,
Arius was recalled from banishment by Constantine the Great; and the severe
laws against him were repealed. Athanasius, one of the most violent against
Arius, in the Nicene council, was, in his turn, banished into Gaul, A. D. 335,
by the council of Tire. Then the Arian party flourished again. The people of
Alexandria refused to admit Arius to communion. Constantine commands Alexander
the bishop of Constantinople to admit him to the communion. After the death of
Constantine the Great, Constantius held with the Arians: Constantine and
Constans Emperors of the West, with the council of Nice. Hence arose endless
animosities and seditions, treacherous plots, and open acts of injustice and
violence between the two contending parties, the Arians and Nicenians. Council
was assembled after council, council against council, and their jarring and
contradictory decrees spread perplexity and confusion throughout the whole
Christian world. Constans was assassinated, A. D. 350. A great part of the
western empire, particularly Rome and Italy, fell soon into the hands of his
brother Constantius. This change was extremely unfavourable to the adherents to
the decrees of the council of Nice. This Emperor's attachment to the Arians
induced him to involve their adversaries in countless troubles and miseries. He
compelled great numbers to embrace Arianism; among others Liberius the Roman
Pontiff, A. D. 357. The Nicene party meditated reprisals, and waited only a fit
opportunity, etc. to avenge themselves. Indeed the history of the church,
during the reign of Constantius, presents the reader with a perpetual scene of
tumult and violence, and the deplorable spectacle of a war carried on between
brothers, without religion, justice or humanity, on account of their differing
sentiments in religion! The death of Constantius, A. D. 362, changed
cons^derably the face of religious affairs, and diminished greatly the strength
and influence of the Arian party. Julian bestowed his favors and protection on
neither side. -- Jovian, his successor, favored the Nicene doctrine -- and
immediately the whole west, with a considerable part of the eastern empire,
changed sides, conformed to the decrees of the council of Nice, and abjured the
Arian system. A good evidence that this religious controversy was espoused and
carried on from views of religion and conscience!

The scene however soon changed again, when Valentinian and his brother Valens
were raised to the empire, A. D. 364. Valentinian adhered to the decrees of the
Nicene council; and hence the whole Arian sect, a few churches only excepted,
were destroyed and extirpated in the west. Valens, on the other hand, favored
the Arians; and his zeal for their cause exposed their adversaries the
Nicenians, in the eastern provinces, to many severe trials and sufferings.
These troubles however ended with the death of this Emperor, who fell in a
battle against the Goths, A. D. 378. He was succeeded by Gratian, a friend to
the Nicenians, and a restorer of their tranquillity. Theodosius the Great,
however, who succeeded him, raised his terrible violence against the Arians;
and rendered the decrees of the council of Nice triumphant over all opposition;
so that the barbarous nations, the Burgundians, Goths and Vandals were the only
professors of Arianism in public, because not conquered. In this long and
shocking contest between the Nicenians and Arians, it will be difficult to
determine which party most exceeded the bounds of probity, charity and
moderation. The members of the Arian sect were wretchedly torn into factions,
which regarded each other with the bitterest aversion. The ancient writers make
mention of these under the names of Semi-Arians, Eusebians, Aetians, Eunomians,
Acacians, Psathyrians and others. -- The Arian controversy produced new sects,
occasioned by the indiscreet lengths to which the contending parties pushed
their respective opinions. Many who opposed Arianism ran headlong into system^
of doctrine as bad or worse. Others who defended them went further than their
chief, and thus fell into errors much more extravagant than those he embraced.
Hence arose the Apollinarians, Marcellians, the Photinians, whose leader,
Photinus of Sirmicum, was chastised not only by the Nicenians, in the councils
of Antioch Dr. Lardner says this council at Antioch was held by the Eusebians,
or Arians, not by the Orthodox, or Nicenians, as Dr. M^sheim affirms.
Credibility, etc. vol. ix. p. 13.
and Milar, in the years 345 and 347, and that at Sirmicum, without date; but
by the Arians also, in an assembly of theirs at Sirmicum, 351. Then Macedonius,
bishop of Constantinople, arose, who was sent into exile by the influence of
the Eunomians, by the council of Constantinople, A. D. 381, which is commonly
called the second general or ecumenical council. A great number of other sects
arose in about 70 or 80 years after the first Nicene council, though of less
note than those mentioned above; all owing their rise to the corrupt and
abominable practice of subscription, set on foot by that council.

Early in the 5th cent. A. D. 404, the council, overcome by the in portunity of
St. Augustine, bishop of Hipps, were prevailed with to send a deputation of
their body from Carthage to the Emperor Honorius, requesting that the laws
might be put in force against the Donatists, a sect still very numerous. The
Emperor was not so forward for persecuting men on account of their religious
tenets as these holy fathers; and therefore only ordered a fire to be imposed
on those of that sect, that would not return into the bosom of the church. But
it seems his humanity and lenient temper were put to too severe a test by a
second deputation sent from those followers and imitators of the mesk and lowly
Jesus, assembled at Carthage, A. D. 407, importuning him, that the laws made in
405, entitled acts of uniformity might be put in force and more strictly
executed against the Donatists. Though this faction of the Donatists was much
broken by these reiterated shocks; yet it mightily revived again, after the
death of Stiticho, who was put to death by the order of Honorius. The
gentleness and humanity of Honorius got the better of his prejudices again, and
in 409, he published a law in favor of liberty of conscience, and prohibited
all compulsion in matters of religion. But this law was not of long
continuance. What could be the reason of its discontinuance? It was certainly
founded upon the soundest principles of reason, policy and religion, and
calculated to promote the universal good both of church and state. The answer
is obvious, and the reason of its abolition most apparent. It suited not the
haughty, assuming, arrogant spirits of the clergy of that day, those ghostly
fathers of the church, who, failing in point of argument, wanted the civil
sword to refute their adversaries with! The earnest and repeated solicitations
of near three hundred bishops, met together at Carthage, in 410, prevailed with
Honorius the Emperor to repeal and abrogate that good and salutary law! The
Tribune Marcellin^s was sent by Honorius into Africa, to put an end to this
controversy: And here he met 286 Catholic bishops, and 279 of the Donatists in
council; and held a conference with them of three days, and finally gave
sentence in favor of the Catholics. The Donatists appealed to the Emperor, but
to no purpose. This shock almost ruined the sect for a time. The Donatists
however recovered their former liberty and tranquillity, by means of men of more
refined sentiments of honor, generosity, humanity and religion than the
catholic bishops of that day; viz, the Vandals, a barbarous and savage nation
of the north, who, under Genseric invaded and took the province of Africa from
the Romans. But so soon as the Arians had found a secure retreat among the
barbarous Goths, Suevi, Heruli, Vandals and Burgundians, and had obtained a
little power, they persecuted the Nicenians to as great a decree of severity
and inhumanity, as they had been persecuted by them. Genseric, and Hunerie his
son, the kings of those barbarous nations, pulled down the churches of those
who held the divinity of Christ, sent their bishops into exile, maimed and
tortured multitudes that were firm in adherence to their creed. And justified
their proceedings by the examples which were set them by the Christian emperors
and bishops! -- Presently after this arose the sect of the Nestorians, formed
by Nestorius, a Syrian, bishop of Constantinople, and a disciple of the
celebrated Theodore of Mopsuestia. The council of Nice had not decreed any
thing concerning the manner or effect of the union of two natures in the
savior. Hence the bishops and doctors had, for about 100 years, expressed
themselves as they pleased, concerning these things. In 428, Anastasius
declaimed vehemently against giving Mary the title, mother of God, and said she
ought to be called mother of Christ. Nestorius warmly espoused the sentiment,
and hence the sect -- Cyril, of the sea of Alexandria, took fire, consulted
with Celestine bishop of Rome, assembled a council at Alexandria, A. D. 430,
and hurled no less than 12 anethemas at the head of Nestorius. Here is a
controversy now between two bishops, of the first dignity, about a matter too,
not of greater importance than the tithing of mint, anise and cumin; yet it was
carried on without reason, moderation, justice, religion, or even the least
shadow of humanity; because they would not tolerate each other in different
sentiments! After Cyril and Nestorius had reciprocally excommunicated each
other, and exasperated each other's spirits to the utmost, a council was called
by Theodosius the younger, A. D. 431, to be held at Ephesus, which was the
third ecumenical council. In this council Cyril presided, though a party
concerned, and an avowed enemy of Nestorius!! Nestorius objected against the
proceedings of the council, as irregular and unjust; but, his remonstrances
being without effect, he refused to comply with the summons that called him
before the council. Cyril, the moderator, pushed on matters with a lawless
violence, and Nestorius was judged without being heard; and, in the absence of
a great number of bishops who belonged to the council, he was compared to the
traitor Judas, charged with blasphemy against the divine Majesty, deprived of
his episcopal dignity, and sent into exile, where he finished his days. The
transactions of this council, says the historian, will appear to the candid and
equitable reader in the most unfavourable light, as full of low artifice,
contrary to all the rules of justice, and even destitute of the least air of
common decency. May God grant that none of our posterity may ever have occasion
to read the similar transactions of an ecclesiastic council in America* This
Ephesian council, as might be well expected, instead of healing divisions, did
but inflame them more and more, and almost destroyed all hope of restoring
concord and tranquillity in the church. John of Antioch, and the other eastern
bishops, for whose arrival Cyril had refused to wait, met at Ephesus, and
pronounced against him and Memnon the bishop of that city, who was his
creature, as severe a sentence at they had thundered against Nestorius. Hence
arose a new and obstinate dissension between Cyril and the Orientals, with John
the bishop of Antioch at their head. Notwithstanding all that was done against
them, the Nestorians, aided mightily by Barsumas, created bishop of Nisibi^, A.
D. 435, spread their tenets, in this and the following century, through Egypt,
Syria, Arabia, India, Tartary and China. A violent aversion to the Nestorian
tenets led many into the opposite extreme. This was the case with the famous
Eutychus, the founder of the Eutychians. Who about A. D. 448, was ordered to
renounce his error, by the council assembled by Flavianus at Constantinople. He
obstinately refused to comply with the decrees of the council, and appealed to
a general council. In consequence of which, the Emperor Theodosius assembled an
ecumenical council at Ephesus, A. D. 449, at the head of which he placed
Dioscorus bishop of Alexandria, successor to Cyril, and a very faithful
imitator of his pride, arrogance and fury, and a declared enemy to the bishop
of Constantinople. Accordingly matters were conducted in this, as they had been
in the former Ephesian council, when Cyril presided. The Greeks called this
council a band, or assembly of robbers, sun^don leestrikeen, to signify that
every thing was carried on by fraud or violence. -- The face of affairs soon
changed, and assumed an aspect utterly unfavourable to the party whom the
Ephesian council had rendered triumphant. For upon the death of Theodesius,
Marcian his successor complied with the demand of a general council, made by
Leo the Great bishop of Rome. The council was assembled at Chalcedon, A. D.
451. The fourth ecumenical council. Dioscorus was condemned, deposed, and
banished into Paphlagoni^, the acts of the council of Ephesus were annulled,
the epistle of Leo, received as a rule of faith; Eutychus, who had been already
sent into banishment and deprived of his sacerdotal dignity by the emperor, was
now condemned, though absent! The remedies however applied by this council, to
heal the wounds of a torn and divided church, proved really worse than the
disease. Troubles infinite immediately arose. To put an end to them, the
Emperor Z^no, by the advice of Acacius, bishop of Constantinople, published, A.
D. 482, the famous Henotican, or decree of union, designed to reconcile the
contending parties. This decree repeated and confirmed all that had been
enacted in the councils of Nice, Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon,
against the Arians, Nestorians, and Eutychians. There were bitter complaints
against the Henoticon, as injurious to the honor and authority of the most
holy council of Chalcedon. Hence arose new contests and new divisions, not less
deplorable than those which the decree of the union was designed to suppress.
It produced new and endless contests both among the Eutychians and the
partisans of the council of Chalcedon. The doctrines of Pelagius were condemned
in a council at Carthage, A. D. 412. This controversy was refered by Coelestius
and Pelagius to the decision of Zosimus the Roman Pontiff, who was raised to
that see, A. D. 417. He decided in favor of the monks, and declared them sound
in the says. The African bishops, with Augustine at their head, persisted in
their sentence. Zosimus yielded to the perseverance of the Africans, changed
his mind, and condemned, with the utmost severity, Pelagius and Coelestius,
whom he had honored with his approbation, and covered with his protection! The
unhappy disputes about the opinions of Pelagius, occasioned, as usually
happens, other controversies equally prejudicial to the peace of the church and
the interests of true Christianity. -- The sects of the Manichean^, Semi
Pelagians, Donatiste, Arians, Nestorians, Eutychians, Mono^hysites, and these
principal sects crumbled into various factions and divisions, remained in the
6th century.

A fifth ecumenical council was convoked at Constantinople, by the Emperor
Justinian, A. D. 553. In this council the emperor gained his point, and had
both the doctrines of Origin and the three chapters condemned. This council,
instead of healing matters by their decrees, made them much worse, and gave
rise to such divisions in the church, as could only be healed by length of
time. Many separated themselves from the communion of the Pope, on this
occasion, and carried their dissentions to a tedious and destructive length.

The ancient sects remained and were still in the church in the seventh
century, and instead of being suppressed by the great number of councils of the
three proceeding centuries, they were really increased and prodigiously
multiplied thereby.

Though the Greek church was already torn asunder by the most lamentable
divisions, yet its calamities were far from being at an end. A new sect arose,
630, under the reign of Heraclius, which shortly excited such violent
commotions, as engaged the eastern and western churches to unite their forces
in order to its extinction. Heraclius having conversed with one Paul, a man of
great credit and influence among the Armenian Monophysites, and with Athanasius
the bishop of that sect; issued an edict, A. D. 630, in favor of the doctrine
of one will, and one operation in Christ. Cyrus, who had been promoted by the
emperor to the sea of Alexandria, assembled a council, and got the doctrines of
Monothelitism, introduced by the emperor's edict, confirmed. This new
modification of the doctrine of the council of Chalcedon, had the desired
effect upon the Monothelites, and induced great numbers of them to return into
the bosom of the church. Notwithstanding this promising appearance, there
presently succeeded the most dreadful tumults. Sophronius a monk of Palestine,
who was present at the council at Alexandria assembled by Cyrus, in 633, had
violently opposed the decree of that council confirming the doctrine of one
will. His opposition, though treated by the council with contempt, became
formidable the following year. When raised to the patriarchal see of Jerusalem,
he summoned a council in which the Monothelites were condemned as heretics,
who ^^vived the Eutychian errors. Sergius the patriarch of Constantinople
informed Honorius, and determined that Pontiff in favor of Monothelitism.
Hence arose those obstinate contests which rent the church into two sects, and
the state into two factions. To put an end to these factions and commotions,
Heraclius issued out, in 639, the famous edict composed by Sergius, called the
ecthesis, or exposition of the faith; in which all controversies upon the
question, whether there was one or two operations in Christ, were strictly
prohibited. A number of the eastern bishops assented to this edict. In the west
the case was quite different. John, the 4th Roman Pontiff of that name,
assembled a council at Rome in 639, in which the ecthesis was rejected, and the
Monothelites condemned. Nor was this all; for in the progress of this contest,
a new edict named the type, or formulary, was published in the year 648, by the
emperor Constans, by the advice of Paul of Constantinople; by which the
ecthesis was suppressed. But this did not give content. Martin, bishop of Rome,
in a council assembled at Rome, A. D. 649, consisting of 105 bishops, condemned
both the ecthesis and the type; and thundered out the most dreadful anathemas
against the Monothelites and their patrons, who were solemnly consigned to the
devil and his angels! The emperor Constans highly incensed at these haughty
proceedings of Martin, who treated the imperial laws with such contempt,
ordered him to be seized and carried into the island of Naxo^, where he was
kept prisoner a whole year. And, for several years, this unhappy controversy
seems to be extinguished; but it was a lurking flame, which spread secretly,
and gave the more considerate reason to dread new combustions, both in church
and state. To prevent these Constantine Pogonatus, the son of Constans,
pursuant to the advice of Agatho the Roman Pontiff, summoned the 6th general or
ecumenical council, A. D. 680, in which be permitted the Monothelites and pope
Honorius himself to be solemnly condemned in the presence of the Roman legates,
who represented Agatho in that assembly, and confirmed the sentence pronounced
by the council by the sanction of penal laws, enacted against such as pretended
to oppose it. The Monothelites however continued in the church down to the 12th
century. As the two last councils had decreed nothing concerning ecclesiastic
discipline, nor religious ceremonies; to supply this defect, a new assembly of
bishops was held pursue it to the order of J^stinian II, in a spacious hall of
the imperial palace, called Trullus, i. e. cupula, from the form of the
building. This council met, A. D. 692, and was called Quinisextum, being
considered by the Greeks as a supplement to the 5th and 6th general or
ecumenical councils.

Thus we have looked through the history of the 4th, 5th, 6th, and 7th
centuries, and the seven ecumenical councils; all of which, except the last,
were convened to judge of articles of faith, make creeds, form confessionals,
determine the sense of scripture, require subscriptions, and terminate
religious controversies. The consequences of all these general councils, and of
every other council which met for the same purposes, for 400 years, were
constantly and invariably the same, viz the multiplication of errors, the
introduction of tumults, strifes, divisions, wrath, emulations, schisms,
convulsions, factions, and a long and nameless train of the most destructive
evils and calamities to the Christian church. Not a single heretic was ever
reclaimed, not an error suppressed, nor one good consequence ever produced, by
any one, or by all these ecclesiastic councils during 400 years. And if we
should trace down the history of the church to the present century, we shall
find the same consequences always and invariably following all ecclesiastic
councils, which have ever been holden, to judge of articles of faith, make
creeds, or compare religious tenets with creeds already made, impose
subscriptions, condemn errors, excommunicate or reclaim heretics, etc. And, as
human nature is the same in all ages, we have the greatest reason to expect the
same consequences will follow all councils that shall ever, through divine
sufference, be convened for these purposes, so long as time shall endure. For
it is contrary to reason, to the will of Heaven, to all the principles of human
liberty and that right which the Deity himself has granted to all mankind, to
search, examine and judge for themselves in all matters of religion, that an
ecclesiastic council should ever meet for such purposes as above. Indeed it is
surprising and greatly astonishing, that any ecclesiastic council should be
guilty of such bold and daring presumption as to meet for the purposes of
judging upon articles of faith, making creeds, imposing subscriptions,
condemning whom they shall be pleased to call erroneous, withdrawing communion,
etc. after more than 1400 years sad and awful experience of the odious,
abominable, destructive and God-provoking consequences of such practices! It is
impossible God should ever manifest his displeasure against any thing, if he
has not constantly done it against such conduct.

Though I am perfectly satisfied of the truth and justness of these
observations, both as concerning the rights of ecclesiastic councils in
matters of faith, and the consequences of their presuming to judge in these
matters, yet I am willing it should be known that I am not alone in my judgment
of these things. The sentiments of an ancient father Greg. Nazian. as I find
him quoted by the Dissenting Gentleman, p. 141, 142, are, Sic sentio, si verum
scribendum est, etc. My opinion it this, if I may be allowed to speak the
truth; that all conventions of bishops are to be avoided: For I never saw any
good come of any synod; nor that it did not much more mischief, than it
hindered. For truth, in such assemblies, is generally borne down by a spirit of
strife and vain glory. The Dissenting Gentlemen himself observee, p. 258, 259.
"Ecclesiastical synods, from the famous council of Nice, down to the non-famous
convocation of L -- n, anno 1717, sad experience has shown to have been little
else than the pests and troublers of mankind; mints where pernicious errors
have received the stamp of authority, and been sent out to corrupt the church,
and to set the world in flames; and that, for the most part, they have been
conventions of interested, ambitious, factious and angry men, who under a fair
pretense of zeal for the Lord of bosts, have been driving furiously and foully
on in pursuit of worldly views; and with an affectation of being thought
contending earnestly for the faith, have been only contending, like the
disciples, who should be greatest among themselves." And, not to swell this
note to too great a length, whoever will be at the pains of reading the
following authors, will certainly find them speaking the same sentiments, viz.
Dr. Lardner, Dr. Mosheim, Dr. Hare^, Dr. Foster, Dr. Tailor, Dr. Whitby, Dr.
Chandler, Dr. Wright, President Dickinson, Dr. Chauncey, Dr. Pemberton, Mr.
Look, Mr. Heart.




And this was not only so before, but has constantly been the case, ever since
the glorious reformation from popery begun in England by Wickliff, and
afterward advanced in Germany by Martin Luther and John Calvin, etc. Only cast
an eye on the history of the Protestant Non-conformists and Puritans, the
worthy ancestors from whom we sprang; and view the intolerable grievances,
hardships, sufferings, imprisonments and deaths they endured in England and
other parts of Europe: And whoever can read their history with dry eyes and an
unfeeling heart, is born of the rocks indeed! But wherefore did these worthies,
these martyrs for the testimony of Jesus, suffer all this? The answer is ready;
they were non-subscribers; the Bible contained their only credenda. They owned
no other Lord of conscience but Jesus Christ. They held themselves accountable
to no other Master, for the articles of their faith. They would not sacrifice
the rights of conscience to any number of creed and confession-makers on earth.

Now why have these mischievous and destructive consequences ever followed the
practice of creed-making and subscription? The answer is at hand. It has been
the invariable sense of all mankind in every age of the world, and of the
church, that they are born free, and with equal right to judge for themselves
in matters of religion. And mankind has never yet found that the God of nature
has contradicted this common sense, in any revelation he has been pleased to
make to them. This right of judging for themselves therefore, mankind have
agreed to hold as sacred from the Deity. When men of proud, haughty, assuming,
arrogant spirits have attempted to infringe upon this sacred common right, men
of noble minds, that dared to do it, have ever opposed and resisted their
encroachments.

But, say some, who tremble for the ark of God, and, it is to be hoped, are
more sincere than judicious, Must we not endeavor to exterminate heresy? Can
we, with a good conscience, permit men to profess or preach heresy? And how
shall we prevent the growth and prevalence of heresy any otherwise, than by
bringing opinions termed heretical, to some test or standard of orthodoxy?
There is no end (says an author) of imputation of heresy; a charge always
denied, and generally returned: To men of charity and sense the very sound is
stale and foolish; and is scarce any other than the language of craft and
bigotry; of knavery and folly.

Some Remarks on Mr. President Clap's History and Vindication, etc. p. 41.




For a reply to these questions, I will,

First, Enquire what heresy is?

Secondly, What is the duty of Christians concerning it?

One man is not to be called an heretic, purely because he differs from
another, as to the articles of his faith. For then, either we should all be
heretics, or there could be no heresy among us. If my neighbor is to be
denominated an heretic, purely because he differs from me in his opinions
about religious matters; then am I also to be denominated an heretic, because
I differ from him in my opinions about religious matters: For certainly I
differ from my neighbor in my religious tenets, as much as my neighbor
differs from me in his.

Again, Men of different religions cannot be heretics to one another. A Turk
is not an heretic to a Jew; nor a Jew to a Christian; nor a Roman catholic to
a Protestant, etc. for this plain reason, that the rule of their faith is not
the same. The alcoran, the law of Moses with various traditions, the Scriptures
of the Old and New Testament, and numberless almost traditions of the Old and
New Testament, only are the various and differing rules of faith, of the Turks,
Jews, Roman catholics and Protestants.

These things being premised, heresy, among those Christians who acknowledge
the word of God to be their only rule of faith, is, a separation made in a
church on account of things not expressly contained in the word of God. And
this separation may be made either by the major part of a church; or by an
individual. Letter concerning Toleration, p. 74, 75.


1. By the major part of a church. When the majority of a chuch withdraw
communion from the minority, or from an individual; because the minority, or
individual, will not subscribe to certain opinions and articles of faith, not
expressly contained in the word of God.

2. When the minority, or any individual, will leave the communion of a church,
and separate themselves from her, because she will not subscribe, as articles
of her faith, certain tenets and doctrines, not expressly contained in the rule
of faith they have adopted, the Holy Scriptures.

These two are heretics. And thus a major, a minor part, or an individual may
be heretics. They may make a separation in a christian society, of the same
religion, adopting the same rule of faith, by requiring subscription to certain
tenets, points of doctrine, or articles of faith, not expressed in the adopted
rule.

And this is both the grammatical meaning of the word heresy, and St. Paul's
meaning of the word heretic in his letter to Titus, iii. 10. Haireesis and
haireetikos both come from the verb haireoo, capio, eligo; which signifies to
choose or elect: Heresy therefore grammatically signifies choice, election,
sect; and a heretic is a sectary, or one who has made a choice or election.
Though I am so happy as to agree with the learned critic, Mr. Poole, in my
criticism upon these words heresy and heretic, yet I have the mi^fortune to
disagree with a Rev. Member of the late consociational convention at
West-Stafford; who not only condemned my exposition of Titus, iii. 10. but also
my criticism upon the words heresy and heretic, and said, the word heresy was
derived of the Latin verb haereo; and signified to stick on, or stick to;
denoting that the heretic was one who pertinaciously held his opinions, and
would not let them go!! This is the man who sets up for a judge of heresy, and
presumes to censure and condemn, and excommunicate others for their religious
tenets! Who is not even scholar enough to know, that the word heresy is of
Greek and not of Latin derivation! This is the man who often declared in
public, that HE was Christ's Attorney, before the late Consociation, and not
Attorney for the complainants!!! I should not have published this masterly
criticism of these modern times, if its author had not repeatedly pronounced it
in public, in the fare of Consociation; and a large assembly of spectators.


St. Paul says of the heretic, "he is subverted, and sins, being condemned
of himself." And what he here says of him is perfectly consistent with what
has been said above concerning an heretic. The Bible is the only rule of
faith a Christian church has adopted; an individual in that church, whether
preacher or hearer, it matters not, has formed certain opinions, not expressly
contained in the Bible, and insists upon it thas his brethren shall subscribe
them. In so doing he subverts the foundation on which the church was built, he
greatly sins and is condemned of himself; for he subscribed the Bible as the
only rule of Christian faith, and now will substitute something else, as the
rule of his faith, his own dogmas and opinions.

The learned and judicious critic, Mr. Poole, gives the same meaning to the
words heresy and heretic, as is above given. Says he, "Est ergo hic hereticus,
is qui per opinionem, de ecclesia partus facit; qui in id disputat ut sibi
discipulos paret unitate contempta." Poli Synopsis in locum.

II. Let us enquire what is the duty of Christians concerning an heretic? And
when an heretic appears in the church, all Christians, who subscribe the Bible
as their only rule of faith, are bound to avoid him, to turn away from him, and
to refuse and forbid all free and familiar conversation and intercourse with
him. They may and ought to treat him very much in the same manner they would
treat an excommunicate. St. Paul does not say excommunicate, but reject him,
paraitou, pass by him, neglect him; for this good reason, that he has
excommunicated himself, by subverting the foundation of church communion and
fellowship.

And this treatment of the heretic is agreeable to the sentiment of the learned
critic before quoted. Says he, "Non amplius admit ad colloquium, sed
aversare; in externa ecclesiae congregatione manner nec patere; excommunica dum
resipiscat; notam illi inure ut bomini qui censurae ecclesiae subjacet, and
sube omnes familiare ejus consortium fugere."

"Non dicit, excommunica; nam ipsi ultro communionem deserunt." Poli Synopsis
in locum.

Now we have a fair and ready reply to the questions before put. 1. Must we not
endeavor to exterminate heresy? Reject, refuse it? 2. Can we with a good
conscience permit men to profess or preach heresy? In a church that adopts the
Bible as her only rule of faith, if a man either profess or preach that she
ought to adopt something else; for instance, several notions and tenets he has
formed, in addition to the Bible, as her rule of faith; the church must
admonish him a first and second time; if he still persist in professing or
preaching his heresy, the church must refuse, reject and avoid him. 3. How
shall we prevent the growth and prevalence of heresy, any otherwise than by
bringing opinions, termed heretical, to some test or standard of orthodoxy? St.
Paul tells us, an heretic is "condemned of himself:" If so, certainly there
can be no necessity for bringing his opinions to any test or standard of
orthodoxy. Heresy does not consist in opinion or sentiment; it is not an error
of ^ead but of the will. Bu^ kitt on Tit. iii, 10, says, "Learn hence, First,
Who is an heretic in the Apostle's sense, even he who is perverted from the
true faith, and holds opinions which subvert the foundation of it; and one who
is condemned in his own conscience, and sins against his own convictions? For
the Apostle here bids Titus, not to inform him of his errors, but admonish him
of his fault, which shows, that the crime lay not in his head, in his
understanding, but in his will and affections: For no man who acts according to
his judgment and conscience, how erroneous soever, it self-condemned in that
action." Henry on the place says, " Knowing that he that is such is subverted,
i. e. turned off from the foundation, and sins grievously being
self-condemned. Those that will not be reclaimed by admonitions, but are
obstinate in their sins and errors, are subverted and self-condemned; they
inflict that punishment upon themselves, that the governors of the church
should inflict upon them; they throw themselves out of the church, and throw
off in communion, and so are self-condemned."

It is surprising any man should imagine heresy to be an error of judgment,
when St. Paul says "he is self-condemned;" which could not possibly be the case
on this supposition. Hence let a man's sentiments be what they may, if he
believes them to be true, he is not an heretic, because not self-condemned.




In a christian church which subscribes the Bible as her only rule of faith, no
man can possibly be an heretic while he insists upon nothing else as the rule
of faith, or necessary to church communion, or essential to salvation: But
whenever any man, in such a church, does insist upon subscription to any thing
else but the Bible, as the rule of faith, or necessary to church communion, or
essential to salvation, he is an heretic, and must be treated as such.

But some sincere conscientious people may still ask, Is there not such a thing
as false doctrine, short of heresy, which is not to be endured in our churches?
I am sensible a reply to this question will bring the great and important
business of ecclesiastic councils, conventions, and synods, under
consideration: But I am the rather willing to attempt a reply on that account.

And in order to a reply, let several things be premised.

1. A preacher of religion is the sole judge, for himself, with regard to the
truth or falsehood of the doctrines he delivers. If it were otherwise, and a man
were obliged to preach what other men judged to be truth, he must then be
obliged to do the very thing for which our Savior condemned the Scribes and
Pharisees, i. e. to teach for doctrines the commandments of men. Nor could he
possibly comply with St. Paul's direction to the Christian preacher, "Take heed
unto thy doctrine." Unless it be said, that the Christian preacher is to take
heed that his doctrine agree with human creeds and articles of faith!

2. The Bible contains expressly every thing necessary to Christian communion
in this world, and eternal felicity and happiness in the world to come, 2 Timothy
iii. 16, 17. All scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in righteousness:
That the man of God may be thoroughly furnished unto all good works.

3. Each brother in the church, and every hearer of a preached gospel, are sole
judges for themselves, with regard to the truth or falsehood of what they hear;
its agreement or disagreement with the unerring standard the word of God. "To
the law and to the testimony: If they speak not according to this word, it is
because there is no light in them." Isa. viii. 20, was the direction given to
the Jewish church with regard to what they heard. "Beloved, believe not every
spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God: Because many false
prophets are gone out into the world," 1 John iv. 1, is the direction given to
the Christian church with regard to what they hear.

4. No man, or body of men, no ecclesiastic council, convention, or synod, of
whatever name, have any right to judge for any Christian on earth, but
themselves, whether preacher or hearer, what he shall preach or what he shall
hear; whether what he preaches, or hears, be true or false, agreeable or
repugnant to the Bible. The author of the history of religion, introduces Dr.
Foster, saying, "Religion therefore is only so far praiseworthy as it is the
matter of our choice; and since religion is the means of procuring us
acceptance with God, it necessarily follows, that every man has an undoubted
right to judge for himself."

The author himself says, p. 96, "Every man must have a right to judge of the
true meaning, and the obligation of those laws that come under his notice; and
where the laws of an inferior clash with those of a superior, reason and
consciousness will point out the proper deference to the laws of a superior.
This alone justifies the separation from any establishment, and destroys the
principle of force."

This author also cites bishop Hoadley, p. 96, 97. "Religious truths, says
bishop Hoadley, is what concerns every one. Religion there can be done without
enquiry; for what is contrary to the first notions of God, established upon the
evidences of reason, cannot be admitted by any one who believes a God upon this
evidence, because it destroys all those principles of reason itself. What is
contrary to the plain design or declaration of the gospel, cannot be received
by any one who believes the gospel, because it destroys the authority of the
gospel in which he believes. And what is contrary to the fundamental principles
of the reformation, without which it could never have been at first, and now
cannot consistently be defended, will ^ot, cannot be received by any true
protestant, because it destroys his vary may^ to that name, and is the very
thing which, as a protestant, he receives."




In proof of which I have already observed, that no ecclesiastic council of
any denomination, that has ever been in the Christian church, has ever done
any good, has ever promoted truth, or suppressed error; but always the
contrary; when ever they have undertaken to judge of doctrines for others, or
to make creeds and formulas for the churches.

The truth of this proposition is also a natural and necessary inference from
the three propositions just premised.

The New Testament every where supposes all men, both preachers and hearers,
sole judges, for themselves, with regard to the truth and falsehood of doctrines
of religion, and their agreement and repugnancy to the unerring standard.

Now, to answer the question put, Whether there is not such a thing as
falsehood, or false doctrine, short of heresy, which is not to be endured in our
churches?

I doubt not the possibility of a man's preaching false doctrines; doctrines
not contained either explicitly or implicitly in the Bible; yea, it may be
granted possible, perhaps, that a man may preach things contrary to what is
thus contained in the Bible: Not contrary to what is expressly contained in the
the Bible, but contrary to what may be therein implied. Now, if a man preach
nothing contrary to any express proposition of the Bible, though he may often
deliver things repugnant to what is implied therein; yet, so long as his
church, the people of his charge, are easy under his ministry, and do not
discern the repugnancy of his doctrines to the Bible; no man, or body of men,
no ecclesiastic council, of whatever name, have any divine right to disturb
this worshipping assembly of Christians, by any of their notions, opinions or
decrees whatsoever; for the reasons above given, viz. that the preacher has a
sole right of judging, for himself, with regard to the truth or falsehood of his
doctrines, and their agreement or disagreement with the unerring standard: And
that his hearers have also a sole right of judging, for themselves, with regard
to the truth or falsehood of the doctrines they hear, and their agreement or
disagreement with the unerring standard.

I have put the case now as favorably as possible on the side of those who
hold the popish tenet above with reference to the authority of ecclesiastic
councils. For it has been generally the case, that a man charged with
preaching false doctrine, and things disagreeing with the implications of the
Bible; has been guilty of delivering some things contrary to long
prescription, and hoary creeds and confessionals, made by men, and unjustly and
injuriously imposed on mankind! And I greatly fear, yea, I know, if authentic
history does not lie, that both preachers and professors of religion have
oftener been persecuted, proscribed, imprisoned, deprived and slain, for
preaching and professing doctrines and opinions contrary to sacred creeds and
confessions of faith, and the established religion, than for contradicting any
thing implied in the Bible! Witness the cruelties and horrid sufferings of that
part of Christ's church which fled into the wilderness, and endeavored to
shelter themselves in the low countries and vales of Piedmont -- of the
Wickliffites in England -- the Protestants in Germany -- the Non-conformists
and Puritans, our pious and illustrious ancestors, in Great Britain, and
numberless others, in all parts of Europe. Were these worthies always
persecuted and tormented to death, because they departed from the Bible-creed
in their preaching and professions! Pride, ambition, lust of power, instigating
men to practice upon that exploded popish maxim, were the formal cause of the
sufferings and deaths of these faithful witnesses of Jesus; who, long since,
wear bright, glorious and unfading crowns, in the kingdom of his father and
their father.

When the case is really such in any church or worshipping assembly of
Christians, that they universally, or very generally, disapprove of, and are
disgusted with, the doctrines and tenets of their preacher, as judging them
inconsistent with reason, and repugnant to the word of God; I know not of any
power on earth that has a right to oblige that church, or worshipping assembly
(after they have taken all reasonable pains rightly to inform their own
judgments, like the noble Bereans of old, by searching the scriptures) still to
live under his administrations. But yet no ecclesiastic council has any
business here; so far at least as the matter relates to opinions and doctrines
preached and heard in this church. If an ecclesiastic council be called in by
the church and people in this situation, purely to advise as to the expediency
or inexpediency of dismissing the pastor; I have not so much to object against
it: Though I confess I know not that even this measure is warrantable, from any
thing that is either expressed or implied in the New Testament.

Put the case, that a very few individuals in a church, or worshipping assembly
of Christians, are dissatisfied with some particular tenets and doctrines of
the preacher; whilst however the pastor and nine tenths of the church and
people are agreed and satisfied as to these tenets and doctrines. Neither the
pastor, nor majority of the people, pretend to impose subscription to these
obnoxious tenets, as they are called, on the minority, or any individual.
Neither of these tenets is contrary to express scripture, nor expressed in the
scripture, and therefore not essential to church communion and salvation; nor
necessary to be believed by any Christian, nor denied. For every thing
essential to church communion and salvation is expressed in the Bible; and
every thing necessary to be denied and rejected by a Christian man is contrary
to express scripture. This is evident upon the least reflection, for certainly
a good and gracious God designs the present peace and future happiness of
mankind: He would not therefore leave things so in his word, the only rule of
the Christian's faith, as to endanger the present peace, much less the future
happiness of mankind: But if every thing necessary to be received or rejected
by the Christian man, were not expressed in the Bible, or plainly and
indubitably contrary to express scripture; both the present peace and future
happiness of men would be endangered; for scarce two men can be found who agree
in their interpretations of implicit or doubtful scriptures, or in any articles
or points of doctrine neither expressed in the Bible, nor indubitably contrary
to what is there expressed: Therefore we may depend upon it, that the spirit of
God has expressed, and explained expressly, every necessary article of the
Christian creed. Therefore the tenets and doctrines complained of, are not of
the essentials of religion. However, representation is made to the Association
of these obnoxious tenets; the Association take pains to inform themselves in
the matter, and advise to the convention of the Consociation to hear and judge
on the premises. The preacher is desired and even required to appear before
this venerable body of clergymen and lays, to answer to charges exhibited
against him, for preaching and holding such dangerous doctrines!

Now, Is not all this mighty stir perfectly right? What will the poor criminal
preacher do? And what will this august assembly of divines and philosophers do?

1. To the question, Is not all this stir perfectly right? I reply, This
convention of Consociation is, in my humble opinion, wrong, mistaken,
unadvised, anti-scriptural, and oppressive. This convention is to hear and
judge upon articles of faith, and they have, according to the supposition
above, required the accused to appear before them, to answer to articles of
charge, concerning doctrines and religious opinions. Hence it is apparent this
venerable body imagine they have some authority in these matters. And in truth
they really have some authority, or they have abused two plain English words,
judge and require; both which words immediately convey to the minds of all, who
hear or see them, whether they be simple or learned, the idea of authority. But
if this body claim authority, they must necessarily claim infallibility;
because, if they are not endued with infallibility, they will lead those into
error, most likely, on whom they impose their authoritative judgment. "This
claim of authority," says the Dissenting Gentleman, "is an invasion of the
divine prerogative, and in the language of the Holy Ghost, a sitting in the
temple of God, showing itself that it is God. It is a claim of honor as due to
a company of poor, frail and fallible men, which belongs only to the omniscient
and infallible God, and to Christ the sole lawgiver and king in the church. It
is the very root of Antichristianism; the prop upon which the whole system of
popery rests; it came from the church of Rome, and thither it directly leads."
p. 232.

The celebrated Mr. Prior says of such boasted authority, "Oh! the tragedies
this usurped authority has acted in the world! It was authority that put the
Lord of life to death, and opposed the propagation of his gospel. It was
authority that brought in purgatory and transubstantiation, with all the other
absurdities of the church of Rome, and made them sacred from ridicule. It was
authority that hid the purity of the gospel so long from our eyes, and delayed
the reformation for ages before it happened. Authority has often consecrated
error; nursed ignorance, and suppressed truth. Authority has made knaves:
Authority has made fools: But mere authority has seldom propogated virtue, or
true religion. The very claim of this authority is a reproach to Christianity;
and an insult upon common sense." -- "The author and finisher of our faith has
given his ministers a commission to declare his will; to administer his
ordnances; to receive those to communion, whom the scripture-canon receives; to
exclude those, whom that excludes; to reprove them that act amise; to exhort to
repentance, and to enforce their exhortations with the highest authority of
Almighty God, the awful powers of another world, and all the engagements of
redeeming love. Further degrees of church power I know not." Charge, p. 45, 46.
Indeed the members themselves that compose our modern conventions
ecclesiastic, afford an unanswerable argument, that such conventions have no
authority to judge on articles of faith, to censure others, condemn and
excommunicate, as they take upon them to do. For who can imagine, or dare
affirm, that the Lord Jesus Christ has given commission to mere novitiates in
antiquity or divinity, to mecanicks and husbandmen, to judge on articles of
faith, censure and condemn! etc. Dr. H^r^ observes with regard to this matter,
"If indeed no one would judge in a cause he did not understand; if no one were
allowed to understand a cause of heresy, but who was a good judge of the sense
of scripture and of primitive antiquity; if no one were esteemed to know
scripture and antiquity, but those who had studied them well, who had read them
carefully with their own eyes, and did not take the sense of them upon trust
from modern writers* If the arguments for his opinion were to be examined,
before his opinion were condemned; if a man, before he gave his vote, were to
lay his hand upon his heart, and declare himself thus qualified to judge; that
he had considered the matter, and would speak nothing but what he thought: On
these suppositions, I am apt to think, a number of judges would not very easily
be found; and when they were, it may reasonably be presumed, that they would
not be very apt to condemn. They would be sensible there was room for honest
mind to be misled, from what they had read and observed themselves; they would
know that there is more to be said on the other side, than the generality at
all dream of; they would be careful how they discouraged learning, by
discouraging the enquiries of learned men. They would be very unwilling a man
should suffer by their sentence, whose life they are sure is innocent and
virtuous, but whose opinions they cannot be so sure are false and dangerous.
They know discouragement in learning and virtue to be of such ill consequences,
that a man's opinions must be very had indeed, to make it necessary to come to
such extremities. But give me leave to say, you have no reason to expect such
judges, or such backwardness to judge. It is always supposed, that the doctrine
of the church you are of, is right; that it is the doctrine of scripture and
antiquity. And this, every body thinks, he understands. So that little learning
or reading is necessary, to make any clergyman a judge over the learnedest man
alive." Dr Hare's letter to a young clergyman, p. 30, 31. Is it to be presumed
that our modern Consociations are always composed of men thus qualified to
judge! By the ecclesiastic constitution of Connecticut, not only laymen, but
any men, whom the churches shall choose, may attend their pastors, and sit in
judgment on matters of the greatest consequence; which require the greatest
abilities, both natural and acquired; the soundest judgment; the greatest
candor and moderation, together with the warmest attachment to religion and the
real interests of manknd! Is it a breach of charity to suppose, that if Dr.
Hare's qualifications were to be required in each member of our Consociations,
before they should be admitted to judge, that five tenths of their number would
be generally excluded? I presume that if these qualifications were to be read
at the opening of the sessions, and those only were to stay behind as judges,
who were thus qualified, the number of judges would be extremely small. Yet,
according to present measures, all who come are admitted to judge, without
exception! Must we be borne in hand that this is a divine constitution! did it
descend from Heaven, and proceed from a God of infinite wisdom and unbounded
goodness! has it met with the approbation of that immortal lover of man, Jesus
our dear and blessed Redeemer, who, to plant religion in our dark benighted
world, clothed himself in humanity, lived, preached, suffered, bled and died
amongst men! I cannot, I may not, believe it! It is blasphemy to say it! It is
certainly evil-speaking both of the wisdom and goodness of the king and head of
the church! If I must submit to ecclesiastic authority, and my religious creed
must be dictated by men, I will certainly, following the example of the
renowned Chillingworth, go to Rome, where dwell those who have a much fairer
claim to infallibility, than any in our church. My reason and conscience, and
the duty, and allegiance I owe to the God of nature and grace, my heavenly
patron and my judge, will never permit me to stand at an human tribunal, and
submit the articles of my faith to poor, weak, frail, fallible men! Nor can I
whilst I retain my reason, and those ideas of the divine Majestly I now have,
be induced to believe, that He ever has required me so to do, or that He would
not be greatly displeased with me, if I should do it.




In proof of the truth of this reply, I appeal to the wretched and destructive
consequences of all such conventions which have ever been in the Christian
church; to the sentiments of the purest and best part of the church of Christ,
ever since he was on earth; to the sentiments of our worthy and illustrious
ancestors, who fled from oppression and ecclesiastic tyranny in their native
country, and first settled this land; and, what is more, I appeal to the New
Testament. And in vindication of this reply I stand solemnly bound, in point of
honor, to appear: For I am not a son of the "bond woman, but of the free."

2. As to the second question, What will the poor criminal preacher do? I
cannot certainly determine what he will do, though I am satisfied what I should
do in a like situation. I should certainly deny the jurisdiction of the
Consociation, and insist, that they showed their warrant for sitting, from
reason and the sacred oracles: And, until this was done to my own, and the
reasonable satisfaction of the impartial world, I should decline to answer a
single question concerning the doctrines impeached.

3. For the third question, What will this august assembly of divines and
philosophers do? The following things may be received in reply. The author of
Remarks upon President Clap's History, etc. says, concerning such ecclesiastic
conventions, "But would men be tried, judged and excommunicated by such a
standard as this? No! not so long as they had one atom of common sense left.
These things will never go down in a free State, where people are bred in, and
breathe a free air, and are formed upon principles of liberty; they might
answer in a popish country, or in Turkey, where the common people are sunk and
degraded almost to the state of brutes, by poverty, chains and absolute
tyranny, and have no more sense of liberty and property, than so many jack
asses: But in a free state they will be eternally ridiculed and abhorred. For
my part, did I not think religion far too sacred to be trifled with, and was I
persuaded that no ill consequences would attend such a ven^rable council, I
should be half pleased to see it; as it would be a droll subject, a subject of
lampoon and buffoonry, to see the Bishop of Connecticut awfully attended with
an equipage of 15 or 16 in black, touring through the Government, to
excommunicate this, that, and the other church from the faith, et caetera." p.
109, 110. Is is not great pity that this good gentleman had not been at
West-Stafford, 2d of November, 1779, to see his droll subject!
Since they have met together in this solemn manner, they will doubtless advise
the complainants, that, as the doctrines in dispute are neither expressed in
the Bible, nor indubitably contrary to any thing therein expressly contained;
having been constantly disputed in the Christian church, for upwards of 1500
years; as they have been constantly held and denied by different divines,
purely on account of their different interpretation of implicit or doubtful
scriptures: And, as neither the pastor nor church do pretend to require
subscription to them of any individual in said church, or in the world; but
leave all men to search the scriptures and judge for themselves, concerning the
truth or falsehood of the doctrines, and consequently to receive or reject them,
as they shall finally determine: I say, they will doubtless, in consequence of
these considerations, advise the complainants, that they carefully and
prayerfully search the rule of their faith, the Bible, endeavoring to form
their religious tenets and articles of faith upon the expressions of scripture;
leaving their minister and the church to which they belong, to enjoy their own
opinions relative to the interpretation of implicit or doubtful scriptures:
And, that they, by no means, attempt to make a schism in the church on account
of opinions not expressly in, nor expressly contrary to, the only rule of faith
adopted in their church; lest they commence heretics and be treated as such.
Heresy being, as before explained, the making a separation in Christian
communion, on account of opinions not expressly in the rule of faith, nor
contrary to any thing expressly contained in it.

A short animadversion on the citation shall finish my present design. The
Association, having taken opportunity for enquiry and information in the case,
have advised that it is highly expedient that the Consociation of this district
be convened as soon as may be with convenience, TO HEAR AND JUDGE ON THE
PREMISES.

This is therefore to desire and REQUIRE you to APPEAR before said
CONSOCIATION, etc. to answer to the CHARGES contained in the paper
beforementioned.

We need look no further back into ecclesiastic history than the reign of
Queen Mary of England, of glorious memory! to find great numbers of citations
which run in the same language, sent to the laborious and painful servants of
Jesus Christ, to call them into the high commission court, to answer to charges
of heresy. "Surely oppression makes a wise man mad," says Solomon.

I plainly discern charges of heresy, citations, trials, censures,
imprisonments, if the civil government would permit, deprivations, gathering
thick around such courteous papers as that under consideration. I mean that the
spirit of the paper, not the Gentlemen who composed it, gives me these ideas.
O! this odious business of creed-making and subscription! it has shed more
human blood than all the civil wars since Christ!

Be pleased to look yonder, and behold your neighbors, your dearest friends,
your sons and brothers, braving every danger, struggling with countless
hardships, difficulties and deaths, in order to ease off from you and their
dear country, the intolerable weight of oppression and civil tyranny! whilst
you at home, in your easy chairs, are, in my humble opinion, fast riveting the
more galling and intolerable chains of ecclesiastic tyranny, on their necks,
and the necks of their children and their children's children!

As to the second name to this paper, Charles Backus, his youth, inexperience
This was the first Consociation Mr. Backus ever was a member of; and yet must
require a Father in the ministry, of upwards of 50 years, to appear before him,
to answer to charges, etc. Is this a constitution of Heaven that admits of such
absurdities! I will as soon believe all the reveries of the Romish church to be
divine!
and want of sufficient reading and discernment, might possibly plead a little
in his favor, and mitigate somewhat the severity of censure. But my tongue
cannot express the amazement of my mind, upon sight of the name, Theodore
Hinsdale, set to such an unchristian paper! A man of upwards of 40 years, of
maturity of judgment, reading and discernment! What will not hoary prescription
do, when men do not sufficiently examine for themselves!

These, Gentlemen, are the reasons of my protestation against the present
procedure of Consociation in the second society in Stafford, Nov. 2, 1779.

DAN FOSTER.

III. STRICTURES on the REPORT of a certain anonymous COMMITTEE.
ALTHOUGH I repeatedly requested a copy of the result of Consociation at
West-Stafford, before they left the ground, and was as often promised one as
soon as it could be prepared; yet after waiting about a month, and when I had
almost concluded the Gentlemen had forgot their promise, or made it with some
mental reservation, I received, very much worn and defaced, a Manuscript,
indorsed on the back in the following words, " A copy of the Result of
Consociation at West-Stafford, Nov. 2, 1779." I unfolded it, and found it
attested by Theodore Hinsdale, and Aaron Church, Scribes; Scribes of what I
could no determine, unless of the Committee. I then looked for the beginning,
and found none, or rather that it began in the middle. -- I then looked for its
regular form and found it had none; I then began in the middle and read it
through, and void and darkness was on the face of it throughout, like the
original chaos represented Genesis i. I then looked to see who were of the
Consociation, at what time, and in what place they held their session, and
found no place, time nor person; I then looked to see who was the Complainant,
what the complaint, who the Defendant and where residing, in fine who the
parties were that appeared to implead each other, and found no body and
nothing. I am obliged therefore to call it the copy of a Result or Report of a
certain anonymous Committee, attested, as such by the two men before named, and
must still wait that their promise of a copy be accomplished, while I repeat my
request of a true, full, and properly attested copy, not of the Report of a
nameless Committee, but of Consociation, that identical Consociation that set
in judgment upon my creed last fall, at West-Stafford.

The following is the Report of this anonymous Committee.

" Thursday, 8 o'clock, Met according to adjournment. The Committee last chosen
made their report, which was accepted, and is as follows,

"ART. I. That Children are not born with sinful and vicious natures, and that
Adam's sin and guilt is not imputed or conveyed to his posterity, but Children
are born in the image of God, objects of his favor and without desert of
punishment. This article owned and defended by Mr. Foster. Voted dangerous and
contrary to gospel, according to charge. The Consociation disapprove of it for
the following reason. The word of God is full and express in asserting that men
are born into the world with corrupt and depraved natures, Genesis vi. 5, speaking
of the wickedness of man, it is said, the imagination of the thoughts of his
heart was only evil continually. "Who can bring a clean thing out of an
unclean? not one," Job xiv. 4, and John iii. 6. "That which is born of the
Flesh is Flesh," Ephesians. ii. 3. "and were by nature children of wrath, even as
others." And that man derives a corrupt nature from Adam is abundantly plain
from Genesis v. 3. And Adam begat a son in his own likeness after his image, not
after the image of God, in which we read man was first made, Genesis i. 27, "God
created man in his own image, in the image of God created he him;" but in his
own fallen likeness. Psalm li. 5, "Behold I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin
did my mother conceive me." Romans v. 12, and on, "therefore as by one man sin
entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men for
that all have sinned." And 18, "therefore as by the offense of one judgment
came upon all men to condemnation." And 19. "by one man's disobedience many
were made sinners." If children are not polluted, why then are they baptized?
Why necessary to be regenerated for the enjoyment of God? Thus evident it is to
every candid and impartial mind that man is born into the world with a sinful
nature, not in the moral image of God, consequently not free from guilt or
desert of punishment.

ART. II. That perfect obedience is not required of us, but the law that
required it of us is entirely abolished. Not proved.

ART. III. That obedience is the only condition in the covenant of grace. Owned
and defended by Mr. Foster, and as explained in his defense and printed works,
was by the council voted dangerous. Romans iv. 5, 6. "But to him that works
not, but believes on him that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for
righteousness" -- "Even as David describes the blessedness of the man unto
whom God imputes righteousness without works." In these words the blessings of
the covenant of grace are expressly suspended on faith, but they could not be
if obedience in distinction from faith were the only condition. It is certain
without holiness no man shall see the Lord, and the gospel contains the most
weighty arguments to universal obedience: But this obedience is the fruit of an
union with Christ, and it can no more exist without this union than a branch
severed from the vine can bear fruit. Romans iv. 5. and xi. 6.

ART. IV. That we have a natural and moral power to do all that the gospel
requires of us. Owned and defended. Voted unscriptural and dangerous according
to charge. Mr. Foster wholly explodes the distinction between natural and moral
power as foolish and ridiculous, and in his defense asserts that we have all
power necessary to do what the gospel requires of us in order to inherit its
blessings. That God does not require natural impossibilities of men we are as
full in asserting as he can be, but at the same time, must believe that man's
inability to holiness is such as fully to justify those words of our savior,
John, vi. 44. "No man can come unto me except the father which has sent me
draw him." And of the Apostle, Romans viii. 7. "The carnal mind is not subject to
the law of God, neither indeed can be." -- Should we admit that man has full
power to do all the Gospel requires of him, in every sense in which he may be
said to possess it, we conceive we must then admit a principle of holiness in
him naturally, in his fallen state, contrary to the word of God, or else
utterly deny the force of moral obligation -- For to adopt the rule of duty to
the blass of the depraved heart, is to make it what we please, and it is
entirely repugnant to all our notions of the perfections of the deity, that he
should give his rational creatures such mutable variable laws, for his laws are
all like himself holy, just, and good immutably.

ART. V. That our good works are the matter of our justification at the
Redeemer's bar. Owned and defended. Voted unscriptural and dangerous. This
article, Mr. Foster professes openly to defend, but to us it appears directly
opposite to, and subversive of the gospel method of salvation. No doctrine is
more plainly and frequently taught, as a foundation principle in the holy
scripture, than that the believer's justification before God, is wholly on
account of Christ's righteousness. Romans iii. 28. A man is justified by faith
without the deeds of the law, -- and 20 "By the deeds of the law there shall no
flesh be justified in his sight." Titus iii. 7. "That being justified by his
grace we should be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life." Romans v.
19. "So by the obedience of one shall many be made righteous." Can any thing be
more evident from these and similar texts than that the matter of our
justification before God, is not our own personal defective obedience, but the
all-perfect righteousness of Christ imputed to us, and received by faith alone.
This righteousness of Christ is the sole and exclusive ground of our pardon and
acceptance with God, and justification at the Redeemer's bar, Romans x. 4. "For
Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that believes." --
Saints in glory are described as having their robes made white in the blood of
the lamb. Rev. vii. 14. "These are they which came out of great tribulation,
and have washed their robes and made them white in the blood of the lamb. If
our works are the matter of our justification at the redeemer's bar, it is
difficult to say for what purpose Christ died, or how be is mediator between
God and man.

ART. VI. That Christ's righteousness is not sufficient for our acceptance with
God, that being a legal righteousness, but we must have a gospel righteousness
for which we shall be accepted. Voted, proved according to charge. For the
reasons we refer to the texts cited under the preceding article.

ART. VII. That the doctrine of particular and personal election is not known
in the word of God. Proved according to charge. It is proved in the opinion of
the Consociation that Mr. Foster explodes the idea of personal election,
particularly in a sermon delivered at the ordination of his son Daniel, pages
p. 50 and 51. This doctrine is plainly and fully taught in divine Revelation.
Ephesians. i. 11. "In whom also we have obtained an inheritance being predestined
according to the purpose of him who works all things after the counsel of his
own will." And 4, 5. According as he has chosen us in him before the
foundation of the world; having predestined us unto the adoption of children
by Jesus Christ. Romans viii. 29. Whom he did predestinate -- moreover, whom he
did predestinate, etc. etc.

ART. VIII. That Christ died for the whole world in this sense, that one as
much as another is alike given to Christ. This Article is proved according to
charge in the judgment of this Council, in the sermon Mr. Foster preached at
Mr. Joel Foster's ordination. -- This Consociation doubt not of the sufficiency
of the merits of the savior for the whole world: But it will not hence follow
that Christ died for all intentionally alike, or that one as much as another is
given to Christ. John xvii. 9. I pray for them: I pray not for the world, but
for them which thou have given me, for they are thine -- and 20, Neither pray I
for these alone but for them also who shall believe on me, through their word.
John vi. 37. All that the father gives me shall come to me, and him that
comes to me I will in no wise cast out. If Christ died for all, as much for
one as another, then if all do not actually participate of the benefits of his
death, and at last arrive to Heaven, his purpose and intention must be
frustrated.

ART. IX. That the righteous man who is pardoned and justified and has the
promise of life, may fall from his righteousness and finally perish. Not
sufficiently proved.

ART. X. That the Bible is badly translated, much of it, and in one place an
error in the original.

As to this article, the Consociation are of opinion that Mr. Foster only meant
that there were errors in some Hebrew copies.

Therefore we think ourselves holden in faithfulness on this occasion, to bear
our open testimony against the abovementioned doctrines held and taught by Mr.
Foster, as being not only contrary to the gospel, and of dangerous tendency,
but some of them, at least, even subversive of the Christian institution, and
to say that we cannot but look upon these errors persisted in, as utterly
disqualifing for the gospel ministry, and therefore that we cannot in
conscience hold communion with the pastor who persisteth in them.

A true Copy, Attest, THEODORE HINSDALE, AARON CHURCH, Scribes."


As the reader has the report before him, I think it needless to repeat the
articles in the following strictures.

ART. I. etc. -- Voted dangerous and contrary to gospel, according to charge,
and disapproved for the following reason: 'The word of God, say they, is full
and express in asserting that men are born into the world with corrupt and
depraved natures.' -- Very confidently said, but where are these full and
express scriptures to be found in the word of God? Why, Genesis vi. 5, is one;
speaking of the wickedness of man, it is said, the imagination of the thoughts
of his heart are only evil continually. -- But what would they infer from these
words? Was the wickedness of the antediluvian world referred to in Genesis vi. 5,
their natural corruption and depravity? If it was then this natural corruption
is not universal, since Noah must be excepted who was a just man, perfect in
his generations and walked with God, see the 9th verse: Or was this wickedness
an evidence of their natural corruption? If so, then by parity of reason Adam
himself was naturally, or as he came into existence, corrupt, for he eat the
forbidden fruit; and the angels, at least many of them, were created vicious
beings, for they revolted from the Almighty: Or, does the evidence of the
natural corruption of the human race depend upon the universality of the
corruption and depravity of mankind referred to? Then certainly Adam and Eve
were naturally depraved; for, when they only were existent, mankind were surely
universally depraved and that without any exception; whereas there was one man
righteous in the age referred to. Hence it is very apparent that the corruption
of mankind in the age referred to, was neither natural corruption itself, nor
an evidence of it. It is the unhappiness of some Gentlemen, that they ascribe
to human nature simply as existing, what belongs to it only as men have
corrupted it by a long course of continued impiety: Thus they make all men
children of wrath by nature, from the Apostle's words to the Ephesians, ii. 2,
3. which evidently relate to their former state of Heathenism, when they lived
in gross idolatry and under the government of the prince of darkness, as the
context plainly shows. Is it a just and conclusive method of reasoning, to
argue from the state of human nature, when corrupted by actual sins and
rebellions, to its state and condition as it comes into existence? Because
human nature is capable of being viciated, and is in fact viciated, by personal
wickedness, therefore it is vicious as it proceeds from the finishing hands of
its maker? Because the imagination of the thoughts of the heart of a moral
wicked agent are evil, therefore the imagination of the thoughts of the heart
of one who is not a moral agent, viz. an infant, are evil? Because the
scriptures inform of a man, or number of men, who by a continued course of
wickedness, had contracted fixed habits of villainy to that degree that all
their thoughts and imaginations were evil, shall we take this to be a full and
express scripture assertion that men are born into the world vicious and
depraved? If a man in a long course of open impiety, is finally left of God to
commit murder, and dies on a gibbet, is this an indubitable evidence that he
was born into the world a wicked wretch, with a murderous disposition? It seems
so, or Genesis vi. 5. would never have been cited in proof of the state of mankind
by nature, or as they came into the world. If such reasoning is not to be
allowed, then the text cited is not to the purpose.

The next scripture cited by the committee as expressly asserting that man is
born into the world with a corrupt and vicious nature, is Job xiv. 4, 'Who can
bring a clean thing out of an unclean? not one.' Let the reader only turn his
attention to the preceding verses of the chapter, and he will find that the
cleanness and uncleanness referred to in the words as they stand connected with
the context, have no reference at all to moral evil, but only and simply to the
shortness, vanity and afflictions of the present life -- that we are liable to
many evils in the present state; our days are few and troublesome, we are cut
down like a flower, and flee as a shadow. As parents are frail and mortal, so
they propagate a frail and mortal nature, for nothing can be more perfect than
its original: This is Job's reasoning, and the evident design of the words: How
then is native corruption and viciousness expressly asserted in these words,
when they have no manner of relation to any such thing.

The next full and express scripture for natural depravity used by the
Committee, is John iii. 6. 'That which is born of the Flesh is Flesh.' i. e.
that which is born in the sense you Nicodemus speak of, is but a mere man
constituted of body and soul, or the mere constitution and powers of a man in
their natural state, and so not fit for the vision of God because not holy;
therefore our savior informs him that a different birth was necessary in order
to qualify for the kingdom of God, viz. a spiritual one: But not a word is
there here about original depravity, or that we are born vicious.

Another express scripture is Ephesians. ii. 3. which we have mentioned already to
have reference to a state of heathenism, and needs nothing further said upon it.

The committee proceed -- "That man derives a corrupt nature from Adam is
abundantly plain from Genesis v. 3. And Adam begat a son in his own likeness,
after his image; not after the image of God, in which we read man was first
made, Genesis i. 27, 'God created man in his own image, in the image of God
created he him,' but in his corrupted fallen likeness." Powerful reasoning!
Adam begat a son in his likeness, and what would they infer from this? So the
inferior orders of creatures, according to a divine establishment, beget their
young in their likeness: Is this an evidence of natural viciousness? No more, I
fancy, is intended by the words, than that Adam, as a worker, together with
God, begat an human reasonable creature, and therefore in his likeness; i. e.
he begat a man like himself, having the same nature that God had given him.
That it has no reference to the qualities and propensities of Adam's mind, or
his son's, is evident, unless minds are propagated as bodies are, by natural
generation, and Adam was the father of Seth's spirit, as he was of his flesh:
And if this be the case, I see not why one moral quality may not be propagated
as well as another; holiness as well as sin, virtue as well as vice; for
viciousness is no more of the essence of the mind than virtue. If then minds
are propagated in the same manner as bodies are the qualities of these minds
are in like manner propagated, for they are not to be separated in any given
instance; by consequence an holy mind will propagate an holy mind, and vice
versa: In the same manner that a vicious moral quality may be propogated, in
the same manner a virtuous moral quality may be propogated. If this reasoning
be not good, let the fallacy be shown. But the truth is, moral viciousness has
its seat in the mind, and the Almighty is the direct and immediate author of
the human mind, and therefore styled in the scriptures the father of our
spirits, Heb. xii. 9. That God is the direct and immediate author of the human
mind is a proposition I shall at present take for granted; when the truth of it
is called in question and disputed, I stand ready to prove it.
and said to form the spirit of man within him, Zech. xii. 1. Hence if Adam's
son had any vicious qualities in his mind connate with the existence of it, God
placed them there, from whom his mind immediately derived, which makes the pure
and holy God the author and prime source of all the wickedness that ever
existed among the human race: But, 'are not my ways equal?' says the Almighty.
May he defend us from such a blasphemous imputation! -- I would here just
observe that the word own, which the Committee appear to place the stress of
their reasoning from Genesis v. 3, upon, is not in the original, but supplied by
the translators, and the text ought to be read thus -- 'And Adam begat in his
likeness, in his image:' To make it therefore an emphatical word is quite
unjustifiable.

From what has already been observed, is not this consequence unavoidable, viz.
that mankind are not corrupt and vicious as they come into the world? It is
capable, I think of demonstration that whatever viciousness there is in the
human mind, as it comes into existence, must proceed from God equally with the
mind itself. Does it not appear vain then for any man to reason from those
words Genesis v. 3, to prove derived viciousness, when agreeable to such reasoning
this viciousness must derive immediately from the deity? Further, are these
Gentlemen of the Committee absolutely certain that Adam, when he begat Seth,
was not a convert, a truly religious and holy man? He was now 130 years old,
and had lived nearly as long under the gospel dispensation; if he ever embraced
the gospel and became a virtuous man, as has been always believed in the
church, it is in the highest degree probable he was now a virtuous and godly
man. And if moral pravity may be propagated by natural generation, as the
Committee suppose, why not moral virtue also? And if moral virtue may be thus
propagated, why is it not quite as likely Seth was born virtuous as vicious? I
think it lies upon the Committee to make it evident that virtue cannot be
propagated as well as depravity; or that Adam, when he begat Seth, was not a
virtuous man. Until then I must look upon the argument from this text, in
favor of the natural viciousness of mankind, as absolutely inconclusive and
prodigiously uncharitable.

If the Gentlemen I oppose will avow the opinion, that minds are capable of
division and multiplication, and therefore, like the animal part, are
propagated by natural generation, they might give a better account of their
derived viciousness; although in this case to impute guilt to the posterity of
Adam, and punish them on account of this derived viciousness would be unjust
and unequal, since it was by virtue of no act or choice of theirs -- to which
they had never given their assent or consent.

The next scripture they have seen fit to produce as express proof of our being
born vicious, is Psalm li. 5. 'I was shapen in iniquity, and in sin did my
mother conceive me.' The words, agreeable to the Hebrew, ought to be rendered
-- 'I was born in iniquity, and in sin did my mother nurse, or nourish me,'
which words have no reference, I conceive, to his simple formation in his
mother's womb, but import no more than that he was a great sinner, early went
astray, and had contracted strong habits of vice. Job speaks of guiding the
widow from his mother's womb, Job xxxi. 18. The wicked are said to go astray
from the womb, as soon as born, speaking lies, Psalm lviii. 3, and the house of
Jacob is called a transgressor from the womb, Isaiah xlviii. 8. These
scriptures are of like import with the words of the Psalmist under
consideration, and intend no more than that they did these things very early,
as soon as capable; not that Job guided the widow, the wicked went astray, and
the Jews transgressed as soon as born, even in an infant state, for this was
utterly impossible. If we take the words in the literal sense of our
translation, it is manifest David charge his sin and wickedness, not upon
himself, but upon some other person; for, it will be granted on all hands, he
did not shape and conceive himself: Who then shaped him? Answer, God, Psalm
cxix. 73, and Job xxxi. 15. That God made us, is an unanswerable reply to all
reasonings from such scriptures as these, or any other, to prove natural
viciousness, and is an incontestable evidence that they are grossly
misunderstood and abused, while strained to patronize such a blasphemous
sentiment.

The next scriptures advanced as being express in the case of derived
viciousness, are " Romans v. 12. Wherefore as by one man sin entered into the
world, and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all have
sinned -- and 18, therefore as by the offense of one, judgment came upon all
men to condemnation -- and 19, by one man's disobedience many were made
sinners." The Committee mean to prove from Romans v. 12, that man derives a
corrupt nature from Adam, i. e. a nature morally corrupt, or vicious -- '
Wherefore by one man, sin entered into the world:' Here the Apostle affirms
that sin entered into the world by one man, i. e. Adam. 'And death by sin.'
What sin? Whose sin? Evidently Adam's sin, his one sin of eating the forbidden
fruit. 'And so death passed upon all men." That is, by the one sin of the one
man Adam, the whole human race became mortal. 'For that all have sinned.' How
is this? Does the Apostle here affirm, that all men have sinned,
contradistinguishing sin from suffering? This would be to contradict himself in
the same verse. He had just affirmed, that one man sinned, and that death came
upon all for, or in consequence, of that one sin: Now to make him affirm in the
last clause, that all have sinned, would make him palpably contradict himself.
Further, it would not then be by one sin 'that death has passed upon all men;'
but by many sins, even the sins of all men, directly repugnant to the express
words of the inspired writer. That mortality came into the world, and passed
upon all men, by Adam's one sin, is proved from the text: But that mankind
derive a corrupt nature from Adam is not expressed in the text most certainly;
nor can it be inferred from any expression in the text, with the least shadow
of probability, except the last clause: And that the Apostle does not mean to
be literally understood in this clause, is undeniably evident, unless he
contradicts himself, which we may not suppose. He evidently means suffering by
the word sin, suffered by sinned, as is very usual in the sacred writings.
Further that St. Paul does not mean to affirm that all mankind sinned in Adam,
is evident from this, that he affirms all are liable to death, on account of
Adam's sin, which he would not have done, had he meant that all mankind had
sinned, and so became liable to death on account of their own sin; which they
would have been, had they all sinned in Adam.

As to verses, 18th and 19th, cited by the Committee, I shall observe nothing
upon them, the above being a full reply to any thing they can gather from those
verses to prove what they undertook to establish from express scripture, viz.
that man derives a corrupt nature from Adam; The twelft^ verse of Rom V. may be
considered as a comment, or exposition upon 1 Cor. ^^.22, as the Apostle is
treating of the same matter though more at (...) As a 'Adam all die*' cannot be
taken literally, but thus, as in Adam all (...) mortal. -- "Why St. Paul
differs in his phrase here from what he used to the Corinthians, and prefers
here that which is harder and more figurative, may perhaps, be easily accounted
for, if we consider his style and usual way of writing, wherein is shown a
great lik^^g of the beauty and force of Anti^h^sis, as serving much to
illustration and impression. In the 15th chapter of Corinthians, he is speaking
of life restored by Jesus Christ, and to illustrate and fix that in their
minds, the death of mankind best served: Here to the Romans he is discoursing
of righteousness restored to men by Jesus Christ, and therefore here the term
sin is the most natural and p^^parest to set that off. But that neither actual
or i^^^ted sin is here meant, or v. 19, where the same way of expression is
used, he that has need of it may see proved in Dr. Whitby, upon the place. If
there can be any need of any other proof, when it is evidently contrary to St.
Paul's design here, which is to show, that all men, from Adam to Moses, died
solely in consequence of Adam's transgression, see verse 17.' -- LOCK. -- See
also Dr. Whitby, Dr. Tailor, and Dr. Chauncey on the place.
but would here express my astonishment that any man, or number of men, unless
professed Deists and Infidels, should thus abuse scripture, by a designed
partial citation of it, as the Committee has done; I say designed, for I cannot
but suppose they were conscious, that a fair and full citation of the 18th and
19th verses of Romans v, would have made it appear to any one of common
understanding who should read their report, that these scriptures were not to
their purpose. I must entreat them for the future to pay a little more respect
to inspiration, than to abuse it in this manner, lest they fall under the heavy
charge of handling the word of God deceitfully.

The Committee then proceed to propound two questions, viz.

I. If children are not polluted why then are they baptized?

Answer. Baptism is a seal of the covenant, the badge of Christ's disciples;
and infants are baptized, to distinguish them from the world as such, by divide
order: And not to wash away original sin as the Papists dream.

II. Why necessary that infants be regenerated for the enjoyment of God?

Answer. Because infants are not personally and inwardly holy as they come into
being, though many of them are federally so, and therefore not fit for the
enjoyment of God, or the kingdom of glory; for without holiness no one shall
see the Lord.

Thus after misinterpreting and misapplying the above scriptures, and
propounding two questions; as if conscious of victory and that truth was with
them, they close their observations upon this first article in the following
words -- "Thus EVIDENT it is What is evident? It is evident to any candid and
impartial mind, that this nameless Committee, whoever they be, have espoused a
system of religious notions, which they mean to use as an infallible standard
and test of orthodoxy: And that though this favorite system cannot be proved,
not defended by scripture, it being neither expressed or implied therein, yet
all those who take the liberty to dissent from it, as all must who search and
examine the scriptures for themselves, must be said to want candor and
impartiality. Again, it is evident, this Committee have some new meaning to the
phrase express scriptures, or else that this assertion of theirs, "that mankind
are born into the world with a corrupt and vicious nature," is not proved by
express scripture. For certainly this proposition is no where to be found in
the Bible, lying in these words: If the Committee therefore mean by express
scripture such as express a proposition in which it is affirmed, as mankind
generally do, then there is no express scripture for the proposition above; and
they who affirm there is, must acknowledge themselves to be greatly mistaken in
so doing. If they mean by express scriptures, such texts as are to be found
written in the Bible, whether they have any reference or not to the matter to
be proved by them, it may be confessed their proposition is proveable from
express scripture; for there are a great number of texts written in the Bible,
that have no manner of reference to such a proposition; though but very few
that have less reference to it, than those cited by the Committee, as express
scriptures in proof of it. If they mean by express scriptures, that the words
of a proposition proved as theirs is, by express scriptures, may be all found,
lying in different parts of the Bible, and so must be picked by partial
citations, and brought together, in order to form the proposition; I
acknowledge this proposition may be proved by express scripture; for all the
words of the proposition above are undoubtedly to be found somewhere in the
Bible. And one would think the last is the meaning the Committee put to the
words express scripture, because they have made attempts to prove their
proposition by partial citations from the scriptures. Again, it is evident, the
Committee found themselves destitute of scripture evidence in support of the
Calvinistick, and therefore orthodox notion, that man is born into the world
with a vicious and sinful nature, and by consequence found themselves under a
necessity, in several instances, to injure the scriptures by partial citations;
hereby making them appear to favor their notions, when otherwise they would
not. Again, it is evident that those who make such a blundering business of
proving their own creed, were never divinely authorized to make creeds for
others, or to judge and condemn others creeds. There are many other things
which are very evident, but as they would not be for the credit and reputation
of the Committee, we content ourselves with only mentioning those things which
are for their honor.
to every candid and impartial mind, that man is born into the world with a
sinful nature, not in the moral image of God, consequently not free from guilt
or desert of punishment"!!! -- But where is the evidence of these conclusions?
Where the premises from whence these unaccountable consequences result? "Man
born into the world with a sinful nature." If this be true, God is the author
of this sinfulness, as he is the author of man's nature; this I have shown.
"Man not now made in the moral image of God." If by the moral image of God,
these Gentlemen intend holiness; I am not their opponent, never supposing that
we were born, in this sense, holy. -- I know of no scripture that says that any
man was ever born, or ever made in the image of God in this sense, that he was
made holy: If the Committee will produce one express scripture (as, upon this
subject they deal altogether in express scriptures) to prove that any one man
ever came out of the hands of God an holy creature, the sentiment shall, at
once, have a place in my creed Perhaps Genesis i. 27, will be cited as an express
scripture in the case -- 'So God made man in his own image, in the image of God
made he him.' Very true, so man was made in the image of God after the flood,
which is given as a reason against murder, and that the murderer should be
punished with death, see Genesis ix. 6, 'Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man shall
his blood be shed: For in the image of God made he man,' Both in Genesis i. 27,
and ix. 6, the original word translated image is the very same: To say
therefore, that the image of God in Genesis i. 27, intends holiness, and in Genesis
ix. 6, intends something else, essentially distinct and different, is
altogether without evidence, and is taking a license to say any thing;
especially when the inspired historian, in those words, plainly refers to the
manner and condition of man's first creation, and founds his reason against
murder upon this supposition, viz. that mankind were then made in the image of
God in like manner as he was at first, which, upon a different supposition,
would be utterly inconclusive. However, it lies upon the Committee to prove
that the image of God, Genesis i. 27, was holiness; and upon such an important
point, I shall receive nothing, as proof, but express scripture; for I do not
suppose that such a cardinal point in the system of some men's divinity, is
left to be spelt out, and inferred by way of consequence from implicit and
doubtful scriptures; which, when they shall have produced, these express
scriptures will equally prove that men in Noah's time, and by consequence to
the end of the world, were made, in like manner, in the image of God, i. e.
holy. -- That men after the flood were in the image of God, and his favorites,
as they came into being, equally with Adam, is further manifest from the
original blessing being repeated, without any variation, except a little
enlargement, and pronounced on the future formation of the human nature see
Genesis ix. 1, 2, 3. And is established by the Apostle James, who informs us,
chap. iii. ver. 9, that men indifinitely are made in the similitude of God.
"Man not free from guilt or desert of punishment." What, pray are they guilty
of as they come into existence, and why guilty? What punishment are they liable
to, and why liable? Did they ever transgress any divine law, or give their
suffrage that any body else should in their name, and on their behalf? Have
they any quality either of mind or body, as they come into being, that they did
not receive, while themselves were altogether passive and inconscious? Does the
Committee mean to adopt the 9th article of the 39 articles of the church of
England, viz, "That original, or birth sin, is the fault or corruption of the
nature of every man, that is naturally engendered of the offspring of Adam; and
in every person born into this world, it deserves God's wrath and damnation?"
Original sin, one of the most learned bishops of the church of England, has
frankly declared "to be a contradiction in terms; for as the word sin implies
an act of the will, so the word original implies the direct contrary; and
supposes the criminal act to have been committed by another, to which act that
person to whom the sin is imputed, neither contributed by thought, word, or
deed." Thoughts on Self Love, innate Ideas, etc. p. 17.
Says another famous writer upon the above article -- "To affirm that every
member of the human race, upon the account of Adam's sin, does really merit
God's wrath and damnation, i. e. that infants are no sooner born than they
become just objects of God's heavy anger and deserve to be damned: To be damned
for an act in which they had not the least share; an act committed six thousand
years before they came into being. That the all-perfect and blessed God is
angry even to wrath, with the work of his own hands, who never have done, were
never capable of doing the least thing to offend him. This will be pronounced a
doctrine so abhorrent to nature, to justice, to truth (may it not be said, so
impious and profane) that it is heartily presumed, that there is not one
sensible and sober clergyman in the kingdom who believes it." The Dissenting
Gentleman etc. p. 305.


ART. III. etc. -- Voted dangerous by the council: It must undoubtedly be
dangerous if voted so: But what reasons do they offer to prove this article
dangerous, besides their vote? Why truly they have found more express
scriptures -- Romans iv. 5, 6. But to him that works not but believes on him
that justifies the ungodly, his faith is counted for righteousness -- Even as
David also describes the blessedness of the man unto whom God imputes
righteousness without works;' and then go on to observe upon the words -- "In
these words the blessings of the covenant of grace are expressly suspended on
faith, but they could not be, if obedience in dictinction from faith were the
only condition." -- But, pray, who are these Gentlemen contending with? Not
surely with me, but with their own shadow -- with a man of straw of their own
manufacture. Did I ever contradistinguish obedience from faith, either in
public or private? Would this anonymous committee hold the public in hand that
I fancy obedience, in distinction from faith, is the only condition of the
covenant of grace? It seems so; and herein they have abused me, and imposed
upon the public. Could they imagine me so weak and childish? A just cause needs
no such measures to support it. Had the Gentlemen who sat in Consociation of
late at West-Stafford dropped their popish claim of authority; rejected the words
require and judge in their subpoena; and ^^^ted me to a friendly conference as
their brother and equal, I might, ^^^ew words, have given them full
satisfaction respecting this, and perhaps some other points of difference; but
this could not be obtained -- I could have appeared before them in no other
character than that of a criminal at the bar of his judges waiting the fatal
sentence: This religion and conscience would not suffer me to do. And I have
the pleasure since that time, to find that I am not the only instance of this
nature that ever happened in this State. -- The Rev. Mr. Noyes, former minister
at New Haven, was suspected by the Corporation of Yale College, of corruptness
in the faith; they took it upon them therefore to call this aged father to
examination, as having authority over him, "Or in plain English (as the the
Rev. Mr. Heart of Saybro^k says, from whom I have the account) they acted
toward him, on this occasion, not as friends and brethren, but as
inquisitors." He told them plainly that they had no right to examine him in
such a manner, and that he would not be thus examined by them -- "And in this,"
says Mr. H. "he did great honor to himself, and made a noble stand against the
encroachments of arbitrary power." After this, the Corporation cited him in
form, required him, I suppose, to appear before them at another session, and
submit himself to be examined by them. He accordingly appeared and denied their
jurisdiction; they affirmed it, and adjourned the trial of the poor Gentleman's
case to another time, and never called it again. -- The late Consociation, in
this instance, were not so wise, if the nameless Committee were of their
number, as is suspected by some people. God grant I may be the last in this, or
any other State, who shall be thus called to buckle on the hatness in defense
of that liberty wherewith Jesus Christ has made Christians free.
Faith is an act of gospel obedience, equally with repentence, or any other
religious exercise whatever, and declared to be such in the sacred pages, see
John vi. 29, 'Jesus answered and said unto them, this is the work of God, that
ye believe on him whom he has sent.' And 1 John iii. 23, 'And this is his
commandment, that ye should believe on the name of his son Jesus Christ." When
I say obedience is the only condition, etc. I do, and ever did, include faith
as an act of obedience equal with any exercise whatever, either of mind or
body, and indeed the first act in the series; for I never supposed that men
would obey the gospel while their minds did not assent to the gospel as true,
and from God. The Committee seem to suppose that the blessings of the new
covenant are suspended on faith, as distinguished from obedience, and would
father this distinction on St. Paul in the words by them cited; but this is an
evident pervertion of his obvious sense and meaning: The plain design of the
Apostle in this chapter is to convince the Jews that they had no pretense to
glory, or exalt themselves above the Gentiles, now in the time of the gospel
because descended from Abraham: But how does he do this? Why first, by showing
them that their father Abraham was justified by faith, and so had not whereof
to glory, since he received righteousness as a gift, and not a debt by
obedience to the legal dispensation. Secondly, Because neither they of the
circumcision, nor they who had the law, but they only who had faith were the
seed of Abraham, to whom the promise was made. Therefore the blessing of
justification was intended for the Gentiles, and bestowed on them, as well as
on the Jews, and upon the same ground. The opposition therefore the Apostle
makes between faith and work, in the 5th and 6th verses, is not an opposition
between faith and work in obedience to the gospel of Christ, as the Committee
would feign have it; but between faith and work in obedience to the Jewish law,
to which the Jews were surprizingly attached, and in obedience to which they
looked for righteousness and life. To impute righteousness in the 6th verse,
and not to impute sin in the 8th, intend the same thing, as Lock well
observes, the Apostle in these two verses using these two expressions as
equivalent; which import no more than that God does not reckon, or put sin to
the account of any one. By thus mistaking the design and meaning of St. Paul in
those verses, the Gentlemen have unhappily ran into the error that we are
justified by a faith distinct from, and no part of gospel obedience; and this
unlucky mistake was the only reason why they fell out with the article, and
voted it dangerous. I could wish this Committee would give us a description of
their faith as contradistinguished from gospel obedience, that we might know
what it is, and how it looks; for I freely confess I can obtain no idea of such
a faith, nor in any measure determine what it is the likeness of.

After observing that holiness is necessary to happiness, and that the gospel
contains the most weighty arguments to universal obedience, they observe, "That
this obedience is the fruit of an union with Christ, and it can no more exist
without this union, than the branch severed from the vine can bear fruit," and
cite Romans iv. 5, and xi. 6. What these two verses are cited for, it is utterly
beyond me to discover, unless cited with an "however they are to be understood"
-- as a text of scripture is cited by the Rev. Mr. Buckminster, in a late
pamphlet, p. 38, which is quite a modern method of citation, and adducing
proofs from the Bible in this manner, one scripture will answer the purpose as
well as an^^er: However, agreeable to what the Committee say above, faith and
saving union with Christ are antecedent to obedience, or any good influence
gospel motives can have upon the human mind: Therefore believing is no act of
obedience, though a commanded duty: Therefore those weighty gospel arguments to
universal obedience are motives to none but those who are united to Christ:
Therefore the unregenerate, with respect to religion and eternity, are not free
agents: Therefore the gospel is of no advantage to them. Are these notions
according to Godliness?

ART IV. etc. Owned and defended: Voted unscriptural and dangerous according to
charge. My defense, it seems, was their only evidence; but let me ask this
Committee, did I ever own and defend the above article in the words in which it
stands? This you have asserted in your condemnatory report although what you
assert is utterly beside the truth, and openly abusive: Doubtless you had my
defense in your hands, or at command; in which defense I maintain the
proposition, not in the words of the article which you have had the boldness to
say I owned and defended, but in the words following -- "That we have all power
necessary to do what the gospel requires of us in order to our taking benefit
thereby, is what I affirm." These words convey a very different idea from the
words of the article, and import no more than that ' God is not an hard master,
reaping where he has not sowed, and gathering where he has not strewed.' Matthew.
xxv. 24. The only sentiment I meant to maintain in the above sentence out of my
defense, in my public discourses, and private conversation, was and is simply
this, that the father of mercies does not require any of his creatures to
exercise a power they have not, or perform an impossibility as a condition of
his favor, or of their taking benefit by Christ's gospel; and if the
Committee, or any other man, will avow the contrary, they alone must bear the
sin and shame of it; as, if I have any consistent ideas of the divine
character, it would be a most vile reflection upon the equity and goodness of
the great parent of men and angels, and a reproach to the benevolence of the
savior, and the design of his gospel. -- The Committee proceed; "Mr. Foster
wholly explodes the distinction between natural and moral power as foolish and
ridiculous, and in his defense expressly asserts that we have all power
necessary to do what the gospel requires of us, in order to inherit its
blessings." I said, 'we have all power necessary to do what the Gospel requires
of us in order to our taking benefit thereby:' These are my words verbatim as
they stand in my defense. Now are these words, in order to inherit its
blessings, an express repetition of these words, in order to our taking benefit
thereby? It is evidently the case that these gentlemen have struck up a new
meaning to the words express and expressly; this I had much rather suppose,
than to imagine they meant to tell lies. The distinction between natural and
moral power, as understood, applied, and defended by some modern continental
writers, whereby they have grossly injured the divine character, and even made
the holy God the author of all wickedness, I disclaim: If any divine is pleased
to call the power and exercises of the mind, moral power and moral exercises;
and the power and exercises of the body natural; and will make and apply this
distinction in such a manner as not to bear hard upon the moral character of
the deity, I am not disposed to contend about words: But this I maintain, that
whatever defect, either in mind or body, we brought into the world with us, and
is coeval with our existence, is properly a natural defect. If there be an
inability to holiness, and a prevailing propensity to sin in the very nature of
man as existing, so that he cannot will, nor act otherwise, until a physical
exertion of divine power upon his mind; I think this inability, and this
propensity, and the necessity resulting herefrom, is, to all intents and
purposes, natural, as it springs from his nature and the very condition of his
being. And as we are but the passive recipients of this nature, which, with all
its endowments and qualities, comes from the finishing hands of its divine
author; so these two consequences, I think, will naturally and necessarily
follow, viz. 1. That human nature in every man as he comes into the world, is
not possessed of vicious and hateful qualities. 2. That God requires no more of
us than the nature he has given us will enable us to perform. Therefore to say,
we have a natural ability to do all the gospel requires of us in order to our
taking benefit thereby, but not a moral; that a natural inability excuses, but
a moral does not, is, I humbly conceive, evidently impertinent, and, which is
much more, an insult upon the divine wisdom, justice and goodness; and not only
so, but it is, I fancy, making a distinction between the powers of nature, that
the bible knows nothing about. If the man, as an intelligent, accountable
creature of God, is unable to perform a certain thing, let his inability be
what you please, and give it what name you please, I would ask, First, Whether
God requires the man to do this thing as a condition of his favor and grace,
and will punish him eternally for not doing the thing, while he does not grant
him power sufficient to overcome the resistance to be met with in the doing of
it? Second, Whether an avowal of the affirmative does not involve in it this
proposition, viz. That the Almighty has suspended his favor and grace upon an
impossible condition, and inflicts a penalty upon the nonperformance of this
impossible condition? And Third, Whether this is not a gross reflection upon
the divine character, by making God an hard master, reaping where he has not
sowed? etc.

The Committee disclaim the notion of God's requiring natural impossibilities
as they are pleased to call them, yet seem to suppose that God requires
impossibilities in some sense, or other, for they go on to say -- "But at the
same time, must believe that man's inability to holiness is such as fully to
justify those words of our savior, John vi. 44, 'No man can come unto me,
except the father which has sent me draw him.' And of the Apostle, Romans viii.
7, 'The carnal mind is not subject to the law of God, neither indeed can be."
But are impossibilities required of us in either of these scriptures? Far
otherwise, I think: It is true, we cannot come to Christ in the sense of our
savior's words, without the drawing of the father; and it is as true we are
not required to, without and separate from this drawing: We are capable of
being drawn, we can be workers together with God, and neither more nor less is
required of us in this affair: How then does the thing required exceed the
ability to perform? As to the words of St. Paul, every body, I suppose, will
grant that a carnal fleshly mind, that is in pursuit of the things of the
flesh, is not subject to God's law, and indeed cannot be remaining so; so our
savior informs us, that 'no man can serve two masters;' but what is all this
to the purpose? Because a man cannot convert himself without divine help;
because a carnal fleshly mind is not, and remaining such, cannot be subject to
God's laws, i. e. because a man cannot serve two masters: Does it therefore
follow, First, That such scriptures are a proof of the distinction between
natural and moral power, as the Committee would understand and apply it?
Second, That man is utterly unable to do what the gospel requires in order
partake of its benefits? And Third, That God requires impossibilities of his
creatures as a condition of the bestowment of his grace? It is surprising that
men should use Bible and reason in this manner!

But they proceed -- "Should we admit that man has full power to do all that
the gospel requires of him, in every sense in which he might be said to possess
it, we conceive we must then admit a principle of holiness in him naturally, in
his fallen state, contrary to the word of God, or utterly deny the force of
moral obligation." -- Only add the words, 'in order to our taking benefit
thereby,' which words, I must think, they have designedly suppressed all along,
in order to give themselves scope, by misrepresentation, to cast an odium upon
me and my sentiments before the world; I mean not to charge all Calvinists with
being influenced by the spirit of Calvin, though in many instances it appears,
and seems inseparable from the tenets themselves, which have in innumerable
instances been manifested by the unchristian methods taken for their support.
-- Mr. John Calvin himself, was a great persecutor -- wrote a book, as well as
Beza, in defense of persecuting measures, and treated several, not inferior to
himself, with great disingenuity, and even inhumanity merely because they
differed from him in sentiment -- witness Costellio, Servetus, and Serom
Balsc^, Vid. History of Religion, vol. II, pages 138, 172, 173, 174.
I say only add the words, in order, etc. and their reasoning as it respects
the case in hand, will stand thus -- Should we admit that man has full power
to do all that the gospel requires of him in order to his taking benefit
thereby, in every sense in which he might be said to possess a full power to do
all that the gospel requires of him in order to his taking benefit thereby, we
conceive we must then admit a principle of holiness in him naturally, etc. The
public may judge whether such reasoning is to the case, or not, or even to the
credit of those who use it. -- I would ask this Committee, are we under
obligation to yield the same obedience that Adam was, as a term of the divine
favor? Are we required to exercise holiness in order to holiness? And by the
force of moral obligation, are the unregenerate bound to yield this obedience,
and exercise such a principle in order that divine grace be confered? If such
opinions as these are couched under the above dark and ambiguous citation, it
is desired they would emerge out of obscurity, and in daylight avow the
opinions, and not hide themselves in clouds, and darken counsel by words
without knowledge. They conclude thus -- "For to adapt the rule of duty to the
bias of the depraved heart, is to make it what we please -- and it is repugnant
to all our notions of the perfections of the deity, that he should give his
rational creatures such mutuable variable laws, for his laws are all like
himself holy, just, and good immutably." Then God cannot publish a law of grace
through a mediator, and suspend a promise of saving blessings upon the faithful
and persevering endeavors of his sinful creatures as the condition of their
bestowment: I say, God cannot do this, unless he renders his laws mutuable by
adapting them to the bias of the depraved heart? He cannot in and through the
great redeemer, publish liberty to captives upon a condition possible for them
to perform, and not destroy the immutable holiness, justice and goodness of his
own laws? What would they insinuate but something like this? The Gentlemen
appear to me to be greatly confused in their notion of things, owing, I am
persuaded, to their not making the following necessary distinction, viz.
between what is God's work, and what is ours in the affair of our salvation: To
renew the mind is the work of God, divine grace is his gift, -- Our business is
to improve our talents in the best manner we are able; to exert our faculties
in endeavoring after divine grace in the way of God's appointment; to seek for
divine wisdom as for silver, etc. God does not require us to exercise a
principle, power or faculty we have not, in order to the obtainment of any
blessing whether temporal or eternal. For as Wollaston well observes, "If he
has no such power, then his power of that kind and degree is nothing; and it is
nothing that is required to be applied: Therefore nothing is required to be
done." WOLLASTON'S Religion of nature, etc. p. 109.
And Dr. Oswald -- "A connection betwixt obligation, and power to fulfill the
obligation, is apparent; and so inviolable, that if you set aside the latter,
the former vanishes of course. In all contracts, and without an express
contract, it is understood, that whoever fails in fulfilling his obligation,
lies under the penalty: But whoever thought any person under an obligation to
do what he has not power to do? Mad men, and tyrants, who are often mad
enough, may insist on obligations to perform impossibilies; but that learned
men should maintain a subtle debate on any such supposition, is unaccountable.
There is not only an apparent and inviolable connection betwixt power and
obligation; but the last is commensurate to the first: Which, by the bye, lays
the learned under an obligation to make mankind acquainted with the extent of
their powers; because, in proportion to them, they shall be accountable to him
from whom they are derived." OSWALD'S Appeal to common sense in behalf of
religion. Vol. II. p. 202 -- 3.


ART. V. Owned and defended: Voted unscriptural and dangerous: This vote is an
unanswerable reason; I shall not therefore enter the list with it, but let it
stand in its full. force, and go to the law, and to the testimony, if they speak
not according to this word, it is because there is no light in them. I shall do
little else here but consider the evidence they have advanced in defense of the
negative. After observing that I appear openly to defend the article, they say,
"But to us it appears directly opposite to, and subversive of the gospel method
of salvation." A very heavy charge surely, and not to be exhibited against a
fellow Christian, much less against a fellow labourer in the kingdom of the
prince of peace, without direct and indubitable evidence from the unerring
standard of religious truth, the holy scriptures. But what evidence have these
confident judges and condemners of my creed produced in defense of this their
weighty charge? How have they made the article appear opposite to, yea, even
subversive of the gospel method of salvation? Why their evidence is ushered in
with a self-contradictory assertion in the following words -- "No doctrine is
more plain and frequently taught as a foundation principle in the holy
scripture, than that the believer's justification before God is wholly on
account of Christ's righteousness." Here it must be confessed, nor need we
dissemble it, that personal merit or demerit cannot be transferred,
righteousness or guilt cannot be shifted from one to another.

LANGHORN'S Sarm. Vol. II. p. 235. And it must be owned, that our savior's
good actions cannot be properly and strictly ours, nor our bad actions his: And
in this sense, personal merit and demerit connot be transferred.

SEED'S Sermon. Vol. II. p. 394. The soul in all actings of faith on Christ's
righteousness, ought to look at this righteousness as in Christ, and not in
himself who believes.

Dr. WILLIAMS, Vol. III. p. 44. A Judge pronounces men to be what they are
according to law, and not (...) them to be righteous who are not.

BAXTER, on Justification.
Respecting this remarkable period, I would ask the following questions, First,
Whether something is not required to be done by us in order to our
justification? Second, Whether, when a favor is confered upon me wholly on
account of what another has done, any thing can be required of me as a
condition of its bestowment? Third, Whether the above citation is not
self-contradictory, by supposing that faith is a qualification or condition in
the subject, prerequisite to justification, and yet that we are justified
wholly on account of Christ's righteousness? But let us look into their
scriptures, " Romans iii. 28, A man is justified by faith without the deeds of
the law." It is desired that the reader would particularly bear in mind what
this and some following scriptures are brought to prove, viz. "That the
believer's justification before God is wholly on account of Christ's
righteousness." The Apostle's Words are, as cited by the Committee, 'A man is
justified by faith without the deeds of the law.' The consequence they would
draw, and indeed it must be drawn, for it will never follow, is this, therefore
we are justified wholly on account of Christ's righteousness: Because the
Apostle tells the Jews that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of
the Jewish law, in obedience to which law they were seeking to be justified;
that therefore we under the gospel are justified without obedience to the laws
of Christ, though justified by faith, as the Apostle declares in the words,
which faith is an act of personal obedience to the Christian law, without which
no one can ever be justified. The Committee first contradict themselves, and
then, to keep themselves in countenance, haul in St. Paul as favoring their
absurdity. The next scripture cited by them is the 20th verse of the same
chapter -- 'By the deeds of the law there shall no Flesh be justified in his
fight;' i. e. by obedience to the law as meritorious no man can be justified in
his sight. But is this plainly caught us in the words, viz. that we are
justified wholly on account of Christ's righteousness, without and separate
from obedience to the laws of Christ; especially when the same Apostle, in the
same chapter, verse 28th, asserts justification by faith, which faith is an act
of gospel obedience? They proceed -- " Titus iii. 7, That being justified by
his grace, we shall be made heirs according to the hope of eternal life." i. e.
we are justified by the grace and mercy of the gospel through Christ, and not
by virtue of our own works as meritorious of so great a favor; though none but
the obedient believer is, or can be justified upon the gospel plan. -- But from
these words are we " plainly taught that the believer's justification before
God is wholly on account of Christ's righteousness" -- i e. are we plainly
taught a palpable contradiction? A gift bestowed upon me wholly on the account
of another person, and yet suspended on a personal act of my own, as a
prerequisite or condition of its bestowment, I look upon as a contradiction in
terms They go on to cite " Rom v. 19, So by the obedience of one shall many be
made righteous." Another instance of their abuse of scripture, by partial
citations; whereas had they been honest enough to have cited the whole ve^ any
one conversant with the bible, wou^ have seen at once that this scripture was
neither expressly nor implicitly to their purpose. But to take them on their
own ground -- If the Committee imagine St. Paul to speak in this and the
preceding verse, of that righteousness, and that justification which is to
life eternal, why will they insist upon making St. Paul contradict himself, by
dreaming that this justification, and this being made righteous, must exclude
all reference to, and connection with, our personal obedience, when faith,
which is an act of personal obedience to an express command of the gospel law,
is expressly made a condition of our justification by St. Paul himself; yea,
even in the words these Gentlemen themselves have had the hand^ing of? They
proceed next to give us the sum total of the above scriptures in the following
words; "Can any thing be more evident from these and similar texts than that
the matter of our justification before God is not our own personal defective
obedience, but the all-perfect righteousness ^f Christ imputed to us, and
received by faith alone?" i. e. Can any thing be more evident, etc. than that
the matter of our justification before God is not our own personal defective
obedience, but the all-perfect righteousness of Christ imputed to us, and
received by an act of personal obedience. How is it possible that men can
reason thus, and drag consequences in this manner; men who look upon themselves
divinely authorized to be the judges of other people's creeds, and to justify
or condemn them at pleasure? But perhaps what follows will relieve the
difficulty; "This righteousness of Christ is the sole and exclusive ground of
our pardon and acceptance with God and justification at the Redeemer's bar."
This assertion of the Committee is contradictory, in my opinion, First, To
themselves. In one place they speak of the believer's justification being
wholly on account of Christ's righteousness -- in another that Christ's
righteousness is received by faith alone -- But here they say, "The
righteousness of Christ is the sole and exclusive ground of our pardon and
acceptance with God, and justification at the redeemer's bar." That we are
justified by (...), and that Christ's righteousness is the sole and exclusive
ground of our justification, are propositions contradictory the one to the
other; it is to include and exclude faith at the same time. "If all works are
excluded in our justification, and faith be a work, then faith is excluded: But
faith is a work." Baxter on Justification, p. 193.
"It is gospel preaching to call men to believe, repent, and to tell them, if
they do so, God will, for Christ's sake, forgive them; and if they do not so,
their sin will remain." Owen on Justification, p. 234.
If faith and repentance are requisite conditions in the subject, without which
he will never be pardoned and justified, then the righteousness of Christ is
not the sole and exclusive ground of our pardon and justification; unless they
mean by this phrase that (...) is the sole and exclusively inclusive ground,
etc. i. e. inclusive of faith; which they themselves seem to include, or rather
to include and exclude as best suits their purpose. Second, To the express
declaration of the redeemer himself. Where the bar of the redeemer is, his
Apostle has told us, 2 Cor. v. 10. By what rule the redeemer will proceed in
justifying and condemning, rewarding and punishing, at this his bar, he himself
has informed us, Matthew. xii. 37. and xxv. 31 verse to the end. Hence we see
that our final doom will be fixed, not by virtue of the righteousness of
another, or our interest in it, but according to our moral behavior while in a
state of trial and discipline. "We shall be judged by the grace and mercy of
the gospel, and not by the rigours of unrelenting justice. God will indeed
judge the world in righteousness, but it is by an evangelical, not a legal
righteousness" Dr. Atterbury's Sermons, vol. II. p. 154 -- 5.
-- "But we must obey all the laws of our savior, if we would be owned by him,
and would be accepted in him; which is that evangelical righteousness, upon
which our final justification and absolution by our savior, when he shall come
to judge the world, depends." Dr. Sherlock's Sermon, vol. II. p. 44.
Third, It gives us a false character of the moral governor of the world, as
though, in the distribution of his favors, he paid no regard to the moral
characters of his subjects, whether deserving of praise or blame, reward or
punishment. "Moral government consists, not barely in rewarding and punishing
men for their actions, which the most tyrannical person may do; but in
rewarding the righteous and punishing the wicked; in rendering to men according
to their actions, considered as good or evil. And the perfection of moral
government consists in doing this, with regard to all intelligent creatures, in
an exact proportion to their personal merits and demerits" Butler's Analogy, p.
66.


Fourth, If Christ's righteousness be the sole and exclusive ground of our
pardon and acceptance with God and justification at the redeemer's bar, I see
not why an holy life in obedience to the laws of Christ, is not utterly and
eternally excluded, and men j^ed and glorified here and hereafter in all their
sins.


But how do they make evident the above anti-scriptural notion? Why, " Romans x.
4. For Christ is the end of the law for righteousness to every one that
believes" i. e. the design and end of the law was to bring men to Christ, that
by believing in him, in obedience to his gospel, they might obtain
justification. Is this scripture full and express evidence, that the
righteousness of Christ is the sole and exclusive ground of our pardon and
acceptance with God, and justification at the redeemer's bar, when not a word
is said in the text about Christ's personal righteousness; not a word about our
pardon and acceptance with God, and justification at the redeemer's bar? Our
final justification and acquittal at the redeemer's bar is a subject as
foreign, I conceive, from the design of St. Paul in the 10th chapter to the
Romans as any subject can possibly be conceived to be, and any text within the
limits of the sacred canon would have answered the purpose just as well. Shall
such profound reasoners as these set up the trade of creed making and
creed-condemning! But we have not done with them upon this opposing and
subverting article yet: "Saints in glory, say they, are described as having
their robes made white in the blood of the lamb, Rev. vii. 14. These are they
which came out of great tribulation, and have washed their robes and made them
white in the blood of the lamb." Would they, from these words, infer that we
are not finally justified and acquitted at the redeemer's bar by our own works,
contrary to the plain declaration of the redeemer himself, and the Apostles who
spoke in his name? I also cite Rev xxi. 7. 'He that overcomes shall inherit
all things, and I will be his God, and he shall be my son;' and infer that we
are not finally justified at the redeemer's bar by the righteousness of Christ,
solely and exclusively, but by our own works; and this inference is, at least,
implicitly contained in the words; whereas Rev. vii. 14, is far from appearing
either expressly or implicitly to their purpose. They close; "If our works are
the matter of our justification at the redeemer's bar, it is difficult to say
for what purpose Christ died, or how he is mediator between God and man." --
There is no difficulty at all in the affair, if men would not try to embarrass
the most plain subject. Is it not in and through Christ as mediator of the new
covenant, that God, consistent with the honor of his laws and the glory of his
name, can and does accept sinners to his favor in consequence of their
faithfully seeking him in the way of the gospel? And is it not through Christ
that our works of righteousness in obedience to the gospel, though imperfect,
meet the divine approbation and the reward of life? yea, is it not through
Christ that we are granted even a state of trial for a future happy life? We
are not absolved at last by virtue of our works, but with an eye to Christ as
our daysman in whose advocateship we are interested, and through whom our
persons and imperfect services find acceptance: Nevertheless, whatever Christ
has done for us, and whatever interest we may be supposed to have in him, or
his righteousness; it is a truth according to godliness, and obvious to the
reason of mankind, that if we are not found at last to have obeyed the gospel,
we never shall be justified at the redeemer's bar, nor rewarded with life; he
will say unto all such, I know you not: On the contrary he who obeys the gospel
in this world, shall meet a divine reward in the kingdom of his father, Romans
ii. 7, 8, 9, 10. 1 Peter iv. 17. John xii. 17. Personal righteousness cannot be
transferred; we cannot, in any propriety of language, be said to be righteous
with another's righteousness, 1 John iii. 7. 'He that does righteousness is
righteous even as he is righteous.' Which words I wish may be particularly
noticed by the reader, and especially by the Committee, who, to maintain their
strange, anti-scriptural notion of our being pardoned and justified both here
and hereafter wholly, solely and exclusively by Christ's righteousness, have
been guilty of vilifying and speaking evil of the very righteousness the
Apostle is speaking of in those words; which they, I hope, will reflect on with
a great degree of shame and compunction. Agreeable to all the representations
we have in the sacred pages, of the solemn transactions of the last day, when
all the sons of men are to be tried at the redeemer's bar for eternity, the
final sentence, fixing the doom of every one, will pass according to the deeds
done here in the body: Those who obey the gospel are finally justified and
acquitted; those who disobey it are condemned; while not one word is spoken
about our interest in the righteousness of another, or its imputation (which is
inconsistent with the nature of things) being the matter of our final
acquittal: And indeed the supposition, that the righteousness of another is the
sole and exclusive ground of our final justification at the redeemer's bar, is
directly subversive of the divine moral government; if this be the case, how
can the moral governor and righteous judge of the world have any regard to
personal merit and demerit in distributing rewards and punishments among his
creatures? And by consequence, how can he have any regard to moral worth and
excellency, though a particular regard to personal merit and deem it, to moral
worth and excellency, are inseparable from the idea of the moral government,
and a state of trial? This is to subvert not only revealed religion, but
natural religion also, and to demolish at one blow the whole government of the
deity, whether natural or moral. For these reasons, with others that might be
mentioned, I am still constrained to believe, with Christ and his Apostles,
that our works in obedience or disobedience to the gospel will be the ground of
the divine procedure at the great day, and according to which our final state
will be determined; especially as the gospel is God's rule of government at
present with respect to all those under the light of it; for I cannot persuade
myself to believe that God, whose rules of government are perfect regularity
and right, will have one rule of government, and another and different rule of
judgment and final retribution. As to the reasons you have offered, and the
scriptures you have adduced in support of the negative, they appear to me
utterly inconclusive, and nothing to the purpose; and it is surprising to me,
as well as to many others, that you should, with such a preremptory air,
pronounce the article unscriptural and dangerous, opposite to, and subversive
of, the gospel method of salvation, upon such slight evidence, which in reality
is no evidence at all! But what lengths will not indiscreet zeal and bigotry
carry men! If you have heavier artillery to bring up, pray exhibit it -- let
the truth appear; I engage for myself to yield to scripture and reason, and
appear on the side of the truth as it is in Jesus, though I mean not to be
dragooned into a creed, or out of one. With me it is a very small thing that I
should be judged of you, or of man's judgment; he who judges me is the Lord.

ART. VI. etc. Voted, proved according to charge: "For the reasons, say they,
we refer to the texts cited under the preceding article." For the reasons of
what, pray? For the reasons why Christ righteousness is not sufficient, etc. Do
they mean to deviate into truth by avowing the article? Or are we referred to
the texts cited under the preceding article for the reasons why it is voted
proved according to charge? But perhaps they designed to vote the article
unscriptural and dangerous according to charge, agreeable to constant usuage in
this case; but it slipped their minds through a multiplicity of creed judging
business: Or perhaps it was lapsus pennoe of the scribes; or perhaps --
However, if they suppose the article contrary to express scripture as the
others are, I would propound this simple question, viz. Whether the sufferings
of Christ and his righteousness are designed to save people in their sins? But
as it is entirely uncertain what the Committee's design was, we can do no more
than for the reasons to refer the reader to our observations upon their defense
of the negative of the preceding article, and wait until the obscurity is
removed from this part of their report by another oracular response.

ART. VII. etc. Proved by vote. "It is proved in the opinion of the
Consociation that Mr. Foster explodes the idea of personal election,
particularly in a Sermon delivered at the ordination of his son Daniel, pages
50 and 51." The words referred to in my Sermon are as follows; "Did I believe
and teach, as some do, that God from all eternity elected to glory by an
absolute decree, a certain number of men, whom he foresaw undone by Adam's
fall, appointed his son to undertake their redemption, who was to satisfy
justice, merit glory, and make them physically mete for it, leaving the rest
under the dreadful decree of reprobation, to treasure up wrath against the day
of wrath, without possibility of help," etc. In this view of the decrees, I
did, do still, and ever shall explode them, while I believe there is a God, and
that his ways are equal: And it is in this view of them the committee must avow
them, if they would oppose me.

As to the article as it lies in the report of the Committee, it was known I
denied it. They go on to say: "This doctrine," ( i. e. the doctrine of election
as represented in the above citation out of my sermon, for it is in that sense
they avow the doctrine) "is plainly and fully taught in divine revelation"!!
What! is it plainly and fully taught in divine revelation that God from all
eternity elected to glory, by an absolute decree, a certain number of men in
such a manner as to denote a leaving the rest under the dreadful decree of
reprobation, to perish without possibility of help? It seems so, or they are
not my opponents: But where are the scriptures in support of such a gloomy,
fatal doctrine? Have these men the confidence to appeal to the Bible for proof
of such a suggestion? Yes, they can first charge God foolishly, Predestination,
a doctrine shocking, and manifestly contrary to all the notions men naturally
have of God, a^ ^ wise, just and good being, was opposed by Arminius; who left
behind him a man better qualified (...) himself, to carry on the cause he had
espoused, I mean the great Episcopius; whose writings soon flew all ove^
Europe, and were much read by the divines of the church of England, and so
ver^y good purpose; for soon after Calvanism vanished from amongst them quite
and clean. CLARKE'S Essay on Study, p. 13, 1^.
by charging him with making intelligent creatures to damn them and then go to
his word for proof of it -- " Ephesians. i. 11. In whom also we have obtained an
inheritance, being predestined according to the purpose of him who works
all things after the counsel of his own will -- Verse 4.5, According as he has
chosen us in him before the foundation of the world -- having predestined us
unto the adoption of children by Jesus Christ. Romans viii. 29, He did
predestinate -- moreover whom he did predestinate," etc. etc. It happens very
unlucky to the Committee that these citations from the Bible, in proof of
personal absolute election, have no reference at all to any election of that
nature, but only and simply to the call of the Gentiles in the kingdom of the
Messiah by the publication of the gospel among them, as might easily be made to
appear, and is fully shown by LOCK in his Paraphrase, etc. It is strange there
cannot be the words predestined, chosen, elect, ordained, etc. in a text of
scripture, but it is at once taken as proof of a personal, eternal, absolute
election, whether they have reference to any such thing or not. In truth the
notion is absolutely without Bible and reason. For further satisfaction I refer
to my reply to the Rev. Mr. Buckminster, where the affair of the decrees is
treated more at large.

ART. VIII. etc. "This article, say they, is proved according to charge in the
judgment of this council in the sermon Mr. Foster preached at Mr. Joel Foster's
ordination," and then proceed; "This Consociation doubt not the sufficiency of
the merits of the savior for the whole world; but it will not hence follow
that Christ died for all intentionally alike, or that one as much as another is
given to Christ." To say that the merits of Christ are sufficient for the
redemption and salvation of the whole world, yet that it was the divine purpose
that but a remnant should be redeemed and saved; and therefore the benefits of
our Lord's salutary passion, in the divine counsel and design, and in the
application of them, are restrained to this remnant, appears to me inconsistent
with the diffusive goodness and beneficence of the father and friend of men,
and not coincident with the character God has seen fit to assume in relation to
the human race; as a God who takes no pleasure in the death of him who dies;
who would have all men be saved, etc. and is in effect to say, that Christ died
no more for the non-elect, or those who, eventually, are not saved, than for
the devils themselves who are reserved in chains, etc. It leaves those for whom
he did not die, under an impossibility of pardon and salvation; faith in Christ
must be restrained to those for whom he intentionall died, the rest having
nothing to believe respecting Christ, unless that his death was sufficient for
their pardon and happiness, which is only to believe that God could have saved
them if he would; and what comfort would it be to a condemned malefactor to
know, that his prince could have pardoned and saved him, a price sufficient
therefore having been paid, but he would not? The Committee proceed to cite
"John xvii. 9, 20. I pray for them: I pray not for the world, but for them
which thou have given me, for they are thine. Neither pray I for these alone,
but for them also which shall believe on me through their word." 'I pray for
them: I pray not for the world,' etc. i. e. "I now offer up my prayer
particularly for my Apostles who are designed for so great a work as preaching
the gospel of the kingdom to both Jews and Gentiles, and therefore will stand
in need of special divine assistance and support; but I do not now intercede
for the world in general:" Though at other times we find him praying for the
world both Jews and Gentiles; yea, even for his persecutors and murderers,
"Father forgive them for they know not what they do." "The sphere of his
beneficence extended backwards to the foundation of the world, and reaches
forward to the last conflagration; so that nothing, which is capable of being
saved, is hid from the heat thereof. He became the savior of all ages, from
the first birth of time to its last period; the father of mankind, from the
rising up of the sun, to the going down of the same. The blessings of his
coming into the world, are as extensive as the world, and as lasting as
eternity. Our savior laid down his life for the si^^ of the whole world. He
came, that a^ in Adam all die, so in Christ should all be made alive. -- View
leisurely the stupendous scheme; a whole world redeemed from misery; a whole
world made happy, if their own impenitence does not prevent it." Seed on
Redemption.
How noble and sublime these views of Christ's redemption! But how debasing and
dishonorary the views of those who would confine the redemption and
intercession of Christ to a small remnant of the human race! As to John vi. 37,
the phrase to be given of the father does not signify the actual faith of those
who are thus given, but only their preparation and qualifications to believe,
by being convicted by the wonderful works our savior wrought, that he was the
true Messiah, and embracing him as such, laying aside their prejudices and
carnal affections, which obstructed their coming to him; and by being persuaded
of the truth, design and importance of the gospel and therefore receive and
attend upon the duties of it: And all are given to Christ, who thus receive him
and his gospel; but it is left with them whether they will be influenced by
these means or not, no force being put upon their minds, or their liberty of
choice in the least infringed; though as Chrysostom informs us, the Manichees
made use of these words to destroy man's free will; and therefore this father,
with St. Cyril, and others, observe, in opposition to the Manichees, that
Christ intends no more by the giving of the father, "but his revelation from
above to a soul disposed to receive it." But what is this to the purpose of
particular redemption? They conclude with the following remarkable reasoning;
"If Christ died for all, as much for one as another, then if all do not
actually participate of the benefits of his death and at last arrive to heaven,
his purpose and intention must be frustrated." Christ's intention to die for
all is one thing; his intention to save all is another thing; what I maintain
is, that Christ, of set purpose and design gave himself a ransom for all, and
tasted death for every man, and therefore that his redemption is equally
extended with the race of man; and this his intention to die for all was
absolute; but his intention to save all, or any, is not absolute, but
conditional; universal salvation, and universal redemption are very different
things, the former I deny, the latter I maintain. If the reasoning of the
Committee is founded upon Christ's intention to die for all, it will stand
thus; If it was Christ's intention to die for all, and all are not saved, this
his intention must be frustrated; but all are not saved -- Ergo, The sophistry
is minifest. If they refer to Christ's intention to save all, their reasoning
is very foreign to the purpose, and effects not the truth of what I maintain.

The two last Articles, it seems, they got over without much difficulty.

The conclusion of the report of the Committee is in the following words and
style -- "Therefore we think ourselves holden in faithfulness on this occasion,
to bear our open testimony against the abovementioned doctrines held and taught
by Mr. Foster, as being not only contrary to the gospel, and of dangerous
tendency, but some of them at least even subversive of the Christian
institution, and to say that we cannot but look upon these errors persisted in,
as utterly unqualifying for the Christian ministry; and therefore that we
cannot in conscience hold communion with the pastor who persisteth in them."

Reply -- We allow infallibility to no man, to no set of men, however dignified
or distinguished. Assemblies and Convocations, ancient Councils and modern
Synods we think to have equal authority in the affairs of faith and religion;
that is, none at all, to bind the Consciences of others We maintain that no two
things can (...) more contrary to one another than faith and force; that to
employ authority against enquiries, and to punish, for mere opinions, for
opinions, that do not affect the safety of civil government, is a sin against
reason and revelation: It is Popery: It is Hobbism. We plead for equal,
impartial liberty; not meaning hereby a license to trample on religion, and to
laugh at revelation; but a liberty for every man to examine with care the
opinions of religion he embraces; a liberty to judge with our own
understandings, to believe with our own faith, and to worship God according to
the dictates of our own consciences. O sacred liberty! Thou soul of happiness!
Tecum vivere amem, tecum moriar libens.

Our duty to God, to Christ, and to our excellent religion, obliges us to
renounce in ourselves, and to oppose in others, spiritual tyranny, and all
human impositions, as terms of communion; the source of schism, and the bane of
the church's peace. Stand fast, ye beloved in the Lord, in the liberty
wherewith Christ has made you free. Know your principles, and never by an
inconsistent conduct debase your glory. An imposing nonconformist is as
contradictory a character as a non-resisting rebel.

PRIOR. The report is thus authenticated -- "A true copy, Attest, Theodore
Hinsdale, Aaron Church, Scribes."

"A true copy."

Question. A true copy of what?

Answer. --

"Attest, Theodore Hinsdale, Aaron Church."

Question. Who ordered you to attest this report?

Answer. --

"Scribes."

Question. Who were you Scribes for?

Answer. --!!

AN ADDRESS TO THE REVEREND ELDERS OF THE LATE CONSOCIATION AT WEST-STAFFORD.
REVEREND SIRS,
WHEN I received a citation, signed, Theodore Hinsdale, Charles Backus, etc.
informing of the approach of your venerable body to judge upon articles of
faith held and taught by me, and requiring me to make my appearance, as a
criminal, at your bar, to answer to charges, etc. -- I was well convinced, from
the haughty and assuming style and spirit of your mandatory citation, what I
must expect as the issue of your inquisitory proceedings: Your first public
appearance in the House of God at Stafford, and the temper and spirit which
were conspicuous in every step of your conduct, presaged a rash conclusion, and
the event has fully justified my previous apprehensions. But suffer me, with
the freedom of a Christian, to expostulate with you; is not the Lord Jesus
Christ the only lawgiver and king in his church, to whose authority and
command, as to things of religion, Christians are bound to submit? Are not the
scriptures of the Old and New Testament the only standard of religious truth?
Has not every free and accountable creature full and undisturbed right to
search the scriptures, judge and believe for himself? Is religion any further
praiseworthy than it is matter of choice? Are not these the principles which
our first reformers asserted with so good effect against the arbitrary claims
of the Romish church? And are they not the very basis and only support of the
reformation? Granting these principles, and they must be granted, or the
reformation from popery is evidently schismatical, is it not palpably
inconsistent with them all, to imagine that Christ has given to any man, or
body of men, authority in matters of religious faith, to whose decrees, in
point of doctrine, Christians are obliged, and ought to submit? Is not the very
claim of such authority equally and the same thing with a claim to
infallibility? Has God given to any man, or body of men, authority in matters
of faith, to whom he has not given infallibility? Then he has given to a man,
or body of men, authority to lead men into error, a right to seduce and
deceive: But let it be granted, at present and for argument sake, that there
is, and will always continue to be, a body of men upon earth, to whom Christ
has given authority to decide in matters of religious faith, and to whose
decisions Christians are subject, and ought to submit; I ask, Where shall we
find this body of men? Is it the Pope with his Cardinals; or the king of
England with his Parliament? Is it the Archbishop with his Bishops; or the
Bishop of every diocese with his Dean and Chapter attending? Is it a Presbytery
or Synod; Association or Consociation? Is it an ecclesiastical council, or a
particular church? Is it any, or all of these? If all have this authority,
then, by virtue of authority derived from Christ, Christianity may be made one
thing in one country, and another thing in another country; in England it will
be Episcopal; in Scotland a Presbyterian; in France a Popish; and in Prussia
and Connecticut it will wear a Calvinistick form: But is Christ divided? Is
this the unity of his kingdom? Is all this genuine Christianity? Then a man's
religion must change with his change of climate, and this according to the will
of Christ; then our separation from the church of Rome was a schismatical
rebellion against the authority of Christ in his church. But if this authority
does not reside equally in all these different bodies of men, Which in
particular has the only rightful claim to it? Is it a Consociation in
Connecticut constituted of Elders and Messengers? Then I ask, Where is the
divine institution for such a body in the gospel, and where the charter vesting
them with this high power? To what things and how far does this authority
extend? Is it limited or unlimited? But I forbear -- It never will be pretended
that a Connecticut Consociation is of divine institution, or is constituted and
vested with authority, in matters of faith, by a charter from Heaven: It is
entirely a synodical institution, and Saybrook Platform is its charter:
Whatever authority therefore is claimed and exercised by this body of men, by
virtue of their institution and charter, is an authority not known in the New
Testament, and by consequence is a bold usurpation of Christ's prerogative, and
a stepping into his throne who is the only lawgiver and king in the church; and
every exercise of such authority is in fact spiritual tyranny, and to be
disclaimed by all who would stand fast in the liberty wherewith Jesus Christ
has made them free. If Christ is the only lawgiver and king in Zion; if the
holy scriptures are the only standard of religious truth; if every free and
accountable creature has full and undisturbed right to search the scriptures
and judge for himself in all religious matters: and if religion is no further
praiseworthy than it is matter of choice; if these things are so, can it be
supposed that Christ has given others authority to disturb, censure and
persecute Christians in the exercise of this right, a right which Christ
himself gave, and commanded the exercise of it? God forbid! And if Christians
in common have this liberty, much more the Ambassadors of Christ who are forbid
to teach for doctrines the commands of men, but on the contrary are bound by
office to teach the people all things whatsoever Christ has commanded them; to
deliver the whole counsel of God; and to take heed to the ministry they have
received of the Lord, that they fulfill it. By viewing the Lord Jesus Christ as
only lawgiver, king and judge; by making the scriptures of truth his only rule
of faith and practice; by using that liberty in the pursuit of divine knowledge
which God has given him as a man, a Christian and a dispenser of the word of
life; by preaching his own candid and impartial interpretations of scripture to
the people of his charge, and when solemnly obliged hereto by his commission,
as a servant of Christ, and accountable to him as supreme pastor; by these
things does the faithful preacher justly expose himself to be judged,
condemned, and excommunicated by his fellow servants, merely because he differs
from them in his interpretations of scripture, and does he expose himself to
all these evils agreeable to the laws and rules of Christ's kingdom? Dare any
presume this! To whom, pray, is an Ambassador accountable, but to the authority
that commissions him as such? -- With respect to the doctrines you have seen
fit to condemn, though you had no right or authority from Christ so to do, I
would expostulate with you -- How is the opinion that mankind come into the
world morally vicious and depraved, under the wrath and curse of God, and
exposed to damnation consistent with the express declarations of the holy
Bible, that God is the father of our spirits; forms the spirit of of man
within him; fashions us in the the womb; that his hands make and fashion us?
Why will you make God the author of all wickedness? How can you believe that
God is slow to anger and abundant in goodness, when he makes a creature such as
it is, and then is angry even to wrath with the creature for being as it is?
How can you suppose that obedience is not the only condition in the covenant of
grace, when we read expressly in the Bible that Christ 'being made perfect,
became the author of eternal salvation to all them that obey him'? And that 'he
who does righteousness is righteous'? How can you entertain the opinion that
men have not both natural and moral power (if you are pleased to make this
distinction) to do all that the gospel requires of them in order to their
taking benefit thereby, when you hereby make the blessed God suspend the
bestowment of saving benefits upon an impossible condition, and then eternally
punish his creatures for nonperformance; though God is said to be
long-suffering, not willing that any should perish? Is not this to make God an
hard master, reaping where he has not sowed, and finally punish his creatures
for nothing? How can you suppose that our good works are not the matter of our
justification at the redeemer's bar, when obedience and disobedience are made
the express conditions of our final justification and condemnation, Romans ii. 7,
and on -- and when our works are made the only subject of enquiry at the great
day, and when it is said that God will render to every man according to his
works? -- How can you believe the doctrine of personal absolute eternal
election to everlasting life; that this election includes but a remnant of the
human race, while the rest are passed by in God's eternal purpose and counsel,
and left to perish without possibility of happiness, which, in other words, is
to say, that God made the far greater part of men on purpose to damn them; I
say, how can you embrace such an opinion, when the Bible expressly informs you
that God has no pleasure in the death of him that dies, Ezekiel. xviii. 23, 31?
What sincerity can there be in the general offers of gospel blessings, and all
the means and methods of God with men, to allure them to himself and happiness?
I plainly tell you, Gentlemen, that I look upon this doctrine reproachful to
the divine character, and so long as I believe that God's tender mercies are
over all the works of his hands, so long I shall continue to reject and detest
such a doctrine. -- How can you avow the notion of particular redemption when
the Bible expressly informs you that Christ died for all in general, 1 Timothy iv.
10; for every man in particular, Heb. ii. 9 -- that he died for the whole world
without exception, 1 John ii. 2. -- without exception of the ungodly, Romans v.
6. -- without exception of enemies, Romans v. 10, and without exception of those
who perish, 2 Peter ii. 1? How can men be said to render themselves worthy of
sorer punishment for rejecting Christ and gospel grace, when, agreeable to this
doctrine, Christ never died for them, gospel grace never was purchased for, nor
designed to be conferred upon them? May I be said to deserve a more severe
punishment for rejecting a favor that was never designed for me? But reasoning
upon so plain ^ subject seems impertinent* -- I can assign no other reason why
you have condemned these doctrines, and avowed their contraries, but an undue
attachment to a particular system of opinions without free and impartial
enquiry; adhereing, with ut proper examination, to human creeds, confessions of
faith, etc. But to the law and to the testimony -- the Bible, the Bible only is
the religion of Protestants. Be entreated, Gentlemen, to pause one minute in
your career, and view the ground you have gone over; lay aside indiscreet zeal,
passion, and prejudice, and let reason ascend the throne and influence you to
calm reflection. In your retired and solemn moments do you enjoy the serene
pleasure of self-applause in a review of the measure you have meted out to me,
and the church of God in West-Stafford? Do you feel justified in your own
minds, and do you, with confidence, expect ere long to meet the approbation of
your judge the Prince of Peace? Can you, Reverend Sirs, I speak it with
concern, can you be infatuated to that degree, after all that has been said, as
to view yourselves invested with authority from Christ to dictate to the faith
of your fellow men? Authority to judge, condemn, and give up others to Satan
merely because they differ from you in judgment and opinion in religious
matters, in one word, because they adopt not your creed? Will you do all in
your power to exclude a fellow servant the kingdom of Heaven, because his creed
differs from yours, which is the very language of your late proceedings at
Stafford? Will you continue to think you have this authority because when met
you call you serves a Consociation, for in your individual capacity you pretend
not to such authority, when you have neither precept nor example of such a body
of men in the Bible to keep yourselves in countenance; no charter from Heaven
incorporating you a Consociation, and vesting you with this authority in
matters of faith? Your claim to such authority is no better founded than the
Pope's claim to infallibility, and if you have it, you are schismatics while
you remain out of the bosom of the holy mother church, and ought directly
repair to Rome As I am an Ambassador of Christ, though unworthy the honor and
unequal to the service, I claim undisturbed liberty as s uch to search the
scriptures, judge and believe for myself; and to preach my own sentiments, my
own intepretations of scripture; I am not your Ambassador; I received not my
instructions from you, nor am I accountable to you, but to the supreme pastor;
you may erect a petty tribunal; you may usurp Christ's throne; assume his
prerogative; arraign a fellow servant; judge, condemn and excommunicate him,
because he presumes to differ from you in religious sentiments and dares to
preach them: I say you may do all this because it is within the compass of your
power; but until you shall make it appear that you are incorporated and
empowered so to do by a charter directly from Heaven, you cannot blame me, if I
view you as bold intruders and usurpers, and busy bodies in matters that do not
belong to you. I hope upon a serious review, you will see your error, retract
it, and unite with me in defense of that liberty wherewith Christ has made us
free: We are Ambassadors of the Prince of Peace; are bound faithfully to
deliver to our people, not the dictates of fallible men, but the unerring
counsels of Heaven; and ought ever to bear in mind through the course of our
Ministry, that he who has called us to this important work will soon judge us
in righteousness; Gentlemen, I wish you God speed in every laudable attempt to
support the religion of Christ and the cause of God; but you may depend upon
it, that, notwithstanding all you have done, or can possibly do, I shall, with
steady, persevering aim, prosecute my duty to God and man; the gospel which I
have received of the Lord Jesus I shall certainly preach.

AN ADDRESS TO THE PEOPLE OF THE STATE OF CONNECTICUT.
MY COUNTRYMEN AND FRIENDS,
THE liberty we plead for, and have a right to expect, is not licentiousness,
nor a liberty to laugh at and abuse a divine revelation; but the principle of
equal, impartial liberty to all peaceable members of the civil state, both
preachers and hearers, to search and examine the sacred scriptures, and to
believe, profess and preach those tenets and doctrines, which appear to them to
be agreeable to the scriptures, and to reject, with entire and perfect
impunity, any, or all those tenets and doctrines, by whomsoever they are
received or taught, as do not appear to them to be agreeable to the scriptures.

This notion of liberty was the very principle upon which the glorious
Protestant reformation from Popery began, proceeded and was finally effected.
This is the very principle of religious liberty, for which the Protestant
non-conformists, our illustrious ancestors in Great Britain, contended unto
blood, before and during the reigns of the Stuart family: For the enjoyment of
this liberty they left their native country, crossed the Atlantic, and came
into America: And this is the great and good principle upon which all
New England churches were first settled, and upon which they flourished for a
great number of years. But alas! whither are we their children going! Surely
with long and dismal strides we are returning again to Rome! For only take away
liberty of free enquiry, and free profession, in matters of religion and the
worship of the deity, and Protestantism is instantly given up and destroyed,
and popery inevitably introduced. And no longer than we hold the principle
above, can we possibly defend the Protestant cause, no^ ourselves in leaving
the Romish communion. And will you, my countrymen, freely and without a
struggle, give up that which is your very basis as Protestants, your
birthright privilege as reasonable, accountable creatures, your divine
ornament and glory as Christian professors! Will you become bound to believe as
this or the other confession of faith directs, as this or the other
ecclesiastic council shall decree, as this or the other minister teaches you,
though in direct contradiction to the clear dictates of your consciences,
regulated by the word of God! Will you resign your faith, your consciences, and
your religion into the hands of any man, or body of men, and delegate them to
think, reason, judge and believe for you? Will you also appear before the
tribunal of Christ, the king of Zion, and your eternal judge, by your delegates
too? And will they warrant your safe appearance there? If not, surely it is
unsafe for you to betrust them now with your faith, your religion, and your
consciences! I fancy I behold a mixture of horror, indignation and contempt in
your very countenances, upon reading these queries; to think that a bare motion
should be made for you to resign every thing sacred and important to you on
earth, and every thing dear and felicitating in a blessed immortality! Your
souls recoil at the naked thought of such horrid suicide, and so much
ingratitude and impiety to the incarnate God, your savior, who has made you
free! And perhaps you are almost offended with me for suggesting such thoughts
to you. But reflect one minute on what you have read above. An ecclesiastic
council, gravely met, upon the invitation, not of a pastor or church, but of
three or four disaffected individuals, to judge of articles of faith and
doctrines of religion; the accused pastor required to appear before them, and
answer to charges of false and dangerous doctrines; and they finally censuring,
condemning, and then excommunicating the pastor; though neither he nor his
church ever embraced, but from the beginning refused the constitution of
Connecticut churches, as it is to be learned from Saybrook agreement! Herein
you plainly see, and with your own eyes, the sacred liberty of conscience
violated, the divine right of private judgment denied, protestantism
overthrown, infallibility implicitly claimed, a wide door opened for the
introduction of popery, and the prerogative of Christ, the only lawgiver in
Zion, boldly assumed! Look again and again upon the doings of that council;
consider and weigh them well. Open your eyes, rouse up your attention, get
yourselves quite awake; and do not suffer yourselves to be lulled to sleep by
that vain and fallacious cry, the church is in danger, from false and corrupt
doctrines entering into her. This has always been the cry of lazy, idle drones,
who never will be at the pains of thinking out of the beaten tract, but receive
their faith and religion, as they do their estates, from the last will and
testament of those who went before them. Those that never did, and never will,
bring any new thing out of their treasure, 'as the good scribe always does, who
is instructed to the kingdom of Heaven,' we may depend will certainly find
fault with those that do. And, when reason and argument fail, such men will
assume that armor which has long been proved, and cry heresy, heresy, the
church is in danger! and this always does the job with the ignorant and unwary?
Before the Nicene council, A. D. 325, this was the constant cry, heresy,
heresy, the church is in danger! And to still this cry all the ecclesiastic
councils, for 400 years were convened. But did these councils, which met for
the same purposes with that at West-Stafford, really deliver the church from
danger? Good God! never, never was the church so much endangered by all the
combinations of earth and hell against her, as she was by the decrees of these
ecclesiastic councils! Will you, after more than 1400 years sad and awful
experience of the fatal consequences of the acts and doings of ecclesiastic
councils in matters of faith and the worship of God, be still imposed upon by
the cry of heresy, the church is in danger, etc. "Now comes the fatal engine,"
says an author, "Ring the bells backward! The temple, the temple of the Lord is
on fire. The church is in danger! This cry of the church's being in danger, has
been a religious ^^oa^^, under which the most wicked flagitious crimes have
been perpetrated: Witness all the histories of persecutions. The cry of heresy
is more surprising to mankind, than the cry of fire; as the consequences have
generally been more terrible and awful."

Read with your own eyes the history of the church, and see and judge for
yourselves what always have been, and thence learn what always will be the
consequences of the acts and doings of ecclesiastic councils, when they have
undertaken to censure and condemn religious tenets and doctrines, and to impose
subscription.

Do you imagine that our catechisms, confessions of faith, and present received
forms, contain a complete and perfect system of revealed religion? Are they
absolutely incapable of addition, amendation or correction? Are they of divine
original, and stamped with the authority of a God, and is he to be accursed who
shall attempt to add to, or diminish from them. You doubtless believe our
catechisms and confession of faith were made by poor, weak, fallible men; who
had no authority, and indeed never claimed any, to impose their interpretations
of scripture upon others; but lest every man at liberty to subscribe or not,
according to the resuit of his own judgment. Why then should he be prosecuted
in the spiritual court for heresy, who shall attempt to add to diminish from,
amend or correct these catechisms, confessions, etc. and why should we pay the
least attention to that old, trite, popish cry of heresy, your church, your
constitution is in danger! One would think this too enlightened an age to be
priest-ridden and deacon-ridden at such a rate! And it would be an
unaccountable phenomenon to Europe, who have beheld with astonishment the
military skill, prowess, fortitude and resolution of the sons of America, in
asserting and defending their civil rights and privileges against lawless power
and domination, now to see them tamely crouching beneath the intolerable weight
of ecclesiastic tyranny and despotism, and yielding implicit faith and
submission to the arbitrary decrees of their priests and deacons: Only advert
to these obvious considerations, that Christ Jesus is the only king in Zion; --
that he has left the consciences of men at entire and absolute liberty from
all human restraints, so that we have perfect divine right to search the sacred
Oracles for ourselves, to see with our own eyes, judge with our own
understandings, not being accountable to any intelligence in the universe, but
him, for our religious tenets and sentiments: And that, that is a poor, sorry,
withered, shabby faith in religion, absolutely unacceptable to Christ and
unprofitable to ourselves, that is dictated by, and sounded on, human authority^

We ought constantly to endeavor to make progress in Christian knowledge, as
well as all other excellent seize; and never be content with what is
already known, or was known 200 years ago. That excellent and generous speech
of Mr. Robinson to his congregation in Holland, just as a part of them were
embarking for America, ought never to be forgotten by true protestants. Mr.
Robinson kept a day of fasting and prayer with his church, and addressed them
as follows, "Brethren, we are now quickly to part from one another, and whether
I may ever live to see your faces on earth any more, the God of Heaven only
knows; but whether the Lord has appointed that or no, I charge you before God
and his blessed angels, that you follow me no farther than you have seen me
follow the Lord Jesus Christ. If God reveal any thing to you, by any other
instrument of his, be as ready to receive it as ever you was to receive any
truth by my ministry; for I am verily persuaded, the Lord has more truth yet to
break forth out of his holy word. For my part, I cannot sufficiently bewail the
condition of the reformed churches, who are come to a period in religion, and
will go at present no farther than the instruments of their reformation. The
Lutherans cannot be drawn to go beyond what Luther saw; whatever part of his
will our God has revealed to Calvin, they will rather die than embrace it; and
the Calvinists, you see, stick fast where they were left by that great man of
God, who yet saw not all things. This is a misery much to be lamented, for
though they were burning and shining lights in their times, yet they penetrated
not into the whole counsel of God, but were they now living, would be as
willing to embrace farther light as that which they first received. I beseech
you remember, it is an article of your church covenant, that you be ready to
receive whatever truth shall be made known to you from the written word of God.
Remember that, and every other article of your sacred covenant. But I must
herewithal exhort you to take heed what you receive as truth, examine it,
consider it and compare it with other scriptures of truth, before you receive
it; for it is not possible the christian world should come so lately out of
such thick antichristian darkness, and that perfection of knowledge should
break forth at once." NEAL'S History of Puritans, vol. I. p. 490, 491.

A true protestant was this great and good man. How firmly did he believe the
right all christians have to search the holy scriptures, see and judge for
themselves, and receive or reject whatever they shall judge to be agreeable or
disagreeable thereto! How would his indignation have been kindled to have seen
the proceedings of the late Consociation at West-Stafford! and to have read
their bold and arrogant result.

Let us endeavor to obtain the spirit of protestants, to assert and vindicate
our liberties as men, as reasonable accountable creatures, and above all as
christians; and, in spite of all the daring, haughty, assuming, popish claims
of any man, or body of men, let us stand fast in that liberty wherewith Christ
has made us free.

ISAAC FOSTER.

POSTSCRIPT; Containing some Circumstances that attended the PROCEEDINGS of
CONSOCIATION, at West-Stafford, November 2, 1779.
NOVEMBER 2d, P. M. the venerable body proceeded to the house of public
worship, and, after prayer, the complaint was read by one of the scribes of
council, and likewise the defense of the four articles, etc. Upon which the
Rev. Mr. Bliss, a member of Consociation, arose, and began an impertinent
harangue, which appeared evidently designed to mislead and impose upon the
assembly, which was very numerous. The accused pastor repeatedly arose and
requested liberty to read a paper he had in his hand, and obtained it finally
with great difficulty, being told by several members of Consociation that Mr.
Bliss was Advocate for the aggrieved, and must not be interrupted, and Mr.
Bliss himself spoke and said, "We did not come here, Mr. Foster, to hear you
read papers, we came to judge." As the Consociation returned from the
meeting house to the council chamber, two of the members went into the house of
the Rev. Isaac Foster, and then and there, of their own accord, said, that, at
the desire of the complainants, Mr. Bliss was voted Advocate for them by
Consociation, and likewise that Consociation, for that reason, voted, that he
should not be judge.

On the 3d of November, when the Consociation were in the meeting house, and a
large assembly of people collected, the Rev. Mr. Bliss, abovementioned, as was
his constant practice in that place, was inveighing with the utmost bitterness
against the doctrines taught and received in the church at West-Stafford, as
false, heretical, etc. etc. The oldest scribe of Consociation spoke and said,
"I do not know but it ought to be known by this congregation, that Mr. Bliss is
chosen by this council -- " Here Mr. Bliss broke in immediately, and in a lower
tone said, "That is not to be told;" upon which the scribe ceased to speak
further upon the matter. On the return of Consociation this day also, another
and different member of their body called in at Mr. Foster's and made the same
declaration concerning Mr. Bliss, that the others made the day before.

Here follows a complaint exhibited to Consociation by a number of men, members
of the church in West-Stafford.

Stafford, 4th Nov. 1779. To the venerable Consociation convened in this place,
GENTLEMEN,
WE would ask liberty to signify to you our great and increasing
dissatisfaction with some proceedings of your body; particularly with your
permitting the Rev. Mr. Bliss to deny, or at least to refuse to own his
Advocacy for the complainants when in public, though we had been previously
acquainted with it by two of your own body: Thus leading the public into an
error with regard to his public speeches. Second, We are greatly dissatisfied
with Mr. Bliss on account of many hard and unkind speeches he has thrown out in
public, concerning the church and people in this place; particularly an
expression of his yesterday in public -- "Will you continue in your heresy,"
which things we do really look upon as unkind and ungenerous: We are truly
sorry, Gentlemen, to see any evidences of prejudice and partiality in any thing
done in your venerable body, and should be glad to be informed a little, and
satisfied as to these things.

Nathan Johnson, Samuel Davis, Silas Blodget, Nathaniel Cushman, Samuel
Bartlet, Timothy Clough, Lemuel Cross, Micah Ross, Haniel Clark, Abel Johnson,
Jabez Kent, Benjamin Davis, Joshua Kent,
Members of the church.


In reply to the above they received the following, which served but to
dissatisfy them the more, as they looked upon it as an evasion.

West-Stafford, Nov. 4th, 1779. To the Gentlemen members of the church who have
signed the within paper, and others whom it may concern,
THIS may certify that the Rev. Mr. Bliss has not undertaken the office of
advocate for the complainants against the Rev. Isaac Foster, nor can with truth
be considered so by any; true it is the complainants desired of the council
that Mr. Bliss might assist them in that character; the council gave liberty
that he might, and some of the members of council thence mistakenly concluded
that he had undertaken; hence arose your mistake: But the truth is, he did
entirely decline the office, and accordingly has not been considered by the
council in that character.

Attested by THEODORE HINSDALE, Scribe of the council.


This may be affirmed without hesitation, that the Rev. Mr. Bliss acted the
part of an advocate in public during the whole time of the residence of
Consociation in West-Stafford, and a most censorious, unchristian, and even
inhuman part too; and what the people complained of, or at least one thing they
complained of, was, that Mr. Bliss should act such a part, and appear in such a
character in public, and yet deny, or at least refuse to own his advocacy for
the complainants. If he was advocate they thought the public should have known
it; if he was not, it appeared to them very astonishing, that a judge should be
suffered to act such a part, publicly to prejudge the cause, and that in the
most offensive, virulent terms. The reply to their complaint informed them,
that although it was desired by the complainants that Mr. Bliss might assist
them in the character of advocate, and that he had liberty so to do from the
council; yet he declined the office, and accordingly was not considered in that
character by Consociation. But how does all this consist with the public and
private voice of many members of their own body, the oldest scribe in
particular, unitedly declaring that this Mr. Bliss was advocate for the
aggrieved, that he was voted advocate by Consociation, etc. etc. all which can
be substantially proved whenever there is need of it? Further, if Mr. Bliss
declined the office, why did he then publicly execute the office? Why was he
suffered to do so by Consociation? And why was this given as a reason, by
several aged members of the council, in particular by the oldest scribe, why
Mr. Bliss must not be interrupted, viz. because he was advocate for the
aggrieved? Mr. Bliss was either advocate, or judge, or both, or neither, if he
was advocate, and we rather think he was, from the foregoing testimonies, and
that this was what the oldest scribe was proceeding to acquaint the assembly
with, when broke in upon by Mr. Bliss as related before; if this was the case,
why all these contradictions? If he was judge, his public behavior was
insufferable upon any principles whatever. If he was both, it is a new thing
under the sun, to make an attorney and judge of the same person, and upon the
same case. If the Consociation considered Mr. Bliss in no character, we are
perfectly willing he should stand for a cipher: But perhaps all these seeming
contradictions may be perfectly reconciled by this one consideration, viz. that
he was appointed advocate for the Lord Jesus Christ, as he declared himself to
be in public; but if he did really act in this character, we think he ought to
have executed the office, at least, with some degree of decency and decorum.

Furthermore, on November 4th, when Consociation were in the meeting house,
they promised the assembly that they should have timely notice when their
result would be published. Nov. 5th a lecture preparatory to the holy communion
was preached 3 o'clock, P. M. After lecture several persons repaired to the
place where Consociation sat, to enquire whether they were like to come to the
meeting house that day, and were told by some of the members of Consociation
that they could not publish their result that night, ^or they had not
accomplished their business; upon which the people went home: Soon after which
it was resolved by Consociation, or at least by some of them, to repair to the
meeting house that evening, and read their result; and being told that the
people were gone home, some of them replied, that is nothing to us, they might
have staid if they would, we must not delay our business for the people --
accordingly about sun-down they came to the meeting house, read their result,
and then repaired to their quarters.

All the above circumstances attending the proceedings of Consociation at
West-Stafford appeared in public, and when occasion shall require, may be
substantially authenticated by great numbers of eye and ear witnesses.

N. B. SINCE the late Consociation at West-Stafford undertook to justify their
proceedure by quotations from Saybrook agreement, it is meet some special
remarks should be made upon these quotations. Among the articles for the
administration of Church discipline, Art. 3, is the first cited by Consociation
in the following words, "That all cases of scandal that shall fall out within
the circuit of any of the aforesaid Consociations, shall be brought to a
council of the elders and also messengers of the churches within said circuit."
It will doubtless be observed by the reader that the Consociation was convened
for the express purpose of judging upon doctrines said to be false and
dangerous, etc. and that they cited this article to prove they had a right to
convene for this purpose. But perhaps Consociation meant to found their right
upon the scriptures referred to in the article. The first scripture cited under
the article, is 3. John ix 10. "I wrote unto the Church: But Diotrephes, who
loves to have pre-eminence among them, receives us not. Therefore if I come.
I will remember his deeds which he does, prating against us with malicious
words; and not content therewith, neither does he himself receive the brethren,
and forbids them that would, and casts them out of the church." Because
St. John complained of some disingenuous and unfriendly conduct of one
Diotrephes, therefore the North Consociation in Hartford county had a right to
convene at West-Stafford, to judge upon false and dangerous doctrines! The next
scripture cited in the article, is 1 Cor. xvi. ^. "Now concerning the
collection for the saints, as I have given order to the church of Galatia even
so do ye." Because St. Paul desired the church at Corinth to make a
contribution for the poor brethren at Jerusalem, therefore the Consociation had
right to make creeds and confessions of faith for the pastor of the church at
West-Stafford! The next scripture is Gal. vi. 1, 2, "Brethren, if a man be
overtaken in a fault, ye which are spiritual restore such an one in the spirit
of meekness, considering thyself, lest thou also be tempted: Bear ye one
another's burdens, and so fulfill the law of Christ" Because St. Paul exhorted
the church at Galatia to treat an offending brother with humanity and
tenderness, therefore the Consociation had a right to condemn and censure the
pastor of the church at West-Stafford for preaching, as they judged, false and
dangerous doctrines! And because St. Paul moved that the christians at Galatia
should bear one another's burdens, therefore it was an act of kindness in the
Consociation to make creeds and confessions for the pastor and church at West
Stafford, and so to ease them of the burden of making them for themselves! The
next scripture is, 2 Cor. xiii. 2. "I told you before, and foretell you as if I
were present the second time; and being absent, now I write to them which
heretofore have sinned, and to all other, that if I come again, I will not
spare." Because St. Paul gave repeated assurances to the church at Corinth,
that, if he should chance that way again, he would administer proper reproof^
to any that had or should behave themselves unbecomingly; therefore the North
Consociation in Hartford county had a right to judge upon articles of
doctrines, and to censure and excommunicate the pastor of the church at
West-Stafford, for preaching such doctrines as they judged heterodox. The next
scripture is Acts xv. 23. "And wrote letters by them after this manner, the
apostles, elders and brethren, send greeting unto the brethren which are of the
gentiles in Antioch, and Syria, and Cilicia." Because the apostles, elders and
brethren, at Jerusalem, sent letters to the gentile churches in Antioch, Syria,
and Celicia; telling them that they would do well to abstain from meats offered
to idols, from blood, from things strangled, and from fornication, therefore
the North Consociation in the county of Hartford had a right to condemn and
excommunicate the pastor of the church at West-Stafford, if he would not
abstain from preaching such doctrines as they judged disagreeable to the
gospel. The next is 2 Cor. viii. 23. "Whether any do enquire of Titus, he is my
partner and fellow-helper concerning you: Or our brethren be enquired of, they
are the messengers of the churches and the glory of Christ." Because St. Paul
thought it expedient that Titus and others, Luke and Apollos as is generally
supposed, should be joined with him, to convey to the poor saints at Jerusalem,
the contributions of the churches, and sent them to Antioch to spirit up the
brethren there to make ready their contributions against he should come along,
therefore the North Consociation in Hartford county had a right to go to
West-Stafford to censure and condemn the pastor of the church there for
preaching false doctrines! Hence every one sees that if the Consociation meant
to found their right upon the scriptures cited under this article, that right
was indisputably proved; for I know no better right than that founded on the
bible!! -- The other article cited by Consociation is the 5th, in these words,
"That when any case is orderly brought before any council of the churches, it
shall there be heard and determined, which shall be a final issue, and all
parties therein concerned, shall sit down, and be determined thereby." The
reader will bear in mind, that the case brought before the venerable
Consociation at West-Stafford was denied to be orderly before that body; and
that they cite this article to prove that said case was cognizable, and finally
to be determined by them. Now as the article itself does not expressly say,
that false and dangerous doctrines are a case that may be orderly brought
before a Consociation, therefore, as in the other article, they doubtless meant
that the scriptures here cited proved this. The first scripture is Acts xv. but
as no verse in particular is quoted we cannot say any thing in reply. The next
scripture is 1 Cor. v. 5. "To deliver such an one unto Satan for the
destruction of the Flesh, that the spirit may be saved in the day of the Lord
Jesus." Because St. Paul directed the church at Corinth to deliver to Satan the
man who had been guilty of such gross fornication as to marry his father's
wife, therefore the charge of preaching false and dangerous doctrines was
orderly brought before the North Consociation in Hartford county, Nov. 2, 1779!
The next scripture is 2 Cor. ii. 6.11. "Sufficient to such an one is the
punishment which was inflicted of many -- least Satan should get an advantage
of us; for we are not ignorant of his devices." Because St. Paul now directs
the church of Corinth to remove the censure they had passed upon the
fornicator, since it had wrought for his good; left the devil should make a bad
use of their want of humanity and tenderness, therefore the charge of false
doctrines, etc. was orderly brought before and finally to be issued by the
North Consociation in Hartford county last fall, at West-Stafford! The next is
Philip. iii. 15. "Let us therefore, as many as be perfect, be thus minded: And
if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal even that unto you."
Because St. Paul exhorted the christians at Philippi, who were sufficiently
grounded in the first principles of christianity, to go on to perfection; and
encouraged those who were not, that God would teach and instruct them;
therefore the charge of false and dangerous doctrines lay scripturally before
Consociation at West Stafford, and must be finally determined by them! The next
scripture pertinent to the purpose, is Romans xiv. 2, 3. "For one believes that
he may eat all things, another, who is weak, eats herbs. Let not him that
eats despise him that eats not, and let not him which eats not, judge him
that eats; for God has received him." Because St. Paul would have christians
act according to their own inc^inations in eating meat or herbs, or any thing
else, without censuring one another for different notions about these things;
therefore, it is beyond all dispute, the case of false doctrines was very
orderly and scripturally before Consociation at West-Stafford, Nov. 2, 1779;
and that they had authority finally to decide it, without any privilege of
appeal, or benefit of clergy.

As these two articles are as clearly founded on scripture as any other, that
would have served the purpose of Consociation; and as every one sees at first
view, that these scriptures have not even the most distant reference to the
business of Consociation at West-Stafford last fall; we are persuaded the
render will judge very favorably of the opposition that was made to the
proceedings of that body, and also of the propriety of adopting the holy
scriptures, and not platforms of human composure, as a rule of faith and
practice.

APPENDIX; Containing a RENUNCIATION of SAYBROOK PLATFORM, (usually so called)
with the Reasons of it.
To the GENTLEMEN of the CONSOCIATION now convened in this place:
I BEG leave to make the following representation, viz When I was ordained in
the ministry at Windsor, I objected against adopting Saybrook Platform as a
model of church discipline. But never did I dream of such an interpretation of
that book, as should warrant any ecclesiastic council in judging upon articles
of faith, for any preacher, professor, or church of christians on earth, until
the affair of Mr. Sage at West-Simsbury. And I doubt not it will be easily
recollected by a number of gentlemen of the Consociation who were then present,
that I then made very great opposition to any decision of Consociation in Mr.
Sage's disfavour, on account of his doctrines or articles of faith; not because
I was of his opinion in every article, but because I considered Consociation as
having no authority to judge upon articles of faith, to his disadvantage, or
the disadvantage of any man, or body of men, on earth, either from Platform or
the word of God. Gentlemen, I am conscientiuosly of the same mind still. And
from the recent experience I have had of what I imagine to be a
misinterpretation of Saybrook Platform, I take this opportunity to signify my
absolute renunciation of that book, as the rule of my faith or manners, so far
as it can possibly be interpreted to signify a right in any man, or body of men
on earth, to judge upon articles of Faith, not heretical, to the least
disadvantage of any preacher, professor, or church of Christ on earth. And also
so far as said book gives authority to any ecclesiastic council, of whatever
name, to decide and finally determine any cause whatsoever, so that all parties
shall be obliged to sit down contented. If a matter of difficulty arises in
any church, or between any pastor and church, I doubt not of the expediency of
asking counsel and advice of neighboring pastors and churches; and, in this
case, an ecclesiastic council have right to give their opinion, counsel and
advice; but no authority, in my opinion, to enforce any judgment or decision of
theirs upon, pastor or church. If the pastor and church, or whatever parties
concerned, do mutually agree to abide the result of council; the council have,
in this case, the same right to give their opinion, etc. as though no such
agreement had taken place; and this opinion of theirs is now become decisive;
not on account or any authority in the council to make it so, but because of
the mutual agreement of the parties concerned, that it shall be so.

My church and people, so far as I am acquainted, are perfectly of my mind, as
above expressed, with regard to the authority of ecclesiastic councils, both
as to articles of faith and doctrines of religion, and all other matters
cognizable by such councils.

DAN FOSTER,
Stafford, Nov. 5, 1779.

The reasons of the above RENUNCIATION follow.

CHRIST Jesus has given each individual in his church, a right to judge for
themselves, as to the interpretation of the holy scriptures, and to receive as
articles of their faith, or reject whatever they shall judge agreeable or
repugnant to the Bible. For proof, Mat. xx. 25, 26. xxiii. 8, 9. But he ye not
called Rabbi: For one is your master, even Christ; and all ye are brethren. And
call no man your father, upon the earth; for one is your father, which is in
Heaven. Mark x. 42, 43, 44. John v. 39. Search the scriptures; for in them ye
think ye have eternal life. And they are they that testify of me. Acts xvii.
11, 12. These were more noble than those in Thessalonica, in that they searched
the scriptures daily, whether these things were so. Therefore many of them
believed, etc. Rom xiv. 1 -- 12. 1 Cor. ii. 5. That your faith should not stand
in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. Gal. i. 6 -- 10. 1 Pet. v. 3.
Neither as being lords over God's heritage, but being ensamples to the Flock. 1
John iv. 1. Beloved, believe not every spirit; but try the spirits, whether
they be of God; because many false prophets are gone out into the world.

It is agreeable to the mind of Christ that every professor of his religion,
whether preacher or hearer, should exercise this divine right. For it cannot be
supposed that Christ should give Christians a right he would not be willing
they should use.

It is also agreeable to the mind of Christ, that christians, whilst they
conscientiously exercise this sacred right of private judgment, should be
unmolested and undisturbed, and not subject to any disadvantages whatsoever, on
account of any differing opinions or sentiments in religion, which may possibly
result from the exercise of this common right.

Therefore no man, or body of men, act according to the mind of Christ, when
they give the least molestation or disturbance to any christians, whether
preachers or hearers; or subject them to the least disadvantage, on account of
any of their different interpretations of sacred scriptures, opinions or
sentiments whatsoever.

If these two last propositions were not true, then christians might, according
to the mind of Christ, be subjected to molestation and disturbance, and to many
and great disadvantages, even whilst they were acting conscientiously according
to the mind of Christ; exercising a right which he had given them; and indeed
for this very conduct of theirs! which never will be admitted by any friend to
revealed religion.

To withdraw christian communion and fellowship from any christian preacher or
professor, or from any church of Christ, on account of differing opinions or
sentiments in religion, is to subject that preacher, professor, or church of
Christ, from whom christian communion and fellowship is withdrawn, to many and
great disadvantages; it is to deprive them of all those advantages, whatever
they may be, which result from christian communion and fellowship. Therefore
the undeniable and unavoidable inference from the whole argument is this, That
it is not agreeable to the mind of Christ, that any man, or body of men on
earth, or any ecclesiastic council, of whatever name or boasted authority,
should withdraw christian communion and fellowship from any christian preacher,
professor or church, on account of differing opinions and sentiments in
religion.

Again, as the Bible is the christian's only rule of faith, and as all
christians have the sacred right above spoken of; no individual christian,
whether preacher or hearer, has a right to impose subscription to any
proposition of religion, not expressly contained in the Bible, on any other
individual christian, whether preacher or hearer: For as far as any such right
of imposition takes place, so far the right of private judgment is destroyed. A
right in A to judge for himself, and to receive or reject any proposition in
religion, not expressed in the Bible, according to the result of his own
judgment; and a right in B to impose subscription to any proposition, or any
number of propositions in religion, not expressly contained in the Bible, on A,
cannot possibly consist together. A's right is clearly and undeniably proved
above, and indeed is indisputable among all true protestants; B, therefore,
undoubtedly has no such right of imposition. But if B has no right of
imposition on A, then he has no right to deprive A of any privilege or
advantage whatsoever, because he differs from him, though ever so much, in his
belief of any propositions not expressed in the Bible. If B therefore withdraws
communion from A, because A's creed is not the same with B's, he does what is
absolutely wrong and injurious; he assumes to himself a right to judge for A,
and in so doing denies A's right to judge for himself, contrary to what is
generally acknowledged, and has been demonstrated above. But if B has no such
right of imposition and deprivation, etc. as above, then B, C, D, E, F and G,
when met together in council, have no right of imposition on A, or to deprive
him of any the least privilege or advantage whatsoever, because he differs from
them in religious sentiments, and will not renounce his own and subscribe their
creed, or any human creed that can be named, that is not composed in the
express words of holy scriptures, For the whole right of B, C, D, etc. when met
in council, is certainly made up of the sum total of their individual rights. B
has no more right in council, than he had in his single capacity; in which
single capacity he has just been proved to have none at all. But B has as much
right as C, or D, or any other member of the council; which is none at all.
When met together therefore in council, though it should be with all
conceivable gravity and solemnity, and the greatest parade and air of clerical
authority, they have no right to impose on A, require him to renounce his own,
or subscribe their creed; or to deprive him of any privilege whatsoever,
because he differs from them in the articles of his faith, and will not
renounce them and come over to their side, but insists upon enjoying and using
that liberty wherewith Christ has made him free. For when met in council, the
rights of B, C, D, E, F and G, are brought into one sum, and six times nothing
is nothing! and this is the sum total of the council's right: For ever so many
ciphers will not amount to a sum. A very limited authority.

Again, let us view this withdrawing communion in a point of light a little
different from the foregoing. B insists upon withdrawing communion from A,
because A preaches or professes false and dangerous doctrines. A declares what
he preaches or professes, to be the sincere dictates of his judgment, regulated
by reason and the Bible. B declares the same as to his doctrines and articles
of faith. Both A and B have collected their tenets from the same sources,
reason and the Bible; and in the exercise of the same right of private
judgment. A is perfectly willing B should enjoy all the liberty he does; and is
not disposed to give him the least disturbance or molestation imaginable; but
really desirous he should enjoy all the privileges of christian society. A is
willing to subscribe the bible as his only rule of faith; nor does he preach or
hold any one proposition contrary or repugnant to any express proposition of
the bible. The whole difference between A and B lies in their different
interpretations of the holy scriptures. But after all their mutual pains and
labor to accommodate differences of sentiment, they are each of the same
opinion as before. A still retains however his tolerant disposition toward B,
and is as willing now as ever that he should enjoy his own opinions in
undisturbed quiet. B is dissatisfied and will not exercise charity and
toleration with respect to A, but insists upon withdrawing communion from him,
and depriving him of the privileges of christian society and fellowship.

The question now is, whether B does not treat A injuriously and deny him the
right of private judgment? I am inclined to take the affirmative of this
question, which may be clearly demonstrated thus; B can have no right to
withdraw christian communion and fellowship from A, but on supposition of A's
having acted wrongs and contrary to the clear dictates or Christ's religion;
and if B has no right to withdraw communion from A, then in doing it he has
treated him injuriously, and denied him the right of private judgment. These
things will be conceeded by everyone. Now A's wrong and antichristian conduct
has been this, that he has carefully and impartially searched the holy
scriptures, and consequently embraced certain tenets and sentiments in
religion, d^ffering indeed from those of B, but such as he conscientiously
believes to be consistent with the Bible. If A has acted wrong and contrary to
the clear dictates of Christ's religion in so doing, then it is certainly wrong
and contrary to the clear dictates of Christ's religion, that A should search
and examine the bible, and form his own religions creed according to the result
of his own judgment: and if so, A has no right of private judgment; which was
one thing to be proved. B has then certainly denied A's right of private
judgment; which he had no right to do: and therefore he has treated A
injuriously; which was the other thing to be proved. So that B cannot withdraw
communion from A, on account of A's religious sentiments, as being ever so
different from his own, without treating him injuriously, and denying him the
right of private judgment.

Here B may perhaps say, I do not mean to deny A's right of private judgment: I
only claim the same right to judge for myself, which I willingly allow A to
enjoy; i. e. a right to judge whether I may, or may not consistently hold
communion with A. I pretend not to judge for A, or to deny the right he has to
judge for himself; as to all the articles of his faith.

I know this is B's only subterfuge: But it is a mean, sorry shift, make the
best of it!

The fallacy of this observation of B, is palpable. It is apparently
fallacious, from what has been said above. I entreat B to advert to this one
consideration, viz If he has no right to withdraw communion from A, on account
of any differing sentiments in religious matters, he certainly has no right to
judge he has. For no man has a right to judge wrong, Besides, B takes the thing
to be proved for granted, i. e. that he may withdraw communion from A on
account of differing sentiments in religion. That he may not, I have
endeavored to demonstrate above. But further yet, we may easily perceive the
absurdity of any such right in B, if we only consider that B has no right to
withdraw communion from A, that A has not to withdraw communion from B, on
account of differing sentiments in religion: For undoubtedly B differs as much
from A, as A does from B, in his religious creed. So that A and B have equal
right to excommunicate, on account of difference of sentiment.

But what shocking absurdity is here! and what notorious impeachment of the
wisdom and goodness of Jesus Christ the head of the church! Must the blessed
Jesus, that most warm and sincere friend of mankind, who, influenced by his
unparallelled love to the church, gave his own life a sacrifice for her! Must
he, who is the wisdom as well as power of God, be supposed to have left things
in such state in his church, that two christians, or two churches, should in
their turns, excommunicate and be excommunicated by each other, and alternately
denied the privileges of christian society and fellowship! and this too for
their fidelity and firm attachment to him as their Lord and master, and their
conscientious adherence to those rights which he himself has been pleased to
grant them! Far be it! God forbid any such bold and impious impeachment of the
wisdom and goodness of our divine redeemer.

This and other consequences, however shocking and blasphemous they may appear,
cannot possibly be avoided, upon the supposition that one church, or one
christian, has a right to withdraw communion from another church, or
christian, on account of differing sentiments in religion.

Indeed the idea of withdrawing communion on account of different sentiments in
religion, is abhorrent from reason and common sense, as well as from the bible;
and contrary to the principles of the reformation from popery: And those who
withdraw communion on account of difference in religious sentiments, cannot
possibly justify the reformation from popery, in any consistence with their
conduct. Withdrawing communion, in America, signifies the same thing with
dragooning, beheading, or burning in popish countries; is practiced upon the
same principles, and to be justified by the same reasons: And the genius of the
civil government of this country, is the only thing which prevents those who
withdraw communion from others, on account of differing sentiments in religion,
from imprisoning, condemning, depriving and burning them.

An heretic is indeed to be rejected; but not on account of any sentiments in
religion which he holds, as differing from those of other men; but because he
breaks off from the communion of a christian church, that will not subscribe
certain tenets he has formed, as the rule of her faith; which tenets and
opinions are not expressed in her adopted rule of faith, the bible. Except the
heretic and immoral christian, there is no character that is to be denied
christian communion and fellowship, according to any laws of Christ I ever saw.

If a man subscribes and adopts the scriptures of the Old and New Testament as
his only rule of faith and practice -- if he, to all appearance, fears God and
works righteousness -- is a peaceable and quiet member of the family, the
church and the state, though he adopts sentiments and opinions in religion ever
so different from those of some other man, some church, or many churches, from
some ecclesiastic council, or from all ecclesiastic councils that ever have
been, or ever will be, so long as time endures, if these tenets and opinions
are not contrary to clear, indubitable, express scripture, no man, no church,
no ecclesiastic council have any right, in my humble opinion, to withdraw
communion from that man, or to subject him to the least conceivable
inconvenience or disadvantage, on account of these differing tenets and
opinions. Nor can any thing of this kind be done, by men uninspired, without
great injury and cruel injustice to the man, and a palpable denial of the right
of private judgment in matters of religion; without daring and presumtuous
boldness, pride and arrogance, and the most shocking imputations upon the
wisdom and goodness of the wisest and most beneficent personage in the universe!

That adopting the bible and subscribing the holy scriptures as the only rule
of faith and practice is sufficient, and all that ought ever to be required of
any man, whether preacher or professor, in order to christian fellowship and
communion, is evident from the scriptures themselves. 1 John iv. 1, 2, 3.
Beloved, believe not every spirit, but try the spirits whether they are of God:
because many false prophets are gone out into the world. Hereby know ye the
spirit of God: every spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the
Flesh, is of God: and every spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is
come in the Flesh, is not of God. Here the apostle is giving directions to a
christian church, how they ought to treat those who pretended to be preachers
of religion. And he tells the church how they might come to a safe and happy
decision with reference to their reception and treatment of such pretenders,
viz. by bringing them to a sure point of trial and religious test; whether they
did, or did not, confess that Jesus Christ was come in the flesh. If they
confessed this they were to be received, if not, rejected. For to confess that
Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, is, in effect, to confess that the
scriptures of the Old and New Testament are the word of God. For, if Jesus
Christ is come in the flesh, these scriptures are certainly the word of God:
And, if these scriptures are the word of God, then certainly Jesus Christ is
come in the flesh. So that to confess either, is, in effect, the same thing.
And to confess this, was, in St. John's day, sufficient to christian fellowship
and communion. The world was not so wise and sagacious then as it has been
since. It has often been the case, since St. John's day, that men could not be
heard as prophets, nor received to christian communion and fellowship, upon
their confession that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh, or subscription to the
Old and New Testament as their only rule of faith. But in order to be qualified
for the pulpit or communion table, men have been, and still are, obliged to
subscribe long lists of articles of faith, and certain creeds and
confessionals, catechisms, etc. And by these means men become sound and
orthodox divines, staunch Calvinists; and, I may add, arrant fools! But I
desire to thank God, I was never dubbed a Calvinist, or orthodox in this way!
and I would be thankful for that restraining grace, that has ever withheld my
hand from subscribing any creed, confession of faith, or catechism, or any
thing else of human composition, as the rule of my faith or manners!

It is indeed surprising men should have the presumption and effrontery to
demand any thing but subscription to the bible, as a necessary prerequisite to
preaching the gospel, or communing at the table of our Lord. Mr. Locke's
observation upon this business of subscription to human creeds, etc. is worthy
of special notice in this place. Says he, "For when they have determined the
holy scriptures to be the only foundation of faith, they nevertheless lay down
certain propositions as fundamental, which are not in the scriptures; and
because others will not acknowledge those additional opinions of theirs, nor
build upon them as if they were necessary and fundamental, they therefore make
a separation in the church, either by withdrawing themselves from the others,
or expelling the others from them. Nor does it signify any thing for them to
say that their confessions and symbols are agreeable to scripture, and to the
analogy of faith. For if they be conceived in the express words of scripture,
there can be no question about them; because those are acknowledged by all
christians to be of divine inspiration, and therefore fundamental. But if they
say, that the articles which they require to be professed, are consequences
deduced from the scripture, it is undoubtedly well done of them to believe and
profess such things as seem unto them so agreeable to the rule of faith; but it
would be very ill done to obtrude those things upon others, to whom they do not
seem to be the indubitable doctrines of the scripture. For I do not think there
is any man arrived to that degree of madness, as that he dare give out his
consequences and interpretations of scripture as divine inspirations, and
compare the articles of faith he has framed according to his own fancy with the
authority of the scripture. I know there are some propositions so evidently
agreeable to scripture, that no body can deny them to be drawn from thence; but
about those therefore there can be no difference. This only I say, that however
clearly we may think this or the other doctrine to be deduced from scripture,
we ought not therefore to impose it upon others, as a necessary article of
faith, because we believe it to be agreeable to the rule of faith; unless we
would be content also that other doctrines should be imposed upon us in like
manner; and that we should be compelled to receive all the different and
contradictory opinions of Lutherans, Calvinists, Remonstrants, Anabaptists,
other sects, which the contrivers of symboles, systems and confessions are
accustomed to deliver to their followers as genuine and necessary deductions
from the holy scripture.

"I cannot but wonder at the extravagant arrogance of those men who think that
they themselves can explain things necessary to salvation more clearly than the
holy ghost, the infinite and eternal wisdom of God." Thus far Mr. Locke's
Letter concerning toleration, p. 75, 76. I am willing to profess myself of the
same mind with this great and good man now quoted, as to this unreasonable and
odious business of making and subscribing human creeds and confessions.

The Dissenting Gentleman, says, p. 307, 308, "The holy scriptures your
Lordship, and all protestant divines, acknowledge to be a perfect rule of
faith: In them all needful and important doctrines are so plainly revealed, in
words dictated by the holy ghost, that no sincere person can possibly mistake
concerning them, so as dangerously to err. Subscription, therefore, to these
scriptures, is all that the interest of truth and of religion does require.
Now, should any man upon earth, or any body of men, take upon them to draw up
articles or formulas of faith, in words different from the holy scriptures, and
to propose them as a rule of faith, or a test of truth to others; what, my
Lord, is the real nature, or the proper language of such an action? Is it not
plainly this; that he thinks himself able to define the doctrines of revelation
in apter and more proper terms than those of the holy ghost? Does he not in
effect say, that the great truths of religion, as they stand revealed in the
scriptures (in words which not man's wisdom, but which the wisdom of God
dictated) are not so distinctly and clearly expressed as man's wisdom, (yea, as
his own wisdom) is able to express them? And is not this, my Lord,
presumtuously to set himself up as a corrector of the holy ghost? To declare
himself capable of mending the revelation! and to profess himself authorized to
dictate to the faith of others, and to interpret the scriptures for them!"

I frankly confess I see not why the requiring subscription to any articles of
faith, framed by men, and not conceived in the words of scripture, as a
necessary prerequisite of christian or ministerial communion and fellowship, is
not an high, implicit impeachment both of the wisdom and goodness of God. The
holy ghost has certainly explained the articles of christian faith, so far as
he thought necessary for all the purposes of christian society in this world,
and eternal happiness in the world to come. Both the goodness and wisdom of God
would prompt him to do this: Yea, he has expressly told us he has done it, 2 Timothy iii. 16, 17. Now for men to frame certain tenets and propositions in
religion, according to their own fancy, not conceiving them in any expressions
of holy scriptures, and impose them on others, as articles of faith, and
require subscription to them, as necessary to christian communion and
fellowship in this world, or happiness in the next; is certainly to do and
require more, in order to christian communion in this world, and happiness in
the next, than the wisdom and goodness of God have ever moved him to do and
require for these purposes. Either what is done in this business of
creed-making and subscription by men, is not at all necessary for christian
communion here, or happiness hereafter; or else the wisdom and goodness of God
have not done all that is necessary for these purposes in the sacred
scriptures. If what men have done, and yet continue to do in this business of
creeds and subscriptions, be unnecessary for the purposes mentioned above;
then, why are creeds composed, and subscription to them required? If this
business of creed-making and subscription be necessary; why has not the wisdom
of God discerned this necessity? And why has not his goodness excited him to
provide some effectual remedy against the wretched consequences of leaving this
business of creed-making to men? For I make no doubt God has a sufficient
capacity to frame a creed that would be less exceptionable and more generally
subscribed by christians, and with far greater satisfaction, than any creed
that has ever been composed by men's hands. And I imagine such a divine creed,
written with the finger of God, though it should be imposed, and subscription
to it required, would not occasion such general uneasiness among christians,
nor be attended with so much complaint and cry of religious tyranny, nor be
followed with such detestable and pernicious consequences, as have always taken
place upon the imposition of all human creeds without exception.

God himself testified, in an awful manner, his high displeasure at the
imposition of the first human creed; that made and imposed by the Nicene
council, A. D. 325. And it cannot be shown from ecclesiastic history that one
good consequence ever followed the imposition of a creed made by men, and not
conceived in the expressions of holy scriptures.

But though it be thus demonstrably contrary to reason and common sense,
contrary to the scriptures, and an high blasphemous impeachment of the wisdom
and goodness of God, that men should make and impose creeds, confessions of
faith, catechisms, etc. yet creed-mongers will have something to plead in
favor of this business of creed-making: And I expect nothing more, than that,
in consequence of my attempts to set at naught this craft, I shall hear a
mighty cry, similar, it may be, to that St. Paul heard at Athens, occasioned by
his setting at naught the craft of the silversmiths, who made sh^ines for
Diana. I fancy the business of creed making is not quite so gainful, especially
in protestant countries, as was the craft of making shrines for Diana; yet as
it is so sweet and gratifying to men of haughty, proud, assuming, arrogant
spirits, to be dictators of other men's creeds and confessions; such men may be
as much incensed when this business is spoken against, as were the silversmiths
of old, when Diana was spoken against.

But what will the sticklers for human creeds and confessions say? They will
undoubtedly object that, if men subscribe only the holy scriptures, then
preachers, professors and churches may presently grow corrupt, pervert the
scriptures to patronize their errors, degenerate from the faith, etc. etc. Just
as if the same men who would corrupt the word of God, would not also corrupt a
creed or confession made by men! The Dissenting Gentleman says on this matter,
"Will it be said -- But crafty and corrupt men pervert the words of the holy
ghost, and sk^een dangerous errors under scriptural forms. Let it be said: And
will not crafty and corrupt men as easily pervert, and as lightly violate and
break through all the articles and forms which human skill can devise, or human
prudence prescribe? Does not the plainest reason and nature of the thing speak,
that thus it will be? Has not the experience of fourteen hundred years put it
beyond all doubt? Will any articles or forms of doctrine prove a fence against
a man of an insincere and corrupt heart, or keep him out of the church? No: He
will ever swim with the stream; he will declare or subscribe any thing, as his
worldly interest directs. No, my Lord, it is men of virtue and integrity only,
your Lordship well knows, that can possibly be affected here: It is men of
principle and conscience only, that these subscriptions are ever capable of
keeping out of the church: So that, if rightly considered, it is not in their
nature to be the least guard against error, nor the least security to truth.
And when withal it is remembered, how in all ages of the church they have been
most mischievously employed by the several parties of christians, as they
alternately prevailed! What wrecks they have made of conscience! What
sacrifices of integrity to human ignorance and pride! What engines they have
proved in the hands of the rulers of the darkness of this world, to torture and
oppress good men, and to exalt and aggrandize the bad! -- Scarce any thing can
be more amazing, than that a measure so notoriously preposterous and absurd; a
measure so directly tending to bring corruption into the church, and to keep
integrity and conscience out; should ever have been patronized, and even
vehemently urged, by men, unquestionably both wise and good." p. 308, 309.

A little attention to ecclesiastic history will convince any impartial
enquirer after truth, that all the endeavors that ever have been made, either
by individuals or by councils and synods, to effect a uniformity of opinion and
sentiment in religious matters, in the church of Christ, have been, not only
vain and fruitless, but attended with the most baneful and pernicious
consequences. Where it can be shown that a single error has ever been
suppressed by framing and imposing creeds and confessions of faith, it may
easily be shown, that an hundred have received their rise and propagation by
these very means. And as it constantly and invariably has been the case in the
church, that hatred, variance, wrath, strife, seditions, emulations and
heresies have followed the endeavors of of creed mongers and
confession-makers, to bring about a uniformity in religious opinions and
sentiments in the christian church, so we have all the reason in the world to
believe, that these sad and dismal consequences will ever follow such
endeavors. Men do not look alike, nor speak, nor write alike: And just as vain
and sleeveless a business would it be, in my opinion, for any man, or body of
men, to undertake to effect a uniformity of visages, manner of speaking, and
handwriting amongst mankind, as to effect a uniformity in religious tenets and
sentiment. And whoever can effect the former, may perhaps effect the latter.
Why then such a mighty cry about orthodoxy in religion? We never hear of an
orthodox face, an orthodox manner of speaking or writing amongst mankind. "It
is great pity," says the author of Remarks upon President Clap's History, etc.
"as charity is our distinguishing mark as christians, that we exercise it much
less in religion, than in the common affairs of life. Agreeable to which, says
an author, I do not believe that there are two men upon earth who think exactly
alike upon every subject; and yet our different tastes in meat, drink, building
and dress make not the least difference in human society; nor is it likely that
they ever will, unless we establish by law, and tack preferments to one
particular mode of eating, drinking, building and dressing; then indeed we may
expect to see the established orthodox mason, cook and tailor, very zealous and
loud for conformity and penalties: But at present ten men, in ten different
suits, can dine together upon ten different dishes; and give ten different
opinions upon one piece of painting of architecture, without breaking
friendship and good humor: If indeed they be drunk with wine or zeal, they
will be apt to fight about the church, or something else: But why men in their
senses should clamor and quarrel at their neighbor's particular conscience,
any more than at his particular palate, no reason can be assigned, but the
delusions of priestcraft, operating upon its genuine issue, bigotry." -- p. 56,
57.

So long as mankind are of different geniuses and dispositions of soul; are
differently educated in families, in public or private schools; go into
different tracts of reading and thinking; and shall agree to hold it as an
unalienable right, sacred from the deity, that they may search, examine and
judge for themselves in all matters of religion; they will most certainly
differ from one another in their religious tenets and sentiments.

As Saybrook Platform gives a right to any ecclesiastic council to decide and
finally determine any cause whatsoever, I dissent from it for this reason, viz.
that, as there is no institution, precept or example of any ecclesiastic
council in the New Testament; so the whole authority of such a council must be
derived from its constituents, the parties concerned; and therefore such a
council can have no authority but what is given them to decide any cause
whatsoever.

Thus much I think proper to offer, at present, as a vindication of my
renunciation of Saybrook Platform, so far as I view it as differing from the
holy scriptures, either in its doctrines or discipline. But as I have suggested
that that book is not so criminal, as that the judgment of an ecclesiastic
council upon articles of faith, or doctrines of religion to the least
conceivable prejudice or disadvantage of any preacher, professor or church, can
be built upon it, or vindicated from it; I mean now to show that the sentiments
or our worthy ancestors, the compilers of that book, were perfectly the same
with those I have attempted to vindicate in these papers. In the preface to
their Confession or Faith, they say, p. 5, 6, "This Confession of Faith we
offer as our firm persuasion, well and fully grounded upon the holy scriptures,
and commend the same unto all, and particularly to the people of our colony, to
be examined, accepted and constantly maintained." How is this? Did these good
men mean to impose their confession of faith upon the people of Connecticut,
and absolutely to require their subscription? Let them answer for themselves.
"We do not assume to ourselves, that any thing be taken upon trust from us, but
commend to our people these following counsels."

I. "That you be immoveably and unchangeably agreed in the only sufficient and
invariable rule of religion, which is the holy scripture, the fixed canon,
incapable of addition or diminution."

II. "That you be determined by this rule in the whole of religion. That your
faith be right and divine, the word of God must be the foundation of it, and
the authority of the word the reason of it."

III. "That you be well grounded in the firm truths of religion. We have
willingly taken pains to add the holy scriptures, whereon every point or faith
contained in this Confession does depend, and is borne up by, and commend the
same to your diligent perusal, that you be established in the truth, and your
faith rest upon its proper basis, the word of God."

IV. Again, p. 8. "That having applied the rule of holy scripture to all the
articles of this Confession, and found the same, upon trial, the unchangeable
and eternal truths of God: you remember and hold them fast, contend earnestly
for them as the faith once delivered to the Saints."

Again, in their Confession of Faith itself, Art. X. "The supreme judge by
which all controversies of religion are to be determined, and all decrees of
councils, opinions of ancient writers, doctrines of men and private spirits,
are to be examined, and in whose sentence we are to rest, can be no other but
the holy scripture delivered by the spirit; into which scripture so delivered
our faith is finally resolved."

I now willingly leave it to the world to judge, whether the compilers of
Saybrook Platform, did not firmly believe that all christians were happy in the
enjoyment of the divine and unalienable right to search the holy scriptures;
and to receive or reject whatever opinions and sentiments they judged agreeable
or repugnant to that unerring standard: And consequently that no man, or body
of men, had authority to frame confessions of faith and impose them on others.

These things being undeniable, how any man, or body of men, should presume to
judge for others, as to articles of faith and doctrines of religion, and to
censure and condemn their fellow christians, on account of their differing
sentiments and opinions, as to the interpretation of holy scriptures; and even
withdraw communion and fellowship from those who differ from them, and deny
them many of the advantages of christian society; or even any advantages
whatsoever; and pretend at the same time a warrant for this conduct from
Saybrook Platform, and, what is more shocking yet, from the New Testament; must
be resolved either into their shameful misinterpretation of the Platform and
New Testament both; or their bold and daring presumption, pride, arrogance, and
itch for dominion over others consciences.

It is a shame and scandal to those who conduct in this unreasonable and
unscriptural manner, if not to religion itself, that it should be 'told in
Gath, or published in the streets of Askelon:' For 'the daughters of the
Philistines will rejoice, the daughters of the uncircumcised will triumph:' The
enemies of our holy profession will blaspheme, when they shall behold
christians crumbling into parts and factions, condemning and anathematizing one
another, excommunicating and being excommunicated, and alternately depriving
and being deprived of the advantages of christian society and communion:
Because they cannot tolerate one another in searching and examining the sacred
canon, and believing or rejecting what they shall judge agreeable or repugnant
to it!

I will conclude what I shall offer on this subject with that very remarkable
paragraph of the renowned Chillingworth, which, I fancy, no true protestant
will read or hear, but with great satisfaction, especially when they consider
that it is the language of a great man, converted from popery by his diligent
search of the sacred scriptures. Addressing himself to a writer of the church
of Rome, he thus speaks in vindication of the protestant cause, "Know then,
Sir, that when I say the religion of protestants is in truth to be preferred
before yours; as on the one side, I do not understand by your religion the
doctrine of Bellarmine or Baronius, or any other private man amongst you; nor
the doctrine of the Sorbonne or of the Jesuits, or of the Dominicans, or of any
other particular company or society amongst you; but that wherein you all
agree, or profess to agree, the doctrine of the council of Trent; so
accordingly on the other side, by the religion of protestants, I do not
understand the doctrine of Luther or Calvin, or Melancthon, nor the confession
of Augsburgh or Geneva, nor the catechism of Heidelberg, nor the articles of
the church of England; no, nor the harmony of protestant creeds and
confessions; but that wherein they all agree, and which they all subscribe with
one accord, as the undoubted perfect rule of their faith and actions, that is,
the bible. The bible, I say, the bible only, is the religion of protestants,
whatsoever else they believe besides it: And the plain, irrefragable, and
indubitable consequences of it, well may they hold as matters of opinion, but
as matters of says and religion, neither can they with coherence to their own
grounds believe it themselves, nor require the belief of it of others, without
most high and schismatical presumption. I, for my part, after a long, and (as I
verily believe and hope) impartial search of the true way to eternal happiness,
do profess plainly that I cannot find any rest for the sole of my foot, but
upon this rock only. I see plainly, and with mine own eyes, that there are
popes against popes, councils against councils, some fathers against others,
the same fathers against themselves, a consent of fathers of one age, against a
consent of fathers of another age, the church of one age against the church of
another age. Traditive interpretations of scripture are pretended; but there
are few or none to be found. No tradition but only of scripture can derive
itself from the fountain, but may be plainly proved to be brought in, in such
an age after Christ, or that in such an age it was not. In a word, there is no
sufficient certainty but of scripture only, for any considering man to build
upon. This, therefore, and this only, I have reason to believe, this I will
profess, according to this I will live, and for this, if there be occasion, I
will not only willingly, but gladly, loose my life; though I should be sorry
that Christians should take it from me. Propose me any thing out of this book,
and require whether I believe or no, and seem it never so incomprehensible to
human reason, I will subscribe it with hand and heart, as knowing no
demonstration can be stronger than this, God has said so, therefore it is
true. In other things, I will take no man's liberty of judging from him,
neither shall any man take mine from me. I will think no man the worse man, nor
the worse christian, I will love no man the less, for differing in opinion from
me; and what measure I mete to others, I expect from them again. I am fully
assured that God does not, and therefore men ought not, to require any more of
any man than this: To believe the scripture to be God's word, to endeavor to
find the true sense of it, and to live according to it." History of Religion,
p. 55, 56, 57.

DAN FOSTER.
Windsor, November 22, 1779.

