The Duty of Honoring the King, explained and recommended: IN A SERMON,
Preached in ST. GEORGE's and ST. PAUL's CHAPELS, NEW YORK, On Sunday, January
30, 1780; Being the Anniversary of the Martyrdom of King CHARLES I.

By CHARLES INGLIS, D. D. RECTOR of TRINITY CHURCH, NEW YORK.

Christianus nullius est hostis, nedum Imperatoris: quem sciens a Deo
constitui, necesse est ut et ipsum diligat, et revereatur, et honoret, et
salvum velit.

TERTULLIANUS ad Scapulam. NEW YORK: Printed by HUGH GAIN, at the BIBLE and
CROWN, in HANOVER-SQUARE, M,DCC,LXXX.

TO The INHABITANTS of the CITY of NEW YORK, IN The COMMUNION of the CHURCH of
ENGLAND; The following SERMON IS Respectfully inscribed, BY Their affectionate
Pastor, Friend and Servant, The Author.

1 PETER. II. 17. Fear God. Honor the King.


SUCH is the concise, nervous and commanding Style in which the Apostle
inforces those two important Duties. He connects the respectful Honor and
Obedience we owe to our Sovereign, with that filial, reverential Fear which is
due to our Creator; not only because they are characteristic of a real
Christian, and should be inseparable; but because our Welfare, Peace and
Happiness, temporal and eternal, depend on the Discharge of them.

IT is worthy of Observation, that these Duties are often joined together in
other Passages of sacred Writ, in the Old as well as New Testament.

THUS Solomon exhorts, -- My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle
not with them that are given to change. And he immediately subjoins a weighty
Reason for the Exhortation. For, says he, their Calamity shall rise suddenly;
and who knows the Ruin of them both Prove. xxiv. 21, 22.
?

WHEN an Opportunity of speaking on those two Points was occasionally presented
to our blessed Savior, he also joined them together -- Render unto Caesar,
says he, the Things which are Caesar's; and unto God, the Things that are God's
Matthew. xxii. 21. Mark xii. 17. Luke xx. 25.
.

THIS serves to point out the close Connection between those Duties; it also
places our Obligation to, "Honor the King," in a striking Light, however it
may be disregarded by some People. Duties which God has thus united and joined
together, no Man should ever presume to put asunder.

THE tragical Event which we are enjoined by our Church to commemorate this
Day, naturally suggests the Consideration of this Subject -- particularly the
latter Part of it, honoring the King. A Failure in this Duty did once involve
our Nation in all the Horrors of Rebellion and Civil War. To such Lengths did
the Phrenzy of Enthusiasm, and Republican Ambition push on the Sons of
Rebellion at that Period, that they imbrued their Hands in the Blood of their
most excellent Sovereign; thereby intailing Guilt on our Nation, and staining
our History with indelible Infamy.

TO raise a just Abhorrence for such atrocious Crimes -- to preserve in our
Minds a proper Sense of the Honor due to our Sovereign, by which the Blessings
of Harmony and Peace are secured -- to deprecate the Divine Displeasure for the
Guilt then contracted, and that God would be pleased to avert similar Guilt and
Calamities for the future: For these great Purposes, our Church has wisely and
piously set apart this Day, as a Day of public Humiliation and Prayer; and has
appointed the excellent Office, which you have now heard, to be annually used
on the Occasion.

EXPERIENCE shows that too much Caution cannot be used in guarding against such
Evils. The Wisdom of Man perhaps could not devise any Thing more effectual to
prevent them, than the Institution I have mentioned. If notwithstanding, a
Rebellion of the same Kind now afflicts this Country, we should not infer that
this Institution is useless, or should be laid aside; but just the Reverse. We
should be the more punctual in observing it; as this has a Tendency to
counteract the Spirit which produces such Disasters; and, certain it is, that
the Despisers, not the conscientious Observers of this Institution, were the
Authors of our present Calamities.

NOTWITHSTANDING the Care that is taken to inculcate Principles of Virtue and
Religion among Mankind, yet much Vice and Impiety prevail in the World. Would
not these be still more prevalent, were that Care to be relaxed, or thrown
aside?

TO fear God, is one of the first and greatest Duties of his rational
Creatures. This Fear arises from a just Conception of His Being, Atributes,
Perfections and Presence. It is mingled with Love, and resembles the Fear of a
dutiful, affectionate Child toward a tender Father. It is the Beginning of
Wisdom Prove. ix. 10.
; and when habitually fixed in the Soul, is the Foundation of true Religion --
the Parent of every Virtue.

TO honor the King, is another Duty of great Consequence, connected with, and
flowing from, the former. Permit me, as this Day requires, to enlarge upon the
latter -- to explain briefly what is implied in the Precept -- "Honor the
King;" and then to show the Reasons on which the Discharge of this Duty is
founded. There are few who will not acknowledge that the Consideration of this
Subject is proper in these unhappy Times.

I. ST. PETER wrote this Epistle from Rome That St. Peter was at Rome, and
suffered Martyrdom in that City, are Facts which are supported by the
unanimous, uncontradicted Testimony of Christian Writers of the five first
Centuries. This has been clearly shown by Bishop PEARSON, and Dr. CAVE, in
Answer to some who, from a false Zeal against Popery, seemed to question
whether that Apostle ever was at Rome: As if the Antichristian Errors and
Usurpations of Popery could not be sufficiently refuted, from Scripture and the
primitive Writers, without denying so well attested a Fact, on Principles that
would subvert all ancient History.

That St. Peter wrote this Epistle from Rome, which he figuratively calls
Babylon, Chap. v. 13. has also the general Suffrage of Antiquity. This Opinion
is accordingly adopted by the best modern Commentators, not only among
Protestants, as GROTIUS, HAMMOND, WHITBY, etc. but even by Writers of the
Church of Rome in general. Rome was figuratively called Babylon on Account of
the Resemblance between those Cities in their Greatness, their Idolatries,
their Opposition to the true Church of God, and in their final Doom. This whole
Subject has been examined with great Accuracy by Dr. LARDNER very lately, whom
I therefore mention: He thinks that St. Peter wrote this Epistle from Rome,
about the Year 64. CREDIB. GOSP. HIST. Vol. xv. Chap. 18, 19.


. He addressed it to all those who were converted to Christianity, and
dispersed through the several Asiatic Provinces mentioned in the Beginning of
the Epistle.

THE fatal Period was now approaching, when the Jewish Nation, abandoned by
Heaven, were to feel the heavy Judgments that had been denounced against them
by the Son of God, whom they crucified. They were cast off, and no longer the
peculiar People of God. Their general Conduct raised the Aversion of Mankind
against them. They were persecuting and uncharitable toward others; whilst
rent by the bitterest Animosities among themselves. They were seditious also,
frequently raising Insurrections, dissolving the Obligations between the Prince
and the Subject, and making Religion the Cloak of Disloyalty.

HITHERTO, Christians were considered by the Gentiles as only a Sect of the
Jews; and the Crimes of the latter were, through Ignorance or Malice, imputed
to the former. Hence there was a Necessity, that the Apostle should exhort
Christians to distinguish themselves by those Virtues which were opposite to
the Vices so frequently practiced by the Jews -- to convince the World that
they were different People, guided by different Principles; that so their Lives
might bear the strictest Scrutiny, and turn the Detraction of their Enemies
into Praise.

THIS will serve to explain the Verses immediately preceding my Text, which are
highly deserving of our Attention. Dearly beloved, says the Apostle, I beseech
you as Strangers and Pilgrims, abstain from fleshly Lusts, which war against
the Soul, having your Conversation honest among the Gentiles: That whereas they
speak against you as evil Doers, they may by your good Works which they shall
behold, glorify God in the Day of Visitation. Submit yourselves to every
Ordinance of Man Every Ordinance of Man, -- The Words in the Original are, PASE
ANTHROOPINE KTISEI, i. e. to every human Creature; and so the Vulgate, and most
of the ancient Versions properly translate it. How they came to be rendered, to
every Ordinance of Man, I profess myself not to understand, says Bishop
SHERLOCK, Vol. iv. Discourse xiii. Nor can I account for it otherwise than by
saying that the Translators, influenced by the Authority of BEZA, who thus
renders it, have in this, as in some other Instances, adopted his
Peculiarities. The Apostle in these Words evidently lays down a general
Proposition, recommending a meek, submissive Behavior toward all Men, as
characteristic of the Christian Religion. He then proceeds to Particulars,
specifying those to whom this Behoviour should in a peculiar Manner be shown,
first to the King or Emperor, next, to his Governors, etc.
, for the Lord's Sake, whether it be to the King as Supreme, or unto Governors,
as unto them that are sent by him for the Punishment of evil Doers, and for the
Praise of them that do well. For so is the Will of God, that with well-doing ye
may put to Silence the Ignorance of foolish Men. As free, and not using your
Liberty for a Cloak of Maliciousness, but as the Servants of God. Honor all
Men; love the Brotherhood: Fear God. Honor the King.

HERE, Purity of Life, Charity, mutual Love and Submission to Government, for
the Lord's Sake, being the express "Will of God," are earnestly urged by the
Apostle; just as they are elsewhere urged by ST. PAUL Romans xiii. 1 -- 7.
, for similar Reasons. By these, Christians were to distinguish themselves from
others, and manifest the native Excellence and Spirit of their Religion. The
Honor of Christ, and the Success of his Gospel, depended on its Professors
observing this Line of Conduct -- I may affirm, that they also greatly depend
on it even now.

NERO was Emperor of Rome when St. Peter wrote this Catholic Epistle; and
notwithstanding the vicious Character of that Prince, he delivers the Precept
in my Text -- "honor the King." This was to be a general Rule for all
Christians. The personal Character of the Magistrate was not to interfere with
the Civil Duty of the Subject: Even when bad, it did not dissolve the
Obligation of the latter -- were the contrary principle admitted, it must
necessarily and daily fill the World with Confusion and Disorder. The Christian
therefore, is here injoined to honor the Person who is vested with legal
Authority, and whom the Providence of God has placed over him.

TO comprehend the Wisdom of this Injunction the better, and explain the Duty
before us, it should be considered, that Government is the only Means by which
human Happiness can be attained.

ACCORDING to the Disposition of Providence, and the Condition of our Nature,
we are born in a State of Society. Without Society, Mankind could not exist --
the whole Race must inevitably be extinguished. But Society cannot subsist
without Government. It is the Band which unites the Interests of Individuals;
it secures to them their respective Rights, and preserves them from Injuries;
it is the Source of numberless Blessings, which are interrupted, or wholly
vanish, the Moment it is disturbed. In a Word, whatever Portion of Happiness is
allotted by Providence to the Children of Men, is attainable only through the
Means of Government. And as our benevolent Creator undoubtedly willed the
Happiness of his Creatures, he must have willed the Means also without which
that Happiness could not be obtained. Hence, Government in general should be
resolved into the Divine Will. It is "the Ordinance of God, ordained by him" to
minister to our Good. Romans xiii. 1, ^.


GOVERNMENT implies Subordination. Where Government is, there must be some who
preside or govern -- and others, over whom that presidency is exercised: From
the very Nature and Design of Government, it is the Duty of the latter to
honor and obey the former. This is also the "Will of God"; and hence, the
Precept in my Text, -- "honor the King."

TO honor the King, is to entertain respectful Sentiments of his Authority and
Person -- to speak always with Deference of both -- to promote the Peace and
Stability of his Reign, and pay a cheerful Obedience to his Laws -- to check,
as far as we are able, the Calumnies which Sedition or Malice would propagate
to his Disadvantage, to oppose the Proceedings which would disturb or endanger
his Authority -- and to promote these Sentiments and this Conduct among others.

THIS Duty implies that we should affectionately interest ourselves in whatever
concerns the Honor, the Fame and Security of our Sovereign and his Government.
These we should assert, and generously defend against all Attempts to injure
them; whether those of avowed Enemies -- or of such as with equally malignant
Designs, though under plausible Pretenses, would destroy and subvert them.

OUR fervent Prayers should ascend to the Almighty for the Preservation and
Prosperity of our Sovereign. This is expressly enjoined by the Word of God 1
Timoth. ii, 1, 2, 3.
; and is a Part of the Duty we are considering. We should devoutly pray, that
He, by whom Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice, Prove. viii. 15.
would bless the King, direct his Counsels, grant him a long and happy Reign,
crown his Undertakings with Success, and make him instrumental in promoting the
Glory of God, the Interests of true Religion and Virtue, and the Welfare,
Safety and Happiness of his People; and finally, that He would confer on him
Immortality and Glory in the Life to come.

IF we honor the King, according to the Spirit of my Text, we shall be
sincerely disposed, and shall actually exert ourselves, to do each of these.

IT may be proper to observe further, that this Duty is not confined to those
who live under any one particular Form of Government: It extends to the
Subjects of all regular States, lawfully established. That some Forms of
Government are preferable to others, cannot be doubted; yet neither our
Savior, nor his Apostles have decided where that Preference is due. This was
foreign to their Design. They interfered not with the Civil Rights of
Individuals, nor with the Political Constitution of States; but laid down the
general Duty of Subjects, who are to render to Caesar the Things that are
Caesar's, -- be subject to the higher Powers, and honor those who are vested
with supreme Authority; whether that Authority be lodged in One, in a Few, or
in Many.

SUCH is the Nature of the important Duty before us. It would be easy to
enlarge on each of those Particulars. But I shall only add, that the Duty here
enjoined by the Expression, honor the King, is in our Language and Law,
signified by the Word Allegiance. All the King's Subjects are bound to
Allegiance, before, or even without, any Oath for that Purpose. Oaths, Fealty
and Homage were only instituted to remind the Subject of his previous Duty, in
certain Cases, and insure the better Performance of it. They are no more than
Declarations of what was implied before, and of that to which the Subject was
indispensibly bound, from the very Nature of Government, and the Reason of
Things.

INDEED, if the Oath of Allegiance be broken by violating the Duty to which it
obliges, it aggravates a Man's Guilt, by adding Perjury to Treason. But it
does not increase the Civil Obligation to Loyalty; it only strengthens the
social Tie by uniting it with that of Religion. I Blackstone, B. I. Chap. 10.
This may serve to expose the Delusion of some, who imagine they are under
little or no Obligation to Loyalty, or "to honor the King," because they have
not taken the Oath of Allegiance.

II. I now proceed to show the Reasons on which the Discharge of this Duty is
founded.

1. WE have the express Commands of God, of his inspired Prophets and Apostles
for discharging this Duty. We should certainly be punctual in the Observation
of a Duty which is so often and so earnestly enjoined by the Authority of
Heaven. When it is "the Will of God," and required of us for "the Lord's Sake,"
we should conscienciously practice it.

CAN any Authority be greater than that of the Almighty? Or should any of his
Precepts be lightly regarded? Do they not all claim our ready and submissive
Obedience? And can any Command be more peremptory or positive than that for
honoring the King? How then can any who call themselves Christians disregard
this Commandment; or think that Conscience is not concerned in obeying it?

ONE of the sore Evils which for some Time has infested our Nation, and does
infest it now perhaps more than ever, is, to resolve this, and every other
Duty, however sacred, into what is called political Obligation; which
Obligation is generally measured by People's (...), and will readily give Way
to the Caprice, Discontent, Ambition, Interest, Pride, and other irregular
Passions of Individuals.

IF those Men who falsely assert, that all Religion is a State Engine -- the
Invention of Politicians to keep the Multitude in Subjection and Order -- if
these should also assert, that the Duty of Loyalty, honoring the King, hangs
on the slender Thread of Political Obligation only, and that it is a Matter
with which God and Conscience have nothing to do; it need not occasion any
Surprise.

BUT that professing Christians, who really believe in a divine Revelation, and
acknowledge its Authority -- that these should be the Dupes of such Men -- that
they should make no Conscience of dishonouring their King, and rebelling
against him -- that they should knowingly trample on the Law of God, and act as
if no such Law existed -- that instead of obeying this Law, they should be
Trumpeters of Sedition and Rebellion: This is astonishing indeed! Did not
melancholy Experience convince us of its Truth, we should think it impossible
that any who profess Christianity, could pursue a Conduct so diametrically
opposite to the Spirit of their Religion!

HOW different was the Conduct of primitive Christians, who exemplified in
their Lives the Precepts of their Master; who studied to obey his Will; and
whose Innocence, Patience and Fortitude finally triumphed over all the
Opposition of Heathen Error and Idolatry! In nothing were they more
distinguished than in Submission to their Civil Rulers, and punctual
Observation of their Laws, where those Laws did not contradict the express Will
of God; as in the Case of sacrificing to Idols, renouncing their Savior,
swearing by Demons, by the Genius of Caesar, and the like.

OUR blessed Lord commanded his Followers to love their Enemies, and pray for
their Persecutors -- to render to Caesar the Things that are Caesar's. To clear
himself from all Imputation of Sedition, he told Pilate that his Kingdom was
not of this World. John xviii. 36.
His Kingdom did not interfere with earthly Kingdoms -- its Spirit and Design
were totally different, and it was to be promoted and administered by other
Laws and Measures. His Apostles unanimously inculcated Submission and Obedience
to the higher Powers.

THOSE Christians justly considered these Precepts to be equally obligatory
with any others in the New Testament; and accordingly, they conformed to them
as conscienciously as to any others. To omit other Instances which evince this,
hear what Tertullian says on the Subject, in his Apology, which he publicly
presented in Behalf of the persecuted Christians, about the Year of our Lord
200 --

WE pray to the eternal, the true and living God for the Life of Emperors; that
God, by whom they reign as Kings, and live as Men. -- In our Prayers we are
ever mindful of all Emperors and Kings; beseeching God that he would vouchsafe
each of them Length of Days, a quiet Reign, a well established Family, gallant
Armies, a faithful Senate, an honest People, and a peaceful World; and whatever
else either Prince or People can wish for. Tertulliani Apolog. Cap. 30. inter
Opera, Edit Paris. 1685.


YOU who think that we have no Concern for the Life and Safety of Caesar, look
into the Word of God, by which we form our Conduct, and which we do not keep
private. There you may know with what abundant Charity we are commanded to love
our Enemies, and to pray for our Persecutors, Matthew. v. 44. Who are such
Persecutors of Christians as the Emperors? -- And yet these are the Persons for
whom we are expressly and by Name commanded to pray; I exhort that
Supplications and Prayers be made for all Men; for Kings, and for all that are
in Authority, that we may live peaceable and quiet Lives. 1 Timothy ii. 1. Apolog.
Cap. 31.


WE reverence the Providence of God in the Persons of the Emperors, to whom he
has assigned the Government of the World. We know that the Power they have,
they have by the Will of God; and we wish well to that which God has willed to
be. Ibid. Cap. 32.


WHENCE were the Cassius's, the Nigers and Albinus's? Whence those who set upon
Caesar between the Laurel Groves? Whence those who rushed into the Palace,
armed, and murdered Pertinax? These were Romans, if I mistake not, and not one
Christian among them. And these Traitors, just before the Perpetration of this
Impiety, offered Sacrifice for Caesar's Life, and swore by his Genius, with
Religion in their Countenance, and Treason and Murder in their Hearts. Ibid.
Cap. 35.


THE Veneration and Loyalty which are due to Emperors, do not consist in the
above mentioned Shows of Duty; which even Rebellion cloaks itself with to pass
undiscovered; but in such Virtues as Civil Society finds necessary to be
practiced sincerely toward Prince and People. In doing Good, we catch at no
Applause or Reward from Men; but from God only, who keeps a Register of our
Works, and has abundant Rewards in Store, for this universal Charity; and we
have the same good Wishes for Emperors that we have for our nearest Friends. To
wish Ill, to do Ill, to speak Ill, or to think Ill of any one, we are equally
forbidden without Exception. TERTUL. Apolog. Cap. 36.


SUCH were the Principles and Practice of primitive Christians with Respect to
the Duty they owed to Rulers; both are faithfully represented in this Extract,
which I have therefore made the longer. They were Strangers to that Sort of
Casuistry which dispenses with the Word of God requiring Honor and Subjection
to the higher Powers; dissolves the Tie of Civil Obedience, though confirmed by
a solemn Oath; releases Conscience from the Obligation of all these, and then
absolves from the Guilt of such Crimes, when Subjects, either through Ambition,
Prejudice, or other sinister Motives, happen to dislike the Government, or want
to overturn it. They persevered in the above Principles and Practice for Ages
after Tertullian's Time, until a Degeneracy of Manners and Decay of Piety in
many, gave Rise to new Maxims and a different Conduct. These Maxims have been
improved upon, and frequently reduced to Practice, in these latter Ages; to the
unspeakable Injury of States, and Disgrace of our holy Religion. The excellent
GROTIUS, speaking of those Positions by which some would evade St. Paul's
Exhortation to Civil Obedience, makes this just Observation -- Si tot --
exceptiones, id est, regulae Paulinae eversiones admittantur dico, nullum
imperium diutius in tuto fore, quam donee talia sentientibus vires defuerint.

Volum pro pace, Oper. Theol. Tom. III. P. 662.


2. BUT if Men will not regard this Precept from a Principle of Conscience, and
because it is the Will of God; yet at least for their own Sake they should do
so: For on a due Observation of it, the Stability of Government and the Peace
of Societies depend; and in these, it may be affirmed, the Happiness of
Individuals is involved. This unquestionably is the Case in our Government,
where all are under the Protection of equal Laws; and no Subject can labor
under any Grievance for which the Law and Constitution have not provided a
Remedy.

TO honor the King therefore, is not only the Duty which God requires and
Reason approves; but it is a Duty, by the Discharge of which we contribute to
the Happiness of all our Fellow Subjects: For hereby we support the
Constitution and Government which secure to them that Happiness.

THE Welfare of Society should be a leading Principle of our Conduct. Reason
and Humanity oblige us to wish that Peace should be established, and its
Blessings be widely diffused -- that Religion, Justice and Righteousness should
flourish -- that public Prosperity and private Contentment should prevail --
that those Benefits which help to sweeten Life, and alievate the Sufferings of
this Scene of Trial, should abound. Who will deny this? Is it not self evident?
Can those Blessings and Benefits be otherwise enjoyed than under a regular
Government? And does not the Observation of this Precept tend as much to
confirm, as the Neglect of it to subvert, regular Government?

WHAT other Security have we for those Benefits; or against Oppression,
Injustice, Violence and Wickedness, than that of Government? It is evidently
the Ordinance of God -- the Remedy which his Providence has appointed against
the numberless Evils of Anarchy. Remove that Barrier, and every Species of
Iniquity would rage and reign without Control. The Weak would fall a Prey to
the Strong -- the Innocent to the Guilty -- the Meek and Humble to the
Designing and Ambitious.

BUT Government cannot be carried on so as to avert these Evils, unless those
who rule, are honored and obeyed. The Obedience of Subjects, flowing from a
Principle of Conscience, and Honor to the Sovereign, is the active Spring by
which Government is moved and exerted. Take away that Spring, and the whole
Machine is disordered: it must stand still; and all the Evils of Anarchy and
Misrule would ensue.

FOR although the Offense, not honoring the King, may seem to be personal, and
directed against the Prince only; yet it rests not there. It virtually extends
to the whole Community, and affects every Member of it; not only by insulting
each of them in the Person of their Sovereign; but by weakening the Energy of
Government, which prepares the Way for all those Disorders to rush in.

3. AND this suggests another Motive or Reason for discharging this Duty;
namely, That the greatest Evils which can befall Society, necessarily attend
the Neglect or Breach of it. So that if even the Authority of God were set
aside in this Case; the Principles of Humanity, Reason and found Policy would
decide in Favor of the Precept -- "honor the King."

MORE human Blood has been shed -- greater Miseries and Calamities have been
entailed on Mankind -- and more audacious Impieties and Enormities of every
Kind have been committed by Means of Sedition and Rebellion, than perhaps
through any other Cause whatever.

IF Men once deviate from the obvious Path of their Duty, there is no telling
where they will stop. Perhaps they apprehend no great Danger at first, and
foresee not all the Consequences of their Procedure. Having subdued the first
Struggles of Conscience, it afterward becomes more pliant; and they are
gradually carried on from one Step to another, till they find themselves in a
Situation, that is extremely difficult and perilous. Thus have the most
aggravated Evils arisen from seemingly small Beginnings, which occasioned
little Alarm: And this is often the Case of Rebellion -- it proceeds mostly
from a neglect of the Precept before us, "Honor the King." Many consider this
Neglect as a very trifling offense; but how pernicious has it frequently proved
in its Effects to Mankind!

WHEN disrespectful Sentiments of the Sovereign are entertained, contrary to
this Command, it leads to disrespectful and seditious Language; and the
Transition is easy and natural from the Language to the Practice of Sedition.
He that freely indulges himself in that Language, wants only an Opportunity to
realize, and reduce it to Practice.

Now reflect for a Moment on the horrid Train of Evils which follow Rebellion.
The first Stages of its Progress are carried on by Deceit, Violence and
Perjury. It is dreadful even in its mildest Effects. It is stained with Blood,
and diffuses general Distress and Misery. The Ruin of Millions attend it. All
the dark, malevolent Passions of the Soul are roused and exerted; its mild and
amiable affections are suppressed; and with them, virtuous Principles are laid
prostrate. Hence it is that Civil Wars are always more cruel and barbarous than
foreign Wars, and more destructive to Morals; In the former, personal Revenge
and Animosity mingle, and kindle up the Soul to tenfold Rage. Reckon over the
Benefits which Government confers on Mankind; and the Evil which is contrary to
each of these Benefits, is brought on Mankind by Rebellion. Add to all this,
that when successful, it generally ends in Tyranny, and the most grievous
Oppression.

EACH of these Particulars was literally verified in the Rebellion, whose Guilt
was consumated by the shedding of Royal Blood -- by the Martyrdom of King
CHARLES I, which we commemorate this Day.

I shall not take up your Time with a minute Detail of the Rise, Progress and
Effects of that Rebellion. Suffice it to observe, that it began with the Breach
of St. Peter's Precept -- "honor the King." Groundless Suspicions of him were
cherished, and the most palpable Falsehoods were propagated by designing Men.
Hereby the Minds of many were poisoned. Ambition under the usual Mask of
Patriotism, and Enthusiasm in the Garb of Religion, blew the Trumpet of
Sedition. Open Violence succeeded, and a bloody, ruinous Rebellion was the
Consequence. The Nation was weakened, its Property destroyed and dissipated,
and the Constitution was wholly subverted. The Sovereign was deliberately
murdered -- a Sovereign who was not more distinguished by his Sufferings, than
by his Fortitude and Probity -- by unaffected Piety to God, and Benevolence to
Mankind. Of this he gave the highest Testimony that Man is capable of giving --
he resisted unto Blood, and laid down his Life, rather than betray the Church
of God, or the People, committed to his Care by divine Providence.

WHAT was the Issue of all those Crimes, this Waste of Blood and Treasure? --
The most oppressive, absolute Tyranny, on the Part of the Usurper; and a State
of the most abject Slavery, with Respect to the People at large! A State
infinitely worse than that which the most inflamed Zealot, the most violent
Republican or Enthusiast even pretended to dread before the Rebellion commenced.

NEED I tell you that the unnatural Rebellion which, at this Day, desolates and
disgraces America, bears the strongest Resemblance to the former Rebellion? The
one is an exact Counterpart of the other -- begun on nearly the same
Principles, and carried on by the very same Methods.

THE Transactions which led to the present Rebellion are recent, and fresh in
your Memory. They originated from those who dishonored the King, traduced his
Government, trampled on his Authority, and imputed to him Designs which had not
the least Foundation in Truth Besides personal Invectives against the King, it
was affirmed that a Plan had been formed to enslave the Colonies -- that Popery
was to be universally established, to which, the Canada Bill was an
Introduction -- an Act of Parliament was forged and printed in the Newspapers,
in which, among other Extravagancies, the tenth Child through all the Colonies
was assigned to the King or parochial Clergyman, I forget which; and such was
the Credulity of People that this Act was believed to be genuine, etc. etc.
. Imaginary Dangers were pretended; the Passions of the Populace were inflamed
to a Degree of Phrenzy; and every Engine was employed to carry on the Work of
Sedition. These Methods, managed with great Artifice and Zeal, and each
Circumstance heightened with the bitterest Aggravations, proved but too
successful. The Minds of many were poisoned, and seduced from their Duty; and
several well meaning Persons were prevailed on to join in the destructive
Measures that were afterward adopted. Independency, that Foible of weak Minds
tinctured with local Pride, in which however the ambitious Leaders sought their
own Aggrandisement, though big with certain Ruin to this Country, was declared;
and then Rebellion, undisguised and undissembled, flourished over us.

WAS there a happier Country on Earth before that Period, than this? Did it not
enjoy all the Advantages of Government without its Burdens? Is there on Earth,
this Day, a more wretched Country? Where is that Peace, that Ease, that
Affluence, Security and Freedom which formerly resided in, and distinguished
America? They are fled. Oppression, Violence and Usurpation prevail in their
Stead. Distress and Affliction are universally diffused. The tenderest Ties are
rent asunder. Those who should live and love like Brethren, are filled with
deadly Animosity against each other: Not only Fellow Subject waring against
Fellow Subject; but Brother and Brother, Parent and Child stand up to shed each
other's Blood! Thousands have perished by the Sword, and by the Calamities of
War -- thousands are driven from their once peaceful Abodes, stripped of their
Property, and exposed to Misery and Want, on Account of their Loyalty. The Land
is polluted with innocent Blood -- with the Blood of those who, from a
Principle of Conscience, adhered to their rightful Sovereign; and rather than
renounce Him, or bear Arms against Him, have submitted to Death. Unsatisfied
with these accumulated Evils, the Leaders of Rebellion would plunge this
devoted Country still deeper in Ruin. They have leagued with the Popish,
inveterate Enemies of our Nation, of our Religion and Liberties -- they have
virtually, and as far as in them lay, delivered this Country into the Hands of
a despotic Power -- a Power which has extinguished Liberty, and extirpated the
Protestant Religion from all its Dominions; and would, doubtless, gladly avail
itself of the Opportunity, now offered, to exterminate Both in this Country
also. -- But I turn from the Subject with Horror -- my Heart will not permit me
to enlarge.

AND are these the Fruits of dishonouring the King? Are these the Benefits that
are gained by it? And shall we listen to the popular Declamations that would
excite to the Breach of God's Law for the Purpose? O rather let me ever adhere
to the Maxims of Inspiration. -- Fear God. Honor the King. A Rebel, in a
neighboring Colony, lately upbraided a Loyalist with being a Tory. The
Loyalist, in Reply, asked him, if he knew the Definition of a Tory? And upon
being answered -- "No" -- "Then I will tell you," says the Loyalist -- A Tory
is one who fears God, and honors the King.


THUS were Matters weighed in the equal Scales of unbyassed Reason and sound
Policy -- were the Consequences of honoring the King, put into the one Scale,
and the Effects of neglecting it, put into the other; it is easy to see which
would preponderate, which would have the Advantage. Prudence, Reason and Policy
certainly forbid us to run into a greater Evil, that we may avoid a less. A
wise Man will deliberately examine Things, not only in themselves, but in their
Consequences; and of two Evils, if he is unavoidably obliged to choose, he will
choose the least. Were we to decide on the Principles of mere worldly Prudence,
this would be a much better Test of Obedience to the Precept in my Text, than
the Feelings of the People, which has been absurdly advanced as a Test in this
Case by some: Not reflecting that the Feelings of the People, of a great many
at least, on such Occasions, will be exactly such as are excited by Ambition,
Discontent, false Principles, or the artful Management of designing Men. But
when to all these Considerations, the Authority of Heaven is added, to "honor
the King," it is difficult to account how any one who fears God, or loves his
Fellow Creatures, can disregard this Precept.

INSTRUCTED thus, and commanded by the Word of God -- warned by the Example of
others, and taught by our own Experience, let us firmly resolve, my respected
Hearers, to practice this Precept, "Honor the King." In doing so, we shall
both act agreeably to the Will of Heaven, and promote the Welfare of Society;
for such is the Goodness of the Almighty, that in this, as in every other
Instance, he has not only made our Duty compatible with our Interest and
Happiness; but he has inseparably connected them together.

LET us honor the King by faithfully adhering to, and supporting his
Government This is undeniably a Part of our Duty; and by discharging it, we
shall adhere to and support the Cause of Truth, of real Liberty, and the
Protestant Religion, whilst we manifest that Loyalty which is due to our
rightful Sovereign.

UNDER his auspicious Reign, this Country enjoyed Blessings whose Value, like
that of Health, was not fully known but by their Loss. At least, they were not
sufficiently prized; or else they had not been so wantonly flung away. To be a
British Subject, with all its concomitant Advantages, implies more Happiness,
more and greater privileges, than to be the Subject of any other State or
Prince on Earth. We should be, and I trust we are, sensible of this; should we
not therefore now act with a Frmness and Zeal proportioned to the Magnitude of
those Objects? Should it not also be our wish, that our deluded Brethren may
return to that Duty which they once warmly professed? And share with us again
in those Blessings we once sweetly enjoyed in common?

LET us honor the King by cherishing respectful Sentiments concerning him;
speaking of him with Affection, with Esteem and Reverence; and by promoting a
like Spirit and Conduct in others.

HAPPY for us, that in doing this, we need not deviate from Truth, nor
sacrifice Christian Sincerity to political Duty. In this remote Quarter of his
Dominions, where his Name has been designedly slandered to serve the Purposes
of Rebellion and Revolt, it is become the more necessary to contradict those
Slanders, and to declare -- That there is not this Day in Christendom a better,
a more amiable Sovereign than our present gracious King -- few Countries at any
Period have been blessed with such a Sovereign -- a King whose Ambition it is
to preserve the Rights of his Subjects inviolate, and communicate Happiness to
them all without Exception -- a King, whose Life is a shining Example of
Religion and Virtue, and is a strong Incentive to the Practice of both by
others -- a King, who is the munificent Patron of Science, and of all those
Liberal Arts which embellish and dignify human Life -- a King, who unites the
private Virtues of the Christian and Citizen with the more splendid Virtues and
Accomplishments of the Monarch; and who, by this bright Assemblage of Virtues,
adds Luster to the Throne he fills!

To vilify such a Sovereign, and rebel against him, how aggravated the Guilt!

I SHALL be the more concise in exhorting you to honor your King, as I am
conscious -- and it is with the highest Pleasure and Exultation I can testify
-- that in the worst of Times, and on the most trying Occasions, you, my Fellow
Citizens, did honor and faithfully adhere to him.

YOU have been, and I doubt not, ever will be, loyal to your earthly Sovereign.
Let me beseech you not to tarnish this Virtue by Disloyalty or Disobedience to
the Sovereign of Earth and Heaven -- to the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

WHILST you honor the King, fear God also. These Duties should be inseparable.
The one naturally rises out of the other. He that has formed just Conceptions
of the Deity, will be impressed with filial Reverence and Fear toward him. The
Conscience of such a Person will be tender, and shrink at the Thought of
violating any of the divine Precepts -- especially those which respect the
Order established by the Almighty among his rational Creatures; for a Disregard
of these cannot fail of dishonouring the Creator, by an Increase of Wickedness;
nor of injuring Mankind by destroying the Barriers which Heaven has fixed to
guard their Happiness.

THERE is the greatest Reason that we should fear God; not as an arbitrary
Tyrant; but as a just, powerful and wise Governor, whose Laws are founded in
Righteousness and Truth; who will support the Dignity of his Laws, by punishing
Transgressors; and who is privy, not only to our Actions, but to our most
private Thoughts.

HIS innate Purity leads him necessarily to detest Sin. As moral Governor of
the Universe, placed at the Head of the great intellectual System, it would be
utterly inconsistent with that Character, and with all his Attributes, not to
check and punish Sin; which might otherwise subvert his Kingdom, and frustrate
his Designs.

HENCE the frequent Denunciations in his Word, against sinful Nations; the
actual Judgments inflicted on those Nations; nay, their total Overthrow, when
they finally abused his Mercy, and the Measure of their Iniquity was full.

THIS Procedure was not confined to that People, whom he chose, and were under
a particular Dispensation. There is the clearest Proof of the contrary. The
general Rules and Laws of God's Proceedings with the Children of Men, are the
same and invariable -- invariable as his Nature, and the Relation which Men
bear to him; for all are equally his Creatures -- all are equally capable of
Virtue and Vice.

THE Jews indeed had a peculiar Law and Dispensation; and by that Law and
Dispensation they were judged. The Gentiles were under the Law and Light of
Nature, and had traditional Instruction; by that Law, that Light and
Instruction they were also judged. The General Rules of the Divine Procedure,
as I said before, were the same to both; the Mode of Application only varied
according to their different Circumstances.

THUS we find in Fact that many of the most celebrated Heathen Nations, States
and Cities which figured in ancient History, are the Subjects of Prophecy
Besides those called the four great Empires, viz. The Babylonish, Persian,
Grecian and Roman; the Egyptians, Edomites, Moabites, etc. Tire, Sidon, etc.
are the Subjects of divine Prophecy -- their Vices are reproved, their
Overthrow on Account of those Vices, is predicted.
. They were liable to the same providential Dispensations with the Jews.
Judgments were denounced against their Vices; and those Judgments were
inflicted. Consult the Prophecies recorded in the Book of God concerning those
Nations; then turn to the History of those Nations, and you will find the
Prophecies concerning them exactly verified.

HENCE War, Famine, Pestilence and other Calamities, are expressly called the
Judgments of God, to execute his Displeasure against guilty Nations. Obedient
to the divine Command, these accordingly rush forth, and visit the Abodes of
Sin. They come to chasten and reclaim, if Men will forsake their Sins, and
return to their Duty: Or else, to overturn and destroy, if they are impenitent,
and refuse to reform.

WHENEVER therefore we see those Judgments abroad, and a People visited with
them, which is our Case at present; we may be assured that the Hand of God is
there, and that he is calling those People to an Account for their
Transgressions. To "fear God" is the especial Duty of such a People -- the
Sentiments and Conduct which they should adopt, are pointed out by Hosea --
Come, and let us return unto the Lord; for he has torn, and he will heal us;
he has smitten, and will bind us up Hosea, vi. 1.
.

TOO many are diverted from their proper Duty on such Occasions, and fail in
making a right Use of those Calamities, by attending only to the secondary and
visible Causes of them. They forget the first Spring and Mover, and the Ends
for which Calamities are sent. Unfruitful and unwholesome Seasons commonly
produce Dearth and Mortality; Ambition, Avarice, Resentment, and the Intrigues
of designing Men are the immediate and general Causes of War. In these
proximate Causes, People rest, without looking further. They do not consider
that Providence always works by such Means, and employs them to effect its
Purposes; and that the Calamities thus produced, come not the less from God,
because they are brought about through those secondary Means and Causes.

A FEW Instances will elucidate this Point with Respect to the Calamities of
War, which concern us most at present.

THE Assyrian, that is Sennacherib, is expressly called "the Rod of God's
Anger," and was sent against the Jews to chastise them for their Vices, which
he accordingly did Isaiah x. 5.
. Cyrus surprised and took Babylon Isaiah xlv.
; Alexander of Macedon overthrew the Persian Monarchy Dan. ii. 39. viii. 5. xi.
3.
, as was predicted of each; and the Romans reduced Jerusalem, and inflicted
those heavy Judgments on the Jews which had been denounced against them by our
Savior. Matthew. xxiv. 15 -- 22,


THE Prophecies concerning those memorable Events undeniably prove that they
happened by the Appointment of God: Yet they were brought about by Men who knew
not the divine Will, and were actuated solely by temporal Motives. What was
said of the Assyrian, may be affirmed of each -- Howbeit he means not so,
neither does his Heart think so; but it is in his Heart to destroy, and cut off
Nations not a few. Isaiah x. 7.


THESE were the Scourges of God; they were the Instruments that executed his
Purposes; though all Claim to Merit on their Part was precluded, because they
were unconscious of those Purposes; it was not in their Heart to accomplish
them, nor did they mean so. They were influenced by Ambition, Pride, Cruelty,
and a Thirst of Conquest; and accordingly, were liable, in their Turn, to the
Stroke of divine Justice for their Transgressions. Excellent are the
Reflections of the most worthy and learned Bishop of London, Dr. LOWTH -- the
Ornament of Religion, Letters, and the present Age -- on this Subject -- God in
the Course of his Providence, makes Use of great Conquerors and Tyrants, as his
Instruments to execute his Judgments in the Earth; he employs one wicked Nation
to scourge another. The Inflector of the Punishment may perhaps be as culpable
as the Sufferer; and may add to his Guilt by indulging his Cruelty in executing
God's Justice. When he has fulfilled the Work to which the divine Vengeance has
ordained him, he will become himself the Object of it. God charges the
Babylonians, though employed by himself to chastise his People, with Cruelty in
Regard to them. They exceeded the Bounds of Justice and Humanity in oppressing
and destroying them; and though they were really executing the righteous Decree
of God, yet, as far as it regarded themselves, they were only indulging their
own Ambition and Violence. Note on Isaiah, xlvii. 6.

This Note is (among others, replete with Erudition, fine Sense, and judicious
Criticism) annexed to his Lordship's New Translation of Isaiah into English,
lately published-The best Translation, beyond Doubt, that has ever been made of
that sublime, evangelical Prophet into any Language. The Lovers of sacred
Literature must be equally pleased and instructed by this Book. The Translation
contributes more to remove Difficulties, and elucidate the Prophet's Sense,
than Volumes of Commentaries. We find the elegant Simplicity of the Original
retained; whilst the Energy, Grandeur and Sublimity by which this Prophet is so
much distinguished, are happily transfused into the Translation.

The whole Bible, equally well translated and explained (and the right Method
for both is here pointed out) would be the most valuable Acquisition perhaps to
the Church of God, that it has received since the Days of Inspiration. Whoever
has read this Book and his Lordship's former Work, De Sacra Poesi Hebraeorum,
will not hesitate to pronounce him one of the ablest Critics -- probably the
very first and ablest in sacred Literature -- that our Nation or any other has
produced. Should any who may honor this Note with a Perusal, and are yet
unacquainted with those excellent Books, be induced to read them, the End for
which it is inserted, will be answered.


But hereby the infinite Wisdom and Power of God are conspicuous, in educing
Good out of Evil; making the irregular Passions of Men subservient to his
Designs, and to the Glory of his Moral Government. Thus not only Idolatrous
Heathens, but even Insects and Vermin, nay, the very Elements, have been
delegated by the God of Heaven, to punish and reclaim his offending People --
to carry his threatened Judgments among guilty Nations.

I mention these Things purely to show, that we should look beyond the
immediate Authors of our present Calamities. We should raise our Thoughts to
God, own his Hand, and acknowledge the Justice of his Dispensations. We should
fear him, as the constant Witness, the righteous Judge of all our Actions -- a
God of Mercy to those who fear and serve him -- a consuming Fire to obstinate
Transgressors.

FEAR, when not directed to its proper Object, is indeed a mean Passion. The
Almighty is its true Object; and to fear him, is as much our Honor and Wisdom,
as it is our Duty. The Fear of God will guard us against the Violation of his
Law; it will lead us to Repentance, if we have offended him, and to the
conscienscious Discharge of each Duty we owe to him and our Fellow Creatures;
it will inspire us with Confidence and firm Trust in Him, and be a Shield
against all other Fears and Terrors.

THE Almighty has the supreme uncontrolled Disposal of all Things. The Actions
and Hearts of Men -- the Powers of Nature and Events of this World, are
entirely in his Hand. He can direct or change, he can repress or accelerate
them as seems best to his unerring Wisdom.

THE Person who firmly believes this; and in Consequence of that Belief,
habitually fears God in his Heart, sincerely serving him, and placing his
Confidence in him, will feel Consolation, Hope and Fortitude springing up
within him, at the Approach, or under the Pressure of any Calamity. He will not
yield to unmanly Fears; but confidently look up to God for Support and
Deliverance.

THESE Reflections are very suitable to our present Situation -- and may we
profit by them. The Times admonish us to examine our Ways, humble ourselves
before God, and turn to him with unfeigned Repentance. Proceeding by the same
Rules which he has always observed toward offending Nations, his Judgments
are gone forth to visit us for our Abuse of his Mercies, our Barrenness under
his Gospel, and the other numberless Transgressions by which we have provoked
him.

CONSULT your Conscience, and then tell me -- Should we not hearken to the
Voice of God, speaking to us in his Judgments, and calling us to Reformation?
Can we look for his Favor or Pardon, if we persist in offending him? Or expect
his Blessing, if the Cry of our Sins continues to enter his Ears? Would it be
right in us to repeat or multiply our Transgressions, when all that is dear to
us, or valuable on Earth, is at Stake in the present Contest; and when the
Issue of this Contest is suspended on his Will?

IF any Persons among us, by their vicious Lives, dishonor God and provoke
him; they are worse Enemies to us than either Rebels, or their Popish Allies.
They make the God of Nature our Adversary, who can summon the Powers of Nature,
and arm every Element, to work our Destruction, and defeat our Designs. The
Efforts and Power of Man may be resisted; but who can resist him that is
Almighty?

I TRUST that these Considerations will sink deep in our Minds, and produce
suitable Effects. O let us not remain hardened under the chastening Hand of
God, nor defeat his gracious Designs to reclaim and save us. Sincerely
lamenting our past Sins, which have been committed against the clearest Light,
the dearest Love, and the most transcendant Mercy, let us prostrate ourselves
before God, implore his Pardon, through the attoning Merits of his blessed Son;
and firmly resolve, by his Grace, to amend hereafter, to fear him, and walk
devoutly in his Ways.

WE should not rest contented with a cold and barren Assent to these Things;
for this could neither be pleasing to God, nor profitable to us. We should
actually reduce those Truths, those Resolutions to Practice; and frequently ask
ourselves. Whether the Purposes of God have been answered by his Visitation?
Whether our evil Habits are weakened or broken -- our Sins mortified and
forsaken -- our Virtues increased and strengthened? Whether we are more
punctual, more conscienscious in the Discharge of our Duty to God and Man?
Whether we have advanced in Piety and Probity, under our Afflictions, and are
become more humble, holy and resigned? Whether we deny ourselves, take up the
Cross daily, and follow our divine Master with more Ardour? Whether our Hearts
be more weaned from the World, from its pleasureable Enjoyments, and criminal
Pursuits? Whether we are more sensible of their Insufficiency for our
Happiness? And, in fine, whether our Affections are more spiritualized, more
disengaged from the fascinating Blandishments of this Life, and centred in God.?

QUESTIONS of this Sort, seriously and repeatedly urged, would be very
beneficial; and I appeal to your Conscience, whether the Gospel does not
require these Particulars of us -- whether each of them is not an especial Duty
in our present Situation? Evidently, it is by a religious Regard to these, and
other like Christian Duties, and by this only, that we can expect the Almighty
will be reconciled to us; that he will remove our Calamities, call back the
Sword from destroying, bid Discord cease, and command Peace, with its attending
Blessings, to revisit us. To such Amendment, his Promises of Mercy and
Deliverance are explicit, numerous and peremptory; and he will be faithful to
those Promises. When so many powerful Motives conspire in recommending this
Line of Conduct, may I not flatter myself that you will pursue it?

INFLUENCED by those Motives, let us, in the Name of God, and in his Strength,
resolutely set about this Conduct: Cheared with the pleasing hope which results
from it, when pursued, let us look forward to that happy Period -- not very
distant now, I trust -- when we shall return into the soft Bosom of Peace; when
the Remembrance of past Sufferings shall serve to enhance its Value, and
inspire us with the more Zeal to praise, and thank, and fear God, and to honor
the King; when our misguided Brethren, cured of their Delusion, shall be
brought back to their Duty, and partake once more of the Benefits which,
hitherto, they have too lightly regarded. Let each of us then, put on Bowels of
Mercy, Kindness, Meekness, long Suffering; forbearing one another, and
forgiving one another, if any Man have a Quarrel against any; even as Christ
forgave you Coloss. iii. 12, 13.
; and let us resolve to imitate the Example of Christ's Subjects in that
blessed State, foretold by Isaiah, when all Envy shall be extinguished, and
brotherly Love shall abound -- Ephraim shall not envy Judah, and Judah shall
not vex Ephraim. Isaiah xi. 13.


THAT each of us may cultivate this divine Temper -- that each of us, as a
Follower of the meek Jesus, may adorn that Profession, and manifest a deep
Sense of our Obligation to imitate, and love, and serve him -- that each of us
may improve by the Chastisements of Heaven, and rise, purified from the Dross
of Sin, more bright and shining out of the Furnace of Affliction -- that each
of us may attain that Amendment, with all its consequent Blessings, which are
designed and aimed at by the Dispensations of our merciful God -- May He of his
infinite Goodness grant, for the Sake and Merits of his dear Son, Jesus Christ;
to whom, with the Father, and Holy Spirit, three Persons, but one eternal God,
be ascribed immortal Praise, Glory, and Dominion, henceforth, for evermore.

AMEN.
ERRATA.
Page 19, line 21, for these, r. then; p. 20, line 26, for alievate, r.
alleviate.


