THE NECESSITY AND DIVINE EXCELLENCY OF A LIFE OF PURITY AND HOLINESS, Set
forth with pathetic Energy, by an eminent MINISTER of the Gospel amongst the
People called Quakers. IN SEVEN DISCOURSES AND THREE PRAYERS, AND AN EPISTLE TO
HIS Brethren in Religious profession in the Island of TORTOLA. Now collected
and re-published, that the instructive and important Truths therein contained,
may be spread and become more generally useful.

Gather up the Fragments that remain, that nothing be lost.

John vi. 12. PHILADELPHIA: Reprinted by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, in Market-Street
between Second and Third-Streets. 1780

ADVERTISEMENT.
SEVERAL of the Editors in their introductions to the following Testimonies,
have informed us that the consent of the Preacher to their publication, though
solicited, had not been obtained, which is assigned as a reason for not
inserting his name; -- it may now be unnecessary to withold it, as by his
removal from this state of probation, beyond the reach of human censure or
human applause, the Reader may be gratified therewith, without giving just
occasion of offense to any. Several attempts to describe this worthy Servant of
CHRIST appeared in the public prints soon after his decease -- two of those
characters are part of the present collection, which with the account given of
his religious progress and faithful labors in the Gospel of JESUS, by his
Brethren in religious profession, extracted from Piety promoted, the eighth
part, may be a sufficient information to those readers who were unacquainted
with him and, the high estimation in which he was held by those who knew him
best.

CHARACTER OF THE LATE MR. SAMUEL FOTHERGILL, BROTHER TO THE PHYSICIAN DR.
FOTHERGILL,
TO commemorate the virtues of great and eminent men, who have been honorable
in their day, is a tribute due to their memory. A tribute which sensible men
pay from emotions of respectful gratitude; and from a hope that it may prove an
incentive to the Living to emulate their virtues.

Of this class the late Mr. SAMUEL FOTHERGILL, of Warrington, an eminent
Preacher among the Quakers, may with great justice be ranked. I knew him well,
and had the happiness of his occasional acquaintance; I call it the happiness,
because I never enjoyed the company of any person from whom I received more
real satisfaction; and however diversified with affliction, the future part of
my life may prove, I shall never remember those hours I have spent with him,
but with peculiar pleasure. He was an happy compound of the gentleman and the
christian; the virtues and amiable qualities of each character being admirably
blended in him. Graceful in his person and deportment, easy and affable in his
manner, he commanded both respect and love; he possessed natural abilities far
superior to the generality of mankind; and improved them to the utmost of his
power. Well read both in books and men, his studies did not terminate in barren
speculation; but the great truths of religion were deeply implanted in his
heart, and beamed forth illustriously in a benevolent and truly christian
conduct.

As a member of civil society he was exceedingly useful, filling up the social
and relative duties of life with great propriety. Blameless in his manners,
kind, charitable, and ready on all occasions to devote his time and talents to
promote the best of all causes, the good of mankind. He lived beloved, and his
loss is deeply deplored by all who had the happiness of knowing his worth.

As a Preacher, he was far superior to most who fill that station: Sound in the
important doctrines of the christian faith, he endeavored to promote them
universally, with the greatest energy of language, and the most persuasive
eloquence. In this capacity he was indeed truly great; and his greatness
received additional luster from his humility. Although followed by numbers, and
courted by persons of superior rank and station, and admired by those of all
persuasions, the applause which his eminence justly acquired, did not exalt,
but evidently tended to make him humble. He was a person of an enlarged mind,
zealous without bigotry, and a steady promoter of universal charity. In his
sermons, it was evident to all his intelligent hearers, that he deeply felt the
force of those solemn truths he delivered; and his manner of displaying them
was so justly emphatical, that none but the insensible or obdurate could
withstand their force, or remain unaffected by them. He traveled much from the
most disinterested motives, among his friends in Great Britain, Ireland, and
the American Colonies, for the promotion of piety and christian virtue, and for
the advancement of that faith and religion in which he most surely believed,
and was so eminent an example.

During the latter part of his life he was much indisposed in his health; but
(as I have heard from the best authority) perfectly happy and easy in his mind,
having an evidence in himself that he was approaching that state of felicity
which is prepared for the righteous. This evidence supported him through the
remains of a painful life, and was his unfailing hope in the awful hour of
death, which (when near his end) he declared, Had no terrors, nor would the
grave have any victory. And also added, That as he had lived, so he should
close with the most unshaken assurance, that he had not followed cunningly
devised fables, but the pure living and eternal substance. Such was his
exemplary life -- Such his triumphant death!

A life so spent is truly honorable -- And such a death unspeakably glorious.

A Lover of Truth and Virtue.

[From the MANCHESTER GAZETTE, June 1772.]
ON the 15th instant paid the last debt of nature, Mr. SAMUEL POTHERGILL, of
Warrington, an eminent Preacher amongst the people called Quakers, endowed with
qualifications superior to most, and animated by a zeal truly apostolic, he
long preached the interesting truths of the gospel to mankind; whilst the
uniform tenor of his life, devoted to religion and spent in the practice of
every virtue, was the strongest comment on his doctrine.

SAMUEL FOTHERGILL, of Warrington in Lancashire, was the sixth son of our
worthy ancient friend JOHN FOTHERGILL, mentioned in this Treatise; see page 29,
and of MARGARET his wife, for an account of whom see volume the sixth, page 90,
of Piety promoted.

This their son being of an active and lively disposition, and during his
apprenticeship mostly from under the watchful eye of his affectionate parent,
he fled from the Holy Cross of CHRIST, and indulged himself in the
gratifications of folly and licentiousness; violating the repeated convictions
of divine grace in his own mind, which had been mercifully extended from his
early years, thereby wounding the soul of his tender father (of whose religious
care to form and lead the tender minds of his children to piety and virtue, we
have an account in the memoirs of his life;) yet his pious admonitions proved
nevertheless, as bread cast on the waters, which returned after many days; for
about the twenty first year of his age, the visitation of divine love was so
powerfully renewed, that it proved effectual to turn his steps out of the paths
of vanity; and as he has expressed, with humble and awful gratitude to the
Preserver of men, It then appeared clear to his understanding, that would be
the last call the heavenly Father would favor him with; he therefore consulted
no longer with flesh and blood, but gave up to the holy visitation, devoting
his whole heart and affections to such reconciliation with GOD, through the
mediation of JESUS CHRIST; and abiding in great humility under the purifying
operation of the holy Ghost and fire, he became thereby qualified for those
eminent services he was called into; for in a few months, by the constraning
power and love of GOD, his mouth was opened to bear a Testimony to the
sufficiency of that holy Arm that had plucked him as a brand out of the fire:
Thus a dispensation of the ministry being committed to his charge, he attended
faithfully thereto, and moved therein at the requirings, and under the
direction of divine wisdom, by which means he soon became an able minister of
the gospel, called thereto and qualified by the Holy Ghost, under which
influence he labored with diligence and devoted much of his time and strength,
when health permitted, to the service of his dear LORD and Master; for the
continuance of whose favors he counted nothing too near or dear to part with,
that he might be instrumental in gathering souls to GOD, which was the object
he had in view in all his gospel labors; being diligent himself, he
endeavored much to excite friends to a due and constant attendance of meetings
for religious worship, and those for the disciplince of the church.

Through the course of his gospel labors, both in public and private, animated
by divine love, he expressed an uncommon warmth of affection for the rising
youth of this generation, with whom he was frequently led into a (...)
brotherly feeling and sympathy for their present and eternal welfare; under
which concern his love to this class of both sexes, under all denominations,
was strong and ardent.

He traveled much in this Nation and Scotland, several times in Ireland, and
once through most of the North American Colonies, in the service of truth;
where, though singularly humbled in a sense of poverty, weakness and
insufficiency on his first landing, he was by accounts received, marvelously
strengthened, both in public and private, in gospel authority and love, to the
awakening and comforting of many.

In the fore part of the year 1769, he visited most of the families of friends
in the monthly meeting of Grace church street, London; in which service he was
divinely strengthened and enabled to extend a helping hand to many in close and
necessary labor, for their increasing care, to live and act consistent with
our holy profession, to the comfort and help of diverse, and his own peace; and
afterward, at two different opportunities, he visited the families of friends
in Horslydown and Westminster monthly-meetings in that city, to the same good
effect.

He mostly attended the yearly-meetings in London, and other places, when of
bodily ability; in which his gospel labors were very acceptable and edifying;
being particularly careful when called from home, to return to his family and
friends with as much expedition as the nature of his service would admit.

Having acquired a moderate competency by his diligence and industry, he
declined trade for several years before his decease, devoting his time and
talents to the service of the churches. As a Pillar in the Lord's house he was
steadfast, being actuated by a christian and manly zeal; in deportment grave;
his private conversation was savory and edifying, corresponding with his
ministry, which at times went forth as a flame, piercing the obdurate, yet
descended like dew upon the tender plants of our heavenly Father's planting,
the true mourners in zion, with these he traveled in a deep sympathy of
spirit; in his gospel labors free from affectation, in doctrine clear, sound
and pathetic, filled with charity, allowing for the prejudices of mankind,
being indeed a minister and elder worthy of double honor, speaking whereof he
knew, and what his own hands had handled of the good word of life.

He endured a long and painful illness with much patience and resignation, and
toward the close of his time expressed himself to some of his relations, when
they took leave of him, previous to their setting out for the yearly meeting in
London, to the following effect: Our health is no more at our command, than
length of days: -- Mine seems drawing fast toward a conclusion; but I am
content with every allotment of Providence, for they are all in wisdom, --
unerring wisdom.

There is one thing which as an arm underneath, bears up and supports; and though
the rolling tempestuous billows surround, yet my head is kept above them, and
my feet are firmly established. -- O! seek it, -- press after it, -- lay fast
hold of it.

Though painful my nights, and wearisome my days, yet I am preserved in patience
and resignation. -- Death has no terrors, nor will the grave have any victory.
-- My soul triumphs over death, hell and the grave.

Husbands and wives, parents and children, health and riches, must all go --
disappointment is another name for them.

I should have been thankful had I been able to have got to the ensuing
yearly meeting in London, which you are now going to attend, where I have been
so often refreshed with my brethren; but it is otherwise allotted: -- I shall
remember them, and some of them will remember me. -- The Lord knows best what
is best for us; I am content and resigned to his will.

I feel a foretaste of that joy that is to come; -- and who would wish to
change such a state of mind?

I should be glad if an easy channel could be found to inform the
yearly meeting that as I have lived, so I shall close, with the most unshaken
assurance, that we have not followed cunningly devised fables, but the pure
living eternal substance.

Let the aged be strong, let the middle aged be animated, and the youth
encouraged; for the Lord is still with Zion; the Lord will bless Zion.

If I be now removed out of his church militant, where I have endeavored in
some measure to fill up my duty, I have an evidence that I shall gain an
admittance into his glorious church triumphant, far above the heavens.

My dear love is to all them that love the Lord Jesus.

He departed this life at his house in Warrington the 15th, and was buried the
19th day of the sixth month 1772, at Penheth, in the fifty-seventh year of his
age, and the thirty-sixth of his ministry.

Extract from the Publisher's Introduction to the Printer of the public Ledger,
dated London, September 4, 1769.
"On a visit lately to a literary acquaintance in the country, I met with the
enclosed manuscript copy of an Epistle to the inhabitants of Tortola in
America, addressed to a society under the distinguished appellation of Friends.
I was induced to borrow it to take a copy for my own use, and several of my
acquaintance expressing a desire of having it printed, that they might become
possessed of some copies without the trouble of writing them, I have sent it
for insertion in order to oblige them. It is but justice to acknowledge that
neither the author, nor his relations know any thing of its being conveyed to
the press for public inspection. Convinced that it may have a tendency to
profit society in general, and cannot possibly be productive of disadvantageous
consequences to any individual, I did not choose to risk its suppression, by
asking leave for its publication.

Whatever blame is due to its appearance, is, therefore, entirely my own;
whatever merit may be found in the performance, is due to its author, as the
instrument of the instruction conveyed thereby; which is all the preface and
apology that seems necessary, by way of introduction, from

Yours etc. J. B.

AN EPISTLE TO FRIENDS IN THE ISLAND OF TORTOLA.
DEAR FRIENDS,
THOUGH I am personally a stranger, and unknown to most of you; yet ye have
been, of late time especially, so frequently the subject of close
thoughtfulness to me, and with so much warmth as to engage my mind to visit you
in a collective capacity with this Epistle, from some apprehensions of duty,
and with an heart replenished with sincere good will, in which I wish you the
possession of that happiness which is everlasting.

It was tidings of great joy to the living body of friends in this land, to
hear that the Lord Almighty was at work in your Island to beget children to
himself: and that the same substantial virtue which wrought upon many in this
and other nations, to redeem and purify them a people to the praise of his
great name, had also visited you with the dayspring from on high; and produced
the same blessed fruits in measure, even a death unto sin, and a new birth unto
righteousness; and, by the baptism of the Holy Ghost, brought them into the
body whereof Christ is head.

Oh the tenderness, the fear, and watchfulness, which attended some of your
souls in that day! A precious day of visitation, which ought for ever to be
remembered; a day wherein the Lord allured some of you, and brought you into
the wilderness; speaking comfortably to you, and in his own time, gave you
vineyards from thence. Some of you, I believe, have in remembrance those times
of divine betrothing, and cannot but acknowledge it was the Lord's doing. Then
the mind was humbled as in the dust, and a living concern arose to walk in
white, and to enter into covenant with the Lord your God. A covenant you then
hoped would never be broken; in this simplicity of heart, the Lord's children
are ever safest; almighty power watching over them for good, and regarding them
with a father's care.

As individuals amongst you were thus engaged, the spiritual sympathy and
fellowship of the one body spread over sea and land; and we became as epistles
written in one another's hearts; and were baptized by the one spirit into the
one body, wherein is the bond of peace, and unity of the faints; in this stood
our rejoicing on your account; for it is not the accession of numbers to any
name or distinction amongst men, but the gathering of souls to the everlasting
shepherd, which gives joy to the Lord's family in heaven and earth.

Now, dear Friends, is not the dew of your morning at times brought to
recollection, and its heavenly relish remembered, yet has not a loss sensibly
attended you, and the once promising plantation amongst you become less
fruitful and beautiful? If so, where shall we enquire for the cause? We shall
not find any deficiency in divine compassion; but the loss has been occasioned
by a neglect to follow on to know the Lord in his own way and leadings; and a
departure in heart from him has ensued, whereby the work has been marred; and
that goodness, wherein the holy unchangeable one would have established you,
and rendered a permanent blessing and beauty to you, has been to too many as a
morning cloud, and as the early dew it has soon passed away.

Such ever was the consequence of unfaithfulness to the discoveries of the pure
light; weakness, revolt, and backsliding have ensued, and when people have
forsaken the fountain of living waters (which is open for sanctification and
refreshment) all their labor and inventions have been as broken cisterns that
can hold no water, and the latter end of such, unless they return and repent,
will be worse than their former un-enlightened state.

Bear with me, dear friends, in this freedom: My soul longs for your help and
restoration; that by and through you the great name may be exalted in those
Islands, and that part of the Lord's footstool may become glorious.

Let, I beseech you, the seeming foremost rank amongst you, look closely to
their own steps; and consider carefully, whether they have not by some means
contributed to the general decay of lively zeal and care, through their own
declension and lukewarmness, for it is most certain the faithfulness, or
unfaithfulness of this rank has a very great influence over young and tender
minds, as well as of those who may be more advanced in years, than experience,
and yet not void of a secret relish for heavenly matters. Return, therefore, I
beseech you, O ye Chiefs amongst the people, to your first love, and do your
first works lest greater desolation ensue; and he, who walks in the midst of
the seven golden candlesticks, come unto you quickly, and remove yours out of
its place; for why should the candlestick remain, when the light and luster of
the candle is extinguished.

And dearly beloved friends of the rising generation, and ye in the prime of
your life, suffer and receive the word of exhortation from one who tenderly
loves you; remember your Creator and your Judge. Let not the foolish
amusements, or vain conversation of this world, prevail to turn you aside from
your great and everlasting interest; remember there is not any thing of this
world can lay the foundation of eternal peace. It is an earnest humble seeking
after the sanctifying hand, and submission to its virtue which can alone
fashion you as vessels of honor, and fit you for the heavenly kingdom. Cherish
the secret drawings of divine love, be not ashamed of its tendering restraining
effects. Why should you sell your souls for a thing of naught, for such will be
the smiles and frowns of this world, in a day that is hastily approaching. Let
not, therefore, the evil example of others, nor the reproach of the scornful
prevail to your hurt; but retain the fear of God, which will keep the heart
clean; and be an excellent enduring treasure, when every thing else shall
vanish as a vapor.

And it most certainly behooves you, friends, who are natives of this land, and
have had your education amongst us as a people, and been frequently directed to
the heavenly monitor, to walk with great circumspection: Ye are amongst a
people who have been made partakers of the like precious faith with us,
principally through the immediate reach of the divine hand. Will not their eyes
be turned to look at your conduct, and to observe the fruits of your faith, by
its prevalence in your lives and conversations: And if instead of the blessed
fruits of righteousness, the contrary should appear, and your conduct be the
means of stumbling to any, and evil liberties be pursued by you to your own and
others hurt; to such I testify in the name, and under an awful sense of the
authority of the Most High, it had been better for them never to have known the
way of righteousness. Heavy, very heavy will be the weight of complicated guilt
of their own transgressions, and the transgressions of others made worse by
their example. Woe from a righteous and dreadful God, to those by whom such
offenses come.

I make no doubt but there are amongst you an honest seed; an afflicted and
poor people, some of the Lord's poor, who retain in some good degree, their
first love, and bewail the hurt of Zion. I beseech such to stand fast in their
own lots, abide in the faith and patience; be sober and hope to the end. Though
the times are gloomy, the outgoings of the morning are of God, and he can, and
will in his own time, cause the wilderness to become a fruitful field. Look not
too much at the declension of others, lest your faith should fail, but
steadfastly look to, and follow on to know the Lord Almighty, who remains for
ever, and the defection of multitudes can by no means impair his unchangeable
truth and righteousness.

In a sense of the fresh extendings of ancient all sufficient help, I most
tenderly and affectionately salute you; may the scattered amongst you be
brought home, and the negligent be roused to diligence, whilst yet a little day
continues. Let the tender breathings still remaining be cherished, that they
may gather strength, and enter with holy prevalence the ear of the Lord and
Father of his people. This is the sincere prayer of one concerned at heart, for
your restoration and stability in righteousness and peace forever.

SAMUEL FOTHERGILL.
Warrington, the 17th of the third Month, 1760.
TWO DISCOURSES AND A PRAYER, PUBLICLY DELIVERED On SUNDAY the Seventeenth and
TUESDAY the Nineteenth Days of MAY, 1767, AT THE QUAKERS YEARLY MEETING, AT THE
FRIARS, IN BRISTOL. THE WHOLE TAKEN DOWN IN CHARACTERS, BY A MEMBER OF THE
CHURCH OF ENGLAND. TO WHICH IS ADDED, A PREFACE.

THE FIFTH EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: Reprinted by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, in Market-Street between Second
and Third-Streets. 1780.

PREFACE.
THE following pathetic, and moving exhortations, were, as carefully as
possible, taken down in characters, as they flowed from the lips of the
preacher to large and crowded audiences; at which were present numbers of
different persuasions: many of whom have requested copies of the transcript;
and others have desired, in the strongest terms, that they might be made still
more public, by means of the press.

The writer is desirous of obliging many, without offense to any individual --
The manuscript has been read and approved of, by numbers of superior judgment,
who were present; and who have joined in this opinion, that from their being
published, good may proceed to the well disposed; nor can any kind of harm be
foreseen to accrue from hence.

The writer is not conscious of having mistaken the author's sense: And if to
the memory of any who were then present, there should occur any variations from
his immediate expressions, the editor is assured there can be but few, and
those not of moment, he having to the readiest expedition, joined the most
perfect attention, though in a crowded congregation (where he could have no other
rest, or support, than the hand or the knee.)

Indeed! the lively force and heartfelt energy with which the subsequent
exhortations were delivered, must remain from that time wanting: nor is it
material to offer, that it is not in the power of the most faithful
transcriber, to convey that enforcing part to his readers. The texts, i. e.
chapter and verse, have been since added, in order to illustrate the work, and
render it (if possible!) more pleasing.

The editor has likewise taken down (by desire) two other Sermons, from the
same preacher; the subject of the first taken from the prayer of Agur, Prove.
xxx. 7, 8, and 9. the other from Cant. iv. and 12, and at the close of each, a
Prayer; but those will continue in manuscript unless a public edition of them
be encouraged.

As the minister has been repeatedly solicited, but in vain, to consent to the
present publication; the reader must not wonder that his name is not published.

The following Sermon was delivered, on Sunday morning the 17th day of May,
1767, at the opening of the yearly meeting, at the Friars, in Bristol.
2 Samuel xx. 9.
Art thou in health; my brother?

IT has been in my mind to adopt the language of salutation of Joab to Amasa;
but with sentiments different, far different, from those which actuated the
treachery of Joab; even those of true and tender affection, and with a mind
replenished with that charity, which wishes well to all.

Art thou in health; my Brother?

I could wish, with all possible solicitude, to lead every mind present, into
the most careful enquiry, in respect to their spiritual state of health; and to
their immediate relation, and affinity, to that supreme almighty being, who is
the just and awful judge of quick and dead. I fear it has proceeded from too
anxious a solicitude for the health of your bodies, and prosperity of your
temporal concerns, that too many of you have too frequently, and in a manner
totally, neglected the great concern of your immortal souls; which is indeed
the one thing needful.

Those temporal concerns, I say, which are of a trifling perishing nature,
have, I fear! interrupted and taken off from this principal concern: your
anxiety and application toward the attainment of the treasures and the
enjoyment of the pleasures of the world, have occasioned too great a neglect of
your religious duty.

The conveniences of life are, by no means, a contemptible concern, where they
are bounded with temperance, and confined within their proper channel: but as
there is a part in us of infinitely greater, of no less than eternal moment; it
also requires an attention proportionable to its proper worth; for what are
temporal concerns, when compared with the important one of eternity!

The state of the body is subject to diverse maladies; and when we have done our
utmost to preserve it, we shall find in the end (and how soon that may be none
knows) that it is of necessity, subject to the stroke of death, and to the
enclosure of the grave.

I have therefore thought it by no means an improper enquiry for each
individual to make, and deeply ponder, What is thy state, or how is it with
thee, O my soul! who art capable of partaking of immortal joys, and destined to
triumph over death and the grave? When this earthly tabernacle shall be
dissolved, thy appointment and destination, if in proper soundness for it,
shall be made persect with the whole family of GOD, and be no longer subject to
the diseases, pains, trials and afflictions of this life, but share the things
which are of GOD, Heb. xii. 23.
With the general assembly and church of the firstborn, whose names are
written in Heaven.

As this is of the most infinite importance to the sons of men, I have thought
it my particular duty, upon the present occasion, to put you in mind of the
necessary enquiry into the state of your spiritual health; the condition of
your immortal souls: being very apprehensive that all of you, my brethren, are
not in perfect health, who have outwardly the appearance of health; but that,
on the contrary, many are in a dangerous state of disease and stupefaction;
have only preserved a lethargic frame, and are tottering upon the brink of
destruction.

This enquiry into the present state of experience, and of advancement in the
work of salvation, has branched itself out in my view, and divided into
several classes, those who are now within the audience of my voice. And, in the
first place, I entreat the attention of you, the elders, amongst whom our LORD,
as amongst so many shepherds, has divided his flock; over whom you are
appointed to watch, and to teach them to persevere in the path which leads to
eternal life!

You have experienced the power of religion: you have Romans xiii. 12.
put on the armor of light; and ought to stand as guardian angels, and to call
as the angel called, saying, Rev. xxi. 9.
Come up hither, and I will show thee the bride, the lamb's wife.

Are you in health, my brethren? Are you in health, my sisters? -- Are you in
health, my fellow laborers in the LORD? -- Are you in a lively active state in
the cause of religion? in the cause of virtue and temperance? in the power of
the gospel, as it is in CHRIST?

If those that have been called with an high and holy calling, as delegated
shepherds under the one great shepherd, walk uprightly in his fear and to his
glory; then the sheep will with them be more likely to be gained upon to follow
the great shepherd; they will then have a frequent desire, a longing appetite
after the divine Manna, which comes down from GOD out of Heaven: for every
life has its food and its proper nutriment, and a soul panting after Heaven
can be satisfied with nothing short of the food from Heaven.

In the next place, I address you, my brethren in the work of the ministry,
reminding you of its divine institution, all that have entered rightly into it
Heb. v. 4.
being called of God, as was Aaron.

It is written, Psalm civ. 4
he makes his angels spirits, and his ministers a flame of fire; and though the
term angels be generally understood of the glorified spirits in Heaven; yet, as
it signifies messengers, it here seems to be applicable to those whom the Most
High prepares and sends forth, to excite and enliven his militant church on
earth. -- Are you in health, my brethren: -- It is the divine will that you be
fed with celestial food; not with the unlawful things of the world, nor with
the unlawful love of its lawful things; but that you become as angels, and like
his ministering spirits, as a flame of fire. He will make you, if with due
constancy ye adhere to, and attend on him, a sacred and fixed flame of love,
and of light never to be extinguished: your care, and pains, and labor here
will be but a moment, your reward will be a crown of life everlasting. The
bread that you eat, and the water that you drink, and of which ye minister
their due share to others, will be daily springing up in you unto everlasting
life! The divine Manna and the daily sacrifice will be continued. Rest in hope,
-- look for the coming of your LORD. -- Labor in the discharge of your duty.

Indeed it has sometimes happened that some of the ministers of CHRIST, 1 Cor.
iv. 1, 2.
stewards of the mystery of God, have not been found faithful to what he
required. Be ever mindful of the necessity of putting on and wearing the
spiritual robes, prefigured by those of Aaron: the holy girdle about the loins;
the breast plate, with the Urim and Thummin; the Bell and the Pomegranate. Some
indeed have had the Bell sending forth an empty unavailing sound, but have
wanted the Pomegranate, the soul-enlivening fruit of the good spirit of CHRIST,
our everlasting high priest.

But I hope better things of you, beloved in CHRIST, and things that accompany
salvation. I am sure we have need, with the utmost diligence, application, and
care, to keep the loins of our minds girded about: we had need to stand upon
the watch: we have great need to maintain the utmost steadiness: for if we, who
stand in the fore front, should fall, we fall not alone: if we slide from the
path of truth, who amongst us will be able to stand!

We ought to be endued with the spirit of wisdom, of judgment, and with sound
minds; which he has promised to them that ask this blessing from him, and has
made good his promise.

Are you in health, my brethren? are you strongly attached to the promotion and
exaltation of that glorious cause which you have embarked in? have each of you
a share in, and a proper care of the LORD'S work? do you watch over the flock
attending on your ministry, under the great shepherd, and with the tenderness
of gospel love seeking to save that which was lost?

I freely confess my own fears, that I am not in a state of perfect health and
sound mind; laboring as I ought in the work of the LORD. As it is a task of
the utmost importance, I ought to remain ever diffident of my own care, and to
watch daily in the discharge of a trust so great and important as that of the
recovery and preservation of the lost sheep of the house of Israel.

The prostration of the soul before the GOD and Father of mercies, in a cause
of such infinite concern, is a continual duty, which can scarce ever be
sufficiently discharged, The secret cry of my soul has, after this manner,
frequently arisen, "LORD! spare thy people and bless thine heritage." I am
fully persuaded, my friends, were all the ministers and elders more blessed
with sound health, the minds of the flock would be more filled with brotherly
kindness, and more and more approach to that state which I have mentioned; they
would know what is meant by the angels being spirits, and how to understand his
ministers being a flame of fire.

I come now to another class, whom I mean to address under the title of those
within the audience of my voice, who continue in a single state.

Are you in health; my brethren and sisters? are you possessed of inward virtue,
and of ability to live to GOD, as becomes his saints; and which alone will
lead you to eternal life: do you aspire after these, with an unabated zeal?

You must not expect always to rest satisfied with the good things of this
life. The day may come when you will loath the abundance of your temporal
possessions: you will then be concerned that you have so indulgently Haggai. i.
4, etc.
dwelt in cieled houses, and have let the house of God lie waste. Then you
would be glad to have exchanged the fading pleasures of life for the
substantial joys of eternity.

Recollect yourselves in the spring time of life; consider early the importance
of this exchange, while you have it in your power to make it. Look up to an
object more glorious than the present world can afford you, even to the joys of
that eternal inheritance, which the children of the firstborn, the innumerable
company of happy spirits, the general assembly of just men already made
perfect, are replenished with. -- Pleasures unspeakable! that exist for
evermore!

Art thou in health, my brother? -- my dear brethren, are ye fervently engaged
in laboring, necessary laboring, for the promotion of the cause of GOD upon
earth?

O ye parents and heads of families, who are placed as delegated shepherds over
them; timely beware, lest the blood of your children, or of any part of your
charge, fall on your heads: (if through your misconduct they become corrupted,
and their souls perish.) Know that inquisition for blood will hasten from the
supreme judge, who has divided the classes of mankind; and, as it were,
separated from the rest those who are parents, and have children: -- his call
is to these, Go work in my vineyard.

These precious gifts which he has given, as pledges of his love, are to be
led and instructed by them with a proper authority.

If the parents experimentally felt the advantages of spiritual health in
themselves, then would they be concerned that the tender minds of their
children should be properly cultivated with the knowledge of the LORD, and a
fearful apprehension of transgressing his supreme commands. They would teach
them to look further than mere temporal acquisitions; even to GOD their
Creator. They would bring them up in the nurture and fear of the LORD; in order
that their minds might be filled from the store house and magazine of boundless
good, and early enriched with the joys of GOD'S salvation: and this would
naturally diffuse the greatest satisfaction to the parents themselves, to see
their children become the delight and ornaments of human nature, and fitted for
a glorious change! the company of Angels, and the spirits of just men made
perfect. The ties of nature, and the stronger ties of gratitude to him who gave
the blessing, call aloud for teaching the tender minds of your children, to
walk in the safe and delightful paths of virtue. With what satisfaction and
composure of mind will such parents be enabled to answer the great GOD, upon
his awful examination to this purpose: What have you done with those tender
sheep which I committed to your care in the wilderness? have you trained them
up in safety? -- How will such parents be supported by a consciousness of
having done their duty, in that solemn hour! -- They then may truly say, I have
done my utmost within my contracted sphere, within the narrow precincts of my
allotment in life, to fill up my stated duty. Then the supreme judge will set
at his right hand such parents, and they shall be united to him in glory.

And I beseech you parents, elders, ministers, (and I include myself) let us
all say Amen, to this solemn care in our respective families; let us all
discharge our several duties as men, hoping for the coming of our LORD; who
then will say unto us, Well done, good and faithful servants, even in that hour
when he shall come with terrors to make inquisition for blood through the various
ranks, whether ministers, elders, heads of families, even throughout the
various classes of mankind.

I wish all parents and heads of families would continually walk, hand in hand
with their children and families, in the path which leads to life eternal;
daily watching over, and improving their rising judgments, with the wisdom
which comes from above; instructing and encouraging them in the contemplation
of divine things! persuading them to believe, as the truth is, that the things
of this world are all uncertain, and fading away! that they have everlasting
mansions erected for them in the city of their GOD; where (if they fall not
short, or turn not aside) they will enjoy the company of saints and angels for
ever more.

Are you in health; my brethren and sisters?

Exercise yourselves in this your present state, differently from those, whose
faculties are bounded within the narrow limits of this world; cultivate,
continually cultivate, the minds of your offspring: endeavoring to raise in
them a proper comprehension of the dignity of their natures, and to fix in them
early a steady belief of their immortality; which is of the utmost importance
to all?

The hearts of those are unsound, who live in a perpetual attachment to the
pride of life, who are contaminated with the love of the world, wherein their
chief happiness appears to be placed: how can such point out the way to the
city of GOD? how can they say to their children, Let us retreat from the world,
from this scene of corruption; let us withdraw from the cares, the solicitudes
of life: let us ascend to our appointed home: let us contemplate the joys of
eternity: let nothing separate us from that blessed hope!

How can parents thus address their children, when they have, perhaps, for a
long course of years, ceased to consider the awful importance of the subject;
and their own minds continue fixed, and tied down to the fading enjoyments of
life! Alas! that the folly and vanity of the superfluous pleasures of the world
should so entirely engage and engross the attention of any one immortal
individual, as to take up almost every moment of their precious time!

Hence, sometimes, parents, instead of instructing the minds of their children,
have so totally corrupted their own, that they have laid obstructions in the
way to the immortal happiness of their offspring, and, when their children have
for a time trod in the ways of religion and virtue, they have been so extremely
corrupt themselves, as to oppose them in their passage; to obstruct them, with
violence, in their way to glory; and thereby aggravated their own guilt beyond
expression; alas! what will their punishment prove, when convicted of so great
a neglect and violation of their duty? when he that is the judge of quick and
dead shall appear in judgment, to render to every man according to his works!
May all parents, who are negligent in the discharge of their duties, lay it
seriously to heart.

In the mean time, may you, my brethren and sisters in a spiritual relation,
continue in a state of lively, active health -- laboring in the sure ground of
hope; that, when the great shepherd himself shall appear, you may also appear
with him in glory. If you so persist, I cannot but yet hope, that your steadfast
continuance will prove the means of spreading spiritual health, in an eminent
degree. For as, on the one hand, minds infected and vitiated with the lust of
the flesh, the lust of the eye, or the pride of life, are very apt to spread
the contagion to all that are round about them: so, on the other hand, such as
are restored by CHRIST, to a state of spiritual health, and by him steadily
preserved in it, often become instrumental in his hand, to diffuse that
blessing; from whence, healthy parents have been frequently observed to have
healthy children.

I am convinced that the LORD is at work amongst the rising generation; many of
whom stand convicted in their own minds, of the want of spiritual health; and
are imploring the mercy of the GOD of their salvation.

In order to your attaining it, let me call upon you again, the present rising
generation; whose stations in life may be likely to have some little
continuance; be ever steadfast in the performance of your religious duties, that
you may become heirs of the kingdom; and have your portion, with the children
of GOD.

It seems to me of the greatest importance, in relation to the various affairs
of life, to form aright the minds of youth; and therefore, I once more entreat
every parent present, that you watch over, and carefully nourish every seed of
virtue springing up in the minds of your children, for the sake of their, and
of your own, temporal welfare; as well as for the hope and assurance of both
their, and your own, eternal happiness.

And here, let me class every single individual; as every single individual is
posting on his way to an eternal state of existence -- and that they may be
guided by infinite wisdom, is my earnest desire; and be at last received into
glory! welcomed thither by their dear Redeemer!

In this city he has laid his hand upon one, and upon another. He has
preserved many from the pollutions that too frequently reign in the world; and
has mercifully induced some to look early into the law of liberty, into the
counsel of his will, who thereby learn the things which belong to their peace.

Art thou in health; my brother? Art thou not only called from a state of
darkness, into his mavelous light; but, obedient to the call, entered upon
the road to eternal glory? Art thou in health; my fellow pilgrim?

A sense of the want of that food which CHRIST gives, is at least a symptom of
life.

I believe it may be said concerning some among you, as was said formerly to
CHRIST; Lord, he whom thou love is sick. The decay of health in many, has
been owing to foul feeding; to their daily feeding upon the spirit, maxims and
manners of the world, upon exterior appearances, upon comparative
righteousness, upon a comparison of their present, with their former state;
whose minds are relaxed with the love and spirit of vanity. Some have relaxed
into evil, and are now become too much unacquainted with GOD and his law;
which, to holiness, and to that only, annexes happiness. Many of these might
have gone on from one degree of strength to another; had they not too much
regarded the things of time, and fed too greedily upon the temptations and
pleasures of this Life; not enough considering, that the diseases and disorders
of the mind thus fed, must certainly at last bring death, even the death, though
not dissolution, of the soul. They might have been clothed, if not with a
perfect heart, yet with a certain degree of strength; and been more and more
advanced on their way to the regions of bliss.

I beseech you, continue in your love to the gospel of CHRIST: that, day after
day, you may feed on the holy sacrifice, and on that eternal fruit with which
he nourishes the soul that hungers and thirsts after righteousness. And, I
cannot help, while I am speaking, pressing you in a more immediate manner, if
possible, that, not relying on your own wisdom, and your own strength, but in a
full dependence and leaning upon the breast of the beloved JESUS, you all,
patiently, with a holy soundness, proceed in the highway to the city of God;
that you may be crowned at last with glory, honor, and immortality!

I find in me (at least) one qualification of a gospel minister; even that of a
strong and ardent love, which wishes well to all mankind: and in particular
that you who are present, may enjoy such a state of perfect health, as I have
been at this time enforcing to your serious consideration: may it spread
through every class; may you all increase in the stability of righteousness,
through this life; and may it carry you into the boundless joys of eternity,
into that glorious city, not one of whose inhabitants, can say, "I am sick."

N. B. The writer could not be present in the morning, nor at the immediate
beginning of this discourse; but was assured, by many present, that the
preacher had proceeded but a little way.

The subject taken from the parable of the unjust steward, viz. this question,

Luke xvi. 5. How much owe thou unto my Lord?
MAY 19, IN THE AFTERNOON.
HAVING in the morning enlarged on our debts or obligations to GOD, for the
abundant variety of temporal blessings received from him in trust, for the good
of others, etc. he proceeded thus.

2 Cor. v. 13.
If we are besides ourselves, it is unto God: If we are sober, it is for your
sakes. If, with the strength of love, and a zealous fervency of mind, we labor
in and for the church, and for the good of those to whom we are sent; if rising
early and lying down late; if being willing to spend and to be spent,
disinterestedly, without any lucrative motive, or receiving any thing, but mere
food, from those amongst whom we labor; if ministering to our own wants, and to
the wants of others, carry any kind of evidence to the considerate and prudent
mind, of a disinterested gospel ministry; we have, so far, a valid claim to it.

2 Cor. iv. 5.
We preach not ourselves, but Christ Jesus the Lord; and ourselves your
servants for his sake.

If we are besides ourselves, it is unto God. If we are sober, it is for your
sakes. Having known the terrors of the Lord for sin; having experienced a
gradual progression from the pit of pollution, from the mire and clay; having,
in some measure, tasted of the good word of life, and of the powers of the
world to come, we apprehend we have authority, more than any human laws or
ordination of men can give us, to tell to others, what GOD has done for our
souls. I may proceed yet further with truth and sincerity, having the sanction
of him, who is the searcher of hearts; 2 Cor. v. 14.
for the love of Christ constrains us. The foundation of the gospel ministry
is this constraining love of CHRIST.

We enter not into the ministerial office, with any application of this sort,
viz. 1 Samuel ii. 36.
Put me (I pray thee) into one of the priest's offices, that I may eat a piece
of bread. We think higher of the gospel ministry; so that no temporary
emolument can possibly be an adequate inducement to us, to enter upon it; for
the love of Christ constrains us. We speak with reverence and a feeling
heart; and we believe the Christian religion will never flourish, in its full
perfection and excellency, 'till their being thus constrained, becomes the case
of all that take the name of GOD in their mouths in a public manner. 2 Cor. v.
14.
The love of Christ constrains us; because we thus judge that if one died for
all, then were all dead. And that he died for all, that they which live, should
not henceforth live to themselves, but to him that died for them, and rose
again.

This expression seems to me, if properly considered, to cast no inconsiderable
light upon the propriety of that query applied to us, viz. How much owe thou
unto my Lord? which I cannot yet relinquish; though so he may think I dwell
upon it too long. The love of Christ constrains us, because if one died for
all, then were all dead. I look upon this as a fundamental part of the
Christian faith; and that life and immortality have been brought to light by
the gospel. We were all dead: we have all partaken of guilt: we have all been
in a state of estrangement from the covenant of GOD: we have all become, more
or less, Ephesians. ii. 12.
aliens to the commonwealth of Israel.

In this state of death the voice of GOD has been signally extended unto
mankind. I have sometimes considered with great attention, his declaration,
Hos. xiii. 14.
O! death, I will be thy plagues; and it has made a deep impression upon my
mind. This declaration of the most high GOD, has been amply verified in the
experience of all, who have been quickened into a life of piety. Christ has
been the resurrection and the life to all such. Though death has come upon all,
we are not all included under death; so as to be left without the quickening
vivifying power, that is offered to raise the dead to life.

The dead have heard the voice of the Son of God! John v. 25.
and have been raised again to life. I cannot think but it has been the
experience of diverse, within the audience of my voice, who know the certainty
of this important truth, though others may reflect upon me, as being beside
myself; yet, if so, I may say with the apostle, it is unto God. But I would
gladly speak intelligibly to the soul that is on its way to the regions of
immortality; for if we are sober, it is for your sakes. I would ask whether a
secret something has not often visited your souls, an unspeakable something,
often secretly and immediately attended, that has engaged you to send up
heavenly and earnest wishes, and raised in your minds strong aspirations, or
breathings, after GOD? when we are told that Romans viii. 21, 22.
the whole creation groaneth together in bondage until now, we have no doubt of
its being relative and applicable to the present times, or such times of
longing after GOD, to be delivered by him. 1 Cor. xv. 45 and 47.
The Lord from heaven is the quickening spirit. An expression of want, from a
real sense of it, is an evidence of life; or being raised by him, from a state
of death. We have not been left in a dead state; this prediction has been
verified, O! death I will be thy plagues. He has brought the first evidence of
life, which is a sense of want. The spiritually dead, have received it; and it
has been of his pure mercy, that he has followed us from time to time; has
met us, as it were, in a narrow place, with instructions and reproofs, and
secretly raised up in us the hidden life of his own divine wisdom; he has
caused the animating and warming beams of the sun of righteousness to break
forth. And, yet more, the word which called Lazarus out of the grave, has
already, in a good degree, raised some of us to life, even life eternal! hence
1 Cor. xv. 54.
death is swallowed up in victory!

And therefore the love of Christ constrains us, because he has proved "the
plagues of our death." He not only died, but the immediate manifestation of his
quickening spirit had led captivity captive, that we, by him, may triumph over
the united powers of darkness.

We follow not formally; but we believe in, and are convinced, fully convinced,
of the doctrines of the christian religion, the incarnation, glory, life,
death, mighty miracles, and various circumstances, relative to the holy life of
JESUS, Isai. liii. 7.
as in the volume of the book it is written; and can, in an awful and reverent
sense, commemorate those vast and most interesting events.

We admire, with humble hearts and minds, the awful transactions of that time,
when sweat, like drops of blood, ran from the face of the holy JESUS! when,
being in an agony, he prayed more earnestly! when he was betrayed, his sacred
head crowned with thorns! his face spit upon! he was most ignominiously
treated, and Psalm. xi. 7.
as a sheep before her shearers is dumb, he complained not!

We behold him, in his agonies on Calvary Mount, offering himself as a
sacrifice for the sins of the whole world; that he might purify us, by the
shedding of his precious blood! more precious than the blood of goats and
lambs; or any other that was shed under the law. We believe in his amazing
mercy, in offering himself there; when, laden with the immense weight of the
sins of mankind, and the immediate sense of the father's presence withdrawn, he
was left to suffer alone; under this extreme pressure crying out, Eloi, Eloi,
lama Sabacthani! was crucified! dead! and buried.

Here pause a little, I beseech you! -- contemplate the adorable theme!
acknowledge, O man! that unbounded gratitude, which is ever due from thee: O!
my soul, how much thou owe unto thy Lord!

I know we have been stigmatized, as disbelieving the truths of the Christian
religion. However, I call the divine record, the SAVIOR of the world, that was
offered a sacrifice without the gate of Jerusalem, to witness for my belief,
that he was sent from God, to do the father's will: and I do, without
controversy, believe that he was. 1 Timothy iii. 16.
God manifest in the flesh, justified in the spirit, believed on in the world,
and received up into glory. We do not at all doubt that 2 Cor. v. 19.
God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself. 1 Timothy ii. 6.
That Christ gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time; Isai.
iii. 5.
that with his stripes we are healed.

By virtue of that holy sacrifice the remission of sins is gained; the
awakening power of that sentence which is due to sin is felt in a state of
alienation from GOD; and as we believe, that if one died for all, then were all
dead; so, we believe that he who was crucified, dead, and buried, likewise
triumphed over the grave, and now sits at the right hand of God, in a
glorified body, to make intercession for man, in order that he might
effectually purchase, and redeem to himself, a people to the praise of his
name; and diffuse, throughout his universal empire, a similarity of opinion and
nature, arising from the experience of his universal redeeming love.

I am no Arian, far from it: -- I believe in the clear emphatic testimonies
laid down in holy writ, that CHRIST was more than a prophet. I repeat my belief
that he suffered, died, ascended, and is now come Heb. ix. 28.
the second time, without sin, to salvation; in order to reconcile the world to
himself. I know many are willing to admit that he died for all, as all were in
a state of death; and that, by the imputation of his righteousness, all are
justified in the sight of GOD. Whereas I think it more just to proceed in the
language of the holy inspired apostle; that they which live, should not
henceforth live to themselves; but to him who died for them, and rose again;
that there may be an effectual redemption, a thorough change; not the
imputation of righteousness, without works; but a real substantial
righteousness in the heart and life; which may operate upon, and regulate the
mind and will, and lead us to a conformity to his divine nature: not a
righteousness imputed to us from what CHRIST did and suffered without us; but a
righteousness raised by him within us; through our surrendering ourselves to his
government, and yielding entire submission to his heart-cleansing, refining
power.

However this doctrine may relish with some, I am convinced he died for all,
that all should be saved; that, through him, we might be justified in the sight
of GOD; that we might put on the Lord Jesus Christ, with all his divine
affections.

Romans viii. 22.
The whole creation of God groaneth together, 2 Cor. v. 22.
to be clothed upon with a house from heaven; not an imaginary house, and an
imaginary righteousness; but, to be clothed upon with the grace of complete
salvation; to put on the LORD JESUS CHRIST; having first put off the old man,
with all his works, and with all his corrupt wisdom, or knowledge; which
puffs up, instead of that charity which edifieth.

Christ is made unto us Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption.

In remembering therefore that he died for us, let us consider what follows:
that henceforth, we should not live to ourselves. Gal. ii. 20.
I am crucified with Christ, says one of the apostles, as a private person: and
it should or ought to be the language in truth of each individual, through all
succeeding ages. Nevertheless, I live; yet not I, but Christ lives in me. He
is become my righteousness; not by imputation only -- but he actually lives in
me: and the life which I now live, is by the faith of the Son of GOD. I think I
may now say, Phil. iii. 14.
let us press forward toward the mark of the prize of the high calling of God.
Let us be crucified with CHRIST, crucified to the world, and the world to us.

O! my friends, for such I term you in the course of that universal love, which
reaches forth to the whole human race, which flows from him who has thus
wrought for me, and brought life and immortality to light in my soul. Is any
one of you desirous of being informed, how much owe thou unto my Lord? -- lay
hold on his offers of redemption; live in his fear, in fellowship with him, in
communion with the church of the first born, whose names are written in heaven:
so will you far better know than any one on earth can ever inform you.

Examine the rising suggestions of your own minds: you are not formed to live
merely to yourselves, merely within the contracted bounds of human privileges,
in the narrow limits of mortality. Consider the dignity of your nature; you are
formed for the most glorious purposes.

I earnestly wish the rising youth would lay these things seriously' to heart,
and often meditate upon them, as one formerly did; who thus expresses himself,
Psalm. xxxix. 3, 4.
while I was musing the fire burned. My heart was hot within me; then spoke I
with my tongue, Lord! make me to know my end, and the measure of my days, what
it is, that I may know how frail I am. -- That they would contemplate the great
design of providence, with regard to their immortality, which would lessen
their esteem of the unsubstantial joys of time, and engage them to pursue those
which are unspeakable and full of glory for ever. While I was musing the fire
burned.

Continue this musing, this state of meditation; prize the invitations of the
spirit of CHRIST, mercifully extended to your immortal spirits; and let your
minds mount upwards: remember your pious predecessors, now perhaps in glory;
and their connections in the world of spirits: likewise put this question to
yourselves, upon every serious occasion, How much owe thou unto my Lord?

I am fully convinced were the Christian world in general to leave out exterior
ceremonies, and enter more into this inward meditation, their minds would be
more largely replenished with divine fruits; and those who are entering as it
were upon the wilderness of this world, would then partake of the advantage. O!
that we might all live in the beauty of holiness!

My heart was hot within me; then spoke I with my tongue! -- A necessary
preparation for a preacher! Abel's offering, on account of such a preparation,
was more acceptable to God than his brother's.

Then spoke I with my tongue. -- O! rising generation, what you speak with your
tongues, let it be from the same good source of hearts divinely prepared; since
on the other hand for every idle word that men speak, they must give an account
in the day of judgment. As you often speak with your tongues, fervently desire
that the sacred faculties of the mind may be fitted for divine meditations, and
the tongue to publish for the honor of GOD and benefit of others, what you
have been taught by him: so will you never admit or utter any thing contrary to
the divinity of CHRIST JESUS your LORD.

Lord, let me know mine end! O that this sound may dwell upon your minds, who
are the hope of the next generation! upon whom the weighty trust and care of
the cause of GOD must, in a little time, necessarily devolve; that you may come
to the knowledge of the measure of your days. I think, without violence to the
text, you may learn from it that you are destined for immortality: but the love
of worldly things is too apt to engage the attention of that immortal part, the
soul; which occasions, too many, the want of their knowing the great and
glorious end for which they were formed, a little lower than the angels, and
intended to be crowned with glory and honor.

Lord! let me know my end and the measure of my days!

I tremble methinks upon the brink of eternity! and so, with a little proper
reflection, you might say all; the aged, the middle aged, and the youth. -- The
end of all things is at hand: flatter not yourselves therefore with length of
days, and a long prosperity of worldly possessions; suffer me to beseech you
for the sake of your immortal souls.

What do I owe to my God? -- What do I not owe him? -- He has snatched me as a
brand out of the fire; and I would not, though to gain the world, tread back
again in the path of folly.

I know it by experience, and therefore I would persuade you, not to turn aside
from the GOD of your salvation; but to acknowledge the infinite debt you owe
him, and to pay him daily with obedience, adoration and praise.

Our sins have been great, and our transgressions never could have been
obliterated, had not CHRIST done it for us; let us therefore no longer dwell
upon the rock of presumption with Satan, who has been a liar from the
beginning; but let us rather descend into the valley of humility and peace, and
settle accounts with the GOD of our lives, from whom I had strayed to that
degree that my life became a burden to me, and I have wished that I had never
been born; but CHRIST, who was a friend to publicans and sinners, is now become
the rock of my salvation! he has caused me to trust in him, and to seek the
LORD my GOD. The debt I owe is infinite, I desire ever to acknowledge it with
all possible gratitude; and to do my utmost toward the discharge of it, while
I have my being.

If there is a soul within the audience of my voice which (upon this awful
query) How much owe thou unto my Lord? is ready to apprehend, that it owes
too much ever to hope for a discharge, or freedom from the heavy load of debt
it has contracted; I have a little to say to such, even from my own experience:
thy transgressions do not exceed the bounds of his mercy; he still cares for
thee, with an inexpressible fatherly care and tenderness. Even when his
afflictions are upon thee they are intended for thy good. The bruised reed he
will not break, the smeaking flax he will not quench. The more any of you see
your real state, the more you remember the favors you have received, and feel
the burden of your injustice and ingratitude; the more readily will he meet
the penitent disposition of your minds.

I have no manner of doubt but he, whose work is salvation, who came into the
world purely and purposely to save sinners, will carry on his own work, and, as
you wholly resign yourselves to his forming hand, will purify your hearts,
reconcile you to the Father, and make you everlasting instances and monuments
of his Infinite mercy. List up therefore thy head in hope, whoever thou art, in
this humbled penitent state; for thy salvation draws nigh. Thou owe abundance
to thy LORD; and there is an abundance which thou can never pay: but there is
the good Samaritan, ever ready to do for thee, as for him, who going from
Jerusalem to Jericho, fell among robbers; by whom he was wounded; and to say,
take care of him, and I will pay. There is a glorious sound from the great and
good friend of publicans and sinners; he is ready to say to thee who art in
this penitent state before him, Take thy bill and write down fifty. He will
Isai. xliv. 22.
blot out thy sins as a cloud, and thy transgressions as a thick cloud.

I cannot but remember with renewed feeling, and warm emotion of heart, the day
that anxiety (in the view of my condition) seized me; and how his mercy
relieved me from it. He made my soul feel his compassion, and in the depth of
gratitude thankfully to adore him. And hence I often feel a tenderness of mind
toward those who are weary of vanity, and heavy laden with a sense of their
manifold transgressions. I beseech such, by the mercy of GOD, that they would
fly to him in their anguish of mind; for it is he, and he alone that can speak
peace to the sinner: though your unrighteousness may be great, it is not in any
degree of proportion, to his infinite mercy! Again, such among you to whom I
have spoke, who delight to dwell in the path of temptation, wherein you have
too long continued; I warn you to consider, that you are in the road to
destruction.

I would not give up, like Esau, Heb. xii. 16, 17.
my birthright to seek a place of repentance with tears, and not to find it. O
my soul! for ever acknowledge how much thou owe unto thy LORD! Let none say
he has blessed me variously, and in some future time I will awake my soul to
gratitude, I have now something else to do; like him who, when an apostle Acts
xxiv. 25.
reasoned of righteousness, temperance and judgment to come, replied go thy way
for this time; when I have a convenient season I will call for thee.

The like disposition continues to prevail in too many: and this seems to be
the language of their hearts, Go thy way this time; call upon me when I have
lived to myself, and answered my own purposes a little longer; visit me at some
distant time hence. Oh! rather today, while it is called today, -- Harden not
thy heart: do not defer thy repentance a moment; thou know not what a moment
may produce. Consider thy repeated transgressions; thy multiplied offenses
against GOD: heap not up wrath against the day of wrath: swell not the dreadful
account. Thou have hitherto trampled upon the goodness and the mercies of the
GOD that made thee; venture not on presumption and delay. Time is uncertain:
Immortality is at hand.

I beseech you therefore my friends at the present time, that you will lay to
heart the necessity of your making up this great account: delay it not to the
decline of life. Many are on the brink of the grave! reflect upon your extreme
danger! think not of crowding the account of your repentance into your last
hour of life! You will find it extremely difficult to labor under the
infirmities of the body, upon a deathbed, without a reasonable ground of hope:
all the offers of mercy having been long continued, and often repeated; yet by
you as long slighted, and as often rejected; what then will discharge you from
that dreadful account! I wish it may never be the case of any within the
audience of my voice. Let us all immediately ponder, rightly consider, and
seriously improve this consideration, How much owe thou unto my Lord?

A PRAYER upon May the 19th, which concluded the afternoon service of that day,
at the Fryer's Meeting.
WITH unspeakable reverence we presume to approach thy presence, O Father! who
art in heaven and, with the voice of thanksgiving and holy praise, to offer the
tribute, that is due to Thee alone!

In a commemoration of thy mercy, thy infinite mercy! we are awfully bowed
before thee, as at thy sacred footstool; in the deepest reverence and
thankfulness, for the stretching forth Psalm. xxiii. 4.
of the rod and the staff, which thou have been pleased to bless, as the means
of our furtherance in the way of life and salvation.

Though humbled in dust, in the sense of our unworthiness, we are,
nevertheless, encouraged to breathe unto Thee; to make mention of thy name,
with joy of heart: we adore that goodness, which has put it into our hearts to
seek, serve and fear Thee; and to turn to the place where Acts xvi. 13.
prayer is wont to be made.

Thou have loved us before we loved Thee: thy love, O LORD! has not been after
the manner of men: Thou have called us, when we were enemies; and have
reconciled transgressiors to thyself. Thou have followed us in the day of our
revolting; and, when we were straying in the wilderness, as a most gracious and
tender shepherd Thou did lay thy hand on us, not only with judgment, but with
mercy; and have brought us home again unto thy flock, and thy fold, and
forgiven us our multiplied transgressions.

Our deviations from thy holy path have not been punished with inexorable
justice; but thy conduct toward us has been clothed with unspeakable
compassion. O! Thou everlasting shepherd, and bishop of our souls! who have
looked upon us, when weltering as in our blood, and by thy divine power have
healed us. Thou, that art the physician of our souls, have cared for us, when
the priest and the levite past us by. -- When cast out and surrounded with the
woes of unutterable distress: when thick clouds covered us, -- Thou in thy
abundant love Psalm. xviii. 9.
bowed the heavens and came down to our help, and all the darkness was put
under thy Feet! Thou have made the clouds thy chariot, and walked upon the
wings of the wind, for our deliverance; when our iniquities, like floods, rose
high, and appeared unto us like to swallow us up in everlasting confusion! O!
adorable condescension! We have no language to express thy mercy, and the
boundless obligations we lie under to thy Majesty! who have thus, in the times
of unspeakable anxiety, vouchsafed to appear for us: and even when we have
wandered from the counsel of thy will, and trod in the path of the wicked,
Psalm. xliii. 3.
Thou sentest forth thy light and thy truth, and did lead us back to thy holy
hill.

We acknowledge all these blessings to thy praise, O! shepherd of Israel! who
sleep not by day, nor slumberest by night.

To thee we owe all our faculties, and all that is within us; and let them all,
we pray Thee, be consecrated to thy honor: we beseech that all our steps may
be directed to Thee; and more and more to thy service. For, Father of infinite
kindness! it has pleased Thee to rank us among thy children; to make our
dwelling with thy light; our habitation with the lifting up of the smiles of
thy countenance: and to remove every obstacle to a perfect communion with Thee:
the power is in thy hands; sanctify us thoroughly to this end; write the
inscription of holy and heavenly characters upon our hearts; and, Oh! grant
that we may still be preserved, through every trial and probation, to a
peaceable admission into thy kingdom.

Blot out all our transgressions! forgive us freely, for thy dear Son's sake!
remember us in the midst of thy mercy! deliver us, we pray Thee, as thou have
graciously hitherto done, like a tender Father.

Grant we may never forget thy counsel; sooner cut the thread of our lives, and
number us to the silent grave!

May we follow Thee, with our whole hearts, submit to the patient resignation
of our all, for thy dear service; and keep us to a happy conclusion in thy
favor! it is all we ask, and beg at thy hand: with regard to outward
circumstances, thy will be done! we have no other supplication to offer.

Preserve us, as in the hollow of thy hand; that from a militant state here, we
may pass to a triumphant one, in thy everlasting kingdom!

O LORD! have mercy on thy people, and thy children, when they spread their
hands toward thy holy habitation. Cloth them with the spirit of grace and
supplication. Excite them to fly to Thee, their only rock and refuge; and to
thy name, that is an impregnable defense; where the righteous, in all ages,
have ever found safety!

Regard those who are far off, and remain unacquainted with thy name. We pray
Thee, let the same mercy spread to them, which Thou have showed unto us. Let
the diffusion of thy spiritual blessings, in and through thy dear Son, flow
among them, that they may seek Thee; that a holy anxiety of mind may take
place, in order to a rest in the day of trouble; and that when the various
trials and troubles of time are over, they having, through thy abundant
goodness and sure support, fought the good fight, and kept the faith, may be
received by Thee, and be crowned with glory and immortality, in thy everlasting
kingdom!

Oh thou that art fairer than the sons of men! grace flows from thy lips; Thou
beholdest us when tempted, and speaks to our states with all the language of
tenderness, Father of mercy! grant that innumerable multitudes may resort to
thy temple, that sacred house, which thou have erected to thy honor and
service. May the poor, the sick, the maimed, the blind, and the naked, inspired
by Thee with holy confidence, look toward Zion; and be clothed by Thee, with
the wedding garment; with the righteousness of their dear SAVIOR!

Thus, gracious GOD! we are divinely encouraged to supplicate thy name, on the
behalf of the church militant, wherever scattered; that it may flourish in
peace and stability; that, not only in part, but in the whole luster of
meridian brightness and splendour, they may commemorate thy glory!

In an humble sense of thy mercy and goodness to the workmanship of thy hands,
we thank Thee, that Thou have been pleased so abundantly to manifest thy loving
kindness and favor, in and amongst us.

We prostrate ourselves before the throne of thy Majesty and grace! we would
offer to Thee an humble, grateful sacrifice of thanksgiving and praise,
dominion, and every excellent attribute! for we know that we have nothing but
from thy bounty, who art the rock of our salvation!

To Thee, Father of infinite mercy! for the multitude of thy mercies, in JESUS
CHRIST our LORD! -- To Thee, the author of every blessing! with the Son of thy
bosom; our LORD and SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST, the Lamb immaculate through the eternal
spirit, be all praise ascribed, now, henceforth, and for evermore. Amen.

FINIS.
THE PRAYER OF AGUR, ILLUSTRATED IN A FUNERAL DISCOURSE: AND THE ADVANTAGES
RESULTING FROM AN EARLY AND STEADFAST PIETY. PREACHED EXTEMPORE, By the AUTHOR
of TWO DISCOURSES and a PRAYER, PUBLICLY DELIVERED AT THE QUAKER's
YEARLY MEETING, IN BRISTOL. THE WHOLE TAKEN DOWN IN CHARACTERS, BY A MEMBER OF
THE CHURCH OF ENGLAND.

THE THIRD EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: Reprinted by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, in Market-Street between Second
and Third-Streets. 1780.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE general encouragement given to the Two Discourses and a Prayer, publicly
delivered at the Quaker's yearly meeting in Bristol; the encomiums passed upon
them in the Critical and Monthly Reviews; which are the most approved, if not
the only public testimonies given of the value of any work, offered to the
consideration of the public from the press; and the many copies bespoke of the
following Sermons, and'c. already taken notice of in a preface to those
discourses; are the real motives which have occasioned the publication of
these, literally taken down as they flowed from the lips of the same eminent
preacher: And that they may become equally acceptable to Readers of every
Persuasion; and tend to the general promotion of true religion and virtue, is
the sincere wish of,

THE EDITOR.
BRISTOL, Feb. 1, 1768.
The following SERMON was delivered at the Friars Meeting in Bristol, on Friday
the 22d Day of May, 1767.
I HAVE frequently thought, and the sentiment has been confirmed from my own
observation and experience, that a great and excellent point would be gained,
highly conducive to the advantage of mankind, did they generally, though from no
surer guide than tradition, subscribe with heart and mind, to that certain
truth, recorded in holy writ;

Psalm lviii. 11.
Verily, there is a reward for the righteous: Verily he is a God, that judges
in the earth; As such a persuasion, from whatever ground it arises, naturally
tends to influence the conduct, to avoid evil, and to pursue that which is
good; and with regard to many, it has proved a step to their nearer
acquaintance with GOD, who is the only sure guide to true happiness.

Indeed I scarce think there can be many, if there be any, who are hardy enough
to deny the existence of the supreme Being; but believe on the contrary, that
many, through the divine favor enlightened to see their duty, and assisted to
discharge it; do, in consequence of these favors, contemplate, with
satisfaction inexpressible, these attributes of the most high GOD, here
mentioned by the Psalmist: and could I be induced to think, that any part of
mankind had swerved from their duty, for want of a firm conviction of those his
attributes, as relative to his creatures; and of the certainty, that there is
really a GOD who judges the earth: I say, could I believe their minds were
destitute of this animating and enlivening prospect of his power, omniscience,
and goodness, in his superintendant care, and present judging the earth, I
should deem such but a very little removed, if any, from the state of the
Athenians, upon whose altars the holy apostle discovered an inscription, Acts
xvii. 23.
"To the unknown God." Indeed a language that was spoken formerly has been too
much adopted by succeeding generations; numbers of whom have been like those
men of Jerusalem, who said, Zeph. i. 12.
the Lord will not do good, neither will he do evil. Many (seduced by the grand
deceiver and his agents) have endeavored to estrange and withdraw themselves
from the arbitrator of the whole earth: they have hence grown dark in their
imaginations, and in like manner thus reasoned with themselves, He will do us
no good, why therefore should we seek him? he will do us no harm; why should we
fear him? This, we may justly look upon, as the most unhappy seduction of mind!
as it misleads to the utmost distance, (without timely recovery) from that
state of obedience, in which we are only capable of happiness, through the
favorable notice of our father who is in heaven.

But we may justly conclude, that such impiety passed not the attention of an
all-seeing GOD, in as much as he replied, I will punish those men of Jerusalem,
who have said, The Lord does us no good, why should we seek him? he will not
do us any harm, why should we fear him?

The certainty of his superintendency, has continued to be the happiness of
all the wise and good in all ages; and it is these, and only these, that
discern wherein true happiness consists. Hence has it become, and still
remains, an established glorious truth, accompanied with, and confirmed by, the
voice of all generations.

Under this head in particular, a Petition or Prayer that was put up to him who
has created the earth, and assigned a reward to the righteous, by Agur the son
of Jaketh, has appeared to my mind, as necessary at this day to be adopted by
every individual, who is desirous of living to the best, wisest, and happiest
purpose of life; without which they had better never have lived: And I cannot
but recommend it most particularly to You, the rising generation, whose minds I
trust are at times susceptible of proper impressions, who are not become slaves
to the vanity and lusts of the world: and indeed it seems like the language of
one that is entering upon the stage of life: Prove. xxx. 7, 8, 9.
Two things have I required of thee, deny me them not before I die! Remove far
from me vanity and lies; give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with food
convenient for me; lest I be full and deny thee, and say, Who is the Lord? or
lest I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my God in vain!

The substance of this memorable requisition has appeared to my mind, during
the course of a long series of observations of men, and times; with regard to
its import in point of religion, virtue, the love and peace of God; as
including indeed, all that is good and necessary for our safe conduct and
support through this life, to that completion of happiness, proposed as the
final reward of the righteous.

But how will some be able to prefer a petition to a power in whom, alas! they
have no trust? who would gladly be possessed of, and are much better pleased
with, sharing a crown of wicked prosperity in this world, than with the
prospect of a crown of pure and perfect felicity, in a state of endless
futurity.

O that parents would timely and vigilantly exert themselves to raise early
impressions in the tender minds of their children, in order to fix deeply the
christian doctrine, with all its glorious consequences; firmly persuading and
convincing them, that they are under the immediate notice of that Being, who is
ever unspeakably good, and gracious; and informing them, that he is clothed
with every awful, reverential attribute; as being perfectly wise, powerful and
good, yet strictly just; that he is the maker of us all; and that he delights
to be called upon by us, with the tender and endearing appellation of, Our
father, who art in heaven.

Wherefore, under the deep and reverent sense of the certainty of his continual
presence and providence, let us be ever careful, ever earnestly desirous to
constitute a part of his children and family, in this our probationary state;
that as we, by our rank in the creation, belong to the order of spirits; we may
assuredly hope to join the cherubim and seraphim, in the habitations of glory
and peace, by our now becoming members of his militant church; and may, when
our warfare shall be accomplished, unite with the chorus of his triumphant
hosts, in the language and tribute of grateful adoration and praise.

And indeed without this blessed hope, we are of all creatures, the most
miserable! being daily surrounded with lamentation and woe! combating with
secret or obvious distresses! and encountering, from the cradle to the grave, a
perpetual succession and variety of afflictions! We might therefore truly say,
if our hopes were only fixed upon the transitory and fleeting pleasures of this
life, we should be of all the animal creation, the most miserable! But we are
assured, that nothing less than GOD himself, is the infinite and endless reward
of all that diligently and constantly solicit him to the following purpose. --
Two things have I required of thee, deny me them not before I die; remove far
from me, vanity, and lies; give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with
food convenient for me, lest I be full, and deny thee, and say, who is the
Lord? or lest I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my God in vain!

Which is as if the Prophet had said, Thou art my father, the author of my
being; I made nothing myself, but am wholly and entirely the offspring of thy
power and workmanship of thy hands: thou know therefore what is best and
fittest for me; and what can I require else from the hands of thee, O my GOD!
than thy preservation out of the dangers of those opposite extremes in life;
thy guidance in the middle path of safety and innocence, and the enjoyment of
thy approbation and favor in my walking therein!

His mind was doubtless deeply impressed with the awfulness and essential
subject of his petition; and the removing far from him vanity and lies seems to
constitute a very considerable part of it. But too many of us, deviating from
this one most important point, are daily inclined to wander in the broad path
of vanity and folly, and prone to mistake it for the path of peace; 'till
oftentimes the stroke of adversity, of pain of body, or affliction of mind,
convinces in part, and, if unreformed, that of Death may fully convince us,
when too late! of this most fatal mistake.

The Prophet saw into the propriety of that frame of mind, which utters the
language dictated by divine wisdom: Prove. iii. 5.
Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not unto thine own
understanding: inasmuch as his gracious superintendency and merciful notice of
his creatures is such as even Isai. xlv. 22.
takes in the ends of the earth; and daily affords us the clearest
manifestation of his goodness here, as it has evidently pointed out to us that
glorious path which leads to safety and eternal peace. But vanity and lies have
too frequently estranged the mind, drawn it off from heavenly objects and
heavenly cares, and fixed its attention upon things wholly unworthy the notice
of an immortal spirit. Under the seducing influence of vanity and lies, men
have been frequently led to pursue many things agreeable to their own wishes
and imagined interests, without the least regard paid to justice and equity.

I may possibly observe an explanation and distinction of the two states as I
go on, which Agur seems to refer to, viz. The distress and misery of the poor,
on the one hand; and the vanity and pride of heart, too frequently conspicuous
in the rich, on the other.

Were the lives of men designed to be wholly alienated from a state of justice
and virtue, and entirely instructed and fixed in the maxims and manners of this
world, singly to be taught to consider it as the chief end of their existence,
there would then be some excuse for using every species of art in joining Isa.
v. 8.
house to house, and laying field to field, 'till there be no place, that they
may be seated as it were alone in the midst of the earth: but now, as the great
design of him who judges the earth, and rewards the righteous, has been
abundantly manifested and denounced to such as thus counter-act it, they who
are entrusted with riches will appear the more inexcusable for their unbounded
avarice, and can have nothing to plead in favor of their violation of his
plain and clear intentions respecting mankind. It will all at last be found
vanity and lies, without virtue; without a faithful dedication of their hearts
to the revealed will of GOD. It is an observation of the preacher that Eccles.
2. xxvi.
God gives to man that is good in his sight wisdom, and knowledge, and joy --
but to the sinner he gives travel; to gather and to heap up, that he may give
to him that is good before God. And though he who is too unmindful of his
creator, may have erected edifices that appear to the eye of the spectator as
if they would stand for ages, and may call them by his own name; yet even in
this view, without virtue, he is, in the sense of Agur, a liar to himself: he
thinks he has secured happiness, when the frame of his mind is the reverse of
it; fixed probably in a state of exclusion, from what may be justly deemed true
and substantial happiness; or any acquisition, which will be acceptable and
well-pleasing in the sight of GOD. In this circumstance therefore he is a liar.
The by-stander indeed, who sees him in the free enjoyment of affluence, and
taking his ease, in appearance, in the fullness of his heart, may be ready to
conclude such a one happy, by being unacquainted with his secret griefs;
whereas many of his moments, if their true state could be penetrated into,
would appear like those distressed ones of the king of Israel; who, when he was
seated in the height of his splendour, magnificence, and royalty, 1 Kings xxi.
27.
rent his clothes; put on sackcloth, fasted, and lay in sackcloth, and went
softly.

Labor therefore after righteousness, rather than to Mat. vi. 19, 20.
lay up for yourselves treasures upon earth; where moth and rust does corrupt,
and where thieves break through and steal; that by such timely and prudent
application, ye may lay up for yourselves treasures in Heaven; where neither
moth nor rust does corrupt, and where thieves do not break through and steal.

Ye rising youth, whose minds are open to the dictates of James iii. 17.
that wisdom which is from above, and to the just and tender sentiments which
it inspires. Be your enquiries to the following purpose, frequent as they are
important, What am I? Who made me? To what purpose was I created? dedicate your
moments to the real purposes of life, pay not too great a regard to any
prospects or temptations of this world; fix not your attention upon its maxims
and proposed interests, which, when they become our idols, do but deceive and
deprive us of infinitely greater; beware of being seduced by the outgoings of
your own minds; let not things that are transient and perishing gain too great
a possession of your hearts and affections; nor ever neglect the following
interesting petition, Remove far from me vanity and lies, and remember that he
is the guide, helper, and director of all them that put their trust in him.

Give me neither poverty nor riches; I readily conclude that in the first part
of this petition all would willingly join; but riches are most apt to lay hold
of our hearts and affections: many indeed are the promises to the poor, Psalm.
lxxii. 12.
Whom the Lord will deliver when he cries, even him that has no helper; they
are frequently encouraged to hope; while the rich, if they mis-apply the riches
committed to their trust, we are assured by divine authority, will be
constrained to weep and howl: they enjoy the blessing and bounty of Heaven,
which they ought to apply to the noblest purposes, particularly the relief of
their distressed brethren, Mat. xxv. 40.
in as much as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my brethren,
(says our Savior) ye have done it unto me. For which purpose he has
committed to some a larger share of temporal enjoyments; which ought to be a
striking motive, a necessary incitement to well-doing: but alas! instead of it,
too frequently wealth becomes subservient to the purposes of pride, luxury, and
wickedness: and therefore, our LORD remarks in another place, Mat. xix. 23, 24.
Mark x. 23.
how hard it is for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of Heaven. And the
apostle James says, James v. 1, 2, 3.
go to now ye rich men, weep and howl, for your miseries that shall come upon
you; your riches are corrupted, and your garments are moth caten; your gold and
silver is cankered, and the rust of them shall be a witness against you; the
hire of the laborers which have reaped down your fields, which is of you kept
back by fraud cries; the cries of them which have reaped, have entered into
the ears of the Lord of Sabbath.

If the extent of thy stewardship, O man! is increased, thy obligations to thy
master are still greater; if thou have received additional blessings from the
GOD of bounty, it is a trust which calls upon thee to distribute with an
unsparing hand. O then, ye who are thus favored! maintain a steady endeavor
to discharge your duty in the sight of your Creator; deceive not yourselves
with a belief that happiness consists in the multitude of your possessions,
since they bring with them their dangers as well as obligations to duty; but
like fountains of water which supply the little streams, 1 Timothy vi. 18, 19.
be ready to distribute, willing to communicate: this being the way to lay up
in store for yourselves a good foundation against the time to come; that ye may
lay hold on eternal life.

I have known some men, and even women, who have thought the ground scarce
worthy to receive the pressure of their feet, divested of all the ties and
tenderness of humanity, and wholly puffed up with vanity and lies; but as the
reign of such is short, and not even then without its pains, and their end
miserable, as in many parts of the sacred records we are assured; may there be
none such here present; on the contrary, let it be a part of your constant
care, not only to feel the distresses of others, but to visit, and be
convinced, and in a manner share the necessities of the poor and needy; to
soften the anguish of their afflicted minds, to alleviate their hidden griefs,
and to dry up the eyes of those that weep; and the tears which stream, 1 Pet.
iv. 8, 9, 10.
as faithful stewards of the manifold Grace of God; having fervent charity;
knowing that charity shall cover a multitude of sins. Using hospitality one
toward another without grudging; in proportion as ye have received the gift,
removing far from you vanity and lies; and contenting yourselves with being fed
with food that is convenient for you.

Some that are present, may think this unreasonable doctrine, and be ready to
reply, I have a family to provide for, and therefore I must embrace every
opportunity of acquiring, and laying up all my acquisitions in store for them:
and should I neglect the present, the like may never happen again in the course
of my life.

Such or the like arguments are often too readily taken up, and obstinately
urged, in opposition to the most important concern; to the unspeakable
prejudice of themselves, of the dispositions and morals of their children in
particular, and of human society in general: how quick is the transition of
many from a state of health to the grave! Luke xii. 20.
"Thou fool! this night shall thy soul be required of thee!" was formerly
pronounced to one of this kind by the great judge of all men. Consider then, it
may be thy case; and art thou prepared against thy dying hour, to render him
such an account, as will then support thee, and justify thee in thy claim to
the inheritance of his everlasting kingdom, by thy having faithfully sought it,
and attended to the conditions thereof, preferably to all the dearest objects
of this uncertain, and momentary state of existence?

I am fully of opinion, many who run after the world with open mouth, and that
mouth scarce ever closed, 'till death closes it; could they be induced to yield
some of their precious moments to timely and serious reflection; would
endeavor to withdraw themselves from transitory things, at least before their
last moments of life; and in some measure, prepare (after this manner) to meet
their GOD.

They would now and then retire, for a short space at least, from the world,
before they entirely left it; frequently sit down, and seriously turn their
view toward another world, another state of being, into which they can never
hope to carry wealth, or honors; toward that approaching dread tribunal of
righteousness, where these will gain no favor.

When we take a survey of the world, and look back through the generations that
are past, we see that the love of vanity, wealth, and grandeur, has proved
from time to time the ruin even of the fairest empires and monarchies, which
have been ever erected on the face of the earth: one reformation after another,
and one state after another, have been destroyed, from the pride and
dissipation inherent in the minds of governors and teachers.

How ought this consideration to humble the hearts, and redouble the vigilance
of such as are placed in exalted stations!

I hope and trust our love, as a people in general, has not been confined
peculiarly to ourselves; but extended, as it ought to be, to all our fellow
creatures; to relieve poverty and distress, according to our abilities; to
prevent and reclaim from the infinite danger and harms of impiety, and to
encourage every kind of real virtue.

Though some families may have turned aside into the state of the world, and
become engrossed with the love of its pleasures and enjoyments; yet many
others, I hope, and believe, have denied themselves; have laid hold of the good
word of life; and under its influence, pursued the one thing needful. Though some
have declined, and even refused, the subjection due to their maker, as if they
had asked with insolence, Who is this LORD, that he should reign over our
hearts? and had added, We know no power equal to that of getting wealth, and
honors; -- yet others have not departed from the obligations of fear and love;
but have made proper reflections, paid just respect to the great author of
their being; and manifested it by a steady watchfulness in conduct, which I
most earnestly desire, may become the happy case of every one of my fellow
creatures.

The present solemn occasion is an important lesson of instruction to us all!
The departure of the disembodied soul, from this world, to another; which
methinks should entirely prevent our setting too great a value upon all
temporal possessions.

I have sometimes been present in a dying hour; I have been present at a scene
of humbling distress; I have seen in some, the closing period of a regular life
of virtue: yet such a life, as on account of outward poverty, had been despised
and over looked -- a whole life spent, in which its happiest moments would have
past for miserable, in the minds of thousands: yet when they have finished
their course, they have experienced triumphant joy, in the blessed hope and
assurance of eternal life! through the merits of their dear redeemer.

I have also beheld, on the other hand, the habitations of splendour exhibit a
mournful scene of distress, far different from the former! Then, when the
solemn approach of death has begun to appear, attended with all its tremblings
and fearful apprehensions of an after state! when the soul, agonizing in its
pains, has viewed things in a far different light to what it had before done,
when even the riches, in which it had long trusted, fell short of giving the
least satisfaction: no hope of future happiness afforded to the possessor! but,
on the contrary, a gloomy prospect of despair; of an eternal state of misery!
of this have I been made a sorrowful witness, that some have gone out of the
world, Ephesians. ii. 12.
without God; without hope; without one comfortable reflection from the sacred
ransom of a dying savior!

In vain have they ardently wished, in an expiring hour, that they might have
been permitted to lengthen out their allotment of life, a little longer; that
they might have but a short space of added time afforded them, for the
important purpose of repentance, and amendment of life; for feeding the hungry,
clothing the naked, and visiting the sick; virtues, to which they had no
pretense, in any of their past hours, and which then it proved too late for
them to attain, however necessary, for their standing approved at the just
judgment, to which they were approaching.

May we all therefore learn instruction, from examples like these; and derive
such advantage from this present solemnity; seeking and embracing the good word
of life; and ever steadfastly adhering to it, so long as we continue in
mutability.

May we never withdraw ourselves, from watchful attention, to the guidance of
divine providence; never indulge ourselves in arrogance, or trust too much to
the rectitude of our own hearts; but 1 Thessalonians. v. 17.
pray without ceasing, that we may be enabled to Mat. iii. 8.
do works meet for repentance; and thereby attain an eternal inheritance in the
kingdom of GOD!

Once more suffer me to entreat you, my friends, in great good will, often
seriously to reflect upon the importance of the petition which I have thus far
endeavored to enforce -- Two things have I required of thee, O Lord! deny me
them not before I die. As I am fully satisfied it is not and will not be
sufficient for me, though I should stand ever so eminently high, on the account
of riches, or honors, in the esteem or applause of men; Remove, therefore, far
from me vanity and lies; giving me neither poverty nor riches; but feed me, I
pray thee, with food convenient for me, lest I be full, and deny thee, and say,
Who is the Lord? or lest I be poor and steal, and take the name of my God in
vain.

Ever beware of the first admission of evil. Guard the avenues of your hearts;
make it your peculiar study so to number your days, as to Psalm. xc. 12.
apply your hearts unto wisdom; and to advance therein keep the account of your
passing moments with greater exactness than you would wish to do of your most
important temporal concerns.

It Is an usual saying, That short reckonings make long friends: continue this
short and frequent reckoning; ever esteeming the numbering of your days aright,
to be the most necessary and blessed exercise; that hereby ye may be in a
continual readiness for your final removal, how sudden soever it may be
permitted.

Some of you are doubtless truly sensible of the importance of thus acquiring
the divine favor; continue to Prove. iv. 23.
keep your hearts in this frame with all diligence, for out of them proceed the
issues of life: remember too that as we are a people who have been frequently
blamed for departing from set forms, how necessary therefore it is for us all
to keep up, in the very innermost recesses of our hearts, the daily sacrifices
of prayer and praise, of fervent mental supplications, reverently to offer them
to the Math. vi. 6.
Father who sees in secret and rewards openly: and let us never forget, that
if the mind once gets off its guard, and relaxes in its earnest pursuit of the
divine favor, the enemy is then most watchful to enter and to seduce. May you
all therefore keep within the verge of innocence; and ever let your morning
oblations, and evening sacrifices, accompany your spirits to the throne of
grace.

Ye rising tender youth, of whom there is a number in this city, for whose
welfare I am at this time, and believe shall ever remain, anxiously solicitous:
May grace, mercy and peace, attend you through the succeeding steps of your
lives! May the Father of infinite mercy still accompany your spirits; May you
live in the perfect love and fear of him; making constant, daily enquiry into
your immortal states; always remembering that you must one day fall beneath the
stroke of death! May your evening and morning sacrifices, therefore, of fervent
prayer, and of a sincere and steadfast devotion, be constantly directed up to
your Creator! Assuring yourselves that in casting your care upon, and trusting
in him, he will remember you in his divine love; that he will remove vanity and
lies far from you, and feed you with food convenient for you; that Genesis xxii.
17.
in blessing he will bless you; and in multiplying he will multiply his favors
toward you; crowning you in the end Pet. i. 8.
with joy unspeakable, and full of glory!

To conclude, let us all treasure up in our minds, and firmly retain this
comfortable assurance, Verily there is a reward for the righteous; verily there
is a God, that judges in the earth.

The following PRAYER was delivered, before the conclusion of the meeting, by
the same Preacher.
IT is unto Thee, the author of all our mercies, thou most glorous and holy
one! that we presume to have recourse; and with the deepest humility and
resignation of mind, to acknowledge thy present blessings, and the diffusion of
thy wisdom and goodness, with gratitude, reverence and feeling submission! As
Thou best know what is best for us, we beg that we may be continually
favored with thy providential and fatherly dispensations; and with that mercy
which sanctifies them, which renders them most highly instructive and useful to
us: that hence we may enjoy inward peace in the time of outward trouble: we
beseech Thee thus to carry on and complete our sanctification and salvation,
that in thy appointed time, we may attain an Col. i. 12.
endless inheritance with the saints in light.

We humbly request that Romans viii. 28.
all things may work together for good to those that are afflicted: may they
profitably listen to the instructive voice of affliction; and those who enjoy
prosperity, alike improve, from the language of every mercy!

Establish us, we pray Thee, upon the holy immovable foundation of thy
ever-blessed and unchangeable truth; Thou that have been with us, and
remembered us; and have opened our hearts for thy admission, through the virtue
of thy heavenly power and divine love. We pray Thee, in the name and spirit of
thy dear son, to direct us in the several succeeding steps of our lives; to
preserve us in an humble dependence and holy trust in thy power: and may we be
continually favored to make mention of thy name with joy and gladness of heart.

Lay thy hand, we pray Thee, upon such as are captivated with vanity and lies,
before they depart hence, and be seen of men no more; to lead them 1 Pet. ii. 9.
out of darkness into thy mavelous light: let the voice of the holy spouse
reach the immortal part, in such, with that comfortable and refreshing
language, "Arise my love, may fair one come away." Lead them, we pray, yet
further and further, in the Prove. viii. 20.
path of righteousness, to 2 Cor. ii. 1.
the perfecting of holiness in thy fear; and let thy rod and thy staff,
evermore, Psalm. xxiii. 4.
comfort them therein; that they may not lag behind, as in the wilderness; but
in humble steady obedience, persevere, with holy circumspection; being thankful
for all thy providential distributions, and ever patiently pronouncing the
divine language of Thy will be done!

Enable thy ministers, with power and authority, to exalt thy name with
additional strength; that through their faithful labors, as instruments in thy
hand, thy sacred light may arise and abundantly spread upon the habitations of
darkness! O most gracious being! Thou that Phil. ii. 13.
workest in us to will and to do, according to thy good pleasure, we pray Thee,
bring all to thy temple; and enable them acceptably to worship Thee therein.
Humble their hearts in full obedience to thy word, Psalm. cxxxix. 24.
lead them in the way everlasting! Let the first dawn of their morning, the
whole course of their day, and the close of their evening, be continually
directed toward Thee!

O Thou! by whom the voice of supplication, is with all readiness admitted,
even from the unworthiest of thy creatures! grant that over sea and land, Ephesians.
ii. 1.
the dead in heart, in trespasses and sins, may hear thy word, feel its power
in Romans vi. 4.
raising them to newness of life, and be finally admitted to the fellowship and
communion of saints in thy kingdom!

For thy great name's sake, and for thy dear Son's sake, remember all the
inhabitants of this city; and those, in particular, that are now met in this
place: that, through the favor of thy light and help, they may move in their
several classes agreeable to the injunctions of thy holy word. Do thou, we pray
Thee, animate and preserve thy ministers, elders, and heads of families; may
they 1 Pet. i. 13.
be sober, and hope to the end; discharging their duties to Thee, themselves,
their households, and the public; having on Ephesians. vi. 14, 15, 16, 17.
the helmet of salvation, the breast plate of righteousness, the shield of
faith, and sword of the spirit; and having their feet shod, with the
preparation of the gospel of peace.

Speak peace, we beseech Thee, O sovereign author of peace! to all that Mat.
xi. 28.
are laboring and heavy laden; Isai. live. 11.
tossed and not comforted; still the perturbations of their minds, when arising
and swelling, like the raging waves of the sea; Jer. v. 22.
though the waves toss and roar, let them not prevail and pass over them.

Now to Thee, whose goodness, mercy, and mavelous power, the tongues and
thoughts of the most grateful and perfect of thy creatures here below, have
ever fallen short of expressing or conceiving; to Thee, with the immaculate
lamb, the son of thy bosom, be deservedly and justly ascribed, as is most due,
all honor and glory, through the succeeding pilgrimage of our lives; and when
we shall no longer remain sojourners here upon earth, may we be admitted to
continue the inexhaustible theme, in the boundless habitations of thy
everlasting glory, world without end.

Amen.
The following SERMON was preached at the Quarterly Meeting at French-Hay, near
Bristol, May 26, 1767, in the morning.
Cant. iv. 12.
A garden enclosed is my sister, my Spouse, a spring shut up, a fountain sealed.
THE whole Book of Canticles is understood and taken in the way of similitude,
or metaphor, setting forth that close connection, that near and dear relation,
which eternally subsists between CHRIST and his church; and in this sense it
certainly conveys instruction, very profitable, as well as very delightful, to
that mind which has dedicated itself to the love and obedience of him, its
only rightful LORD.

iv. 15.
The Church is called a fountain of Gardens; which seems to me very evidently
to imply that enclosed collected strength, beauty, regularity; those
consolatory refreshments; that steady firmness of thought, unity of heart, and
divine affection, which becomes a people that well understand what is meant by
the solemn injunction of 1 Pet. i. 13.
girding up the loins of their minds: well apprized of the state of their
pilgrimage; of the nature, end and design of their being; of the necessity of 1
Pet. iv. 7.
watchfulness unto prayer; of having their minds brought into, and established
in, the lovely order of the gospel; their loins girded; their faculties
circumscribed, and directed to the proper purpose, the great and glorious end
of their being; within the limits of that holy frame of mind, which has Prove.
i. 7, and ix. 10.
a fountain of gifts, preparatory to every kind of useful service, for the
comfort of individuals, and the united benefit of the whole body; ever abiding
in the Prove. i. 7.
fear of the Lord, which is the beginning of wisdom: the most perfect wisdom,
by which the mind is kept clean, and preserved in its proper clothing.

For the Fear of the Lord, as the Psalmist expresses it, Psalm. xix. 9.
is clean, and endures for ever: and if this fear continues to rest upon our
minds, it will assuredly keep them clean; and more and more illuminate them to
discern the propriety and fitness of this language of CHRIST to his church: A
garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse, my church; erected and preserved by my
power, my followers united to me, and all dear to one another, 1 Pet. ii. 9
a royal priesthood, a holy nation, a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

May we therefore all separately, each for ourselves, attend to this state, and
become acquainted with that degree of resemblance of such an enclosed garden
which we beat, in the sight of him, who at one view, sees the several
conditions of men, and beholds the state of his whole creation!

If we are enclosed, of what nature is our enclosure? since nothing less will
become our sufficient defense, than the surrounding arm of the Almighty! He is
the strength of every individual that rightly trusts in him: Their situation is
aptly described in holy writ, in many parts of it, by a variety of lively and
beautiful figures; as here, by that of a garden enclosed, or Cant. iv. 15.
fountain of gardens. They likewise joyfully experience, in this sense of the
text, what was meant by the song that was predicted to be sung in the land of
Judah, when the divine covenant should happily cement, and enclose that
favored people in a state of innocence, integrity and love, enjoying together
the lasting and unutterable sweets of divine protection and peace. Isaiah xxvi.
1.
In that day shall this song be sung in the land of Judah; we have a strong
city; salvation will God appoint for walls and bulwarks: and I cannot but
entreat that all present, who are come to years of mature consideration,
especially, may obey the call of GOD; come out of a state of sin, and neglect
of duty, and become Ephesians ii. 19.
fellow-citizens with the saints of this city; a city that has Heb. xi. 10.
sure foundations; being built upon that rock, which Mat. xvi. 18.
the gates of hell have never been able to prevail against.

O you that are in the bloom of life, and surrounded with the impetuous waves
of diverse passions; who continue yet uncorrected, unrefined by divine grace;
may you diligently and seriously reflect upon your extreme want of resemblance
to the garden enclosed; and of answering thereby the gracious design of your
maker concerning you! May you be directed 1 Kings xix. 12.
by the still small voice, which the LORD GOD will make use of, and meet you
with Genesis iii. 8.
in the garden; in order to reclaim you, and to draw you to himself! May all
that stand in slippery places, make him their refuge, that they may know him,
to calm every tumult in the mind; to crown (...) with the joys of obedience;
and to direct their steps aright through life, to his honor, and their own true
and lasting happiness!

May all who mourn for want of a place of rest, attain this happy situation,
all who are ready to cry out as one formerly did, Psalm cxx. 5.
"Woe is me that I sojourn in Meshech, and dwell in the tents of Kedar." Woe is
me for this state of wickedness, with which I am now on every side surrounded;
both that of my own, and that of others round about me! who are ready to fear
Jer. viii. 20.
the harvest is past, the summer is ended, and that they are not gathered into
the city walled with salvation; or the garden enclosed with divine beauty, with
united and unfading joy!

I hope better things for those whose concern sometimes appears likely to
become more than they are able to bear, even a concern, lest they should be
excluded from an inheritance with the sanctified.

He that of old made Psalm cxiv. 4.
the mountains skip like rams, and the little hills like lambs, for the
miraculous preservation of his people, even when they had begun to despair of
their deliverance; can still equally effect the like glorious work in restoring
the desponding, the broken in heart; that, having been too much off their
watch, have from thence been the more subject to be Ephesians. iv. 14.
tossed about by every wind of doctrine, and cunning craftiness of men; whereby
they lie in wait to deceive. Know that though your own resolutions, your own
strength, and wisdom, have been insufficient (in the days that are past) for
your security; and perhaps the strongest resolutions, that you have hitherto
made, have been written in dust; so that the next gale of temptation has blown
them away; and you have hence been carried further and further, into a state of
groaning captivity, and crying distress! and have been unable to lift up your
heads in the day of trial: know, that the duly humble and repenting sinner has
ever been graciously received; and the diffident have become clothed with
divine strength, through the name and power of the LORD JESUS; their minds have
been brought into a holy frame, having entered within the celestial enclosure
and defense.

O that the salvation of Israel would come out of Sion, then should Jacob
rejoice, and Israel should be right glad. This has been the sacred language of
individuals that have at times been tossed in uncertainty, distressed in vanity,
wickedness and disappointment; who, notwithstanding, have been at last happily
fixed within the habitation of the holy city, or garden enclosed; through a
steady perseverance and strong resistance, though in the night season; like
Jacob, who as a prince, Genesis xxxii. 28.
prevailed with God and with men. So the sincere, the penitent sinner, in his
resolute and patient conflict, imploring and relying on divine help, will at
length obtain an assured victory, to his great joy, and returning of
thanksgiving to the author of all his mercies.

A Garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse; ah, too unthinking youth! how
widely different from this state is too many of yours! To you appears
particularly applicable that ancient call from GOD, Isa. xli. 1.
Keep silence before me, oh ye islands! I beseech you, in this your time of
danger, when your minds may be compared to floating islands, blown upon and
covered with a succession of waves, surrounded with temptations of various
kinds, that are perpetually withdrawing you from that most precious interest,
which CHRIST has purchased for you in the garden enclosed; I beseech you, that
you maintain a steady dependence upon him; that ye be vigilant in your pursuit
after eternal enjoyments; that ye stand upon your guard against the wiles of
the grand enemy to your salvation; remembering that even Job i. 6.
when the sons of God have met together, Satan has presented himself amongst
them.

Does thy mind watch with holy diligence to prayer? being fervent in spirit,
that though the enemy may endeavor to come in as a flood of corruption, and
seek incessantly to draw thee from the strong hold of that city, Isa. lx. 18.
whose walls are salvation, and whose gates are praise; the arm of omnipotence
may defend thee: know, thou art no farther guilty than as thou joinest with the
temptation; it is no sin to be tempted; the holy everlasting bridegroom of the
true church, was himself tried, proved, tempted before thee, time after time,
by the ruler of the darkness of this world, the prince of the power of the air;
yet he continued unmoved, unwearied; being supported and sustained by the power
of GOD: Heb. iv. 15.
He was like unto us in all things, sin only excepted; he knows and is willing
to sustain them that are tempted; and to encourage in the day of battle, every
one that cleaves unto, and calletih upon him, with full purpose of heart, in
the whole course and conduct of his life: though he may be deeply proved, and
may sometimes be ready to cry out, Even though the gates of death, may appear
to be in motion against me, and just opening to receive me, yet if I die, Oh
let it be at thy feet.

This has been the language of minds, in the day of temptation; and when the
battle has been hot, they have known a secret hiding place, where the enemy
could not prevail. Though he encountered the whole army of martyrs; though they
were tempted, trod upon, buffeted and even crucified; yet it was never in his
power to subdue them; they were still succored by the hand of the almighty;
they were enabled to 1 Timothy vi. 12.
fight the good fight of faith; to pass through all their fiery trials with
patience; and, in honor of their victory, are now crowned with glory!

How beautiful, how amiable, must be those gardens enclosed, the rising youth,
in the vigor and prime of life! when their minds are circumscribed, and
animated to piety; when they have upon them the indubitable proofs of the handy
work of GOD; standing immoveably upright on the side of religion and virtue;
keeping out all the works of darkness, by walls of divine erection!

How excellent are these gardens enclosed! their conversation and behavior,
how edifying! how exemplary! how truly honorable! their admission is sure into
2 Cor. V. 1.
that glorious house, not made with hands, to a perpetual festival, an eternal
fruition of the unspeakably rich rewards of their good works, which they have
been enabled to perform, to the glorifying of their father who is in heaven.

Than such a blessed society as this I know of nothing that can possibly be
deemed more amiable upon the face of the earth; nothing more consistent with
the design of heaven; or more resembling its own happiness, for those that are
young Eccles. xii. 1.
to remember their creator in the days of their youth, with a continual
reverence; and to give up their hearts to him, in the perfection of love; for
the most desirable part of the whole creation to live thus, amidst the bloom
and luster of the spring time of life, is to constitute the beauty of holiness!
the one great ornament of the garden of the LORD here on earth!

Ye heads of families; fathers, mothers, and guardians, that preside over and
sustain the various relations in domestic life; ever carefully prosecute your
own eternal happiness, and the happiness of all those over whom you are placed
in charge! exhorting them in tender affection, and encouraging them by worthy
example, to Col. iii, 2.
set their affections on things above; watchfully guarding, and even confining
them, in order to preserve them from all harms and corruptions of vice, as
gardens enclosed within the limits of that holy fear, Prove. xiii. 14.
which is a fountain of life, that preserves from the snares of death, and
prepares for a crown of glory, in the regions of eternal felicity!

When the ties of nature become joined with ties of grace, and together rest
upon the minds of parents and guardians; they cannot but be solicitous that
their offspring and charge may be favored in an eminent degree with divine
preservation: they would then earnestly desire to help them forward in their
way, being qualified to say to the rising generation, Follow me as I follow
CHRIST. I am persuaded had this been more generally the case, had they
themselves, I say, really lived as gardens enclosed within the bounds of divine
wisdom and government, our christian society would have worn a different aspect
to what it now does. Could parents and heads of families, from time to time,
have appealed to the searcher of hearts for the uprightness of their
intentions, and the rectitude of their conduct in these most important
concerns, then might they have said with holy confidence, Luke ii. 29, 30.
Lord! now let thou thy servant depart in peace; for mine eyes have seen
thy salvation!

What think ye parents? ye that live as it were in a state of stupefaction;
what think ye of the important moment, when in the sight of GOD, angels, and
men, inquisition for blood shall be made; what think ye of the preparation of
rendering that account with joy, at the dread tribunal of final judgment? in
which an enquiry into the discharge of your several duties, in this respect,
will most assuredly be made! -- It is possible, and indeed I cannot but believe
it consistent with the goodness of the supreme being; that, where the natural
parents have been negligent in their discharge of this important trust, and
have conducted their offspring into byways and crooked paths, forgetful of the
way that leads to life eternal; the everlasting father has not been wholly
unmindful of his children, thus abandoned to the wiles of the destroyer; but
has frequently reached forth a kind hand to such, and will continue to make up
to them, who gratefully receive his kindness, and obey his voice, the
deficiency of such past parental care; even by the virtue of his living power
in their hearts: in the mean time, the very criminal neglect of such parents
will, notwithstanding this, draw down on them its own weight of condemnation:
Dan. v. 5.27.
the hand writing on the wall will still remain against them; and, like wicked
Belshazzar, they will be weighed in the balance, and found wanting.

Indeed it must be confessed, and I am thoroughly assured, that all parents are
not thus negligent: I cannot but remember the inestimable father I had in early
life; and above all things, his almost unexampled care and tenderness over his
infant offspring. I well remember the very powerful and moving eloquence of
descending tears! when he collected his numerous family of little ones about
him, and in the time of our extreme tenderness, and very early years, how often
he has wept over us, when he has been recommending us to the throne of grace!
though I cannot repeat the immediate language he uttered, upon these occasions,
which were so extremely interesting to us all!

I wandered, as to myself indeed I may say, and strayed from the garden
enclosed, in many of the succeeding steps of my life: and even now stand as a
monument of mercy amongst you! whilst I thus afresh remember and recite this
amazing instance of a tender parent's anxious and unabated care, for our
preservation out of the evils that abound in the world; for our having a safe
place within the enclosures, where Cant. i. 7.
Christ feeds his flock, and makes them to rest at noon!

O Fathers and mothers! I beseech you, by the mercies of GOD, and the solemn
account you must one day close with him; that you lay this charge seriously to
heart; still offering up your humble petitions to the Father of light, that he
will enable you, more and more, to instruct the children he has blessed you
with, in the one thing needful; in order that being thus savoured, thus
enlightened and enlarged by his power, you may have nothing to do but die, when
that time shall arrive; nothing to charge yourselves with, in relation to the
neglect of this great duty, when the measure of your days shall be
accomplished; but may render up your accounts with joy, and receive the
beatific sentence of Mat. xxv. 21.
Well done, good and faithful servant; thou have been faithful in a little; I
will make thee ruler over more; enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

A Garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse. -- May we pay all due honor to the
testimony of CHRIST respecting his church, both as individuals, as heads of
families, and parents of children: and more and more sustain with diligence and
propriety in all our several stations the character of gardens enclosed, or be
as plants therein, of the Lord's own right hand planting; plentifully adorned
and enriched with all the good fruits of his own spirit; that we may be, as our
fathers were in the day, when the LORD raised them up, fed, and miraculously
supported them! and may fervently pray, Isai. lii. 1, 2. lx. 1.
that Zion might arise, and shine, and shake herself from the dust of the
earth; and put on her beautiful garments! and that many amongst us, who yet
need it, might shake themselves from those outward things that adorn them, as
they vainly imagine; that that divine beauty and luster which once
conspicuously shined upon and adorned our Zion, may again be restored, and
continue to dwell amongst us: and in order to this, may we study more and more
the increase of righteousness and true holiness, encouraging one another by
good example and by tender counsel in the pursuit thereof; as we cannot,
consistent with our love of GOD, be indifferent in our wishes for the happiness
and welfare of any of our fellow creatures; nor say of our brother, Let him
alone, Leave him to himself, it is sufficient for me to mind myself. Since it
is our immediate duty to watch over him; and to be ready, on every occasion,
tenderly to advise and assist, to prevent or support him; and not answer the
LORD, when he shall require an account of his welfare from me; Genesis iv. 9.
Am I my brother's keeper?

At this door, my friends, unspeakable damage has entered, and widely spread
amongst us as a people; even through this neglect, the grand deceiver has the
more easily broke into this and the other family; the power of seduction has
taken place; and many young people may be said to have laid violent hands on
their own souls, and those of others too, in their gradual stepping out of the
garden enclosed.

Am I my brother's keeper? What have I to do with the welfare of another? This
has greatly obstructed the increase of our felicity, as a collective body; the
progress of our Zion; and introduced the destroyer; who has broke into our
enclosure, and made a sorrowful devastation among the flock and family of GOD.
Where I see thus the danger of the hedge (which the Lord in mercy made about
us!) being broke down; I cannot help expressing my concern, and using my speedy
and vigilant efforts to prevent, as much as possible, the beginning and
increase of so great an evil.

Is there even a servant lad, or a servant girl that has continued neglected,
and their minds left to wander at will? I cannot but feel for them, with an
earnest desire of informing such, and drawing them, if possible, within the
limits of the garden enclosed; that they might enjoy the benefit and delightful
assurance of immortal happiness, from their entrance into, and continuance in
well doing! Many fly from their own interest, forget the GOD that made them,
and even Heb. x. 29.
account the blood of the covenant as an unholy thing, for want of having their
minds properly centered, and their judgments duly enlightened; and therefore it
is all your duty, who are advanced within the heavenly bounds, and are grown up
into a capacity of service, so faithfully to improve your talents, that ye may
become instrumental, to enlighten their understanding, and to administer to
them a suitable degree of spiritual health: not to say, Am I my brother's
keeper? but if ye love God, to love your brother also; to lead him within the
heritage and limits of the enclosed garden; within the impregnable defense of
that city whose walls are salvation.

I know well, friends, that though my education was within the garden enclosed,
yet I wandered far from it; and in my departing, laid myself open to the enemy
of my soul. I kept the worst of company; I subjected myself to almost every
temptation; broke through the fence of the sacred enclosure! trampled it under
my feet! and when for a time I found the least inclination to do good, evil was
present with me! and I went on from one degree of it to another! my wickedness
so far increased with my diligence that at length, alas! I beheld the strong
wall broken down! the garden wall destroyed! the mound left defenseless! and no
hopes left of returning peace to my afflicted soul!

O ye, who are the hopes of the next generation! the steps I have trod warrant
me to expostulate with, and to warn you of the most dreadful danger of that
deviation, to which youth is too prone, for want of due and timely reflection,
suitable to its vast importance; and the extreme difficulty of treading back,
or extricating yourselves from it, when the mind is once engaged and entered
into the path of folly: believe me, now is your acceptable time; now is the day
of the LORD's tender mercy afforded to you: flatter not yourselves therefore
with the hope of its being time enough, that in some future part of your lives
you will diligently seek him: now is your seed time; your hour of profitable
diligence; and not in the decline of life. Life frequently is held by a moment
of time! it passes, and man is no more seen! Isa. xl. 6.
All flesh is grass, and its beauty as the flower of the field; the grass
withers, and the flower fades. The grave, to which we are all hastening,
ought to be an early lesson of serious instruction, sounding the alarm in the
ears of every youth; seeing it is frequently opened to receive its victims in
the very bloom of life; and Eccles. xii. 1.
before the years draw nigh, in which, in the course of nature, they can take
no pleasure -- Prove. xxvii. 1.
boast not therefore thyself of tomorrow, since thou know not what a day
may bring forth; but rather let the example of others teach thee, the absolute
necessity of improving the present moments; and duly to reflect upon the
imminent danger of delay.

If thy delight be not now within the garden enclosed, thou can not
reasonably expect hereafter to do Acts xxvi. 20.
works meet for repentance: believe me, the evening hour will have its fill of
work, even after discharging the duty of the most diligent day; though thou
begin this necessary work immediately, thou will not have a moment to spare
when thy sands of life are hastening to a close, and thou art finally appointed
to tread the silent and solemn path of death! which is an hour that will,
doubtless, bring with it a sufficient employment to the most serious mind, and
to the most assiduous improver of the time that has been allotted him in
mutability.

O then, ye beloved youth! that your minds may be thus properly exercised to
lay hold on the things that belong to your everlasting peace! may you lay these
reflections seriously to heart; and may their good effects demonstrate that
they have a powerful and proper influence upon your conduct, through the whole
series of your lives; that ye may finish your course with joy! and be crowned
in the end with glory and immortality! having faithfully answered the boundless
love of CHRIST to his church, whose peculiar relation to himself he expresses
in this endearing language, A garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse, a spring
shut up, a fountain sealed.

The following PRAYER likewise was delivered extempore, after the preceding
Discourse, by the same eminent speaker.
WE approach thy presence, O Father of infinite kindness, and make mention of
thy name, in a deep and awful sense of thy mercy, which has followed us from
time to time, and most graciously encouraged us, even to open our hearts before
thee! the LORD of heaven, and the whole earth!

We were cast upon rocks, and there left in a destitute and perishing state;
when thou manifested thy tender regard, stretched forth thy delivering hand,
and fed and sustained us by thy watchful providence! Thou wast pleased to look
upon us in mercy, in the days of our temporal calamities! to reveal to us the
saving arm of thy power, and to cause those very calamities to turn to our
solid advantage! Thou, who art encircled with light, did enlighten our
darkness; gave us clearly to understand the great things of thy law; such of
them as thou in thy wisdom saw necessary for us. In the day of our utmost need,
thou wast pleased to appear for us, and to speak comfort to our afflicted
states!

We earnestly beg, that the grateful sense of all these thine unutterably kind
dealings with us, may be imprinted on our hearts in characters never to be
obliterated! What more have we to ask, but that thou may ever continue to guide
and direct us! that such a sense of thy unmerited mercies may be to us, as
often heretofore it has been, an enlivening comfort, and a strong support in
the day of trouble: and we beseech thee, O blessed father! to remember all in
the like situation: send forth thy light and thy truth even amongst those who
have never known, or have long forgotten thee. We pray thee, draw them into thy
holy house; plant them in thine enclosed, for ever beautiful and most excellent
garden! their hearts becoming hereby powerfully inclined to attend with a fixed
and unlimited submission, to the salutary discipline of thine omnipresent, and
unerring wisdom!

If thou see any cast upon the bed of languishing, do thou be pleased, we
humbly pray thee, to afford them the visitation of thy love: let thy divine
consolation be their continual attendant, whereby they may be endued with
perfect resignation to thy blessed will!

O thou! that have poured into our hearts, the fresh and reviving sense of thy
unbounded love; accept we beseech thee, our prayers for our own preservation,
and the lifting up of our hands for one another, for the gathering together of
many to thy self; who art, and have been, the restorer of many that have been
scattered abroad, that have gone astray, being seduced by various temptations,
from thy sacred truth.

For thy great name's sake, for thy dear son's sake, and for the sake of thy
glorious cause of righteousness! we pray thee, remember the offspring of thy
people; incline and strengthen them more, and more, to turn toward thee; and
Heb. xii. 1.
to run the race that is set before them; that in the places of the honorable
fathers, removed to thy kingdom, may succeed their sons; steadily walking in
their footsteps, to the glory of thy name; that generation to generation may
tell thy acts, and age to age pronounce thy goodness and mavelous power; who,
through manifold temptations and trials, prefervest unspotted from the world,
them who trust in thee, and adhere to the dictates of thy grace!

Be with the people assembled here at this time; and in a particular manner
with those that are thine in heart, and dedicated to thy service. Endue, we
pray thee, with the spirit of sound judgment, those that sit in judgment; and
strengthen those who are enlisted into thine army, engaged under thy banner,
and that turn the battle to the gate, that they may so act, and 1 Timothy vi. 12.
so fight the good fight of faith, as to lay hold on eternal life! which thou
art now, in this the day of thy mercy, freely offering unto all!

May the ministers and stewards of thy word, cheerfully proceed in thy glorious
cause, speaking powerfully in wisdom to all, that many may become through their
calls, yet more and more ardently inclined to listen to the doctrine of thy
son, and to be instructed in thy law immediately from his internal voice in
their own hearts.

O holy and infinite father of all our mercies! grant we beseech thee, that
being preserved in our stations, as those who are Coloss. iii. 1, 2, 4.
risen with Christ, our affections may be set on things which are above, and
our life hid with them in thee our GOD, that when he who is our life shall
appear, we also may appear with him in glory!

May all our faculties, and all that is within us, bless thy great and
excellent name; may we perpetually approach thy throne with confidence, to
offer thee the oblation of humble prayer, and grateful praise and thanksgiving,
now, henceforth, and for ever, world without end! Amen.

FINIS.
The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Love of God, and a Divine Communion,
recommended and enforced, in A SERMON PUBLICLY DELIVERED At a MEETING of the
PEOPLE called QUAKERS, HELD In Leeds, the 26th of the Sixth Month, commonly
called June, 1769.

CAREFULLY TAKEN DOWN IN CHARACTERS AT THE SAME TIME, BY JAMES BLAKES, JUN.

PHILADELPHIA: Reprinted by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, in Market-Street between Second
and Third-Streets. 1780.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE Editor of the following Sermon, which was delivered extempore to a large
Auditory of different Persuasions, conceives himself obliged to acknowledge,
that the Idea of printing it, was not successful enough to obtain the
Preacher's Approbation. Nevertheless through the repeated Requests of many of
the Hearers, who were of opinion it might be rendered more extensively useful
if printed, provided a serious and impartial Attention were paid to those
important Truths which are the Subjects enlarged upon therein, he has been
prevailed upon to submit it to the Candor of the Public; being not without a
Hope, that the apparent Benevolence of the Motive which first suggested the
Design, will in some Measure excuse him to the Preacher for the Part he has
taken in the Execution of it.

J. B.
Leeds, 1771,
A SERMON.
IT is not in the "Oldness of the Letter Romans vii, 6.
," or in unfeeling Formality, but from the animating warmth of Gospel Love,
that I salute this assembly in these expressions; The Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all
always. Amen. 2 Cor. xiii. 14.
It is the constant language of that evangelical spirit, from which arises this
tribute of Glory to God in the highest, peace on earth, good will to men Luke
ii. 14.
, and which I am thankful to feel not restrained within less compass than the
Bulk of Mankind; but zealously and ardently pointing toward all such as
profess faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and a hope of salvation by him.

There is something further couched in this affectionate salutation than the
language of Love; the language of Wisdom. -- That Wisdom which is "profitable
to direct Eccl. x. 10.
," seems to me very evidently and very eminently displayed by the father of
mercy and kindness in these expressions; which, by divine assistance, I would
endeavor a little to open, and to urge as words of some signification, unto
all such whose minds are at times turned to contemplate, and not only
contemplate, but also to pursue, "the things which make for peace Romans xiv. 19.
."

I. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.
There is no language, or form of words, sufficiently copious and expressive,
though raised to the utmost extent or height of description, for representing
the adorable manifestations of heavenly kindness, goodness, condescension and
mercy, or for exhibiting the things which proceed from the Grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ: but it is allowable to speak whereof we know, according to the
Measure of knowledge, and to utter, according to the proportion of Strength
given, what we now see in part, and what from experience we feel, of the
merciful kindness of God; and which, as we faithfully follow his will, we shall
hereafter more fully and comprehensively behold. -- This I apprehend is
necessary for all, to whom a revelation of the Christian Religion has been made
by means of Holy Writ; and in an especial manner, where He that is the
discoverer of states, has opened their understandings to believe the Doctrines
of the Christian Religion, and the sacred records of that miraculous Favor and
Grace that came by Jesus Christ.

But for my own part, I must freely acknowledge there was a time of my life, in
which I would gladly have relieved myself from following the arduous paths of
religion, by turning aside into the paths of Skepticism and Infidelity. My mind
was ready to allege, as some at this time of day may be, How can we believe
without Evidence! There is not a sufficient Evidence of Truth to convince my
judgment, or to induce me to believe. I know this has been the allegation of
some: But I have found there is no Deficiency of evidence, but an unwillingness
to admit the Force of that evidence, which would properly influence the mind;
and I have reason to apprehend this has been the case with others; for if there
was a thorough submission, and disposition of mind to receive the Truth in the
Love of it; to endeavor after it in its genuine simplicity; to look at it with
a single eye; and, if I may be allowed the expression, to suppress or banish
all the "buts and ifs; we should soon find the Evidence of the Christian
Religion to be lively and incontestible, and effectually to operate to make us
wise and good; Wise with the Wisdom that is to Salvation; and Good, with the
Goodness that is of God, the Source of Goodness.

But whilst people "take counsel, and not of God," and suffer themselves to be
covered with a covering and not of his Spirit Isaiah xxx 1.
, they are unwilling to admit the force of those truths which would separate
the precious from the vile, and purify us according to his word. -- While this
is the case that many deviate in point of Faith, they may complain of the want
of Evidence, respecting the Certainty and Truth of the Christian Religion; and
complain with as much justice, as a man who wilfully hides himself in Darkness,
complains of his Incapacity of Seeing. For we have such an evidence and
understanding imparted by the Light and Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, as
doubtless abundantly displays the immediate Regard and Love of God, as recorded
in Holy Writ; and from which I freely acknowledge an internal illumination
necessary, for all that would have valid claim to the Christian Religion;
whereby we obtain a firm assurance of, and a well-grounded belief in, those
glorious truths.

We have sometimes been accused of allegorizing away the important truths of
the Christian Religion as recorded in Holy Writ: It is far, very far, from our
intention or inclination! We want to enforce them, upon ourselves, upon our
brethren, with all that requisite weight which commands their belief; calling
to a belief of Heart, not a mere assent with the Tongue; but "a belief of Heart
unto righteousness Rom, x. 10.
."

We have been distinguished, and are not ashamed of the distinction, for
preaching, "Christ within;" but we never preach a Christ within, opposed to, or
derogating from, a Christ without. -- We fully believe not only in his glorious
and gracious appearance amongst the sons of men, "as in the volume of the book
it is written Heb. x. 7.
;" but we also believe in his inward and spiritual appearance, "the second time
without sin unto salvation Ibid. ix. 28.
;" in which we are supported by a cloud of witnesses Ibid. xii. 1
, and by the doctrine of the holy Author of the Christian Religion, enforcing
his inward and spiritual manifestation (the manifestation of his Grace) in as
clear and indubitable a manner, as from the testimonies delivered concerning
his external appearance.

But the mystery of ungodliness has powerfully wrought with some who profess
the Christian name, in opposition to the force of those testimonies with regard
to his internal appearance, or manifestation of himself in the hearts of
mankind; and to render inadmissible the doctrine of an inward and spiritual
communion, the revelation of Light, Life, and Good to the souls of men,
immediately imparted for our redemption and sanctification. -- This would lead
people home from the flowery paths of Ease and Speculation, into the arduous
one of Practice: It would transfer religion from the Head to the Heart; and, in
its progress, would remove every obctacle to the admission of the doctrine of
an inward and spiritual manifestation of the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.

But there has been a lamentable defection from the Life and Spirit of true
christianity, wherein the Old Man, under all the pomp of Opinion, and assenting
to indubitable Truths still remains in full possession of every inordinate
love, and his goods are at ease. A mind disguised with JACOB'S Voice, and
ESAU'S Hands, sound orthodox Principles, with a schismatic Heart, ingross the
Formalist of all names and distinctions to religion; the old man being at ease
with his goods, in a state of self-sufficiency, either rejoicing under a Form,
and the false shade of Opinion and regularity of conduct, or in the pomp of a
specious external appearance; wherein some continue possessed of an unhappy
tranquillity or ease of mind, and are endeavoring to build up a tabernacle
quiet and safe, content with a Form, or depending upon a bare Belief in the
doctrines of the christian religion. -- But there is a work whereby the Old
Earth, and the Old Heavens are made to shake, and must be removed; which is of
the adorable mercy and grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, when he thus may reveal
himself; --

Yet once more will I shake not the Earth only, but also HEAVEN! Heb. xii. 27.
-- Not only the Earth, not only against the inhabitants of the earth; but the
Work of God is made conspicuous in the Awakening of the ungodly, for their
conversion from sin and death, unto righteousness and life. -- "Yet once more
will I shake HEAVEN!" -- The glorious specious Appearances of Truth, and
Doctrines recorded and assented to, but yet not reduced to Experience; truths
received and confessed by the Tongue, but the Heart revolting from their
efficacious influence.

Yet once more will I shake not the Earth only, but also Heaven. And this word,
yet once more, signifies the REMOVING of those things which are shaken. And
undoubtedly the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, in its manifestation, procedure
and effects, would shake every false rest in which any deluded soul may have
fixed its repose: He would shake every false rest among those under all names
and distinctions to religion, who are trusting in Name and in Form, without the
POWER, or an experience of its virtual effects upon the soul; these all
appertain to one family: -- and not only so, but he would shake every false
rest, yea and the FOUNDATION, of those who are building upon a Profession, and
upon the Apostles Testimony of Jesus Christ; because they are only building
upon the Credibility of those truths, yet cannot experimentally say, Through
the Grace of our Lord Jesus, "We acknowledge the Truth, according to Godliness.
Titus i. 1.
"

They that are of the World, come here also to a house fortified with Opinion,
and are supporting themselves in having obtained a clear, full, and concise
knowledge of the Truth of the Christian Religion. But there is a power that
will search every false foundation, and overturn every superficial dependence
on Human Production, that is inconsistent with the uniform tendency of his
sacred Law, fashioned upon the plan of unchangeable, everlasting Wisdom. -- It
is not of Man, or by Man, but proceeds from the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
whereby those truths are brought home to the Hearts of mankind. The gracious
effects of his powerful working, are manifested to bring us home from a state
of false dependence, that we may humbly and experimentally acknowledge, In God
is my Salvation, and my Glory, the Rock of my Strength: Psalm. lxii. 7.
in God alone is my Trust.

But "the Strong Man," armed with OPINION and BELIEF, has nevertheless been
pursuing vitiated Affections; which people have endeavored to retain, and
glossed over with a specious lofty Profession; fully assenting to the truths
handed forth from the experience of others, but unreduced to practice in
themselves.

While the strong man armed keeps the palace, the things that he possesses are
in peace; Luke xi. 21.
until a stronger than he overcome, and cast him out with all his goods. -- All
those things that are inconsistent with the holiness and purity of the Divine
Nature, which are pointed clearly out, and may be understood, by the
declaration of our Lord concerning the Church, wherein every plant that is not
of my heavenly Father's right hand planting, shall be rooted out. Mat. xv. 13.
-- What would then become of all those things, which a mistaken judgment calls
"but little things?" Of the Pleasures and Amusements of the present age,
invented by the sons of dissipation, who add wings to their moments, and are
carried forward with rapidity through time, unprepared, to a final judgment?
What a multiplicity of those things which are not of the Father, but of the
World that lies in wickedness: 1 John v. 19.
things of which I shall not now particularly speak; but they are such as have
no life in the LIFE of the Lord Jesus Christ in Man, but are ever Enemies to
it, while the Affections are earthly, and confined to this world, however the
partiality of deluded minds may think to seek a resource, and attempt to
obviate the seeming Rigours of the Gospel, or find for themselves an easier and
more flexible way, by resting upon a mere Belief of Systems (the goods
belonging to the strong man armed) wherein they endeavor to support
themselves, and are high in Profession, but weak respecting Practice? A species
of Deviation from the Power of Truth proceeding from the Grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ, which would search the secrets of every Heart! It would open to
the view of the attentive mind their nature, and the situation they are in;
what is of God, and what is not of God; what is pure, and what is impure: It
would ever prove a more decisive test in all our actions, a more certain
criterion in our conduct through life, than it is to be feared the generality
of Christian professors have attained, and which it is absolutely impossible
for the Strong Man armed to produce, with all his seeming Sanctity of the
Flesh, or strenuous Support of Belief, and a multitude of external
performances; notwithstanding he may endeavor to plead for the "Law and the
Commandment," and think thereby to attain the mark of Christ's followers, who
"walk therein all the days of their lives."

But although they are thus lifted up in their minds, there is an Omniscient
and Omnipresent BEING, who cannot be deceived or imposed upon; and it is
impossible to invalidate that invariable obligation to live under the Power of
the Cross of Christ, however they may endeavor to find means, by professing
his Name without taking up a Cross to the inordinate pleasures and pursuits of
this world, or attribute to themselves the merits of his death, without a death
unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness, wherein alone we are made
partakers of an everlasting glory.

I beseech you by the most powerful motive of the Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, that every one may endeavor to cultivate in your minds a living Sense
of Religion; and that we may all experience the purity and sanctity of its
nature to operate in our hearts; and as members of one Family, though
distinguished by various Names, we may continue as Brethren and
Fellow-pilgrims, in our passage through the wilderness of this world, to an
endless Glory; that we may run with patience the arduous race, although through
distress of temptation and probation, to an inheritance incorruptible,
undefiled, and that fades not away.

I beseech you by the Mercies of God, by every powerful motive, in the language
of Love, the Love of God, which lives in my heart, lay hold of the Grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ; by which alone our hearts and minds can experimentally
acknowledge, that it is by the virtue of it we are cleansed, purified, and
redeemed from the pollutions and defilements of the world; and whereby we
become fashioned in the image of righteousness and true holiness.

Let us next consider the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ as offered for our
REDEMPTION. -- And I have no doubt of its being acknowledged, by all who have
any understanding of the nature of True Christianity, or care about their
immortal souls, that the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ manifestly leads to the
doctrine of Repentance from dead works, and of Faith toward God; to a
redemption of the soul from death, hell, and the grave; consequently, from that
state of punishment due to sinners, where the ungodly receive the reward of
their disobedience: -- Neither have I any doubt of our being accompanied herein
by a cloud of witnesses, who feel the Truth of the Christian Religion, and know
the force and authority of those testimonies concerning it. -- And let us take
along with us the knowledge which the apostles and primitive believers had of
the Christian Redemption and Doctrine in their times, that the Grace of God,
that brings salvation, has appeared to ALL men; teaching us, that denying
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly,
in this present world; looking for that blessed hope, and glorious appearance,
of the Grace of God, through our Lord Jesus Christ, who gave himself for us,
that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar
people, zealous of good works Titus ii. 11, 12, 13, 14.
. This is the Redemption proposed by the Gospel, which commands our assent, and
will remain obligatory throughout all ages of the Christian dispensation.

But there has been a claim to Redemption, introduced in the Apostasy from the
LIFE of Religion, maintained amongst professors under various names, who plead
the Impossibility of being redeemed from the Power of Sin; -- a Redemption from
the Penalty, but not from the Commission; -- a Redemption from the Punishment
without a Victory over the transgressing nature: -- And herein the mystery of
unrighteousness has powerfully wrought, and still works, thus to substitute
Names for Things, Sounds instead of Substance; and a Profession instead of a
lively Possession of its powerful and virtual effects upon the mind. -- But it
is a Redemption from "all iniquity," whereby alone he will purify unto himself
a peculiar people, zealous of good works,

Thou shall call his name JESUS, for he shall save his people from their Sins
Mat. i. 21.
-- From the Worldly Nature, and from the Corruptions and Defilements in the
world. -- A Redemption from the Power of Sin; -- wherein we are sanctified, and
justified, in the sight of God, and are prepared for an admission into the
kingdom of heaven, as we are possessed of this efficacious redemption: -- "It
is like unto a little Leaven, which a woman took and hid in three measures of
meal Mat. xiii. 33.
-- It was operative; -- and being diffussed through the three measures of
meal, there was a real, inherent Change, or partaking of its own Nature; -- a
change effected by the powerful diffusion of that leavening Virtue.

This is the Redemption of Jesus Christ; -- a Redemption effected by the Grace
of our Lord Jesus Christ. -- It consists not in the Strength, or Change of
Opinions, or a formal Conception; -- but as we experience a gradual progression
from glory to glory, and from one degree of similitude, or resemblance, of the
Divine Image to another, until we attain a victory here, and the consummation
of happiness in a future state.

I apprehend this is the genuine nature of Christian Redemption, as proposed by
the Gospel, which will stand the test, and bring forth the glorious fruits of
RIGHTEOUSNESS, PEACE, and JOY in the HOLY GHOST; and wherein he will refine,
and purify unto himself, a peculiar people, zealous of good works.

We are not to ascribe or attribute to ourselves any Merit of Works, as
performed in the strength of a natural Understanding, or from any religious
Seize; but ever to retain a consciousness of our inability; as knowing
nothing belongs to us as Creatures, but "Blushing and Confusion of Face Dan.
ix. 7.
;" and that our growth toward perfection proceeds from the assistance
dispensed of his unbounded mercy and grace; as says the apostle, It is by the
Grace of God I am what I am; and his Grace which is in me, was not in vain; but
I labored more abundantly than they all; yet not I, but the Grace of God which
is IN me 1 Cor. xv. 10.
.

I have no doubt that many of your minds, under various names and distinctions
to religion, have been at times touched with a feeling sense of the nature and
excellency of true christianity; with a blessed sense of it, proceeding from
the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ. -- May you so follow on, as to experience a
further progress in its efficacious operation upon your minds, and witness its
Leavening Virtue into its own Nature, drawing you from the temper and
defilements of the world, by a transformation of your minds from dead works, to
serve the living God! -- wherein you would truly experience an increase in
strength, derived from him to whom "all Power is given Mat. xxviii. 18.
:" power to effect every excellent purpose, and fill up to you all those
relative attributes which are inseparable from the Divine Nature; and wherein
he is mercifully communicating an holy evidence of Faith in the Grace of our
Lord Jesus Christ; a faith in things not seen, the substance of things hoped
for Heb. xi. 1.
.

May we be engaged in an humble dependence, and awful worship, before the God
of heaven and earth! continually contemplate him in his adorable perfections,
as the Father and Fountain of all our mercies; and faithfully regard every part
of our duty in bringing "Glory to God," proposed as the Mark of Redemption and
Reconciliation, through the Merits and Mediation of a crucified Savior; who
gave himself for us, that he might redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto
himself a peculiar people, zealous of good works. -- In this manner we become
members of his sacred Militant Church on Earth; and are entering upon the path
to the Triumphant Church in Heaven.

We were made a little lower than the angels, and intended to partake in the
fruition of happiness with the spirits of just men made perfect, in the general
assembly of the firstborn sons of God. And I have no doubt but he will still
beautify his footstool by the gift of his Grace, the Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, proceeding from himself, the Author and Fountain of good, and of every
perfect work, whereunto we are called by his Spirit, and become united in
membership with his sanctified church and family: -- So that having filled up
the measure of our days in the world, we may finally receive the beatific
reward of an endless life with the just of all generations.

I have no doubt of the possibility of Access to the Father while clothed with
mortality, through the mediation and intercession of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. -- But it is as we admit his Spirit to operate in our minds to prepare
us for access, and duly attend to the assistance afforded us.

May the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all, always! -- May you be
built up in his Grace, and continue engaged in the contemplation of his
adorable perfections! the infinite Kindness and Goodness of God! the excellency
and purity of the Christian Nature! and, by a separation from the world, obtain
a well-grounded hope that he may be with you all, always. Amen.

Yet notwithstanding an happy advancement may be known, a state of humble
Watchfulness is our duty, and our safety. -- I cannot join with the opinion of
those, who maintain the doctrine of once in Grace, ever in Grace. -- I believe
that it is possible for those who have been visited with a measure and
manifestation of the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, that have tasted the good
word of life, and of the powers of the world to come Heb. vi. 5.
, to fall away. -- It is necessary to continue in a state of Daily Dependence
on Divine Strength, for our faithful perseverance in the uniform progressive
labor of a christian life, and a daily walking with the God of our lives, to
preserve us from evil. -- The apostle, who seemed to entertain a requisite
diffidence with regard to himself, perceived the necessity of a Continuance in
the Communion of Grace, in order to a happy conclusion; and was cautious, while
he was preaching to others, lest himself should become a castaway 1 Cor. ix.
27.
-- Let us, therefore, not content ourselves that we begin and run well for a
Season; but retain upon our minds a living SENSE of religion, clothed with
native simplicity and purity, proceeding from the Grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ.

II. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ; the Love of God.
He has so loved us, and manifested his inconceivable favor toward us, that
he has not dealt with us according to our Merits, but of his free and
unmerited GRACE, that we might become heirs of an endless inheritance in glory!
God so loved the world, that he sent his own Son into the world to be a LIGHT
to the world; a Light to enlighten the Gentiles, and to be his Salvation to the
ends of the earth Acts xiii. 47.
-- It is this heavenly Love, the Love of God, that is the grand and solemn
cement of his family, both here and hereafter: wherein we are united to him,
and in fellowship one with another. It binds all into an uniform consistency,
both in heaven and earth. -- Many other objects of our love are local and
temporary, limited to Time and Place, or confined to this world, and to the
things that are in it: but the Love of GOD is an endless commandment. -- It is
CHARITY; that divine Charity, that will remain when testimonies shall cease,
and declarations come to an end; -- in a participation whereof we shall still
continue to join in holy worship and adoration unto God, the Author of our
being.

It is in the enjoyment of this divine and ardent Charity, that the celestial
inhabitants in the realms of light receive the sacred Emanations of LOVE, and
enjoy the Favor of God in a participation of those ineffable pleasures which
it yields to the glorified assembly of saints in bliss. -- And, indeed, it
seems to me to be the grand Source of all happiness and duty, happiness in
heaven, as well as perfection of wisdom to the sons of men, derived from those
gracious relative attributes of the Divinity wherein he is mercifully
communicating the essential part of his own Nature, being in Himself,
"altogether lovely, Canticles v. 16.
" consummate in the perfection of holiness, and unparallelled in wisdom! --
wherein we are sometimes favored with the fruition of his Love, measurably
imparted, to our comfort and unspeakable joy, infinitely superior to all that
this world can afford, and which will remain, when the elements shall melt with
fervent heat, the earth also, and the works that are therein, shall be burnt up
2 Peter iii. 10.
-- The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the Love of God, will then open
unto the foul that glorious prospect of unutterable, inconceivable happiness,
which is the provision of God for the righteous, and those who faithfully
persevere to a peaceful and happy conclusion.

It is by virtue of the Grace and Love of God, that we are enabled to advance
in a proper progression through the various steps of a religious life; and
which would kindle an ardour of affection in the mind with desires for a
continued supply of that heavenly virtue, which nourishes the soul up unto
eternal life. -- A Want of this, makes us bow to the god of this world, and to
things that are in it. -- The love of Money, Riches, and the Praise of Men;
which with various powers of seduction are presented to our view, and our
prospects are bounded by the narrow conceptions of an Earthly Mind. -- It is a
love of those things, which obstructs the progress of religion. -- A secret
deviation from the Love of God to a Love of this World, has prevailed in many.
-- But how can it be otherwise, since like will ever assimilate with its like?
And while the BODY is terrestrial, the GLORY is terrestrial, and the body will
continue engaged in the pursuit of earthly things. -- For every mind will
attend to its Similitude. -- And while the Body is terrestrial, the Glory will
remain terrestrial, however it may assume a resemblance to matters of a higher
nature, and superior importance. -- Yet while the Glory is earthly, our Views
earthly, and confined to the pleasures and pursuits of this world, our
Affections are earthly, and we are rendered incapable of that LOVE, which is of
a divine and heavenly nature.

A terrestrial love presides and is prevalent in the minds of many; which has
obstructed the power of truth, and been the cause of feeble purposes and feeble
efforts, enfeebled minds with irresolute intentions, and proved the occasion of
a defection amongst Christian professors, who have been desirous to form
something more amiable and agreeable, or better adapted to their natural
inclinations. -- But there is a deficiency in their Love, a wavering in
Affection, a division of Love, which is the cause of weakness and incapacity to
make a proper advancement in a Christian life, or improvement in the
progressive work of religion upon the soul. For, (...) I have hinted, while the
BODY is terrestrial, the GLORY is terrestrial, until we are created anew in
Christ Jesus, unto righteousness; wherein our minds will become clothed with a
celestial glory, and by the power of Divine Grace, be set above every earthly
love: And then the Love of GOD will prevail in our minds, and we shall attain
an experience of additional strength, steadily to persevere in the arduous
warfare of a Christian Life. And the Glory being celestial, our views are
circumscribed within the limits of an heavenly love, wherein we are lifted up
to God, being renewed in the spirit of our minds, and enabled to travel on
toward the glorious city of the saints solemnity.

But it is a deficiency of Love, it is a cleaving to other things, inconsistent
with the purity of the Divine Nature, that has slain ten thousands! -- A secret
defection of Heart, which no human eye has been privy to, has slain more than
open Prophanity! -- A degeneracy of Heart, a secret sliding from the Covenant
of Life, in those who are turning aside into the path of irreligion, and a
mental deviation from the purity of holiness; the necessary requisite to an
union and divine participation in the love of God.

I think it is said with very great propriety, that The love of money is the
root of all evil; which while some have lusted after, they have erred from the
faith, and peirced themselves through with many sorrows 1 Timothy vi. 10.
-- But though it may seem to many not needful to tell of these things,
methinks it is applicable to some in these days who would be deemed "Men of
God;" and for whom I wish, as for myself, that when the heavens shall roll back
as a scroll, and eternity shall open upon us, when our views of these lower
objects shall vanish and disappear, when the Arch-angel's trump shall sound to
judgment, and a righteous retribution is made, we may be found men of God! --
"But, O Man of God," that have these things in view, think on the unutterable
prospect of infinite happiness, the reward of obedience, and flee these things.
Thee the glory and splendour of this transient world; continue to follow after
righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, meekness; fight the good fight
of faith, lay hold on eternal life, whereunto thou art called, and have
professed a good profession before many witnesses.

This is the language of the Love of God to this assembly, that we may be found
"Men of God," when all the glory of this world, with its splendour and
dependencies, shall come to a conclusion; that when every human aid shall
vanish, and no worldly assistance is near, the Love of God may cover our
spirits in all our trials; that when every human help is totally suspended, we
may continue to feel the effects of his mercy and goodness happily to spread in
our minds, to their edification and unspeakable joy. -- Herein we receive a
divine evidence of love, communicated from that boundless Source of unutterable
Grace wherewith he has visited us, in order to dwell in our hearts, or that He
may "dwell in us richly." -- And thus we are brought to discern the beauty of
holiness, the uniformity of love, to open the mind beyond the contracted view
of human powers, into the glorious fruition of divine essential Love, the Love
of God, that would thus dwell in our hearts and minds; and then we may witness
him to be with us all, always. Amen. He will be a light to our paths, and an
aid at hand, while we are traveling through the various difficulties and
probations in life. -- May the Shepherd of Israel, who sleeps not by day, nor
slumbers by night, attend you! and may we place our whole dependence upon him,
as our support and all-sufficient strength in every needful time!

And dearly-beloved youth! you that are entering upon the stage of active life,
be ever vigilantly concerned to improve the present moments, and that you may
build beyond the habitation of sorrow; that all the high places may be removed,
and your minds become replenished with true consolation. -- And as you are not
always to expect one uniform joyous scene, but clouds of darkness sometimes
interrupt the prospects of pleasure, in your pilgrimage through life, prepare
your minds, by zealously endeavoring after the Love of God; and wait to know
in yourselves, the unspeakable advantage of his heavenly aid and assistance,
offered to conduct you through the various scenes of mortality, to the
righteous and awful presence of the Judge of heaven and earth; which will
continue to sustain you, when no human consolation can afford relief; even when
your offenses appear as a flood, surrounded with temptation and distress, and
you are ready to cry out, who shall deliver me from the wrath of an offended
Creator! In this state of anxious solicitude, your heavenly Father is
mercifully pleased to arise, and administer relief to such, who are thus
"hungering and thirsting after righteousness;" and the cup of life and
salvation is handed to their comfort, from the glorious Helper, that in his
strength you may be enabled to stand unshaken in the troublous time! -- And it
is to these he waits to be gracious; a helper at hand, from whom proceeds every
power to assist, and every attribute of mercy, kindness, goodness, and adorable
condescension, are graciously dispensed to the sons of men, wherein they are
established in righteousness and true holiness.

"He touches the mountains, and they melt:" every obstruction that would hinder
the progress or advancement of this divine, essential, efficacious work of
redemption upon the soul, must be removed; every unavailing connection must give
place to the ties of an ardent and sanctified Love.

He touches the mountains, and they melt; the everlasting hills, they bow at
his presence. In his mercy we experience the removing of those things, that
oppose or prevent an increase in the knowledge of God, or of the things
appertaining to our everlasting peace; in order that the exercised pilgrim in
his progress may receive additional strength, to run with alacrity the race of
a christian life, and finally attain an happy union with the sons of the
morning, who sing together for joy.

It is the glorious benefits proceeding from the Love of God, which I earnestly
entreat that the youth, of all names and distinctions to religion, may
carefully seek, and avail yourselves of, that HE may be with you through the
various steps of a probationary life. And though you may sometimes have to
travel in the exercised path of temptation and anxious distress, continue in
hope, and you will feel his LIGHT to arise in your hearts, and witness an
inward resurrection unto LIFE; that Life that will never fade, but will remain,
when every tender and lawful connection can no longer comfort, but must soon be
dissolved, and the sympathy one for another shall be ineffectual to deliver.
All the tender connexions in life are but of uncertain duration, and upon them
all this inscription is wrote, "They shall shortly perish;" but the LOVE of GOD
never fades: -- It is continued from generation to generation, and will remain
when Time shall be swallowed up in Eternity: -- It is this wherein we taste of
the Goodness of God, and are made to drink the cup of life and salvation, and
have to rejoice in the unspeakable fruition of happiness it affords to the
sanctified in heart, who in future time, as well as the present, will have to
say, Spring up, O well, and we will sing unto thee; -- it will remain an
enduring portion to the Ransomed in Jacob, and to the Redeemed in Israel; and
will be an excellent comforter in the time of probation and exercise, through
the silent steps of anxiety and secret distress, known to none but GOD and thy
own Soul.

He knows ALL things, by whose merciful aid we are sustained through "the
Regions of the shadow of Death," when every unavailing relation or human
dependency shall disappear and come to an end. What then, can sustain us, but
the Love of God? -- It is that which covers the head in the day of battle; and
which I would recommend, with a fervent affection, to you who are the hopes of
the present age, that you ardently endeavor after the Love of God, that will
never decrease with age; it enlarges upon the mind, and is increased with an
increase of Love: It proceeds from the THRONE of God, and spreads from the
Threshold of his House: It is continued through the Courts of his Sanctuary,
and reaches to the Uttermost Part of the Earth; and is as a RIVER, the Streams
whereof make glad the whole Heritage of God.

All the beauty and splendour of the world will fade; and the excellency of
temporal enjoyments, which are the portion of uncertainty, shall shortly know
their time and place no more: But the love of God, flowing from Himself,
returns upon the sanctified soul as a River that never passes by, proceeding
from the inexhaustible SOURCE of Love: it spreads through the various states of
mankind, and is diffused throughout the spiritual creation of his Son,
unlimited as Eternity! A degree of which I feel upon my mind for this assembly,
with an ardency that cannot be expressed, "that He may be with you All, always.
Amen!" -- For the Love of God imparted to the sanctified Soul, and a portion of
the Holy Ghost, and Divine Approbation in Communion, has been such, as Eye
has not seen, nor ear heard, neither has it entered into the heart of man to
conceive the good things that God has in store for them that love him.

III. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Love of God, and the Communion of
the Holy Ghost.
This is the bond that binds, and wherein we are united to God, and know it to
be a well springing up unto Eternal Life. -- It is not in external Helps, nor
in the Agreement of Words, neither is it in the Consent of Doctrine, or in
fine-spun regular Systems, to constitute a "Communion of the Holy Ghost." But
it is as we are admitted to a sacred repast in the divine "Banqueting House,"
(wherein we offer the oblation of Worship, a Cloud of Incense, arising from
hearts prepared by the Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and in the Love of God,)
that we are advanced to a divine Communion of the Holy Ghost. A communion not
restrained to any Distinction or Profession of People, but extended to all such
as experience an union and Fellowship in Spirit, wherein they are sometimes
lifted up to the Father of spirits, and enabled to approach him "in Spirit and
in Truth;" which has often been sealed with the Love and Approbation of God, in
a divine manifestation of his kindness and goodness to men, who eat that which
is good, and delight themselves in fatness, being renewed in the spirit of
their minds, and enabled to lay hold on eternal life.

In this Communion, this unutterable, this inconceivable Communion, many have
found their Strength to be renewed, and their Hearts engaged in the solemn
Worship of God, the Author of their being: A communion inexpressible in its
nature! -- May those minds, who have attained this happy experience, continue
therein in all humility and purity!

It is a Communion in Spirit, wherein the sanctified soul approaches the Author
of spirits with a Sacrifice in spirit, when the sacrifice of Words shall fail.
-- For there is a Communion which Language cannot express! A Worship that wants
not the aid of Words, nor is to be defined by an Harmony of Sounds, in which we
approach the sacred Author of unutterable Love!

When there was Silence in Heaven for about the Space of Half an Hour; when the
Vocal Tribute of "Holy, Holy, Holy," and the Hallelujahs of sanctified Spirits
in endless felicity were suspended, their Worship continued in awful, holy,
solemn, inconceivable SILENCE! It was a Rapturous Adoration, too copious for
Language to express! A Cloud of Incense, before the Throne of immaculate Purity
and Love! -- May our minds be gathered to it, let our Name or profession to
Religion be what it may! and may we experience this Divine Communion of Saints,
and deeply ponder God's unbounded Love, in solemn Silence! For there is no
Power of Eloquence can sufficiently acknowledge the Obligation and Reverence we
owe HIS Infinite MAJESTY, who fills heaven and earth with his glory and
goodness! -- But let us look up unto him, and wait to be prepared for it; --
for they that wait upon the Lord shall renew their strength; -- wherein we may
experience a constant advancement from Grace to Grace, until we attain the
glorious end proposed by this lively animating salutation (which I wish for you
as for myself) The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Love of God, and the
Communion of the Holy Ghost, be with you all, always. Amen.

FINIS.
Repent and be converted: A SERMON PREACHED AT A MEETING of the PEOPLE called
QUAKERS, 1768. ALSO THE HEADS OF A SERMON, PREACHED At Horsleydown MEETING,
upon the close of a visit to Friends Families in that Quarter, the 19th of the
Eleventh Month, 1769.

PHILADELPHIA: Reprinted by JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, in Market-Street between Second
and Third-Streets, 1780.

A SERMON.
THERE is a passage in sacred Writ, which has been revived in my remembrance
during the silence of this Meeting, and the train of reflections which it
excited, has sealed instruction to my mind, and furnished me with renewed cause
of humiliation and gratitude; Acts ii. 37.
Men and Brethren, what shall we do to be saved?

Every person who seriously believes in the existence of a God, in a future
state, and in the awful doctrine of rewards and punishments, cannot be
indifferent respecting what may be his lot, when he shall be dispossessed of
this frail Tabernacle of clay which he now inhabits, and which is approaching
to the Period of its dissolution; it cannot be a matter of indifference to him,
whether he shall finally receive the irrevocable sentence of Mat. xxv. 41.
go ye cursed into the regions of irremediable misery;" or Ibid. xxv. 34.
come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for the righteous,
enter thou into the Joy of thy Lord, and into thy master's rest. This concern
has prompted many to enquire what is essentially necessary for them to believe
and practice in order to render them the proper objects of divine complacence,
and furnish them with a well grounded hope of a glorious and happy immortality.
Many of the honest and sincere of every Nation under Heaven, have formed
different ideas of the requisites to salvation, and of course have pursued as
different measures to accomplish that desirable end. It is not my present
business, to particularize any of those various systems of Faith, which are
adopted by any party amongst mankind; it is not to controvert matters, in which
sincere men of the various denominations most surely believe; but rather to
recommend them always to stand open to conviction, and a strict attention to
those rules of conduct, which appear to them most agreeable to the will of
Heaven. I shall therefore address myself to those, in whatever religious
society they are found, whose honest inquiries have not yet been attended with
sufficient conviction, or led them clearly to perceive what are the terms on
which their future happiness depends, and who are therefore looking one upon
another, whilst this important question is found, at least in their hearts if
not in their mouths Men and Brethren what shall we do to be saved?

I shall not presume arrogantly to dictate to any respecting matters of so
important a concern as that of the salvation of the Soul; every Man should
exercise those talents with which the Father of lights has endued him, in a
close and sincere attention to the voice of the internal Teacher, and in the
discovery of those truths both practical and speculative which have an
immediate relation to the happiness of a Being circumstanced as he is. I shall
simply propose those things which from my own experience as an individual
appear to me worthy of God for their Author, and worthy of Man's most serious
attention. It is an indisputable truth that we made not ourselves: We are thine
offspring, thou have made us and not we ourselves, says the prophet in his
appeal to God. The matter which forms the universe, the vehicles which the soul
informs, and the intellectual powers and faculties we possess, derived their
being from the eternal fountain of all power and intelligence, whom we
characterize by the awful names of Jah, Jehovah and God. It is also clear to me
that we were brought into existence with the benevolent design of finally
sustaining the confluent dignities of Glory, Honor, Immortality and eternal
Life; the Lord Almighty has in unspeakable mercy promised, that after we have
endured a season of probation on earth, a conflict with our passions excited by
numerous causes, and a fight of afflictions, we should finally receive a
glorious reward, a perpetuity of unmixed felicity in the unknown regions of
eternity. But this desirable and excellent end is not to be effected by what is
generally called fate, the laws of necessity, or the arbitrary will and power
of the Author of our existence. God has constituted us free and intelligent
beings, and endued us with faculties capable of apprehending and practicing
those duties which he makes the condition of our final acceptance with him: he
offers, but does not impose, happiness on his creatures; he shows us the
spiritual Canaan, he gives us power to possess it, but does not compel us to
enter into it; good and evil are clearly set before us, but our election is not
constrained to either; the sovereign of the universe is no respecter of
persons, for of one blood he made all nations that dwell on the face of the
earth; they stand in the same relation to the universal Father, Shepherd and
Bishop of Souls, who tenderly invites the whole race of Mankind to inherit the
Joy of his Salvation. To this doctrine the holy Apostle bore an ample and
explicit testimony: Acts x. 34, 35.
Of a truth, said he, I perceive that God is no respecter of persons, but in
every nation those who fear him and work righteousness shall be accepted of
him." -- Romans viii. 13.
"If ye live after the flesh ye shall die, but if through the spirit ye morify
the deeds of the body, ye shall live. This is a proposition that relates to
every individual in the vast community of Mankind, however circumstanced,
whether bond or free, or in whatever climate he resides.

All this indeed may be acknowledged both by those within and without the
audience of my voice, who are yet in doubt what they shall do to be saved with
an everlasting salvation; they want to be informed of the precise ideas that
should be affixed to the conditions contained in the text, though perhaps they
readily apprehend the terms life and death imply future happiness and misery. I
shall therefore attempt according to the ability I am endued with, to give you
my thoughts on the important subject in question at this time. To "live after
the flesh" is to live in the gratification of our animal appetites and
passions, beyond the bounds of reason, temperance and sobriety, which as it
frequently introduces numerous disorders into the animal system, and aggravates
the infirmities to which these corruptible bodies are incident, so it affects
the good of society, and renders unfit for those contemplations and that
felicity which is adapted to the dignity of rational and immortal spirits,
beings whom God in his wisdom Heb. ii. 7.
has made a little (and perhaps but a little) lower than the Angels, and who
would crown them with a superior glory, honor and happiness than that which
animal gratifications can confer on their deluded votaries. Whilst we are in
the body we must expect to find those appetites, affections and passions which
belong to our nature; but these are to be restricted within the bounds of
virtue, and attended to in proportion to our exigencies and necessities, of
which the divine principle which God has graciously implanted in our hearts
ought to determine.

This principle of intelligence although called by a variety of names in the
different professions amongst Men, is the same in nature throughout all
Mankind. It is the spirit in Man that gives a right understanding; it is the
light that more or less enlightens every Man; it is the word of God in the
heart; the word of faith which the Apostle preached to the Gentiles; it is the
Grace that has appeared to all Men, teaching them to deny ungodliness and the
world's lusts, and to live soberly, righteously and godly in this present
world; and finally it is the supreme reason, the law of truth and rectitude,
the test of virtue and vice, which God himself has erected in the hearts of
all Men; and happy are those who hear and obey it in all things.

I would not be understood to mean that this principle of which I am speaking
is designed to instruct us in all truths which the human mind may attempt to
investigate, or to give a clear insight into those numerous speculative
subjects, which have, not only unprofitably employed mankind and diverted their
attention from more substantial objects, but which have perplexed and divided
them from generation to generation; but by the exercise of it we may apprehend
those truths that belong to us, and have an essential relation to the important
end of our existence; of which truths the Father of spirits has enabled us to
judge; this is employed by the question which our Lord himself proposed to a
people misled by the traditions of their fathers, and who had taken for
doctrine the commandments of men, Luke xii. 57.
yea and why judge ye not for yourselves, what is right?

Various are our obligations and duties, religious, relative and social,
arising from our various connexions, natural and divine: The relation we stand
in to the Author of our being is that of Children; filial fear, obedience and
worship is therefore our indispensible duty to him, in our conduct at all
times, throughout our whole lives. The relation which our fellow creatures
stand in to us, is that of brethren, children of the same universal Father, and
formed for the same glorious and happy end; justice, charity and brotherly
kindness are therefore our indispensible obligations unto mankind. There are
also various accidental relations, such as father, governor, master, servant
and numerous others, all which have their correspondent duties. Thus far
perhaps the persons whom I immediately address at this time may concur with me
in sentiment, but they as well as I, are perhaps conscious of having failed in
numerous instances of discharging their religious duties to God and their
social duties to mankind. We have all sinned and fallen short of the glory of
God! we have multiplied our transgressions without number! and our iniquities
rise before us as a thick cloud! which obscures the brightness of that eternal
Sun of righteousness, which would otherwise illuminate our understandings with
its mavelous light. Who, therefore, (says the illuminated penitent soul)
shall deliver us from the body of this death? who shall take from us the weight
of our sins under which we groan incessantly? who shall save us from the wrath
to come? "Men and Brethren what shall we do to be saved?" The condition of our
reconciliation and redemption are very clearly expressed in the sacred oracles
of truth; the placability of the divine nature is repeatedly asserted; he is
represented to us in the adorable character of a God of mercy, long suffering
and of unspeakable kindness; as a Being ready to blot out our transgressions
from the celestial register, on our sincere repentance, and to remember them no
more.

This important and interesting doctrine was typified under the Law, spoken of
by the Prophets, and gloriously asserted by the Son of God, who is our Mediator
with the Father, and the hope of our future Glory. In his character was
displayed to Mankind, in the most eminent and striking manner, the provident
care, mercy and goodness of God toward the whole rational creation; who like
sheep have gone astray from the universal shepherd and bishop of Souls, who
have widely wandered from the paths of purity and holiness, which are ways of
pleasantness and peace; that path of the just Man, which (like the luminous orb
as it arises in our hemisphere) shines with increasing refulgency, splendour and
brightness, till it arrives at the meridian altitude of a gloriously perfect
day! This path leads all who steadily pursue its direction, by degrees of
experience, through the wilderness of this world to the grand and ultimate end
of our Creation, to that complete fruition of bliss that is figuratively
represented to us by Heb. xi. 10.
a City that has foundations, whose builder and maker God is;" a City " Isaiah
lx. 18.
whose Walls are salvation, and whose Gates are eternal praise; a City that
has no need of the elementary light of Sun, Moon and Stars, " Rev. xxi. 23.
for the Lord God and the Lamb are the light thereof" a City where God reigns
triumphantly amongst his saints, and is to them an inexhaustible fountain of
light and felicity; there the weary pilgrim finds an end of all his anxiety and
labor, and receives the reward of his faith, the fruition of his hopes, even
the salvation of his Soul.

The important message which Christ had in commission from his Father and our
Father, from his God and our God, was, that he compassionated his Creatures,
encompassed with the distresses which their sins had brought upon them, that he
willed not their everlasting separation from him the source of happiness, that
he was willing they should be reconciled to him; he therefore called upon them
to Repent and be converted that their sins might be forgiven them, and that
they might finally enter into his rest. This was the interesting doctrine which
the Savior of Man promulgated, and happy are those who hear and obey it.
Repent and be converted that your sins may be forgiven you. It is not the
assent of the lip and of the tongue to the glorious truths of the Gospel; but a
surrender of the will and affections, a renovation of heart, and conformity to
the divine Image, which can alone gain us admission into the New Jerusalem, the
City of God.

If we take an impartial survey of our past lives, review our frequent
revoltings, and compare our conduct with the convictions we have often received
of right and wrong, virtue and vice, there is scarcely a Soul present but must
feel some degree of remorse, some degree of repentance for the turpitude of his
morals, and his want of love, obedience and gratitude to so gracious a Father,
who has encompassed us with blessings, and preserved us by his providence from
the earliest period of our lives to the present hour; we must (I say again)
upon serious retrospection, possess some degree of repentance; but unhappily
for us the impressions that are made on our minds by such a review of our
actions, are frequently erased by the influence which a variety of creaturely
objects are suffered to have upon us, and like the early dew they soon pass
away. Those who have been cleansed in some degree by the water of contrition,
are often defiled again by the repetition of that iniquity which in the moments
of their humiliation they had determined to renounce and forsake, they are
again caught in the snare of their lusts, and captivated by those objects which
have a tendency to alienate their affections from the supreme good. Thus when
the force of conviction again sounds the awakening alarm, they are ready to
query with surprise and anxiety what is to be done in this afflictive dilemma
to which our inconstancy to our virtuous resolutions has reduced us? shall we
despair of that divine mercy we have so often abused, of that goodness we have
so long trifled with? God forbid! rather prostrate your Souls at the Throne of
Grace, and humbly implore the continued mercy of the universal parent, as a
Father pitieth his Children, so he pitieth them that fear him; he knows our
frame, he remembereth that we are but dust; beseech him therefore to send forth
help from his holy sanctuary, that you may be strengthened to renew and keep
your Covenants with him; refrain from the Commission of evil, and wait on him
in the silence of all flesh; since it has pleased him again to enlighten your
darkness, and thus to give you to see yourselves as you are seen of him; he may
also be pleased to inflame your hearts with that celestial fire which purges
away all the intellectual filth and dross, that prevents the ascent of the Soul
godward, and renders it an unfit habitation for his holiness to dwell in. As
our backslidings have frequently corrected us and covered our minds with
anxiety, let our future conduct directed by his Grace, atone for what is
passed, and by a conversation ordered aright, let us glorify our Father who is
in Heaven.

I feel at this season the influence (in degree) of that celestial Charity
which breathes through Immanuel to the whole creation of God, wishing salvation
to every Soul that inhabits the earth; in which I entreat you (as a being
subject to the same infirmities which you sometimes unavailably deplore)
"repent and be converted;" repentance you have frequently experienced, but too
little I fear of that essential conversion which the Gospel of Jesus proposes,
it is highly probable that some persons present have seen the necessity of that
renovation of heart and reformation of manners intended by conversion, but
urged by the powerful prevalency of their lusts, would if possible find some
other remedy for a wounded conscience, than that which the simplicity of the
Gospel requires, as a necessary prelude to the favor of God; like the young
Man in the Gospel, they have been animated with a desire to be enrolled amongst
the disciples of Jesus, who are called Heirs of God and Coheirs with Christ of
that inheritance which is incorruptible and full of Glory; they have asked
counsel of the wonderful counselor, addressing him with this important
question, Mark x. 17.
what good thing shall I do, that I may inherit eternal life? yet when the
unchangeable terms of salvation have been proposed, when they have been told
that they must part with all their Idols, they have gone away sorrowful, the
terms have appeared too hard for them to comply with; and like Naaman who
wanted to be cured of his Leprosy, yet was staggered at the simplicity of the
Prophet's direction, are crying out 2 Kings v. 12.
are not Abana and Pharpar rivers of Damascus better than all the waters of
Israel, may I not wash in them and be clean? thus numbers amongst Mankind are
striving to elude the measures which the Gospel of Jesus enjoins, and are
substituting others in their stead, which are better adapted to sooth the
carnal mind, and prevent that mortification which human nature shrinks from.

Man is desirous to possess the crown of eternal life, but not to bear the
Cross; he would indeed reign with Christ, but not suffer with him; he would
accompany him to the mount of transfiguration, but not to Golgotha; he would be
his attendant at his Glorification, but not in the awful scene of his
Humiliation.

Diverse have wandered as from mountain to mountain and from hill to hill,
seeking for the living in the Sepulchers of the Dead, they have sometimes
adopted one creed, and sometimes another, practiced external ordinances, and
complied with empty forms, addressing themselves frequently to guides as blind
and impotent as themselves with this awful inquiry Men and Brethren what shall
we do to be saved?" "I say again, repent and be converted, for this is the only
way to find salvation to your Souls; no external ceremonies, no verbal
confessions, nor any change of opinions merely, can accomplish this repentance
and conversion, and afford you the consequent reward of a glorious immortality,
this important work of salvation must be effected in man, by the powerful
operation of the Holy Ghost, which is a consuming fire to the adverse part in
Man, to the corrupt and perverse will, which would not that Christ should reign
in his Kingdom, and that God should be all in all. It is the Baptism of fire
(of which John's was but a type) which discriminating the pure from the impure,
gathers the Wheat into the Garner but consumes the chaff with unquenchable
burnings.

In the world there are many voices which correspond not with the voice of
Christ, the only Shepherd of Souls (whom we ought to hear and obey in all
things) but are the voices of those who preach for hire and divine for Money;
who look for their gain from their respective quarters; and as to such
conscientious Men who cannot put into their mouths, they are ready to make war
against them; these have found it for their worldly interest to lead the
deluded people from, rather than to Christ, that glorious High Priest of the
Christian Religion; they have attempted to render that mysterious which the
Holy Ghost has left clear, and to perplex the understandings of mankind with
vain metaphysical speculations, without making them either wiser or better.
This class of Men whose God is their belly, and whose Glory is their shame,
have indeed proved physicians of no real value; instead of laying the Axe to
the root of the corrupt Tree, they have only attempted to lop off some of its
branches; they have prescribed emollients, where the most searching operations
were expedient; and healing the wound of the daughter of Zion deceitfully have
lulled, multitudes into a fatal security, flattering them with hopes which it
is to be feared will finally end in disappointment. There are others who assume
the Office of Ministers, (the purity of whose intentions my Charity will not
permit me to doubt,) who like a Man that attempts to answer a question before
he has fully heard it, have too precipitately embarked in the important work of
instructing Souls relative to the affairs of salvation; these are like Ephraim
Hosea vii. 8.
a Cake not turned, are not yet instructed in the way of God perfectly, and
whilst they are teaching others, had need themselves to be taught what are the
first principles of the Oracles of God; they have run on the Lord's errand
unsent, and therefore have not essentially profited the people; they have taken
upon them to guide those who are inquiring what they shall do to be saved, and
have led them indeed from the confines of Egypt, but leave them (undirected to
the spiritual Moses) to wander in uncertainty and to compass a mountain of
doubts in the wilderness. May the Lord Almighty in his mercy gather these who
are wandering as sheep without a Shepherd, and lead them into the sacred
enclosure of his fold, into eternal safety.

Let it not be thought from any thing I have said, that I look upon all those
who appear girded with the linen Ephod, of other Christian societies, either as
Impostors, or the deluded votaries of Antichrist; I freely declare, that I
doubt not but many of them have had a dispensation of the Gospel committed to
them, and although they may be biased by the prejudice of education and the
traditions of their Fathers, yet the root of the matter seems to be in them;
and I esteem these (in whatever society they are found or in whatever vestments
they are clothed) as my Brethren in the fellowship of the everlasting Gospel
of Christ; yet I cannot direct the searcher after truth who is pensively
enquiring what he shall do to be saved, to the Ministry of any Man, but would
rather recommend him to the immediate teaching of the word nigh in the heart,
even the spirit of God; this is the only infallible teacher, the primary
adequate rule of faith and practice, and will lead those who attend to its
dictates into the peaceable paths of safety and of truth. ^ John ii. 27.
Ye need not (says the holy Apostle to the Church formerly) that any Man teach
you, save as this anointing teaches, which is truth and no lie; cease
therefore from Man whose breath is in his nostrils, and whose existence is but
a vapor, for wherein is he to be accounted of? as a fallible being he is
liable to frequent deceptions, and therefore liable to deceive; whereas the
spirit of God cannot be deceived, neither will it deceive any Soul that yields
itself to its Government and obeys its dictates.

O ye penitent Prodigals! my Soul earnestly longs for your restoration to the
mercy and favor of God! ye who are reduced by your wanderings in the
wilderness of this world to a state of extreme poverty, to the want of that
bread that comes, down from the celestial Regions above, which alone can
nourish the Soul up unto eternal Life! ye who are attempting to satisfy the
cravings of an immortal spirit with the spiritless husks and shells of an empty
profession of Religion! look toward your Father from whom you have revolted;
remember that in his House there is bread enough and to spare; there your Souls
may be replenished with ever enduring substance: Return, O House of Israel! and
seek the face of your everlasting friend and Father! he has in unspeakable
kindness declared that he will be found of those who seek him in sincerity of
heart, and that as many as knock at the Gate of mercy for an entrance, shall be
admitted to his presence, and receive the remission of their Sins.

The humble address which the Prodigal made to his Father (in that excellent
parable given us by Christ) the Father's return to it, and the manner of his
reception into favor, is exceedingly expressive of the becoming penitence of
the one and the mercy of the other Luke xv. 21.
I have sinned against Heaven and in thy sight, and am no more worthy to be
called thy Son, make me therefore as one of thy hired Servants. The injured
parent compassionates his distress, takes the Prodigal in his arms, owns him
for his Son; orders the fatted Calf to be killed, and rebukes the envy of his
elder Brother with, this my Son was dead but is alive again, was lost but is
found! O the height and depth of the goodness and mercy of God! look unto him
all ye ends of the earth and be ye saved.

Before I conclude, I find it in my Heart to address another class in this
Meeting, a class who have earnestly sought and happily sound him of whom Moses
and the Prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth the Immanuel, which being
interpreted is, God with us; you who once were scattered as sheep without a
shepherd, on the barren mountains and desolate hills of an empty profession,
but the Great Shepherd of Souls has gathered you within the sacred Enclosure
of his Sheepfold, and you are under the peculiar protection of the Lord
Almighty, you has he plucked as brands out of the burning, and redeemed to
himself with the saving strength of his right Arm; may you ever remember his
unutterable mercy, and dedicate the remaining moments of life to the honor of
his Name. My Soul salutes you in the endeared affection of the Gospel of peace,
and wishes your establishment in Righteousness, that you may abide in holy
patience the fiery trial of your faith throughout the days of your Pilgrimage
on earth, and become as fixed pillars in the celestial building, the house of
God, that shall go no more out.

If ye abide in the word of faith by which ye have been taught, the malice of
Men nor Devils, nor all the united powers of darkness, shall be able to pluck
you out of the hand of him, who is your Judge, your King, your Protector, your
Father and your everlasting Friend. When the earth shall be wrapped together as
a scroll, and the Sun and Moon be darkened, when every Constellation of the
Heavens sinks into everlasting obscurity, and the Elements of this world shall
melt with fervent heat, you will possess an habitation within the superior
regions of a new Heaven and a new Earth, where the Lord your Righteousness
dwells.

Many of the pretended wise, learned and prudent who have sought to climb up
some other way, rather than to enter by Christ, who is the door (by the
conditions which he has proposed) into the sheepfold, may pity you as fools, or
ridicule you as enthusiasts, count your lives madness, and your end to be
without honor, but they will one day be astonished at the strangeness of your
Salvation, when they see to their confusion that you are finally numbered
amongst the Children of God, and that the lot of your Inheritance is amongst
the Saints. In the World you are to expect tribulations of various kinds; pain,
sickness, temptations and disappointments invade the breast of the most
righteous and temperate amongst Men; the cup of mixture (more or less
impregnated with the wormwood and the gall) is the lot of all Men, designed
doubtless to effect a valuable purpose, by him who afflicts not willingly, nor
without a righteous and benevolent cause, the Children of Men; as the Heavens
are higher than the Earth so are the ways of Almighty Wisdom higher than our
ways, and his thoughts than our thoughts! We see a little, and but a very
little of the amazing universal plan of his Government over rational and
immortal spirits. It lies beyond the reach of the most exalted human faculties
to comprehend his wisdom, throughout the righteous administration of his
Providence, which is unsearchable! It is our duty as frail dependent beings to
meet every dispensation of his Providence with that resignation of spirit,
which incessantly breathes the humble language of "not my will O Lord! but
thine, be done in all things!" Under the evils which we feel and which our
prudence could not prevent, let us rather implore divine aid to endure them
with patience, than to pray that they may be removed from us; lest like
ignorant Children we should seek to avoid that portion from our Heavenly
Father's Hand, which he graciously designed to remove or prevent a greater
evil. This is not the place of your rest, but a state of probation, a painful
pilgrimage, a Land of pits and snares, through which lies a narrow Path to the
regions of eternal Peace.

The Soul by reason of its connection with the body, enclosed within the walls
of flesh, cannot extend its views and employ its faculties on divine objects,
without frequent interruption; but when the days of its captivity are
accomplished, it will be capable of a more glorious expansion in the Kingdom of
Immortality, and (if bearing the inscription of Holiness) will be put in
possession or that Joy which is unspeakable and full of Glory. Therefore in all
those calamities to which we are subject in the house of our Pilgrimage, we
have a place of refuge to flee to, where safety is alone to be found; though
indeed we must feel in degree as Men, yet we may possess the patience,
resignation and holy fortitude of Christians, who are looking for a better
Country, a more excellent Inheritance in that City whose Inhabitant cannot say
"I am Sick."

Be ye therefore steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
forasmuch as ye know that your labor shall not be in vain. Be ye in your
several stations in the Church, and in the world, as way-marks to the honest
inquirers who are asking their way to Zion, and from a true sense of their
condition are crying out "what shall we do to be saved?" show forth by your
example of Charity, Sobriety, Temperance and Holiness of Life, that you are
redeemed from the spirit of the world, that lies in wickedness; be not
captivated by its trifling amusements, nor ensnared by its lying vanities, but
retain the fear of the Lord which will keep the heart clean, and prove a source
of surest consolation when all things else will be unavailing! let the purity
of your lives demonstrate that you are attentive to things more excellent,
things that are permanent and eternal, essentially relating to the salvation of
the Soul! by this means you will become the consecrated Temples of the Holy
Ghost, and be a means of leading others in the way of Righteousness!

Finally, my Brethren, farewell! I commend you to God, the Shepherd of Israel,
and to the word of his Grace; this is alone able to build us up in the most
holy faith, to direct our feet in the way of Righteousness and Peace; and
finally to put us in possession of a glorious Inheritance amongst the saints,
that will never fade away.

THE HEADS OF A SERMON
PREACHED at HORSLEYDOWN MEETING, upon the close of a visit to Friends Families
in that Quarter, the 19th of the Eleventh MONTH, 1769.
A SOLEMN summons which the Almighty gave through his Prophet Joel, to a People
whom he had known above all the families of the Earth, (at a time when they had
revolted and departed in Heart from him) has been revived in my mind; with an
apprehension that the same authority requires the republication of it in this
day, to a People likewise highly favored of him; and who have in like manner
departed from their first love.

Joel ii. 15, 16, 17, 18.
Blow the Trumpet in Zion -- sanctify a fast -- call a solemn assembly --
gather the People -- sanctify the Congregation -- assemble the Elders -- gather
the Children and those that suck the breast -- let the Bridegroom go forth of
his chamber, and the Bride out of her closet -- let the Priests, the Ministers
of the Lord, weep between the Porch and the Altar; let them say, spare thy
People O Lord! and give not thy heritage to reproach, that the Heathen should
rule over them! wherefore should they say amongst the People, where is their
God? then will the Lord be jealous over his Land and pity his People.

As I am about to conclude (perhaps finally conclude) my labors amongst you in
this Quarter; I would query with some, with many that are present, whether they
have not heard intelligibly the sound of the Trumpet, calling them with a
degree of certainty, to arise and prepare themselves for the Battle. My
Brethren and Sisters, amongst whom I have been constrained in the overflowings
of the Fathers Love, to labor in a private capacity, breaking (I hope I may
say) a little bread from house to house -- the everlasting Gospel has been
preached amongst you with all the force of pathetic energy, with all the
tenderness of divine compassion; let it not be ineffectual! The Gospel message
has been delivered with such indubitable clearness, that your judgments have
been convinced, you have assented to " Ephesians iv. 21.
the Truth as it is in Jesus;" suffer not the impressions it has made on your
minds to be speedily erased. Far, very far, be it from me to think highly of
myself, to exalt the Officer, the Minister. I would not that you should hold
any Man's person in high estimation. I am deeply sensible that to me belongs
blushing and confusion of face, but I magnify mine office, and the power of him
who has seen meet to employ me therein; I would endeavor to exalt in your view
the adorable goodness and condescension of the great Author of all mercies, in
that he has caused the Trumpet to be renewedly sounded in your borders; hear
its important message with suitable attention; let it rouse and prepare all the
ranks in the Armies of our Israel, to engage in the glorious Cause of our God.
Let the Daughter of our Zion arise from the bed of Indolence; from the
lethargic stupor of a fatal forgetfulness; from all the deadning benumbing
gratifications of sensuality, and shake herself from the dust of the earth,
that she may come up to the help of him who has called her with an high and
holy calling. The Trumpet is blown in her streets, the alarm has been heard by
all, Oh! let not its language be rendered unintelligible by the multiplicity of
trivial things that too much absorb the minds of many.

I am fully persuaded that the gracious Visitation of humbling melting
goodness, has been afresh extended to individuals present, in (I had almost
said) a very memorable manner; nor will I recall the expression, for if it is
not treasured up in your remembrance now, for your profit and advantage, it
will be memorable in that awful approaching period, when every neglected mercy
will appear deeply engraven, as a dread Daniel v. 5.
Handwriting on the wall, against us. Let me therefore tenderly entreat you,
with all the warmth of unutterable affection, as a Brother, as a fellow
Pilgrim, through the vicissitudes of time to the unmixed joys of a happy
eternity, that you will no longer neglect the offers of Mercy, or turn a deaf
ear to the reproofs of Instruction. I feel my mind covered with that boundless
Love, that wishes, that ardently desires, you may indeed be wise for
yourselves: For although I may be deficient in many qualifications of a Gospel
Minister, I am not wanting in that pure disinterested Love, which seeks not
your but you. Blow the trumpet in Zion; sanctify a Fast. If we were but enough
attentive to the sound of the Trumpet, we should see the absolute necessity of
this sanctified fast; a fast from every of those delusive pleasures, those
slavish attachments, that render the mind insensible of Good. Call a solemn
Assembly. This branch of the summons (may some say) belongs only to a few, and
we have no share in the duty it enjoins. I confess I am of another opinion; I
think every Individual has a share in the Instruction couched in it. "Call a
solemn Assembly." Oh! you active ones, stop a while in your swift career; make
a solemn pause; stand collected from every object that can gratify or delight
the sensual part; labor diligently to assemble all the powers and faculties of
your Souls, that they may be sanctified by him who gave them. I believe there
is no useless, dead, unactive member in the Church of God; and those that can
thus assemble the collected attention of a redeemed mind, devoted to do the
divine will, have an undoubted right from the highest Authority to call an holy
convocation. 2 Cor. xii. 8.
We can do nothing against the Truth, but for the Truth, was the language of
some formerly, who had indeed sanctified an acceptable Fast. I much desire that
those who perhaps cannot be so active in promoting this glorious Cause amongst
the Sons of Men, as some who are called into more eminent stations in the
Church, may by a circumspect care over all their words and actions, see that
they do nothing against the Truth. "Call a solemn assembly; gather the People."
How scattered are many of the members of this Quarter! scattered indeed as
sheep without a shepherd! dispersed up and down in the dark vale of
insensibility and selfforgetfulness! many upon the barren Mountains of an empty
profession; lost to all sense of religious fellowship; unacquainted with that
holy union in which is the bond of Peace! How many are the Gallios I have met
with amongst you, who (alas! it may be said) care for none of these things! Oh
you Elders! who are or might have been as Pillars in the Lord's House; you
delegated Shepherds, who might have adorned the first ranks in the armies of
our Israel, if you had not sat down and taken up a rest short of those glorious
abodes, which are prepared for them that steadily persevere in the line of
divine appointment -- to you the call is, "Gather the People."

Genesis iv. ^.
Am I my Brothers keeper!" let it suffice for me that I look to myself, and
that my own Family is in tolerable order, is a language that too much prevails.
But Oh! that you had the Cause of God more at heart; that you were more engaged
to gather the People; that you might, with a Fatherly care, overlook those
whose minds at present resemble the barren desert, the uncultivated wilderness;
that you might comfort and encourage them that tread the gloomy scenes of an
adverse allotment, as it were cut off from every Joy, and alive to each painful
sensibility; how would it comfort many of these, if an experienced friend was
now and then to drop into their families, and at times speak a word, in the
opening of divine wisdom, suitable to their several states: I believe it would
be a great means of gathering the People. Why should your care be circumscribed
within the narrow limits of your own Families (although they should certainly be
well regulated) but you might be more extensively serviceable, if thus engaged
in the care of the Household of God. I am persuaded that the divine wing would
be over you, and a Blessing would attend your labors. It Is not a time for us
to dwell unconcerned in our ceiled Houses, when the House of God lies waste. We
have, many of us, the same tender connexions as you; I myself have the same
endearing attachments as some of you, the same ties of domestic Love, and
perhaps as deeply sensible of all their force, as some of you; not less
attentive to every relative and social duty, than some of you; my Nature is not
harsh, my Principles much less so; yet I am made willing to leave all, to come
and labor with you; if so be I might be instrumental to rouse any to a more
arduous pursuit of their everlasting Interest; and I can freely acknowledge,
with humble thankfulness, that I never more fully experienced my Peace to flow
as a River; never could with greater Joy say Psalm. cxvi. 7.
return Oh! my Soul to the place of thy rest, for the Lord thy God has dealt
bountifully with thee, than when I have been thus engaged in extensive private
labors; visiting the sick; reviving the sorrowful; encouraging the
disconsolate; strengthening the weak; watching over and carefully admonishing
the giddy incautious Youth; and I doubt not but you would have the reward of
Peace in your own bosoms, if as heads of the society you were more often thus
employed in endeavoring to gather the People.

"Sanctify the Congregation; assemble the Elders." I have been deeply concerned
to see some of the Elders so deficient in filling the line of divine
appointment. If they were more frequently engaged to assemble under the holy
influence of that power in which they should move, they would many of them be
commanded to "blow the Trumpet in Zion; but I know of no state harder to speak
to or more difficult to reach, than that of an Elder whose mind is overgrown by
the earthly nature; Jer. xxii. 29.
Oh! Earth, Earth, Earth! hear the word of the Lord. I don't recollect any
other instance in sacred writ, where attention is demanded in a similar manner;
"Oh! Earth, Earth, Earth!" thus thrice repeated, plainly signifying the great
difficulty there is in reaching to those, who are as it were buried in the
earth, whose minds are fixed in it.

"Gather the Children." You that have the rising Youth under your care, let me
call upon you, let me entreat you to "gather the Children;" gather them from
all the bewitching enticing allurements of the world, gather their attention to
that of God in their own minds. Oh! how have I secretly mourned to see the poor
Children so sorrowfully neglected; so uninstructed; so much estranged to that
holy divine principle, which would so exceedingly beautify and enrich them! but
alas! how few Parents are rightly qualified to teach their Children the law of
divine love; to instill into their tender minds proper sentiments, to cultivate
upon them those impressions that would be of everlasting advantage; and if the
Children, when the gracious visitation of the Father of mercies moves upon
their hearts, warming and animating them with the Love of Virtue, raising the
secret sigh, and begetting desires after Heaven and Holiness: I say if the
Children should then ask the negligent parent; what is this secret something
which I feel; this principle which impresses my mind with the love of Virtue?
what is it? what value shall I set upon it? How then can you give them suitable
instruction? you cannot teach them obedience to its sacred dictates, when your
own example speaks a language quite opposite: Oh! why should the Sea Monster be
brought against you Lament. iv. 3. Job xxxix. 14, 15.
the Sea Monster draws forth the breast to her Young, but the Daughter of my
People is become cruel, like the Ostrich in the Wilderness that leaves her
Eggs in the Sand to be hatched by the beams of the Sun, and considers not
that the Foot of the Passenger may crush them! -- the Daughter of my People
has lest her tender Offspring to the uncertainty of being accidentally
benefited, or I should rather say, to the Mercy of God, unasked, unsought,
exposed to all the dangers of a dreary Wilderness, unaided unassisted by the
Care of a natural Parent! The Tongue of the sucking Child cleaves to the roof
of its Mouth for thirst! the Children ask Bread and there is none in many
Families to break it, they want to be nourished by the sincere Milk of the
word, but alas! the Daughter of my People is become cruel! Oh! you Parents, you
delegated Shepherds, what account will you have to render when the Lord of the
whole Earth arises to make inquisition for Blood!

Bear with me my beloved Friends; flattery and smooth tales may please Fools,
but they will not please him whom I desire to serve in the Gospel of his Son.
All that is within me is moved, while I thus earnestly expostulate with you on
behalf of the dear Children; suffer me to entreat you, for God's sake, for your
own Soul's sake, for the sake of the Cause of Truth, "Gather the Children, and
those that suck the breast;" those that are filling themselves with the World's
consolation, with the intoxicating pleasures and amusements of a degenerate
age; wean them from these delights; gather them to the knowledge of themselves,
to a sense of the Mercies that are offered them by the great Author of Mercies
ancient and new. 1 Kings xx. 40.
While thy Servant was busied hither and thither the Man made his escape, was
the vain excuse of the Officer to whose custody a certain Captive was committed
with this charge, Ibid xx. 39.
take care of this Man till I come, and if thou let him go, thy life shall go
for his life. No plea of other engagements, nor even the want of ability to
discharge our duty toward our Offspring will stand us in any stead; if, when
the Almighty queries with us What have thou done with those Lambs I left under
thy care in the wilderness, those tender Offsprings I gave thee in charge! we
have through neglect, through unwatchfulness suffered him or her to go, but we
shall most certainly, stand accountable for his or her Life. I said want of
ability, because I assuredly believe, that want of ability will be so far from
a palliation of our Crime, that it will rather increase our condemnation; can
we plead want of ability to him who is always ready to furnish us with it, if
we are but willing to receive it at his Hand!.

I am of opinion respecting many of our Youth, that if they had been properly
instructed, and carefully watched over, if they could have seen the beauty of
Holiness shine in the example of their Parents, they would not have gone out so
widely as they have. Oh! you Parents of both sexes, an important trust is
reposed in you; example your Children in the practice of Piety; example speaks
louder, much louder, than precept; its influence is far more extensive. And
while on the one hand you are excited to a faithful discharge of your duty
toward them, by the certain hope of a glorious reward; so on the other hand,
the powerful ties of natural affection, the warm solicitude for the happiness
of those you love, must stir up to diligence in the work and service appointed
you.

"Gather the Children." If after your attentive care has been employed, for
their preservation; if after by the forceable voice of example, you have called
them to the perfecting of holiness in the fear of God, they will go, they will
turn aside into the byways and crooked paths of sin and iniquity, they must
stand by their own choice; you have redeemed your Souls, and will be found in
your lots at the end of time, a ponderous Crown awaits you, you will close your
eyes, and open them to the boundless fruition of unmixt Joy, in a happy
eternity.

We do sometimes with sorrow observe, the unwearied labors of a Parent's love,
bestowed without the desired effect; it is mournful to see Children pierce with
bitterness and anxiety the breast that has been their support in their
infantile years; to fill that eye with sorrow, that has dropped over them the
tear of maternal fondness! it is a cruel thing for a Child to mingle Gall and
Wormwood, in the cup of a Parent descending to the Grave; let us be assured
that their own portion of Gall and Wormwood will be doubly increased thereby,
in the solemn hour of just Retribution! But, Oh beloved Youth! I earnestly
desire that you may never thus widely deviate from the paths of rectitude; it is
on you the hope of the present age must shortly devolve; may you wisely choose
an early submission to the holy discipline of the Cross of Christ, that you may
come up as an Army for God. Consider the uncertainty of your stay here;
consider the important business of Life; and let the love of every unprofitable
delight, be swallowed up in the arduous pursuit of Glory, Honor, Immortality
and Eternal Life. We are daily instructed by the powerful eloquent language of
Mortality; Death invades all ranks, snatches those of all ages from the busy
stage of life, she that was yesterday surrounded with nuptial Joys, must
tomorrow be confined within the cold enclosure of the silent Grave. Let the
Bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the Bride out of her Closet; let the
young, the joyous; those that are in the bloom of life, leave every thing that
tends to retard their progress toward the City of the Saints solemnity; let
them relinquish their most exalted satisfactions, rather than neglect to lay
hold on the Joys of God's Salvation; which are unutterably more desirable, than
all the sin-pleasing gratifications that this World can bestow.

Let the Priests, the Ministers of the Lord weep between the Porch and the
Altar; this should not be confined to those only whose mouths may be opened
publicly amongst you, for it belongs to all those who Preach to others by the
regularity of a Godly life and conversation; although we are favored with a
living ministry of divine appointment, who dare not fill the ears of Men with a
repetition of unfelt Truths, nor amuse them with the unprofitable productions
of an empty mind, but are concerned to discharge themselves faithfully 1 Cor.
iv. ^.
as stewards of the mysteries of God yet let them be joined by all those that
mourn for the desolation of Zion; by all that wish Peace within her Walls and
prosperity within her Palaces, Let us weep between the Porch and the Altar,
saying Spare thy People O Lord! and give not thy Heritage to reproach, that the
Heathen should rule over them! wherefore should they say among the People,
where is their God? If we are thus unitedly engaged on behalf of our Israel it
may be that the Lord will again "be jealous over his land" with an holy
jealousy, for I cannot think that a People whom he has raised by his own
invincible power, and so signally placed his name amongst, were ever designed
to be only the transient Glory of a couple of centuries; I am still revived by
a secret Hope of better times, when our Zion shall again put on her beautiful
Garments; and in her, and with her, shall arise Judges as at the first, and
Counselors and Lawgivers as at the beginning; let us weep between the Porch
and the Altar; let us interceed for the People that the land may yet be spared!
the gracious ear of our Heavenly Father is still open to the supplications of
his Children, and I believe he will yet Joel ii. 18.
be jealous over his Land and pity his People. The time approaches when the
great dasher in pieces will more and more come up amongst us, and may all who
are broken by him, wait to be healed by the arising of his Love; I shall not
live to see it, but I live in the Faith, and I believe I shall die in the
Faith, that the Lord of Hosts will yet beautify the place of his Feet, that our
Isaiah lx. 15. lxii. 7.
Zion will yet become an Eternal excellency, and Jerusalem the praise of the
whole Earth!

Let us weep between the porch and the Altar with unwearied intercession, for
the Lord will yet be jealous over his Land and pity his People. The bowels of
adorable Compassion yet yearn over his Children, with all the tenderness of a
Father's Love, Hosea xi. 8.
. How shall I give thee up O Ephraim? How shall I make thee as Admah and set
thee as Zeboam? How shall I cut thee off from being a People before me? by this
moving and pathetic language would the Great Father of the Universe induce you
to return to the Arms of everlasting Mercy! And if we who are placed as
Watchmen in Zion faithfully discharge the trust reposed in us, we shall be made
Instrumental in gathering the scattered and dispersed Sheep, from the East and
from the West, from the North and from the South, to the great Shepherd, to the
one Sheepfoid; and finally obtain an admittance into those glorious Mansions
where the morning Stars join in Singing Hallelujahs! and where all the Sons of
God forever shout for Joy.

Now unto the King Eternal, Immortal, Invisible, the only God! be Honor and
Praise for ever and ever.

FINIS.

