THE CANDID RETROSPECT; OR The AMERICAN WAR examined, BY WHIG PRINCIPLES.

CHARLESTOWN printed: -- NEW YORK reprinted. MDCCLXXX.

THE CANDID RETROSPECT.
THE political creed of America (for I make no estimate of two parties, who
taken together are a Minority of the continent) may be comprised in the twelve
following articles.

I. Every nation has authority to frame such a government for itself, as will,
without injury to others, be most conducive to its own felicity.

II. The national sovereignty under every form of government whether in the
hands of one, or of many persons, or however modelled, is absolute; for no
State can exist, if any of its members may by force or fraud attempt its
subversion with impunity: And therefore, every nation punishes treason, or an
attempt tending to overturn the constitution, as the highest crime of which a
subject can be guilty.

III. No man can be innocent, even F^ro Conscienti^^, in an endeavor to change
the government of his country, if the meditated revolution will light up a
civil war, and the miseries in prospect are likely to exceed those, which the
community have been accustomed to endure.

IV. The establishments made in America by English emigrants and their
associates, might in the early day of the colonies, if the parent country had
been so determined, have been prevented or broken up.

V. The Lords and Commons of England, being conn^sant of the grants and
charters of their Kings and Queens, for the encouragement of the colonies, and
of the transactions under them; and afterward cooperating for regulating the
plantations, rendering them secure against foreign invasions and useful to
Great Britain, they cannot therefore be considered as merely Royal, but
Parliamentary, or national establishments.

VI. The grants and charters to the colonies, and the posterior settlements,
regulations and usages by the permission, and with the knowledge or privity,
and without the interdiction of Parliament, are incontestible proofs of a great
national covenant between the Mother Country and the colonies, for her favors
(which undeniably have been many and great) by inspiring the Colonists with
confidence, and exposing them to hazardous and expensive undertakings, created
rights; and gratitude never obliges to returns and surrenders, incompatible
with those rights which are essential to the felicity of the receiver of the
benefits.

VII. Before the year 1764, the King, Lords and Commons, were universally
acknowledged to be the supreme lawgivers of the whole empire; of which the
colonies were members.

VIII. The national c^^enant bound the parent country to protect and promote
the colonies, according to the good faith implied in the grants and charters,
and other royal and national acts in their favor, as far as was consitient
with the general weal of all the dispersions of the nation; and it obliged the
plantations to submit to her authority, in all cases not repugnant to their
grants, charters and establishments; and to such acts aad contributions, as
were necessary for the common defense and felicity of the empire.

IX. Neither of the contracting parties may dissolve this compact, as lo^^ as
their joint aim in the union, to wit, their mutual prosperity, can be attained
by it.

X. As no provision was made for constituting an impartial Judge between them,
to bridle or correct the partiality or infidelity of either party, therefore
their controversies are to be decided by negotiation and treaty, or on appeal
by battle to the Lord of Hosts; for neither is obliged to surrender its
essential rights at the will of the other, and each is justifiable in exerting
its own self-preserving powers.

XI. When one of them wants either will or ability to fulfill its engagements,
the other, if not instrumental to this disaffection or impotence, will be
discharged from the original obligation. But,

XII. Since amongst imperfect beings offenses are inevitable, the contractors
are by the laws of a judge who cannot be deceived, reciprocally bound, upon
exceptions taken, to pursue every measure of a re-conciliatory nature,
consistent with the end of the union; and to such mutual condescensions, as
tend to the re-establishment of the general felicity, peace and harmony: And
this is the more eminently their duty, since the empire consists of other
branches, which have offended neither of the parties at strife, and will
nevertheless be ruined if the controversy ends in a separation,

In the application of these principles to the present quarrel, perhaps neither
Great Britain nor America will appear to be without blame.

What a new and awful idea of the constitution did the Parent Country hold up
to her Colonies, at the passing of the stamp act! Her language was this:

"You Americans are absolutely ours. We may dispose of your persons, your
commerce, your lands and acquisitions as we please. You have no rights. The
grants of our Kings to your ancestors do not bind this nation. The privileges
and securities of Englishmen cannot be yours unless you return to the old
realm. Our ancient indulgences were temporary permissions, from which you can
deduce no title to permanent enjoyments. Your plea that our Commons are not of
your electing, and that we and they are interested in the increase of your
burdens, can come with propriety only from the mouth of a British inhabitant --
All America is subject to our taxations; nor will we hear your complaints,
until you first own our authority to deal with you as we please, and
acknowledge that such benefits as you request, are to be expected not as of
right, but of grace."

Had England such principles at the first emigrations, she was bound to declare
them to the adventurers, before they gave themselves to the winds and the seas,
to gain her a share of the wealth and commerce of the new world, by which her
island has been converted into a Nation of Princes.

But thus she never did speak till this memorable era; and therefore the
Colonies were in consternation at the haughty tone, uttering this novel
explanation of the nature of the union. They remonstrated -- they resisted --
and the instant Great Britain took off the new burden, America regarded her
deeds more than her words, submitting without cavalling, to that rational
sovereignty she had formerly exercised, to the common advantage of the empire.

The grand desideratum of the moment in which the stamp act was repealed (1766)
was some plan for obtaining in future the reasonable contributions of the
Colonies for the common defense, consistent with the supremacy of Parliament
and the freedom of America, either in the old or in some new and
unexceptionable mode. If assemblies were no longer to be trusted, for grants on
separate requisitions from the Crown (though the Colonies had in this way the
credit of having overacted their parts) an American Parliament might have been
constituted to insure and quicken the supplies; or permanent funds might have
been set a part in every plantation for their quotas to the national charge,
rising and falling with the commerce of a colony, perfectly consistent with
their safety and the national supremacy, and requisite for the union and
direction of their force: But to the astonishment of common sense,
Great Britain, blind to futurity, and anxious only for present peace, contented
herself with an empty declaration of her authority to bind the colonies in all
cases whatsoever; and as if this would have prevented America from indulging
jealousies, or have induced her to slide into security and confidence, she
absurdly enrolled it among her laws. Easy themselves, the ministers of the day,
devised nothing to counteract the poison administered by their predecessors,
and seemed to be regardless of the durable interests of the Monarch they
served, and the nation who resigned to their counsels. But to proceed, we
remark,

1. That the present animosities are imputable to the pride and avarice of
Great Britain, in assuming an authority, inconsistent with the compact by which
the empire had been long prosperously united. The colonies had the merit of
returning to their submission, as soon as they were disburdened of the
stamp-duties, the irritating assertion of a right to despotic sovereignty over
them notwithstanding. They remained quiet till Mr. Townshend revived the old
claim in a new form, by imposing duties upon paper, paint, etc. for raising a
revenue, subversive of the Colony Legislatures and the ancient customs of he
empire.

2. That the Colonies were justifiable in censuring the new law devised to
execute the tea duty act; for that aiming to enforce the claim of absolute
sovereignty obliged to some conduct or declaration against an unconditional
submission -- Perhaps it justified the open violation to which they resorted.
-- Representations and petitions having been tried without effect, what could
be expected from the mere influence of dissuasions against the purchase of the
dutied article? Had not the patriot dissuader to apprehend prosecution and
ruin, unless when imprisoned, his countrymen would rise up against the
government for his redemption? And which measure was least exceptionable, the
destruction of the commodity, or the rupture of gaols, for a deliverance of the
prisoners in the confederacy, and the sudden overturning of the Colony
Government for defeating the regular course of the law?

That the resentment of Great Britain, on the destruction and expulsion of the
tea cargoes, manifested in the coercive measures of 1774, by altering the
charter of the Massachusetts Bay, extinguishing the commerce of Boston,
collecting an army there, rendering the soldiery dispunishable for the shedding
of blood, modelling the province of Quebec favorable to the designs of
compulsion and violence, was utterly unjustifiable, and an infraction of the
league, which obliged Great Britain to protect the colonies; and these
severities were the more inexcusable, since to that moment her sovereignty in
all cases (the matter of taxation excepted) had not been denied by the
Colonies; but was by all their courts, and in all their proceedings, confessed
or implied, adjudged, and supported.

4. That the provinces were not blameable in forming a Congress, to unite their
counsels and ward off danger, as they did in September 1774.

5. That it was the duty of the American Assemblies, and of the Congress acting
for the whole continent, at that time to tender a plan to the Mother Country,
for restoring peace, consistent with the compact, by which the Parliament of
Great Britain was to enjoy a supremacy for the common felicity of the empire;
and consequently, that the declaration they then made, of the right of the
colonies to an exclusive legislation, not only in cases of taxation but of
internal polity, subject only to the negative of their sovereign, was a
departure in terms from the original league; since it left no authority to the
Parliament of Great Britain over the Plantations, except for the regulation of
the external commerce of the empire; and gave vigor to the jealousy before
excited, by the misrepresentations of their enemies, of a design to maintain an
inauspicious union and confederacy with the Monarchs, and not with the
Legislature and People of Great Britain; and that the intimation of the same
Congress, of the willingness of the colonies, to acquiesce in their condition,
prior to 1763, gave Great Britain no sufficient ground to expect their
submission, to the ancient acknowledged claims of her Parliament; since the
repeal of the offensive statutes, without a retraction of the denial of her
legislative authority, would, by a violent implication, establish the
Congress's declaration, and amount to a consent, that America was thenceforth
to be the Ally of Great Britain, and not what the Congress, at that very time,
averred her to be, a Member of the Empire. Extract from that part of the
Proceedings of the Continental Congress, assembled at (...), 5th of September,
1774, which was called "The American Bill of Rights." The inhabitants of the
English Colonies in North America, by the immutable law^ of nature, the
principles of the English Constitution, and the several charters or comp^^^s,
have the following Rights.

After affirming in the three first resolves, That the Americans are entitled
to Life, Liberty and Property; that their ancestors had at the time of their
emigration, all the rights, liberties and immunities of free and natural born
subjects within the realm; that they were not (...) by the emigration, and that
their descendants have a right to enjoy such of them, as consist with their
local circumstances, it is

Resolved 4thly, That the foundation of English liberty and of all free
government, is a right in the people to participate in their Legislative
Councils; and as the English Colonies are not represented, and from their local
and other circumstances, cannot properly be represented in the British
Parliament, they are entitled to a ^ree and exclusive power of legislation, in
their several Provincial legislatures; where their right of representation can
alone be preserved, in all cases of taxation and INTERNAL POLITY, subject only
to the negative of their Sovereign, in such manner as has been heretofore used
and accustomed. But from the necessity of the case, and a regard to the mutual
interests of both countries, we cheerfully CONSENT to the operation of such
acts of the British Parliament, as are 'bona fide' restrained to the regulation
of our external commerce, for the purposes of securing the commercial
advantages of the whole Empire to the Mother Country, and the commercial
benefits of its respective members; excluding every idea of taxation internal
or external, for raising a revenue on the subjects in America without their
consent.

Can it be doubted that the party who introduced this resolve, had any other
design than the severance of the Empire? Precluded as Great Britain was to be
in future, from all (...) of legislation, a^^^^ting the internal polity of
every colony, how then could she check practices injurious to the common weal?
she must rely, said the independent, upon the vigilance and fidelity of her
Sovereigns: What? let candor answer it, had the people of Great Britain
nothing to fear from their Kings? from Kings at the head of Colonies, that have
already (even without the aid of the Crown) braved all the rest of the Empire?
nay what security would those Monarchs have had for the continuance of their
power.

But the Congress consented (a term properly used after the whole authority of
Parliament had been denied) to be subject to the laws of trade; and with this
the honest and simple hearted Americans were contented, for few of them were
aware of the craft which tacked to every such law, a condition to render it
nugatory and void, unless while it continued the advantages of the commerce to
Great Britain, I should say, of the external commerce of the whole Empire, it
secured at the same time, the commercial benefits of its respective members. An
insidious addition, which brought some Delegates within doors, and thousands
without, to approve in terms, a sentiment which in their hearts they abhorred.
Is it in the understanding of man, to frame an act of trade, that will be proof
against the cavils, to which such an article gave an handle? And would not the
assent to it as a fundamental of the union, have set every colony upon the high
ground of a contracting potentate; authorized to resist by violence, what she
might not be able to prevent by dissuasion? It was only to show that an act of
Parliament was not so beneficial to the Empire, or any part of it, as it might
have been, to be void, and as easy to foresee that this principle admitted, it
was impossible to pen a law, that would be valid in all or any of the
Provinces. In short, if Great Britain had run into one extreme for asserting
her right to bind the Colonies in all cases whatsoever, was it not equally
extravagant to hold that she could bind us in none? I shall not disparage
America, by asserting that there were no persons here who discerned and
detested at the day of these transactions, the design and tendency of this
article of the declaration of rights; t^ere were, and with grief we must add,
that there were members of that very Congress, who, then overreached, have
since died of vexation; as well as others, who to avoid the like imputation,
sacrifice integrity to pride, and boast of being from the beginning in that
plot, which has cost their coumtrymen an ocean of blood. Thousands must be able
to point to the men, once as loud in denying, as they are at present in owning,
the intention of severing that Empire from the year 1774. They have my consent
for the fame they aspire after, and that what they wished to be believed, may
never be questioned till that happy day, when themselves shall find safety, in
producing the proofs they now are desirous to conceal.

Is it asked, what should have been substituted for the resolve we condenm? I
answer, one safe to America and not injurious to the rest of the Empire. Had
the Delegates of that day the general felicity in their eye, might we not have
looked for something like the following declaration as most consistent with the
safety and sentiments of those, with whose lives and fortunes they were
entrusted?

The foundation of English liberty and of all free government, is a right in
the people to participate in their Legislative Council. The Colonists are not,
and from local and other circumstances cannot, be represented as the
inhabitants of the ancient realm are, in the British Parliament. If only the
objects of the bounty and care, and not contributory to the burdens of the
parent nation, they could not complain of their not participating in her
councils. But the case was altered after the Providence of God had enabled them
to sustain, and we called them to bear, a part of the general charge for the
common defense of the British stock, now dispersed in all quarters of the
world. America has no unnatural desire to shrink from the load, but declares
herself willing to submit to an equitable ratio. She expects it from the wisdom
and justice of the Parent State to set limits to her power, that Great Britain
will abstain from all measures directly and indirectly tending to levy taxes,
and from ^^^ements and innovations for humbling the Colonies into a base
devotion to her arbitrary pleasure. She has drawn aids from them by her
commercial regulations. Let a council be convoked to deliberate upon a
settlement, to ascertain what contributions the Provinces shall afford in
future, for the protection she ought not to refuse.

Such language as this could only have offended those, who meant to subject us
to despotism: And it must be confessed to the honor of Great Britain, that she
threw out the first hint for an accommodation of differences by compact, in the
resolve of the 20th of February, 1775. It is at the same time the misfortune of
the Colonies, that their leaders preferred a defiance of her power to the
tenders of her love. Look at the sullen answer to the conciliatory declaration,
entered in the Congress minutes of the 31st of July, 1775, an answer too,
unfairly suspended from the preceding April, that the multitude might in the
interval, be the better prepared to approve its insidious contents. What
incredible pains were taken to practice upon the Provincial Congresses, and
inculcate the ludicrous idea uttered in Parliament, that liberty was set up at
auction, to be sold to the Provinces bidding highest? And how grateful the
poison of that parricide, to an inflamed populace, gulled into a destructive
war, by the hope of paying nothing toward the charge for supporting and
defending the liberties they enjoyed! Miserable Americans! say now who are your
foes!




6. That it would not have been inconsistent with the dignity of Great Britain,
if instead of declaring war against her Colonies, as in the joint address of
the Lords and Commons to the King in January, 1775, she had animadverted upon
the denial of her authority in all cases respecting internal polity, as an
error; and have specified in what particulars the Americans should be restored
to a uti posidetis relative to their charters, patents, assemblies, elections,
and modes of government, etc. on condition of their contributing to the
necessities of the Empire. And that the parliamentary vote of the 20th of
February, 1775, would have more naturally effected a treaty of reconciliation,
had it explicitly asserted, that the right reserved to Parliament, of approving
the quantum of the Colony contributions toward the common defense, was not
claimed upon the supposition, that Parliament authoritatively command levies,
but only on her right to judge of the exercise or defect of a due sympathy in
any branch of the empire, to the general necessities of the whole body; and
especially if Great Britain had at the same time intimated a readiness to
consent to such checks, limitations and restraints, as might be necessary to
insure the application of them, to the end for which they were given; and had
with these, promised a restitution of rights and act of oblivion. Extract from
the Journals of the House of Commons.
DIE LUNAE, 20mo Die Februarii, 1775.
THE HOUSE in a COMMITTEE on the American Papers.

Motion made and Question proposed,

That it is the opinion of this Committee, that when the Governor, Council and
Assembly, or General Court of any of his Majesty's Provinces or Colonies in
America, shall propose to make provision, according to the condition,
circumstances and situation on such Province or Colony, for contributing their
proportion to the common defense (such proportion to be raised under the
authority of the General Court on General Assembly of such Province or Colony,
and di^posable by Parliament^ and shall engage to make provision also for the
(...) of the civil government, and the administration of justice in such
Province to Colony, it will be p^oper, if such proposal shall be approved by
his Majesty and the two Houses of Parliament, and for so long (...) such
provision shall be made accordingly, to forbear in respect of such Province or
Colony, to levy any duty, tax or assessment, except only such duties as it may
be expedient to continue to levy, or impose for the regulation of commerce; the
nett produce of the duties last mentioned, to be carried to the account of such
Province or Colony respectively.

The circular Letter enclosing this Resolution,
SIR, Whitehall, February 22d, 1775.
ENCLOSED I send you by the King's command, a joint address of both Housing of
Parliament to his Majesty, upon a consideration of the papers, which had been
communicated to them relative to the American Colonies, together with (...)
Majesty's most gracious answer to the said address.

I likewise send you a printed copy of a bill brought into the House of Commons
for restraining the trade and fisheries of the four New England Governments for
a limited time, together with a copy of a resolution declaratory of the sense
of Parliament upon the subject of taxation; which resolution was moved in the
committee on Monday last, and carried by a majority of 274 to 88.

As these two measures are as yet in the first stages only of consideration,
and as the bill may possibly admit in it is further progress of some
alterations, I shall only say upon them, that I ^atter myself that the firm
determination of Parliament, to preserve and Colonies, in a due dependence upon
this kingdom, tempered with the justice and moderation expressed in the last
resolution of the Committee, will have the effect to produce such a conduct on
the part of the Colonies, as shall lead to a restoration of the public
tranquillity. I am, Sir, your most obedient humble servant,

DARTMOUTH.

The Circular Letter of the American Secretary of State.
SIR, Whitehall, March 3d, 1775.
YOU will have sees in the King's answer to the joint address of both Houses of
Parliament on the 7th of February, which address and answer have already been
transmitted to you, how much attention his Majesty was most graciously pleased
to give to the assurance held out in that address, of the readiness of
Parliament to afford any just and reasonable indulgence to the Colonies,
whenever they should make proper application on the ground of any real
grievance they might have to complian of: And therefore I have the less
occasion now, to enlarge upon the satisfaction it has given his Majesty, to see
that address followed by the enclosed resolution of the House of Commons;
which, whatever may be the effect of it, (I hope a happy one) will forever
remain an evidence of their justice and moderation, and man^est the temper
which has accompanied their deliberations upon that question, which has been
the source of so much disquiet to his Majesty's subjects in America, and a
pretense for acts of such criminal disorder and disobedience.

His Majesty ardently wishing to see a reconciliation of the unhappy
differences, which have produced these disorders, by (...) means (...) which it
may be ^tained, without prejudice to the just authority or Parliament, which
his Majesty will never suffer to be violated, approves the resolution of his
faithful Commons; and commands me to (...) to you, not doubting that this happy
disposition to comply with every just and (...) of the King's subjects in
America, will meet with such a return of duty and affection on (...) as will
lead to a happy (...) of the prefect (...), and to a re-establisment of the
public tranquillity, on these grounds of justice and moderation which this
resolution (...) forth. The letter adds,

The resolution neither points (...) what the civil establishment should be,
nor demands any (...) in aid on the publish (...) -- In both these respects, it
leaves full scope (...), which may be expected from Colonies, that (...)
prejudice, (...) never been wanting (...) expressions of an affectionate (...)
to the mother country, and a zealous regard for the general welfare of the
British empire.




7. That it was a fault to issue that proposal, in terms capable of being
construed, into an attachment to the principle of unlimited submission, and
accompanying it with acts for augmenting her force at Boston, and restraining
the fishery and commerce of her Colonies, and for neglecting to command a
cessation of arms, until the Colonies had an opportunity to deliberate, with
composure of mind, upon that proposal -- more especially for her irritating
sally to Concord and ^exington, on the 19th of April 1775, when no Governor but
Mr. Gage had received the Parliament's conciliatory resolve.

8. That as this vote, under these circumstances, and the partial direction of
her wrath against the New England Colonies, favored the opinion of its being
contrived, to deceive and divide the Provinces, the Congress of 1775, had some
pretext for flying to arms, to repel further incursions of the British troops,
till Government gave them an opportunity, in a condition less alarming, to
explain the declaration of 1774 into a consistency with the ancient supremacy
of Parliament, and to state the limitations requisite for their safety, in
answer to the February resolution or proposal.

9. That the total rejection of it in August 1775, and the neglect of the
Congress to recall or explain the declaration of 1774, had natural tendency to
exasperate the nation; and as the Continental successes in Canada, a^ the
impotent state of the British army at Boston, did leave America in a condition
for a more cool and deliberate consideration of the controversy, than could
have been expected immediately after the irritations at Lexington, Concord, and
Cha^lestown, her Congress deserves the charge of abandoning to passion, if not
to motives less excusable; it being then the palpable duty of both countries,
by proper agents in a confidential way, to state and explain their respective
claims and desires.

10. That the neglect of Great Britain to supersede the orders to the navy, for
sacrificing every town on the American coast, which should prepare for defense;
and^ her continuance of hostilities after the petition to the King, preferred
by Mr. Richard Pean in August 1775, submitting it to his wisdom to point to
some plan for the restoration of harmony, confirmed the cha^e of her commencing
a war to maintain an illiberal dominion.

11. That the Congress would have had merit with their countrymen, if instead
of (...) it to the King to direct to a m^de, by which the united applications
of his faithful Colonists to the throne, in pursuance of their common councils,
may be (...) into a happy and permanent reconciliation; they had at the same
time expressly assured his Majesty, that they meant not by their declaration of
rights in 1774, to exclude Parliament from participating in the regulations
respecting the internal polity of the Colonies: And that an ^^^^ission so
naturally confirming the suspicion of a design to involve the Empire in blood,
by a struggle for (...) it, discovers, at least great imperfection in the
counsels of that Congress; as it was reasonable to suppose, that the petition
would be compared with the principles and temper manifested in the preparations
for an offensive war into Canada, and the disdainful rejection of the
Parliament's proposal, of the month of February preceding.

12. That every partial view, whether of Great Britain, to aggrandize herself
by extortionate exactions from the Plantations, regardless of their felicity;
or of America, to figure as an independent power, on the ruins of
Great Britain, Ireland, and the other Colonies, Factories and Settlements, is
unrighteous in the sight of God; and upon the belief of the manifestation of
his justice in the government of nations, must expose to the correction of his
irresistible and unerring hand.

13. Both countries being chargeable with inattention to the obligations they
were under to pursue the measures requisite to a reconciliation, neither of
them could reject terms consistent with the original compact, though no
reimbursements were offered for the losses they had sustained. Add to this,
that the controversy arose from -- neglect in our early days, to concert such
specific stipulations as were necessary to prevent doubts and strife, and
reconcile the safety of the Colonies with the general supremacy of Parliament;
and that a definitive treaty restoring each country to a situation preferable
to her primitive condition, afforded a reasonable security for her future
felicity; Great-Britain's best hopes being founded on the dependence and union
of America; and the Colonies being arrived at such a maturity of strength, as
to command upon the principles of utility, a system of liberality, in the
future management of their affairs.

14. That Great Britain even in passing the prohibitory act of December 1775,
opened a door to pacification, as it repealed the Boston port act. and the two
other coercive statutes for restraining the fishery and the commerce of the
Colonies; and enabling the Crown to appoint Commissioners, to render the
prohibiting act itself useless, upon a treaty to be made with the Colonies, or
with any port or place within either of them; and more especially as the King's
Ministers had so early as September (soon after the Congress's petition to the
King) dispatched messengers, who in January 1776, had interviews with certain
of the Delegates at Philadelphia, and made such intimations, as gave just
ground to hope for an immediate termination of all differences had the Congress
sent others on their part, to confess their willingness to negotiate upon the
overtures, which Administration (then supposed by the Colonies or their
Congress to have the lead of Parliament) stood ready to recommend to the
national approbation. The Prohibitory Act of December 1775, authorized the
making captures of American vessels, and though it repealed that for shutting
up the port of Boston, and two others for restraining the commerce of the
Colonies, and enabled the Crown to appoint Commissioners for opening
negotiations to terminate the present animosities, and to render all the
denunciations of the prohibitory statute itself utterly inefficatious, in every
Colony, County or Village desirous ^ peace, yet it was artfully made a handle
of to induce the multitude to believe, that they were thereby put out of the
King's protection, except upon the terms of unconditional submission. How few
not in Congress were at that time, or have since been informed of what all
should have known, and upon which the collective body ought to have been
consulted, viz.

That Lord Drummond left England in September, 1775, three months before the
passing of the prohibitory act, and after touching at Halit^ and Boston,
arrived at New York, and with Mr. Elliot, made a journey to the Congress at
Philadelphia, in January 1776.

That it was then confidentially signified to certain of the Delegates
attending there, that the Minister of the Court of Great Britain was desirous
of a treaty for a pacification of differences, upon the following equitable
propositions.

1. To assertain the proportion each Colony was able to contribute toward the
common defense.

2. That the supply should be raised by acts of Assembly, in duties upon
imports or exports, most likely to keep pace with the growth or decline of the
Colony.

3. That other duties for regulating trade, should be paid into the Colony
treasury, and be subject to the disposal of the Assembly, and.

4thly, Great Britain to renounce the claim of taxation, and depend for aids in
all exigencies, upon the free gift of the Colonies.

It was also intimated that these points agreed, the repeal of the statutes
offensive to America would follow; and such a limitation proposed for the
quartering of troops, and the partition of them through the provinces, as to
induce one of the then Delegates, to declare that he should consider them as
hostages for the good behavior of Great Britain.

It was at the same interview heartily hinted, that the mother country would
arm at all points in the spring, and precede her operations by overtures for a
treaty; and as a means to prevent even the arrival of the intended armaments,
Lord Drummond urged, that Congress should declare themselves on these
proposals, by special messengers of their own to go home immediately.

How this pacifick message was received, the people of any Colony may know, if
they have spirit and power left under their present tyrants, to call the
Delegates of that day to an examination upon oath. It is asserted that a motion
was made in Congress, to commit their Messengers to close custody; and
certainly true, that they were not dismissed till their paroles were exacted;
and that much pains were taken to hide these momentous transactions from the
public eye. If the enquiry (which it imports every province to make into the
conduct and fidelity of her agents) is not slovenly conducted, it will come
out, that two of the Delegates sought a conveyance from New York to England
upon this business in February 1776, and that the design was relinquished, as
soon as the news of an event in Virginia gave the party for the intended
independency, advantages for subduing the common reluctance of a great majority
of the Continent, to advance to that dangerous precipice, from which they have
launched so many of their credulous countrymen into the ocean of eternity;
while scores of thousands remain behind them, in all the complicated
wretchedness of want and despair.

Such, America, was the patriotism of your leaders! Do you wonder that they who
cheated you into ruin, have ever since practiced the arts of delusion, to
screen themselves from a detection, that must expose them to your vengeance?




15. That the concealment of these pre-intimations, so explanatory of the true
intent of the armanents expected in June and July, 1776, and of the nature of
the commission and instructions given to Lord and General How, added to the
guilt of the Congress, and favored the perilous design of drawing the people
into the precipitate renunciation of the dependency of the Colonies, the 4th of
July, 1776, and of plunging their countrymen into a tedious and desolating war.
Extract from the Prohibitory Act, called by some an Act to cast the Americans
out of the King's Protection, passed 22d of December, 1775. After authorizing
the capture of their vessels, etc. there is this clause: -- Provided always
neverthelss, and it is hereby enacted by the authority aforesaid, That in order
to encourage all well affected persons in any of the said Colonies, to exert
themselves in suppressing the rebellion therein, and to afford a speedy
protection to those who are disposed to return to their duty, it shall and may
be lawful, to and for any person or persons appointed and authorized by his
Majesty to grant a pardon or pardons to any number or description of persons by
proclamation, in his Majesty's name, to declare any Colony or Province,
Colonies or Provinces, or any county, town, port, district or place in any
Colony or Province, to be at the peace of his Majesty; and from and after the
issuing of any such proclamation in any of the aforesaid Colonies or Provinces,
or if his Majesty shall be graciously pleased to signify the same by his Royal
Proclamation, then and after the issuing of the same, this act, with respect to
such Colony or Province, Colonies or Provinces, county, town, port district or
place, shall cease, determine and utterly void.

Extract from the Commission to Lord How and General How, dated 5th May, 1776.

After the power to pardon, etc. it runs thus, -- And we do hereby strictly
charge and command you the said Lord Viscount How and William How, and each
of you, from time to time to enquire diligently into the state and condition of
the said Colonies and Provinces, and of every county, town, port, district and
place within the same, or any of them respectively; and to receive and
entertain all dutiful complaints and representations, made to you or either of
you, by the inhabitants thereof, and faithfully and duly to transmit the same
to one of our principal Secretaries of State; that such reformation and redress
may follow thereupon, as the nature of the case may require. And it is our
further will and pleasure, that you confer as occasion may require, with our
subjects in the said Provinces, or any of them, concerning such arrangements
and regulations as may tend to the advantage and stability of the said several
Colonies and Provinces, and to a lasting union of each of them respectively,
with Great Britain, upon the true principles of the Constitution.

It concludes with authority to the Commissioners to put a peaceful Colony in
full-possession of her rights, by calling ^an Assembly and proclaiming the
King's peace, after which the prohibiting act is to cease and be void.

To pave the way to a treaty before the British troops landed on Long Island,
Lord Drummond sent the following letter to Mr. Washington, then with his army
at New York.

SIR, August 17th, 1776.
Being deeply interested in the welfare of America, I think it my duty to
communicate a matter of intelligence, which I flatter myself may be rendered
conducive to the restoration of a desirable peace; and in this view, I request
your Excellency's permission to land at New York, to go directly to
Philadelphia, in order to lay the same before the General Congress.

In the course of a conversation I have had with Lord How, I perceive that the
powers he is vested with as well as his disposition for establishing an
equitable and permanent peace, are altogether misunderstood by the Colonies.

For in consequence of a sketch of some propositions being offered for his
consideration, he very frankly assured me, he was willing to confer upon these
grounds, with any gentlemen of the greatest influence in this country.

As I am at liberty to declare his sentiments, I have the honor to enclose for
your Excellency's information, a copy of my correspondence with his Lordship,
and of the propositions referred to in his letter, which are the motives of my
present request.

Attending in the boat to be indulged with your answer, I have the honor to be
your, Excellency's most humble servant,

DRUMMOND.

General Washington.

The papers enclosed were these.

Lord Drummond's Letter to Lord How, and Lord Howe's Answer.
To Lord HOW.
My LORD,
I take the liberty of sending enclosed the sketch of propositions, referred to
is my late conversation with your Lordship; which propositions, I have
understood the Colonies were disposed, not many months ago, to make the basis
of a reconciliation with Great Britain. I have the honor to be your Lordship's
most obedient humble servant,

Sloop Polly, August 12th, 1776. DRUMMOND.

Sketch of Propositions communicated to Lord How, 12th August, 1776.
1. That it shall be ascertained as far as can be determined by calculation,
what supply toward the general exigency of the state, each separate Colony can
furnish, consi^tent with its ability.

2. When such supply is thus ascertained, that each colony shall, by Acts of
its own Assembly, impose such taxes, as they shall find expedient for raising
o^ the said supply.

3. In consideration of the (...) state of all young countries, that such taxes
may not, in their operation, become partially or accidentally burdensome on
the one hand, nor on the other hand, gradually become deficient in producing
the aid intended by the Colonies toward the general exigency of the state, such
articles shall the chosen as the objects of imposition, as they shall deem the
most likely to keep pace with the growth or decline of the said Colonies.

4. That these taxes so imposed, shall, as in the customs, be levied by
officers of the appointment of the King; and that a perpetual grant of the
produce of these taxes, shall be made by the respective Assembles to the Crown
of Great Britain.

5. As the direct means of removing the fatal grounds of this contention, by
establishing a security against the apprehended invasion of property by
Parliament, formal relinquishment shall be made on the part of Great Britain,
of all future claim to taxation over there her Colonies.

6. To remove all suture suspicions from the minds of the Colonists, that under
the appearance of regulating commerce, duties may be imposed for the further
purposes of revenue, an application of the produce of all duties imposed on
articles of trade by the British Legislature, shall be made toward defraying
the expenses of the collection; and the surplusses in each Colony, to be paid
into their separate treasuries, and to be subject to the disposal of the
respective Houses of Assembly.

DRUMMOND

Lord HOWE's Answer.
My LORD, Eagle, off Staten-Island, August 15th, 1776.
I HAVE received the honor of your Lordship's letter of the 12th, enclosing a
sketch of the propositions mentioned in your late conversations, which I return
herewith.

As I think they contain matter, that upon a conference and cool discussion,
might be wrought into a plan of permanent union, I shall with great
satisfaction embrace the first opportunity that may be offered upon these
grounds, to promote so desirable an event. I have the honor to be, my Lord,
your Lordship's most obedient servant,

HOW.

Right Hon. Lord Drummond.
Lord Drummond was not permitted to come on shore, but the following letter
sent to him.
My Lord, New York, August 17th, 1776.
I HAVE your Lordship's favor of this day, accompanied by papers on subjects
of the greatest moment, and deserving the most deliberate consideration. I
allow (...) for your Lordship's well meant zeal on such an occasion, but I fear
it has transported you beyond that attention to your parole, which comprehends
the character (...) man of strict honor. How your Lordship can reconcile your
past or present conduct, with your engagements, so as to satisfy your own mind,
I must submit to your^ own feelings; but I find myself under the disagreeable
necessity on objecting to the mode of negoclating proposed, while your
Lordship's line of conduct appears so exceptionable.

I shall, by express, forward to Congress your Lordship's letter and the papers
which accompanied it. The result will be communicated as soon as possible. I am
sorry to have detained your Lordship so long, but the unavoidable necessity
must be my apology, I am, my Lord, your Lordship's most obedient and very
humble servant,

GEORGE WASHINGTON.

It took a^^, however, that the flag brought proposals for a treaty, not only
in the American army, but in the New York Convention then sitting on the
island^ and to prevent the effect of the rumor, It was thought proper to deny
it in (...) orders, which were first shown at General Washington's
headquarters in draft so two members of the Congress, then attending him upon
a message from Haelems one of whom has since acted as a Delegate in the
Congress at Philadelphia. -- It continued a secret till form time afterward,
that a letter had been written and (...) other papers received.

Dunlap's Advertiser of the 24th of September, 1776, containing the following
publication: Extract from Washington's Letter to the president of the Congress.
New York, August 18th, 1776.
I have the honor to enclose you for the perusal and consideration of
Congress, sundry papers, the whole of which, except No. 2 and 7, I received
yesterday evening by a flag, and to which I beg leave to refer Congress.

Report of the Committee (Mr. Franklin, Mr. John Admas, and Mr. E. Rutledge)
appointed on wait on Lord How.

In obedience to the orders of Congress, we have had a meeting with Lord How.
It was on Wednesday last upon State^-Island, opposite to Amboy, where his
Lordship received and entertained us with the utmost politeness.

His Lordship opened the conversation, by acquainting us that though he could
not treat with us as a Committee of Congress, yet as his powers enabled him to
confer and consult with any private gentlemen of influence in the Colonies, on
the means of restoring peace between the two countries, he was glad of this
opportunity of con^erring with us on that subject, if we thought ourselves at
liberty to enter into a conference with him in that character. We observed to
his Lordship, that as our business was to hear, he might consider us in what
light he pleased, and communicate to us any propositions he might be authorized
to make for the purpose mentioned; but that we could consider ourselves in no
other character, than that in which we were placed by the order of Congress.
His Lordship then entered into a discourse of considerable length, which
contained no explicit proposition of peace, except one, viz. that the Colonies
should return to their allegiance and obedience to the Government of
Great Britain. -- The rest consisted principally of assurances, that there was
an exceeding good disposition in the King and Ministers to make that government
easy to us; with intimations, that in case of our submission, they would cause
the offensive acts of Parliament to be revived, and the instructions to
Governors to be re-considered; that so, if any just causes of complaint were
found in the acts, or any errors in Government were perceived to have crept
into the instructions, they might be amended or withdrawn.

We gave it as our opinion to his Lordship, that a return to the domination of
Great Britain was not to be expected; we mentioned the repeated humble
petitions of the Colonies to the King and Parliament, which had been treated
with contempt, and answered only by additional injuries; the unexam^^ed
patience we had shown under their tyrannical government and that it was not
until the last act of Parliament, which denounced war against us, and put us
out of the King's protection, that we declared our independence. That this
declaration had been called for by the people of the Colonies in general --
that every Colony had approved of it when made, and all now considered
themselves as independent States, and were settling or had settled their
governments accordingly; so that it was not in the power of Congress to agree
for them, that they should return to their former dependent state. That there
was no doubt of their inclination to peace, and their willingness to enter into
a treaty with Britain, that might be advantageous to both countries -- that
though his Lordship has at pre^ent no power to treat with them as Independent
States, he might it there was the same good disposition in Britain, much sooner
obtain (...) powers from thence for that purpose, than powers could be obtained
by Congress from the several Colonies to consent to a subm^^ion. The
intelligent American wants no aid to convict this report of the want of truth
and good faith. Some of them were so far from the calling for Independence, as
to (...) all authority to declare it, to this hour. And when uttered it
shocked, and from (...) divided the Continent, and drove its advocates to
violences and (...) demonstrate the general discontent^, and their (...).
His Lordship then saying, that he was sorry to find that no accommodation was
like to take place, put an end to the conference.

Upon the whole, it did not appear to your Committee, that his Lordship's
commission contained any other authority of importance, than what is expressed
in the act of Parliament, viz. that of granting pardons, with such exceptions
as the Commissioners shall think proper to make, and of declaring America, or
any part of it, to be in the King's peace upon submission: For as to the power
of enquiring into the state of America, which his Lordship mentioned to us, and
of conferring and consulting with any persons the Commissioners might think
proper, and representing the result of such conversations to the Ministry, who
(provided the Colonies would subject themselves) might after all, or might not
at their pleasure, make any alterations in the former instructions to
Governors, or propose in Parliament any amendment of the acts complained of;
we apprehend any expectation from the effect of such a power, would have been
too uncertain and precarious to be relied on by America, had she still
continued in her state of dependence.

Copy of Lord Howe's letter to Lord George German, dated Eagle off New York,
20th September 1776, communicated to the House of Lords, and taken from the
Parliamentary Register for 1778.
My LORD,
FINDING in a conversation with Mr. Sullivan, a Major General in the rebel
army, taken prisoner in the action of the 27th of August, that the leaders of
the disaffected Americans, professed to understand the powers delegated by the
King's commission, were restricted to grating pardons and declaring the
Colonies at peace, without authority to enter into any discussion of
grievances, I thought proper to inform that gentleman, that the object of his
Majesty's paternal desire was to make his American subjects happy, as well as
to relieve them from the calamities of war -- That the Commissioners were
willing to consult and confer with any persons of influence, upon the means of
attaining these ends; and that reconciliation, union and redress of grievances,
might be the happy consequence. Mr. Suilivan hereupon proposed, and with
General Howe's approbation, I consented, that he should go to Philadelphia, and
undeceive those who appeared to entertain that confined opinion of the King's
most gracious intentions.

On the 9th instant he returned, and acquainted me, that he had made known the
sentiments I had expressed to him; and that according to the t^^^r of a
resolution of Congress, three Deputies might soon be expected in this province,
to (...) more particularly into the grounds of the information he had
communicated.

I have the honor to send enclosed to your Lordship a copy of that resolution.

Although the object of this deputation apparently was to interrogate rather
than to confer, General How concurred in opinion with me, that I should not,
on that account, decline any proposition for a meeting. -- We thought it
material to controvert the real or affected ideas before mentioned, which had
probably been circulated with a view of persuade the ignorant, that the offer
of peace and pardon held (...) in our Declaration of the 14th of July, was
merely an artifice to (...) them, and that their liberties and properties were
only to be secured by a perseverance in their resolution, to throw off all
dependence upon the King and Parliament of Great Britain.

In the evening of the same day I received information that Doctor Franklin,
Mr. John Adams, and Mr. Rutledge, would meet me, at any appointed place, on the
morning on the 11th. General Howe's presence being that day necessary with the
army, he could not accompany me to the meeting which I appointed should be on
State^-Island, opposite to the town of Amboy.

I acquainted them, that King's desire to restore public tranquillity, had
induced him to constitute Commissioners open the spot, to remove the
restrictions upon trade and intercourse, to dis^en^e the Royal cleamency to
those who had been hurried away from their allegiance, to receive
representations of grievances, and to discuss the means whereby that mutual
confidence and just re^lution which ought to ful^ful between the Coloni^, and
the Parent State, might be restored and preserved I also gave them to
understand, that his Majesty was graciously disposed to a revision of such of
his royal instructions as might have laid too much restraint upon their
^gimation, and to concur in a revisal of any of the plantation laws, by which
the Colonies might be aggrieved -- That the Commissioners are earnest, on their
part, to prevent the further effusion of blood, and to proceed upon all such
measures as might expedite the accomplishment of the (...) of their commission
-- That they were willing to confer with any of his Majesty's subjects, and to
treat with Delegates of the Colonies, legally chosen, upon all matters relating
to grievance and regulations; but that, for very obvious reasons, we could not
enter into any treaty wish their Congress; and much less proceed in any
conference of negotiation upon the inadmissible ground of Independency -- I
pretension which the Commissioners had not, nor was it possible they ever
should have, authority to acknowledge.

The three gentlemen were very explicit in their opinions, that the associated
Colonies would not accede to any peace or alliance, but as free and independent
States; and they endeavored to prove, that Great Britain would derive more
extensive and more durable advantages from such an alliance, than from the
connection it was the object of the Commission to restore. -- Their comments
not meri^ing a serious attention, the conversation ended, and the gentleman
returned to Amboy.

In consequence of the result of the abovementioned interview, we judge it
necessary to publish the declaration enclosed in our joint letter to your
Lordship of this day's date. The examination of Mr. John Brown, who was sent
out in November, 1777, from Philadelphia, by Mr. Willing, one of the Judges of
the Supreme Court of Pennsylvania, not long before a member of the Congress,
communicated from York; in Pennsylvania, to a friend at Bal^imore, and there
published -- Republished in the Remembrancer for 1778, page 92. "That he left
the city on the 4th of November instant, (...) consequence of the (...) Mr.
Thomas Willing, who thawed this examinant a note from General How, requesting
to see him, Mr. Willing -- That Mr. Willing told this exami^ant, that General
How desired to accommond^te the difference, and prevent the (...) of human
blood -- That he and his brother had (...) power to treat with the Congress, as
Congress, or any men they should appoint, provided they would res^d
Independency -- That he, General How, (...) thi^ to be made known to some
member of Congress; and Mr. Willing desired this (...) to be the messenger --
That he, General How, would put them in the same (...) they were in, (...) and
give them more privileges than they had ever asked -- That he did not desire
us to lay down our arms, of cease from our preparations, ti^l matters were
accommodated -- That upon such an accommodation, he would withdraw his forces
and army and no standing army should be kept up in this country; and that the
paper currency should be established -- That some of these articles, of which
the last was one, were added upon Mr. Willing's returning to General How, in
consequence of this examinant's hesitating to come out with them; upon which
this examinant undertook the business, and engaged not to communicate his
business to any person, until he should have first communicated it to some
member of Congress -- That this examinant passed the Schuylkill, in consequence
of a passport from an Aid-de-Camp of General Howe's -- That he passed General
Potter in the evening, without communicating his business to him, or obtaining
a pass from him, and traveled up to the house of Mr. Robert Morris at Manheim,
and there waited from Thursday evening to Saturday evening following, for the
arrival of Mr. Morris; and when he arrived, communicated the matter first of
all to him -- That Mr. Morris then called in Mr. Duer, another member of
Congress, and these were the first persons to whom he revealed the business --
And from Manheim he returned to Lancaster, where he was first called before
this Council, and bailed by Mr. Morris and Mr. Duer to go to York; and that he
has hitherto communicated his business only to Mr. Morris and Mr. Duer, and to
the members of this Council; but that he understood the matter had been
mentioned by Mr. Morris and Mr. Duer, or one of them, to other members of
Congress at York, and was there freely spoken of; but this examinant was not
called before the Congress -- and that this examinant had no writing, flag or
public testimonial relative to this business from General How or others in
Philadelphia, except what passed, by word of mouth, between him and Mr. Willing
as herein before mentioned and set forth -- And this examinant further adds,
that he recollects Mr. Willing told him that General How assured him, Mr.
Willing, That Great Britain would never give way to the Independence of
North America -- That more men would be sent out in the spring, and that they
would harrass us so, that we could not go on.

JOHN BROWN.
Taken before me, Thomas Wharton, jun. President.

Instead of an enquiry by a flag, whether Mr. Brown was dispatched from
Philadelphia according to his declaration, he was conveyed from York to
Lancaster as a spy, and committed to gaol; but his message having taken air,
the leaders thought it requisite to circulate the following publication.

THE base artifices of tyrants are not less dangerous than their arms. Of this
truth the present contest is one among a thousand examples. The British leaders
have proved themselves alike bloody and deceitful.

The faith of public proclamations, and even the words of sacred honor o^
their Chiefs in person, most solemnly plighted to individuals for the
protection of their property, have been violated. The miserable wretches
starving in the gaols (...) New York and Phialdelphia, were tempted to (...)
with the enemy, by assurances that General Washington had refused to exchange
them, when in truth General How had broke the (...) had settled, and had
eluded every offer he had afterward made, as fast as they were complied with
on our part.

But above all, the repeated attempts of our enemies to seduce the people of
this country from their virtuous efforts, by the false ideas of peace and
reconciliation which they never meant, are highly insidious and delusive.

The last year General ^ulliy, then a captive, was sent by Lord and General
How from Long Island to Philadelphia, with very plausible terms; but when a
Committee or Congress waited on the British Commissioners, they receded from
every thing they had told him. The opportunity was, however, diligently
improved, for the double purpose of blasting negotiations in Europe, by
assurances to foreign Courts, that the quarrel wa^ settled, and (...) to
debauch the minds of the Americans, with the pretense that Congress was averse
to peace. That at the very (...) that their emissaries were buzzing about in
this country, that Congress refused to listen to the most ^easonable terms of
accommodation, Lord Stormont was very industriously pledging his honor to the
Court of France, that the treaty was far advanced, if not finally ratified.

No sooner was the world undeceived on this head, than the attempt was renewed,
through the means of the unfortu^ante General Lee General Lee, while a prisoner
at New York, wrote two letters to intimate the willingness of Lord and General
How to suspend the war, and enter upon a treaty for a permanent peace; he was
then high in the confidence of the Congress, and requested to the appointed one
of their Commissioners on this important service. Can any reason be assigned
for a flog from the British General to them, which does not call as loud for
one from them to him after so many previous attempts? How soon might they have
known by a ^ine to General How, or Mr. Willing, whether the m^n, they for a
blind had imprisoned, was an impostor, or the real messenger of peace
, but still the Commissioners declined to pledge themselves for any thing --
nothing appears from them -- nothing in writing is sent forward; but the
Commissioners were left at liberty to retract and deny every thing, is soon as
they had answered the end of misleading the people here, and amusing (...)
nations. And o! Mr. John Brown is employed to tell a rid^^ulous tale of peace,
and at the same time a large number of emissaries are let loose, to propagate
the story throughout the State; still nothing appears in writing. A mere verbal
talk of Mr. Willing, that he (Mr. Willing) had a talk with General How. Were
we a tribe of savages, this talk would at least be accompanied with a belt of
wampum, but to us not even the sligh^^t token was vouchsafed. The sole word of
John Brown is again to gull us into a sham treaty which is again to be spread
throughout Europe, to defeat our most promising (...) from that quarter, and
again to deceive and mislead our own people, while his Excellency is again
ready to (...) that he is pretended to have told Mr. Willing to tell John Brown
and to laugh at the mischief he had mad^.

Friends and Country men, be not deceived: If General How has any thing to
propose to Congress, the way is open to him through the usual channels. He can
send a flag of truce. He is under no necessity of sending out an obscure
person, like a thief of a spy, to (...) through our camp, without passports,
without ^^ence.

Does the (...) a treaty of peace require less ceremony? No, but a message in
writing by a flag of truce is not so easily evaded. General How might be loath
to deny his handwriting, though it seems he has not hesitated to deny his
words.

France and Spain are likely to take a decisive part in our quarrel. A few
months perseverance will establish our liberty and independence FOR EVER.

If we are not false to ourselves; if we are not driven to and from and
deceived by every idle artifice of our perfidious enemies, trusting in
Providence we may look forward with confidence, to the hope of being speed
(...) and for ever delivered from the (...) and perfidy of Britain; from the
bloody and vind^tive malice of our cruel enemies.

Published by Order of Council, JACOB HOWELL, Secretary pro tempore.

The reader will recollect, that it was not till after the message by Mr.
Brown, that the Congress then at York in Pennsylvania, i^^ned the paper (...)
"Articles of Confederation and Union, etc." by which they hoped to gain the
consent of the Colonies, to enter into treaties with foreign nations. Not one
of the new republics ratified that league till the winter 1778; in some it was
approved only by their mock legislatures, before their constituents had heard
of it, and that hastily, to exclude their reflections and the subject; and
there are Co^^nies who withhold their concurrence to this hour.




If I have troubled your Lordship with a narrative too long and unimportant,
you will do me the justice to impute it to the desire I have of communicating
every circumstance, from whence it is possible for your Lordship to collect
information of the principles and conduct of those, who still possess the
government of this unhappy country.

I have only to add, that as the rebel army remains strongly posted at the
north part of the island of New York, and the (...) who had (...), or been
compelled to leave the city, before the King's troops took possession of (...),
are not returned; we have it not yet in our power, even were it expedient in
the present moment, to effect the complete re-establishment of the Civil
Government of this district.

I have the honor to be, etc. HOW.




16. That there is reason to suspect, that the views which prompted to that
awful resolution, will lead the Delegates to practice every artifice, to hide
its horrible tendency from the eye of the public; and if possible, to turn the
quarrel to their own emolument, at the expense of the blood and treasure of
their country. The Proclamation of the 30th of November, 1776, promising
pardons to all without any exception.


17. That the appeal being made by the sword to the Omniscient Judge who will
decide upon it with infallible rectitude, and the war wasting the empire, and
tending to a separation ruinous to millions, who have taken no part in the
controversy, it concerns those who began, as well as those who support and
protract it, under the loud calls of justice, humanity, benevolence, honor,
religion and the general interest, to cultivate concord, and a return to their
ancient union, according to that compact which eminently advanced the common
prosperity, antecedent to the year 1764; for no end however laudable and
desirable, will justify a perfidious and ambitious violation of that covenant,
under which the two countries were placed by the Providence of God, be the
prospect never so flattering to our zeal for the civil or religious interests
of mankind; it being the indispensable duty of Christians, to seek for temporal
as well as eternal felicity in the way of well-doing; trusting it to the
Supreme Ruler, to accomplish his benevolent design^, relating both to Church
and State, according to his own infinite wisdom and uncontrollable sovereignty.

18. If it was the duty of the Congress by withholding at first or afterward
re^^^ctng the declaration of 1774, which renounces the whole authority of
Parliament in the concerns of civil polity, to have prevented an open war; or
to have terminated it by messages in answer to the overtures of January 1776,
when but few of the Colonies had thought of even temporary establishments for
common order, nor any of them had authorized their Delegates to vote for a
disunion, or to have checked the military operations, by calling for the terms
brought out by Lord How, and submitting them, under a cessation of arms, to
the consideration of their constituents in autumn 1776, no subsequent
transaction of the Congress, to give success to the unwarrantable project for
dismembering the Empire, then concealed from the multitude, can bind the rest
of their countrymen, in honor or conscience, to support a weak and wicked
faction, in an obstinate prosecution of the war.

19. Who then are the real enemies of America, if not they who have perverted
the virtuous aims of the main body of the people for the defense of their
rights and privileges, into a war for dominion? And seduced some, terrified
many, and driven more, to assist in this extravagant enterprise -- who, under
the disguise of patriot zeal, did, unauthorized, dispatch an emissary in the
winter 1776, Silas Deane, a Country Trader, of Weathersfield, in Connecticut.
to draw the ancient enmity of France into a contenton purely domestic; and
have since by various arts and assiduous labors, in and out of Congress,
opposed all peaceful negotiations, and effected a league with the common see,
to gratify the corrupt aims of private ambition and interest; and together with
others, in diverse posts, offices and employments, are feeding and thriving upon
the miseries of their countrymen, and by force and fraud preventing their
return to the blessings of peace, liberty and safety, under a most generous
plan tendered by Great Britain, with proposals of a solemn covention, for
advancing and perpetuating the prosperity of the whole Empire? Great Britain
has repealed the statute for blocking up the Port of Boston, that for altering
the charter and government of the (...) Bay, the tea duty act, those for
restraining the fishery and the trade of the Colonies, and passed another to
renounce the claim of taxation, as well in the North-American Colonies as in
the West India Islands. That the Plantations may be restored to their happy
condition before the close of the last war, she enabled her Commissioners in
1778,

1. To put an immediate stop to hostilities both by sea and land. 2. To open
the trade of the Colonies, by suspending the act which prohibits it is course
and renders their property prize. 3. To suspend the operation of any other act
passed since the 10th of February 1763. 4. To bury past offenses in oblivion by
general pardons. 5. To constitute whom they pleased to be Governors of the
provinces that were within the appointment of the Crown.
But the Parent State had still more liberality. She offered to treat with the
Colonies, or either of them, for the establishment of arrangements to be
irrevocably ratified by her legislature; and her Commissioners were ready to
agree to a cessation of arms, until the sense of Parliament could be obtained
on a grand, solemn, constitutional compact, relating to the following points:

1. The further extent of the commerce of America. 2. Subjecting the keeping up
of military forces in America, to the will and pleasure of the Colonies, or of
the General Congress, if they so chose. 3. The discharge of the debts of the
Colonies, and raising the credit and value of their paper money. 4. To provide
a seat and voice for an agent from every Colony in the British Parliament, and
an agent from Great Britain in every Assembly. 5. To fix the power of all the
Colony Legislatures, and settle their Provinces and Civil and Military
establishments, for the exercise of a perfect freedom of Legislation. and
internal government under one common Sovereign, with every privilege short of a
total separation of interests, or consistent with that union of force, on which
the safety of our common religion and liberty depends.
Among the statutes passed since 1763 and subjected to immediate suspension,
and on a treaty to be marked out for future alteration or repeal, were those
complained of as extending the Admiralty jurisdiction, depriving parties of the
trial by jury, exacting security from claimants, indemnifying captors from
damages, that directing the trial of certain criminals in England, the Quebec
or Canada act, the statute of supremacy, claiming authority to b^^d America in
all cases whatsoever, and those respecting the Board of Commissioners in
Boston, etc. etc. etc.

What has prevented the Americans from being the ful^est possession of all the
peace, felicity and prosperity they can reasonably desire, but the want of a
disposition in the Congress, to treat with the British Commissioners on the
momentous concerns of the Empire?

A door was opened for the requisitions of all orders of men, civil and
ecclesiastical. It was not shut against any propositions that could, in the
smallest degree, contribute to the common weal. What hinders even now at least
an interview for consultation? And till it is had, who can assert that any
salutary proposal for the benefit of the people will fail?

The transactions of the Commissioners, and the manner in which they have been
treated, and the miseries of America slighted by the Congress, will never be
forgotten. Let the suffering American peruse the pamphlet published by the
Royal Commissioners before they took their departure in November 1778, and for
himself determine in his enquiries concerning the authors of his own, and of
the present and future calamities of his country.




20. It being manifest that nothing will satisfy the directors of the American
Councils (by whom several of the Colonies suffer themselves to be ruled) but
measures incompatible with the safety of the many millions of the same natural
stock with themselves in Europe, Asia and Africa, and in the contended
dispersions in the Islands, as well as on the continent of America,
Great Britain will be justifiable in exerting the powers she enjoys for her
preservation, to render the rebelled Plantations as impotent as they appear to
be unfriendly, to the welfare of that vast community, with whom they may be, as
they once were, happily united; and from whom they are not sullenly severed,
upon principles of partiality, reprobated by great multitudes of their own
countrymen, who have suffered insults, imprisonments, fines, sequestrations,
and many of them death itself.

21. But since men's passions became inflamed, under erroneous views of the
measures requisite to promote and secure the common interests of both
countries, and it is scares possible for the ordinary (...) of justice, biassed
as they may be by prejudices, exactly to discern the line of separation,
between that conduct, which from the motives and ends of the agent, may not
deserve blame, and a behavior in the eye of the law criminal and treasonable,
it was wise and just as well as merciful in Great Britain, to issue as she did,
in October 1778, general and undistinguishing pardons; that punishment might be
inflicted only for guilt to be contracted in future, by persevering in a
conflict, undoubtedly degenerated from a struggle for liberty, into an
UNNATURAL REBELLION.

22. That the sufferings of the loyalists in all parts of the continent, from
the hands of fellow subjects, who while violating the rights of private
judgment, are nevertheless appealing in their fasts, prayers and thanksgivings,
so the God of love and mercy, for their innocence, will eternally demonstrate
the hypocrisy, avarice and profligacy of some, and the fanaticism of the rest
of their oppressors; as the forbearance of Great Britain, in not having yet
executed a single rebel in her power, and in restraining from the devastations
and complicated calamities, she might (...) brought upon the avowed ally of her
inveterate enemy, is of her lenity and ge^erosity: And that it will become her
in future, to have tender regard, not only to her friends in America, but to
discriminate the ignorant, the timid, the helpless, the uninformed and the
seduced, by proportionable indulgencies; and to remember at the final
termination of the war in a reunion, the fidelity and affection she found here,
and to strike hands with the Colonies, in a free and generous establishment of
their privileges, bought by the blood of the American, as well as the European
loyalist.

Lastly, That Great Britain independent of her own interest in the controversy,
i^, all circumstances considered, bound by justice and honor to prevent the
ruin of her American friends, at every risk short of certain destruction to
herself: And that it will be her duty, if compelled by adversity to conclude a
disadvantageous peace, and to part with one or more of her Colonies to France,
Spain or any other foreign nation, to stipulate in clear and strong terms, in
behalf of the loyalists who may be found there, for every advantage of
disposing of their estates, and free liberty to remove to such of the Colonies
or Dominions as may not be unfortunately surrendered at the end of the war, to
a popish or arbitrary power.

FINIS.

