A BRIEF NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE AND CONFESSION OF BARNETT DAVENPORT. Under
Sentence of Death, for a Series of the most horrid Murders, ever perpetrated in
this Country, or perhaps any other, on the Evening following the 3d of
February, 1780. Is to be executed at Litchfield, on the 8th of May.

Printed in the Year, M.DCC.LXXI.

PREFACE.
THE following account, is one of the most shocking. A brief narrative of the
life of one, who, before he was twenty years of age, could deliberately murder
a family, for the sake of plundering the house, it is apprehended, may be of
some service to mankind. When they consider the fearful end of one, brought up
in profaneness, neglect of public worship, without pious instruction or
learning, profaning GOD's sabbaths, and blaspheming his name; which the
wretched malefactor represents as having been very much his case. The narrative
is penned from the criminal's mouth, though not always exactly in his own
words. Some moral reflections are interspersed.

A BRIEF NARRATIVE, etc.
AS they tell me, I was born at New-Milford, the 25th of October, 1760, and
lived with my parents until I was about nine years of age. By this time, I was
become quite expert in using bad language, having been accustomed to
profaneness, from the time I was capable of forming articulate sounds. How
early was the infernal dialect become habitual! I was then sent to live with
Mr. Nathan Hawley, where I abode about two years and an half. Here I had but
little opportunity of going to school, and that which I had, was not most
carefully improved; but very little proficiency was made in learning to read.
When about eleven years old, as near as I can recollect, I ran away from Mr.
Hawley's, under pretense of having been abused: But there I began to pilfer, by
stealing green corn, which was, (if I rightly remember) the beginning of that
infamous practice, which led me on to the most horrid crimes ever committed. I
then went to my father's house, and lived there about one year. Then I was sent
to live with one Mr. Ebenezer Bostwick, where I continued part of one summer;
but being uneasy, would live there no longer, and returned to my father, with
whom I lived till the following spring, when I returned to Mr. Bostwick's.
Presently, I grew very uneasy, imagining myself treated with too much severity.
Here, my temper, naturally passionate, frequently vented itself in perverse
language, or was manifested by a sullen dumbness. Insomuch, that when a plough
boy, I would frequently either not speak at all, or use such language as is not
fit to be repeated. Being now about twelve years of age, I could not read; had
scarce ever been in a place of public worships; nor always, where family
worship was, attended. That parents counsel's, warnings, and solemn admonitions
may come with weight on children's minds, family prayer and public worship are
of great importance.

Here I was guilty of pillaging a neighbor's garden, stole some water-melons,
etc. However small these crimes may appear to some, yet, when viewed in the
light of eternity, and as leading to the most dreadful enormities, they must
appear awfully fearful.

During this year, my time was spent in going to one place to live, and then to
another, disquieted, like the troubled sea, which cannot rest.

When I was about thirteen years old, I was sent to live at another place, and
not long after, was let out to Mr. Daniel Tyrrell; from whose son, I pretty
soon stole some money. I was detected, reproved, admonished, and warned of my
danger, by some who reminded me of the notorious Fra^ie^, and his fearful end,
similar to which they feared mine would be. I was corrected as well as warned,
and my father informed, and I was sent to him. With him I continued till the
spring following, when I went to live with Mr. Aaron Hitchcock, where I learned
to read, though but poorly. Contrary to orders, I rode away his horse, which
being discovered, he threatened to punish me. Upon this, I stole a small matter
of money and a silk handkerchief, and run away. Finding that I was pursued, I
concealed myself by the wayside, and thought within myself, when the two men in
pursuit of me rode by, "I loved to see the devils ride. They are got fooled
once These are his very words, which, he says, express his mind, and which he
then conceived.
." I had once before run away from the same man, with whom, it had been well
for me, if I had lived. I was carried back the next day, and corrected. There I
was to have lived 'till I was sixteen; but being discontented, I went again to
my father's, being now about fourteen.

The next winter my father bound me to Mr. John Stillwell, to live with him
till I was of age. With him I lived more than a year. While I lived here, I
once laid a plan to murder Mr. Stillwell, and how to conceal it, in the
following manner: When we were in the field, drawing logs, and Mr. Stillwell
was stooping down to put the chain round the log, I took up the ax to knock him
on the head, and then designed to draw the log over him, tear him to pieces,
and so conceal the murdering of him. But my heart then failed me, not being yet
so hardened in sin, as to carry into execution my horrid plan, and perpetrate
the shocking crime. It is a maxim, as old as ancient Rome, That no man becomes
a devil in a minute. Things of trifling value I stole here, such as eggs, hens,
potatoes, etc. and sold them to persons near where I then lived, which was at
Pitts-Town. The summer following, I stole Mr. Stillwell's horse, and ran away.
Before I got to Stockbridge, I turned up the horse; and, about a month after,
went home to my father, continuing the wretched practice of pilfering green
corn, water-melons, and the like, leading a most careless, stupid life, neither
reading, praying, or attending any public worship. Indeed, I had now almost
forgot that which I once learnt, as to reading.

The winter following, I enlisted for three years, in Col. Brewers regiment,
belonging to the State of Massachusetts; went to Ticonderoga, March 1777;
tarried there till the fort was evacuated by our troops, retreated with our
forces; was at the battle of Hobartown; then retreated to Sillwater. Here,
being one day enraged at a soldier, in my passion, I threw a club at him, which
missing him, wounded an officer, and I was punished. When our army, after
General Burgoyne's surrender, came down to Albany, I was there visited with
sore sickness; then went home upon a furlough for 12 days, and, by imprudence,
got a very severe relapse.

Early the next spring, I went to Danbury* where I kept guard two months;
during which, I stole hens, geese, Continental rum and wine. From thence I went
to Valley-Forge, and joined the army; but on the road stole some sugar; was at
the battle at Monmouth; remained with the army till General Patterson's
brigade, to which I belonged, came to Woodbury, the October following. There I
got a pass for one day, to go and see my brother, and was then to rejoin the
army. But never joined that brigade again. I went to my brother's, and then to
my father's, and on the road stole a pair of stockings. Then went and lived at
four different places in Cornwall at Canaan, in less than four months,
discontented at each, for some reason or other. I was then hired by a man in
Nobletown, to go into the service for nine months, and went to Albany and
joined Capt. Bovit's company. As the man that hired me, refused to pay part of
what he promised, I attempted to return to my father; but was pursued,
overtook, and carried back -- joined the regiment, (Col. Ransselaers.) From
Albany went with a party to the German Flatts, and remained there till about
October, 1779. During this campaign, I stole one pair of brass shoe-buckles
from a soldier; a piece of linen cloth from one of the inhabitants; a powder
horn, powder, bullet-pouch, and bullets, from a soldier. Being one day sent out
upon a scout, with some others, we plundered an house, by leave of the officer;
and I privately, without leave, set it on fire.

Having obtained a furlough of twelve days to go home, on the road stole a pair
of silver shoe-buckles; between Sheffield and Canaan stole an horse, and rode
it almost home. On the way I stole two shirts, one frock, and a piece of linen
cloth, at different places. In the beginning of November, went to live in
New York State; stole one Continental dollar. Returned, and about the end of
that month, went to live at Mr. Caleb Mallery's.

He took me in out of pity and compassion, and engaged to let me have some
clothing, of which I stood in special need, and for which I made the most
vile, ungrateful, and detestable returns, as the sequel of this tragical story
will tell.

Just at the close of the month of January, 1780, about five or six days before
my perpetrating the blackest crimes that ever mortals committed, I determined
upon the murder of Mr. Mallory and his family, the first opportunity; and this,
merely, for the sake of plundering his house; without the least provocation, or
prejudice against any of them. The family in which I now lived consisted of Mr.
Mallery, Mrs. Mallery, a daughter in law, a daughter, and three grand children.

I was haunted and possessed with the thoughts of murder, from the time of my
first entertaining them, both day and night. Nor could I get rid of them, even
when I attempted to do it. -- Mr. Mallery's own daughter being a tayloress,
went out to work: her sister in law spoke of going to pay a visit, and tarrying
all night: which was the time I fixed upon to execute my bloody, land-defiling,
soul-ruining, and heaven-daring plan. With great impatience I waited for, and
endeavored to hasten the daughter in law to pay her visit, while the other
daughter was absent. On the 3d of February, she went away accordingly, and
tarried that night -- A night big with uncommon horror. My heart trembles and
is moved out of its place, at the relation of this most tremendous, cruel,
bloody, and amazing scene. -- Mr. Mallery and his wife with one of the
children, went to bed in the same room -- he lying in one bed, and the other
two in the other. Upon this, I took a piece of cloth and made me a knapsack:
and then went to plundering the daughter in law's room, searching for some hard
money, which, I understood she had, but could not find it. After putting some
things into my knapsack; with the candle in one had and the swingle in the
other, I went into the room where Mr. Mallery, his wife and one grand child lay
asleep. First I smote him with my might once or twice on his head; upon this
Mrs. Mallery awaking attempted to rise up; I turned and struck her one or two
blows. Mr. Mallery then sprung up; I struck immediately at him; but he partly
warded off the blow with his arm, and then struck the candle out of my hand; I
then pushed him back, and down upon the bed, belabouring him with the club --
He asked me who I was? what I meant? and said, tell me what you do it for? Then
called to his wife to come and help him repeatedly. Who can abstain from tears,
while relating these things! Mrs. Mallery made no answer, only shrieks, cries,
and doleful lamentations. Having for some time smote Mr. Mallery and pounded
him, the swingle split. Upon this, I catched a gun which stood behind the door,
and with this instrument of death, proceeded still to smite him: I then turned
again, and did the same to Mrs. Mallery, and continued striking till she lay
still as well as he.

The child, in bed with its grand mother, was seven years and eight months old.
These cruel blows and piercing cries awoke the tender babe, in shocking
surprise, even while I was killing her grand father; and starting up she asks,
her dear but wounded grand mother, what is the matter. She cried out bitterly;
she called out for me, or to me, by the name, the pleasant child used to call
me, saying, Mr. Nicholas Nicholas was the name by which he was called in that
family: and Mr. Nicholas by the child.
. But I continued paying on; feeling no remorse at killing my aged patrons and
benefactors. For the child, I seemed to feel, some small relentings, without
remitting in the least, my execrable exertions. This anger was cursed, for it
was most barbarous and cruel. Probably this child was at this time mortally
wounded; for she gave a few terrible shrieks, which (one would think) were
enough to pierce the hardest heart, and reach the center of the most obdurate
sinner's soul: And then she lay still, sighing and groaning in the most
affecting manner.

The room being now besmeared with blood, and filled with horrendous groans: I
went into the other room, lighted the candle, and presently returned to this
room, in which expiring groan answered to groan. Nor was Pharaoh's heart harder
than mine For amidst these dying groans and streaming blood, I looked for the
key to open the chest where the money lay; but could not find it. Then I went,
got a pestle and broke open the chest. By this time both Mr. Mallery and his
wife began to struggle -- I mashed his head all to pieces with this instrument:
And she rising partly up in the bed, I smote her also with the pestle on her
head, several times, and she tumbled behind the bed. Before this I saw her face
swollen to twice its common bigness, disfigured with wounds, and covered with
gore and streaming blood.

To an heart not past all feeling what could have been more shocking! But how
unmoved was I, who now set myself to searching for the money of the dead.
Having found a considerable sum of paper currency, and some solid coin; and
searched among the papers for more, scattering them about. I put on some of the
dying man's clothes: -- plundering the room in which those still groaning
persons, in the anguish of death, then were lying. Then, I went into a room
where the two other grand children lay. These were waked up by the preceding
blows or cries, and asked for their clothes to get up. I told them to lie down,
and go to sleep for it was not morning. They cried and asked what was the
matter with their grand mother? I answered, she was sick. They asked again,
What made her make such a noise? And then they lay down, sobbing These two
children were, one about six, the other about four years old.
. I then plundered the house of sundry articles. After this, I set a fire in
the milk room, another in the outward room, and another up chamber, in the flax
and tow. Seeing the house well on fire, and the outward room all filled with
blaze, I set off for Blue Swamp, about eight miles from thence. But for want of
a track in the snow, was obliged to go about twelve miles to get there. From
thence I purposed for Ball Town. Arrived at Blue Swamp, about nine o'clock, A.
M. But no sooner had I finished the dreadful scene of murder, than fear
attacked me -- Fleeing from the burning house and crossing a bridge near by, I
was afraid it would break under me, and kill me. -- After I got to Blue Swamp
(strange to relate) I tarried there from Friday morning till the next Wednesday
afternoon: Sometimes I felt alarmed and determined immediately to flee with all
possible speed: And in a few moments would sink into a state of the utmost
carelessness and remissness. Notwithstanding repeated resolutions, one thing
and another would intervene, and I could not go. The next day after I got to
Blue Swamp, we heard of the conflagration. I concluded, they would think that I
was burnt up, and was left to that stupidity, great part of the time, as not to
imagine they would hear of me. Sometimes, I apprehended, I should be
immediately taken, then sunk into the greatest security. On Wednesday
afternoon, I set off and went to Cornwall, where I put up for that night; when
I was pursued and taken in bed. Upon this I confessed the murder; though I
falsified the truth as to my having an accomplice. For I solemnly declare, that
no person living knew any thing about my murderous design, or had the least
hand in it, either mediately or immediately, but myself -- I undertook and
perpetrated it alone, amazing, and unheard of as it is.

After being sent to gaol, and even before I was committed, I confessed the
falsehood, respecting my saying, that I had an accomplice. On the 25th of
April, I was arraigned before the honorable superior court of this State, and
plead guilty to the indictment of murder, laid in against me.

On the 27th, sentence of death was publicly pronounced; and, upon the eighth
of May next, I am to be executed. O that others may take warning by my dreadful
example and fearful end! And avoid those sins which I have committed, and which
by a series of wickedness have led me on to the most awful crimes that ever
were perpetrated in this land, or perhaps any other; and for which I must (most
justly) suffer a violent death, and I greatly fear, everlasting burning, horror
and despair.

BARNETT DAVENPORT.
Litchfield Gaol, this 29th of April, Anno Domini, 1780. N. B. A number of
thefts, which he mentioned, after the minutes of the above were taken, are not
inserted; and probably many, which he either forgot or neglected to tell. He is
young in years, but old in crimes, having performed that exploit of wickedness,
which none other in this land, or perhaps any other, especially in so early
life, ever attempted. May the sordid life, the unheard of crimes, and fearful
end, of this poor, wretched malefactor, be a warning to parents and children.
That parents may be more careful to instruct and teach their children; pray
with and for them: so that they abstain from profaneness, and other works of
darkness, attend public worship, being taught by precept and example. And that
children would early call on God, avoid sin and all temptation, as knowing that
sins which, to them may perhaps appear small, yet being indulged, open the
floodgates to all manner of impiety, and lead down to the chambers of
everlasting death

As he is also to be considered in the character of a desorter from the army,
having been repeatedly guilty of that dreadful sin, may others take warning,
and not dare to do so wickedly, lest they incur the vengeance of Heaven, and of
their injured Country.



THE END.

