A CONSTITUTION or FRAME OF GOVERNMENT, Agreed upon by the DELEGATES of the
People of the STATE of MASSACHUSETTS BAY.

CONSTITUTION OR FRAME OF GOVERNMENT, Agreed upon by the DELEGATES of the
People of the State of MASSACHUSETTS BAY. IN CONVENTION, Begun and held at
CAMBRIDGE on the First of September, 1779, AND Continued by Adjournments to the
Second of MARCH, 1780. [Revised and Corrected.]

BOSTON: STATE OF MASSACHUSETTS BAY, Printed by BENJAMIN EDES and SONS, in
State-Street, M,DCC,LXXX.

A Constitution or Form of Government for the Commonwealth of MASSACHUSETTS.
PREAMBLE.
THE end of the institution, maintenance and administration of government, is
to secure the existence of the body-politic; to protect it; and to furnish the
individuals who compose it, with the power of enjoying, in safety and
tranquillity, their natural rights, and the blessings of life: And whenever
these great objects are not obtained, the people have a right to alter the
government, and to take measures necessary for their safety, prosperity and
happiness.

THE body-politic is formed by a voluntary association of individuals: It is a
social compact, by which the whole people covenants with each citizen, and each
citizen with the whole people, that all shall be governed by certain laws for
the common good. It is the duty of the people, therefore, in framing a
Constitution of Government, to provide for an equitable mode of making laws, as
well as for an impartial interpretation, and a faithful execution of them; that
every man may, at all times, find his security in them.

WE, therefore, the people of Massachusetts, acknowledging, with grateful
hearts, the goodness of the Great Legislator of the Universe, in affording us,
in the course of His Providence, an opportunity, deliberately and peaceably,
without fraud, violence or surprise, of entering into an original, explicit,
and solemn compact with each other; and of forming a new Constitution of Civil
Government, for ourselves and posterity; and devoutly imploring His direction
in so interesting a design, DO agree upon, ordain and establish, the following
Declaration of Rights, and Frame of Government, as the CONSTITUTION of the
COMMONWEALTH of MASSACHUSETTS.

PART THE FIRST. A DECLARATION of the RIGHTS of the Inhabitants of the
Commonwealth of MASSACHUSETTS.
Art. I.
ALL men are born free and equal, and have certain natural essential, and
unalienable rights; among which may be reckoned the right of enjoying and
defending their lives and liberties; that of acquiring, possessing, and
protecting property; in fine, that of seeking and obtaining their safety and
happiness.

II. IT is the right as well as the duty of all men in society, publicly, and
at stated seasons, to worship the SUPREME BEING, the great creator and
preserver of the universe. And no subject shall be hurt, molested, or
restrained, in his person, liberty, or estate, for worshipping GOD in the manner
and season most agreeable to the dictates of his own conscience; or for his
religious profession or sentiments; provided he does not disturb the public
peace, or obstruct others in their religious worship.

III. As the happiness of a people, and the good order and preservation of
civil government, essentially depend upon piety, religion and morality; and as
these cannot be generally diffused through a community, but by the institution
of the public worship of GOD, and of public instructions in piety, religion and
morality: Therefore, to promote their happiness, and to secure the good order
and preservation of their government, the people of this Commonwealth have a
right to invest their legislature with power to authorize and require, and the
legislature shall, from time to time, authorize and require, the several towns,
parishes, precincts and other bodies politic, or religious societies, to make
suitable provision, at their own expense, for the institution of the public
worship of GOD, and for the support and maintenance of public protestant
teachers of piety, religion and morality, in all cases where such provision
shall not be made voluntarily.

AND the people of this Commonwealth have also a right to, and do, invest their
legislature with authority to enjoin upon all the subjects an attendance upon
the instructions of the public teachers aforesaid, at stated times and seasons,
if there be any on whose instructions they can conscienciously and conveniently
attend.

PROVIDED notwithstanding, that the several towns, parishes, precincts, and
other bodies-politic, or religious societies, shall, at all times, have the
exclusive right of electing their public teachers, and of contracting with them
for their support and maintenance

AND all moneys paid by the subject to the support of public worship, and of
the public teachers aforesaid, shall, if he require it, be uniformly applied to
the support of the public teacher or teachers of his own religious sect or
denomination, provided there be any on whose instructions he attends; otherwise
it may be paid toward the support of the teacher or teachers of the parish or
precinct in which the said moneys are raised.

AND every denomination of christians, demeaning themselves peaceably, and as
good subjects of the Commonwealth, shall be equally under the protection of the
law: And no subordination of any one sect or denomination to another shall ever
be established by law.

IV. THE people of this Commonwealth have the sole and exclusive right of
governing themselves as a free, sovereign, and independent state; and do, and
forever hereafter shall, exercise and enjoy every power, jurisdiction, and
right which is not, or may not hereafter, be by them expressly delegated to the
United States of America in Congress assembled.

V. ALL power residing originally in the people, and being derived from them,
the several magistrates and officers of government, vested with authority,
whether legislative, executive, or judicial, are their substitutes and agents,
and are at all times accountable to them.

VI. NO man, nor corporation, or association of men, have any other title to
obtain advantages, or particular and exclusive privileges, distinct from those
of the community, than what arises from the consideration of services rendered
to the public; and this title being in nature neither hereditary, nor
transmissible to children, or descendents, or relations by blood, the idea of a
man born a magistrate, lawgiver, or judge, is absurd and unnatural.

VII. GOVERNMENT is instituted for the common good; for the protection, safety,
prosperity and happiness of the people; and not for the profit, honor, or
private interest of any one man, family or class of men: Therefore the people
alone have an incontestible, unalienable, and indefeasible tight to institute
government; and to reform, alter, or totally charge the same, when their
protection, safety, prosperity and happiness require it.

VIII. IN order to prevent those, who are vested with authority, from becoming
oppressors, the people have a right, at such periods and in such manner as they
shall establish by their frame of government, to cause the^^ public officers to
return to private life; and to fill up vacant places by certain and regular
elections and appointments.

IX. ALL elections ought to be free and all the inhabitants of this
Commonwealth, having such qualifications as they shall establish by their frame
of government, have an equal right to elect officers, and to be elected, for
public employments.

X EACH individual of the society has a right to be protected by it in the
enjoyment of his life, liberty and property, according to standing laws. He is
obliged, consequently, to contribute his share to the expense of this
protection; to give his personal service, or an equivalent, when necessary: But
no part of the property of any individual, can, with justice, be taken from
him, or applied to public uses, without his own consent, or that of the
representative body of the people: In fine, the people of this Commonwealth are
not controulable by any other laws, than those to which their constitutional
representative body have given their consent. And whenever the public
exigencies require, that the property of any individual should be appropriated
to public uses, he shall receive a reasonable compensation therefore.

XI. EVERY subject of the Commonwealth ought to find a certain remedy, by
having recourse to the laws for all injuries or wrongs which he may receive in
his person, property, or character. He ought to obtain right and justice
freely, and without being obliged to purchase it; completely, and without any
denial; promptly, and without delay; conformably to the laws.

XII. NO subject shall be held to answer for any crime or offense, until the
same is fully and plainly, substantially and formally, described to him; or be
compelled to accuse, or furnish evidence against himself. And every subject
shall have a right to produce all proofs, that may be favorable to him; to
meet the witnesses against him face to face, and to be fully heard in his
defense by himself, or his council, at his election. And no subject shall be
arrested, imprisoned, despoiled, or deprived of his property, immunities, or
privileges, put out of the protection of the law, exiled, or deprived of his
life, liberty, or estate, but by the judgment of his peers, or the law of the
land.

AND the legislature shall not make any law, that shall subject any person to a
capital or infamous punishment, excepting for the government of the army and
navy, without trial by jury.

XIII. IN criminal prosecutions, the verification of facts in the vicinity
where they happen, is one of the greatest securities of the life, liberty, and
property of the citizen.

XIV. EVERY subject has a right to be secure from all unreasonable searches,
and seizures, of his person, his houses, his papers, and all his possessions.
All warrants, therefore, are contrary to this right, if the cause or foundation
of them be not previously supported by oath or affirmation; and if the order in
the warrant to a civil officer, to make search in suspected places, or to
arrest one or more suspected persons, or to seize their property, be not
accompanied with a special designation of the persons or objects of search,
arrest, or seizure: and no warrant ought to be issued but in cases, and with
the formalities, prescribed by the laws.

XV. IN all controversies concerning property, and in all suits between two or
more persons, except in cases in which it has heretofore been otherways used
and practiced, the parties have a right to a trial by a jury; and this method
of procedure shall be held sacred, unless, in causes arising on the high-seas,
and such as relate to mariners wagers, the legislature shall hereafter find it
necessary to alter it.

XVI. THE liberty of the press is essential to the security of freedom in a
state: it ought not, therefore, to be restrained in this Commonwealth.

XVII. THE people have a right to keep and to bear arms for the common defense.
And as in time of peace armies are dangerous to liberty, they ought not to be
maintained without the consent of the legislature; and the military power shall
always be held in an exact subordination to the civil authority and be governed
by it.

XVIII. A FREQUENT recurrence to the fundamental principles of the
constitution, and a constant adherence to those of piety, justice, moderation,
temperance, industry, and frugality, are absolutely necessary to preserve the
advantages of liberty, and to maintain a free government: The people ought,
consequently, to have a particular attention to all those principles, in the
choice of their officers and representatives: And they have a right to require
of their lawgivers and magistrates, an exact and constant observance of them,
in the formation and execution of the laws necessary for the good
administration of the Commonwealth.

XIX. THE people have a right, in an orderly and peaceable manner, to assemble
to consult upon the common good: give instructions to their representatives;
and to request of the legislative body, by the way of addresses, petitions, or
remonstrances, redress of the wrongs done them, and of the grievances they
suffer.

XX. THE power of suspending the laws, or the execution of the laws, ought
never to be exercised but by the legislature, or by authority derived from it,
to be exercised in such particular cases only as the legislature shall expressly
provide for.

XXI. THE freedom of deliberation, speech and debate, in either house of the
legislature, is so essential to the rights of the people, that it cannot be the
foundation of any accusation or prosecution, action or complaint, in any other
court or place whatsoever.

XXII. THE legislature ought frequently to assemble for the redress of
grievances, for correcting, strengthening, and confirming the laws and for
making new laws, as the common good may require.

XXIII. NO subsidy, charge, tax, impost, or duties, ought to be established,
fixed, laid, or levied under any pretext whatsoever, without the consent of the
people, or their representatives in the legislature.

XXIV. LAWS made to punish for actions done before the existence of such laws,
and which have not been declared crimes by proceeding laws, are unjust,
expressive, and inconsistent with the fundamental principles of a free
government.

XXV. NO subject ought, in any case, or in any time to be declared guilty of
treason or felony by the legislature.

XXVI. NO magistrate or court of law, shall demand excessive bail or sureties,
impose excessive fines, or inflict cruel or unusual punishments.

XXVII. IN time of peace no soldier ought to be quartered in any house without
the consent of the owner; and in time of war such quarters ought not to be made
but by the civil magistrate, in a manner ordained by the legislature.

XXVIII. NO person can in any case be subjected to law-martial, or to any
penalties or pains, by virtue of that law, except those employed in the army or
navy, and except the militia in actual service, but by authority of the
legislature.

XXIX. IT is essential to the preservation of the rights of every individual,
his life, liberty, property and character, that there be an impartial
interpretation of the laws, and administration of justice. It is the right of
every citizen to be tried by judges as free, impartial and independent as the
lot of humanity will admit. It is therefore not only the best policy, but for
the security of the rights of the people, and of every citizen, that the judges
of the supreme judicial court should hold their offices as long as they behave
themselves well; and that they should have honorable salaries ascertained and
established by standing laws.

XXX. IN the government of this Commonwealth, the legislative department shall
never exercise the executive and judicial powers, or either of them: The
executive shall never exercise the legislative and judicial powers, or either
of them: The judicial shall never exercise the legislative and executive
powers, or either of them: to the end it may be a government of laws and not of
men.

PART THE SECOND. The Frame of Government.
THE people inhabiting the territory formerly called the Province of
Massachusetts Bay, do hereby solemnly and mutually agree with each other, to
form themselves into a free, sovereign, and independent body-politic or state,
by the name of THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS.

CHAPTER I. The Legislative Power.
SECTION I. The General Court.
ART. I. THE department of legislation shall be formed by two branches, a
Senate and House of Representatives: each of which shall have a negative on the
other.

THE legislative body shall assemble every year on the last Wednesday in May,
and at such other times as they shall judge necessary; and shall disolve and be
dissolved on the day next preceding the said last Wednesday in May; and shall
be styled, THE GENERAL COURT of MASSACHUSETTS.

II. NO bill or resolve of the Senate or House of Representatives shall become
a law, and have force as such, until it shall have been laid before the
Governor for his revisal: And if he, upon such revision, approve thereof, he
shall signify his approbation by signing the same. But if he have any objection
to the passing of such bill or resolve, he shall return the same, together with
his objections thereto, in writing, to the Senate or House of Representatives,
in which soever the same shall have originated; who shall enter the objections
sent down by the Governor, at large, on their records, and proceed to
reconsider the said bill or resolve: But if after such reconsideration, two
thirds of the said Senate or House of Representatives, shall, notwithstanding
the said objections, agree to pass the same, it shall, together with the
objections, be sent to the other branch of the legislature, where it shall also
be reconsidered, and if approved by two thirds of the members present it shall
have the force of a law: but in all such cases, the votes of both houses shall
be determined by yeas and nays; and the names of the persons voting for, or
against, the said bill or resolve, shall be entered upon the public records of
the Commonwealth.

AND in order to prevent unnecessary delays, if any bill or resolve shall not
be returned by the Governor within five days after it shall have been
presented, the same shall have the force of a law.

III. THE General Court shall forever have full power and authority to erect
and constitute judicatories and courts of record, or other courts, to be held
in the name of the Commonwealth, for the hearing, trying, and determining of
all manner of crimes, offenses, pleas, processes, plaints, actions, matters,
causes and things, whatsoever, arising or happening within the Commonwealth, or
between or concerning persons inhabiting, or residing, or brought within the
same; whether the same be criminal or civil, or whether the said crimes be
capital or not capital, and whether the said pleas be real, personal, or mixed;
and for the awarding and making out of execution thereupon: To which courts and
judicatories are hereby given and granted full power and authority, from time
to time, to administer oaths or affirmations, for the better discovery of truth
in any matter in controversy or depending before them.

IV. AND further, full power and authority are hereby given and granted to the
said General Court, from time to time, to make, ordain, and establish, all
manner of wholesome and reasonable orders, laws, statutes, and ordinances,
directions and instructions, either with penalties or without; so as the same
be not repugnant or contrary to this Constitution, as they shall judge to be
for the good and welfare of this Commonwealth, and for the government and
ordering thereof, and of the subjects of the same, and for the necessary
support and defense of the government thereof; and to name and settle annually,
or provide by fixed laws, for the naming and settling all civil officers within
the said Commonwealth; the election and constitution of whom are not hereafter
in this Form of Government otherwise provided for; and to set forth the several
duties, powers and limits, of the several civil and military officers of this
Commonwealth and the forms of such oaths or affirmations as shall be
respectively administered unto them for the execution of their several offices
and places, so as the same be not repugnant or contrary to this Constitution;
and to impose and levy proportional and reasonable assessments, rates and
taxes, upon all the inhabitants of, and persons resident, and estates lying,
within the said Commonwealth; and also to impose, and levy, reasonable duties
and excises, upon any produce goods, wares, merchandise, and commodities
whatsoever, brought into, produced, manufactured, or being within the same; to
be issued and disposed of by warrant, under the hand of the Governor of this
Commonwealth for the time being with the advice and consent of the Council, for
the public service, in the necessary defense and support of the government of
the said Commonwealth and the protection and preservation of the subjects
thereof, according to such acts as are or shall be in force within the same.

AND while the public charges of government, or any part thereof, shall be
assessed on polls and estates in the manner that has hitherto been practiced;
in order that such assessments may be made with equality, there shall be a
valuation of estates within the Commonwealth taken anew once in every ten years
at the least, and as much oftener as the General court shall order.

CHAPTER I. SECTION II. SENATE.
Art. I. THERE shall be annually elected by the freeholders and other
inhabitants of this Commonwealth, qualified as in this Constitution is
provided, forty persons to be Counselors and Senators for the year ensuing
their election; to be chosen by the inhabitants of the districts, into which
the Commonwealth may from time to time be divided by the General Court for that
purpose: And the General Court, in assigning the numbers to be elected by the
respective districts, shall govern themselves by the proportion of the public
taxes paid by the said districts; and timely make known to the inhabitants of
the Commonwealth, the limits of each district, and the number of Counselors
and Senators to be chosen therein; provided that the number of such districts
shall be never less than thirteen; and that no district be so large as to
entitle the same to choose more than six Senators.

AND the several counties in this Commonwealth shall, until the General Court
shall determine it necessary to alter the said districts, be districts for the
choice of Counselors and Senators (except that the counties of Dukes-County
and Nantucket shall form one district for that purpose) and shall elect the
following number for Counselors and Senators, viz.

Suffolk Six York Two Essex Six Dukes-County and Nantucket One Middlesex Five
Hampshire Four Worcester Five Plymouth Three Cumberland One Barnstable One
Lincoln One Bristol Three Berkshire Two

II. THE Senate shall be the first branch of the legislature; and the Senators
shall be chosen in the following manner, viz. There shall be a meeting on the
first Monday in April annually, forever, of the inhabitants of each town in the
several counties of this Commonwealth; to be called by the Selectmen, and
warned in due course of law, at least seven days before the first Monday in
April, for the purpose of electing persons to be Senators and Counselors: And
at such meetings every male inhabitant of twenty-one years of age and upwards,
having a freehold estate within the Commonwealth, of the annual income of three
pounds, or any estate of the value of sixty pounds, shall have a right to give
in his vote for the Senators for the district of which he is an inhabitant. And
to remove all doubts concerning the meaning of the word "Inhabitant," in this
Constitution, every person shall be considered as an inhabitant, for the
purpose of electing and being elected into any office or place within this
State, in that town, district or plantation, where he dwells, or has his
home.

THE Selectmen of the several towns shall preside at such meetings impartially;
and shall receive the votes of all the inhabitants of such towns present and
qualified to vote for Senators, and shall sort and count them in open
town-meeting, and in presence of the Town Clerk, who shall make a fair record,
in presence of the Selectmen, and in open town-meeting, of the name of every
person voted for, and of the number of votes against his name; and a fair copy
of this record shall be attested by the Selectmen and the Town Clerk, and shall
be sealed up, directed to the Secretary of the Commonwealth for the time being,
with a superscription, expressing the purport of the contents thereof, and
delivered by the Town Clerk of such towns, to the Sheriff of the county in
which such town lies, thirty days at least before the last Wednesday in May
annually; or it shall be delivered into the Secretary's office seventeen days
at least before the said last Wednesday in May; and the Sheriff of each county
shall deliver all such certificates by him received into the Secretary's office
seventeen days before the said last Wednesday in May.

AND the inhabitants of plantations unincorporated, qualified as this
Constitution provides, who are or shall be empowered and required to assess
taxes upon themselves toward the support of government, shall have the same
privilege of voting for Counselors and Senators in the plantations where they
reside, as town inhabitants have in their respective towns; and the plantation
meetings for that purpose shall be held annually on the same firs;t Monday in
April at such place in the plantations respectively, as the Assessors thereof
shall direct; which Assessors shall have like authority for notifying the
electors collecting and returning the votes, as the Selectmen and Town Clerks
have in their several towns, by this Constitution. And all other persons living
in places unincorporated (qualified as aforesaid) who shall be assessed to the
support of government by the Assessors of an adjacent town, shall have the
privilege of giving in their votes for Counselors and Senators, in the town
where they shall be assessed, and be notified of the place of meeting by the
Selectmen of the town where they shall be assessed, for that purpose
accordingly.

III. AND that there may be a due convention of Senators on the last Wednesday
in May annually, the Governor, with five of the Council, for the time being,
shall, as soon as may be, examine the returned copies of such records; and
fourteen days before the said day he shall issue his summons to such persons as
shall appear to be chosen by a majority of voters, to attend on that day, and
take their seats accordingly: Provided nevertheless, that for the first year
the said returned copies shall be examined by the President and five of the
Council of the former Constitution of Government; and the said President shall,
in like manner, issue his summons to the persons so elected, that they may take
their seats as aforesaid.

IV. THE Senate shall be the final judge of the elections, returns and
qualifications of their own members, as pointed out in the Constitution; and
shall, on the said last Wednesday in May annually, determine and declare who
are elected by each district, to be Senators by a majority of votes: And in
case there shall not appear to be the full number of Senators returned elected
by a majority of votes for any district, the deficiency shall be supplied in
the following manner, viz The members of the House of Representatives, and such
Senators as shall be declared elected, shall take the names of such persons as
shall be found to have the highest number of votes in such district, and not
elected, amounting to twice the number of Senators wanting, if there be so many
voted for; and out of these, shall elect by ballot a number of Senators
sufficient to fill up the vacancies in such district; and in this manner all
such vacancies shall be filled up in every district of the Commonwealth; and in
like manner all vacancies in the Senate, arising by death, removal out of the
State, or otherwise, shall be supplied as soon as may be, after such vacancies
shall happen.

V. PROVIDED nevertheless, that no person shall be capable of being elected as
a Senator, who is not seized in his own right of a freehold within this
Commonwealth, of the value of three hundred pounds at least, or possessed of
personal estate to the value of six hundred pounds at least, or of both to the
amount of the same sum, and who has not been an inhabitant of this Commonwealth
for the space of five years immediately preceding his election, and at the
time of his election, he shall be an inhabitant in the district for which he
shall be chosen.

VI. THE Senate shall have power to adjourn themselves, provided such
adjournments do not exceed two days at a time.

VII. THE Senate shall choose its own President, appoint its own officers, and
determine its own rules of proceedings.

VIII. THE Senate shall be a court with full authority to hear and determine
all impeachments made by the House of Representatives, against any officer or
officers of the Commonwealth, for misconduct and mal-administration in their
offices. But previous to the trial of every impeachment, the members of the
Senate shall respectively be sworn, truly and impartially to try and determine
the charge in question, according to evidence. Their judgment, however shall
not extend further than to removal from office, and disqualification to hold or
enjoy any place of honor, trust, or profit, under this Commonwealth: But the
party so convicted, shall be, nevertheless, liable to indictment, trial,
judgment, and punishment, according to the laws of the land.

IX. NOT less than sixteen members of the Senate shall constitute a quorum for
doing business.

CHAPTER I. SECTION III. House of Representatives.
Art. I. THERE shall be in the Legislature of this Commonwealth, a
representation of the people, annually elected, and founded upon the principle
of equality.

II. AND in order to provide for a representation of the citizens of this
Commonwealth, founded upon the principle of equality, every corporate town
containing one hundred and fifty rateable polls, may elect one Representative:
Every corporate town, containing three hundred and seventy-five rateable polls,
may elect two Representatives: Every corporate town, containing six hundred
rateable polls, may elect three Representatives; and proceeding in that manner,
making two hundred and twenty-five rateable polls the mean increasing number
for every additional Representative.

PROVIDED nevertheless, that each town now incorporated, not having one hundred
and fifty rateable polls, may elect one Representative: But no place shall
hereafter be incoporated with the privilege of electing a Representative,
unless there are within the same one hundred and fifty rateable polls.

AND the House of Representatives shall have power from time to time to impose
fines upon such towns a shall neglect to choose and return members to the same
agr^^ably to this Constitution.

THE expenses of traveling to the General Assembly and returning home, once in
every session and no more, shall be paid by the government, out of the public
treasury, to every member who shall attend as seasonably as he can, in the
judgment of the House, and does not depart without leave.

III. EVERY member of the House of Representatives shall be chosen by written
votes; and for one year at least next preceding his election, shall have been
an inhabitant of, and have been seized in his own right of a freehold of the
value of one hundred pounds within the town he shall be chosen to represent, or
any rateable estate to the value of two hundred pounds; and he shall cease to
represent the said town immediately on his ceasing to be qualified as aforesaid.

IV. EVERY male person, being twenty-one years of age, and resident in any
particular town in this Commonwealth for the space of one year next preceding,
having a freehold estate within the same town, of the annual income of three
pounds, or any estate of the value of sixty pounds, shall have a right to vote
in the choice of a Representative, or Representatives for the said town.

V. THE members of the House of Representatives shall be chosen annually in the
month of May, ten days at least before the last Wednesday of that month.

VI. THE House of Representatives shall be the Grand Inquest of this
Commonwealth; and all impeachments made by them, shall be heard and tried by
the Senate.

VII. ALL money-bills shall originate in the House of Representatives; but the
Senate may propose or concur with amendments, as on other bills.

VIII. THE House of Representatives shall have power to adjourn themselves;
provided such adjournment shall not exceed two days at a time.

IX NOT less than sixty members of the House of Representatives, shall
constitute a quorum for doing business.

X THE House of Representatives shall be the judge of the returns, elections,
and qualifications of its own members as pointed out in the Constitution; shall
choose their own Speaker; appoint their own officers, and settle the rules and
orders of proceeding in their own House: They shall have authority to punish by
imprisonment, every person not a member who shall be guilty of disrespect to
the House by any disorderly, or contemptuous behavior in its presence; or who,
in the town where the General Court is sitting, and during the time of its
sitting, shall threaten harm to the body or estate of any of its members, for
any thing said or done in the House; or who shall assault any of them
therefore; or who shall assault, or arrest any witness, or other person,
ordered to attend the House, in his way in going, or returning; or who shall
rescue any person arrested by the order of the House.

AND no member of the House of Representatives shall be arrested, or held to
bail on mean process, during his going unto, returning from, or his attending
the General Assembly.

XI. THE Senate shall have the same powers in the like cases; and the Governor
and Council shall have the same authority to punish in like cases. Provided
that no imprisonment on the warrant or order of the Governor, Council, Senate,
or House of Representatives, for either of the above-described offenses be for
a term exceeding thirty days.

AND the Senate and House of Representatives may try, and determine, all cases
where their rights and privileges are concerned, and which, by the
Constitution, they have authority to try and determine, by committees of their
own members, or in such other way as they may respectively think best.

CHAPTER II. Executive Power.
SECTION I. GOVERNOR.
Art. I. THERE shall be a supreme executive Magistrate, who shall be styled,
THE GOVERNOR OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS; and whose title shall be --
HIS EXCELLENCY.

II. THE Governor shall be chosen annually: And no person shall be eligible to
this office, unless at the time of his election, he shall have been an
inhabitant of this Commonwealth for seven years next preceding; and unless he
shall, at the same time, be seized in his own right, of a freehold within the
Commonwealth, of the value of one thousand pounds; and unless he shall declare
himself to be of the christian religion.

III. THOSE persons who shall be qualified to vote for Senators and
Representatives within the several towns of this Commonwealth, shall, at a
meeting to be called for that purpose, on the first Monday of April annually,
give in their votes for a Governor, to the Selectmen, who shall preside at such
meetings; and the Town Clerk, in the presence and with the assistance of the
Selectmen, shall, in open town-meeting, sort and count the votes, and form a
list of the persons voted for, with the number of votes for each person against
his name; and shall make a fair record of the same in the town books, and a
public declaration thereof in the said meeting; and shall, in the presence of
the inhabitants, seal up copies of the said list, attested by him and the
Selectmen, and transmit the same to the Sheriff of the county, thirty days at
least before the last Wednesday in May; and the Sheriff shall transmit the same
to the Secretary's office, seventeen days at least before the said last
Wednesday in May; or the Selectmen may cause returns of the same to be made to
the office of the Secretary of the Commonwealth, seventeen days at least before
the said day; and the Secretary shall lay the same before the Senate and the
House of Representatives, on the last Wednesday in May, to be by them examined:
And in case of an election by a majority of all the votes returned, the choice
shall be by them declared and published: But if no person shall have a majority
of votes, the House of Representatives shall, by ballot, elect two out of four
persons who had the highest numbers of votes, if so many shall have been voted
for; but, if otherwise, out of the number voted for; and make return to the
Senate of the two persons so elected; on which, the Senate shall proceed, by
ballot to elect one, who shall be declared Governor.

IV. THE Governor shall have authority, from time to time, at his discretion,
to assemble and call together the Counselors of this Commonwealth for the time
being; and the Governor, with the said Counselors, or five of them at least,
shall, and may from time to time, hold and keep a Council, for the ordering and
directing the affairs of the Commonwealth, agreeably to the Constitution and
the laws of the land.

V. THE Governor, with advice of Council, shall have full power and authority,
during the session of the General Court to adjourn or prorogue the same to any
time the two Houses shall desire; and to dissolve the same on the day next
preceding the last Wednesday in May; and, in the recess of the said Court, to
prorogue the same from time to time, not exceeding ninety days in any one
recess; and to call it together sooner than the time to which it may be
adjourned or prorogued, if the welfare of the Commonwealth shall require the
same: And in case of any infectious distemper prevailing in the place where the
said Court is next at any time to convene, or any other cause happening whereby
danger may arise to the health or lives of the members from their attendance,
he may direct the session to be held at some other the most convenient place
within the State.

AND the Governor shall dissolve the said General Court on the day next
preceding the last Wednesday in May.

VI. IN cases of disagreement between the two Houses, with regard to the
necessity, expediency or time of adjournment, or prorogation, the Governor,
with advice of the Council, shall have a right to adjourn or prorogue the
General Court, not exceeding ninety days, as he shall determine the public good
shall require.

VII. THE Governor of this Commonwealth for the time being, shall be the
commander in chief of the army and navy, and of all the military forces of the
State, by sea and land; and shall have full power by himself, or by any
commander, or other officer or officers, from time to time, to train, instruct,
exercise and govern the militia and navy; and, for the special defense and
safety of the Commonwealth, to assemble in martial array, and put in warlike
posture, the inhabitants thereof, and to lead and conduct them, and with them,
to encounter, repel, resist, expel and pursue, by force of arms, as well by sea
as by land, within or without the limits of this Commonwealth, and also to
kill, slay and destroy, if necessary, and conquer by all fitting ways,
enterprises, and means whatsoever, all and every such person and persons as
shall, at any time hereafter, in a hostile manner, attempt or enterprise the
destruction, invasion, detriment, or annoyance of this Commonwealth; and to use
and exercise, over the army and navy, and over the militia in actual service,
the law-martial, in time of war or invasion, and also in time of rebellion,
declared by the Legislature to exist, as occasion shall necessarily require;
and to take and surprise by all ways and means whatsoever, all and every such
person or persons, with their ships, arms, ammunition and other goods, as
shall, in a hostile manner, invade or attempt the invading, conquering, or
annoying this Commonwealth; and that the Governor be entrusted with all these
and other powers, incident to the offices of Captain General and Commander in
Chief, and Admiral, to be exercised agreeably to the rules and regulations of
the Constitution, and the laws of the land, and not otherwise.

PROVIDED, that the said Governor shall not, at any time hereafter, by virtue
of any power by this Constitution granted, or hereafter to be granted to him by
the Legislature, transport any of the inhabitants of this Commonwealth, or
oblige them to march out of the limits of the same, without their free and
voluntary consent, or the consent of the General Court; except so far as may be
necessary to march or transport them by land or water for the defense of such
part of the State, to which they cannot otherwise conveniently have access.

VIII. THE power of pardoning offenses, except such as persons may be convicted
of before the Senate by an impeachment of the House, shall be in the Governor,
by and with the advice of Council: But no charter of pardon, granted by the
Governor, with advice of the Council, before conviction, shall avail the party
pleading the same, notwithstanding any general or particular expressions
contained therein, descriptive of the offense or offenses intended to be
pardoned.

IX. ALL judicial officers, the Attorney General, the Solicitor-General, all
Sheriffs, Coroners, and Registers of Probate, shall be nominated and appointed
by the Governor, by and with the advice and consent of the Council; and every
such nomination shall be made by the Governor, and made at least seven days
prior to such appointment.

X. THE Captains and Subalterns of the militia, shall be elected by the written
votes of the train band and alarm-list of their respective companies, of
twenty-one years of age and upwards: The Field-Officers of regiments shall be
elected by the written votes of the Captains and Subalterns of their respective
regiments: The Brigadiers shall be elected in like manner, by the
Field-Officers of their respective brigades: And such officers, so elected,
shall be commissioned by the Governor, who shall determine their rank.

THE Legislature shall, by standing laws, direct the time and manner of
convening the electors, and of collecting votes, and of certifying to the
Governor the officers elected.

THE Major-Generals shall be appointed by the Senate and House of
Representatives, each having a negative upon the other; and be commissioned by
the Governor.

AND if the electors of Brigadiers, Field-Officers, Captains or Subalterns,
shall neglect or refuse to make such elections, after being duly notified,
according to the laws for the time being, then the Governor, with advice of
Council, shall appoint suitable persons to fill such offices.

AND no officer, duly commissioned to command in the militia, shall be removed
from his office, but by the address of both Houses to the Governor, or by fair
trial in court martial, pursuant to the laws of the Commonwealth for the time
being.

THE commanding officers of regiments shall appoint their Adjutants and
Quarter Masters; the Brigadiers their Brigade Majors; and the Major-Generals
their Aids; and the Governor shall appoint the Adjutant General.

THE Governor, with advice of Council, shall appoint all officers of the
continental army, whom by the confederation of the United States it is provided
that this Commonwealth shall appoint, -- as also all officers of sorts and
garrisons.

THE divisions of the militia into brigades, regiments and companies, made in
pursuance of the militia laws now in force, shall be considered as the proper
divisions of the militia of this Commonwealth, until the same shall be altered
in pursuance of some future law.

XI. No moneys shall be issued out of the treasury of this Commonwealth, and
disposed of (except such sums as may be appropriated for the redemption of
bills of credit or Treasurer's notes or for the payment of interest arising
thereon) but by warrant under the hand of the Governor for the time being, with
the advice and consent of the Council, for the necessary defense and support of
the Commonwealth; and for the protection and preservation of the inhabitants
thereof, agreeably to the acts and resolves of the General Court.

XII. ALL public boards, the Commissary-General, all superintending officers of
public magazines and stores, belonging to this Commonwealth, and all commanding
officers of forts and garrisons within the same, shall once in every three
months officially, and without requisition, and at other times, when required
by the Governor, deliver to him an account of all goods, stores, provisions,
ammunition, cannon with their appendages, and small arms with their
accoutrements, and of all other public property whatever under their care
respectively; distinguishing the quantity, number, quality and kind of each, as
particularly as may be; together with the condition of such forts and
garrisons: And the said commanding officer shall exhibit to the Governor, when
required by him, true and exact plans of such forts, and of the land and sea or
harbor or harbors adjacent.

AND the said boards, and all public officers, shall communicate to the
Governor, as soon as may be after receiving the same, all letters, dispatches,
and intelligencies of a public nature, which shall be directed to them
respectively.

XIII. AS the public good requires that the Governor should not be under the
undue influence of any of the members of the General Court, by a dependence on
them for his support -- that he should in all cases, act with freedom for the
benefit of the public -- that he should not have his attention necessarily
diverted from that object to his private concerns -- and that he should
maintain the dignity of the Commonwealth in the character of its chief
magistrate -- it is necessary that he should have an honorable stated salary,
of a fixed and permanent value, amply sufficient for those purposes, and
established by standing laws: And it shall be among the first acts of the
General Court, after the commencement of this Constitution, to establish such
salary by law accordingly.

PERMANENT and honorable salaries shall also be established by law for the
Justices of the supreme judicial court.

AND if it shall be found that any of the salaries aforesaid, so established,
are insufficient, they shall, from time to time, be enlarged as the General
Court shall judge proper.

CHAPTER II. SECTION II. Lieutenant Governor.
Art. I. THERE shall be annually elected a Lieutenant Governor of the
Commonwealth of Massachusetts, whose title shall be -- HIS HONOR -- and who
shall be qualified, in point of religion, property, and residence in the
Commonwealth, in the same manner with the Governor: And the day and manner of
his election, and the qualifications of the electors, shall be the same as are
required in the election of a Governor. The return of the votes for this
officer, and the declaration of his election, shall be in the same manner: And
if no one person shall be found to have a majority of all the votes returned,
the vacancy shall be filled by the Senate and House of Representatives, in the
same manner as the Governor is to be elected, in case no one person shall have
a majority of the votes of the people to be Governor.

II. THE Governor, and in his absence the Lieutenant Governor, shall be
President of the Council, but shall have no vote in Council: And the
Lieutenant Governor shall always be a member of the Council, except when the
chair of the Governor shall be vacant.

III. WHENEVER the chair of the Governor shall be vacant, by reason of his
death, or absence from the Commonwealth, or otherwise, the Lieutenant Governor,
for the time being, shall, during such vacancy, perform all the duties
incumbent upon the Governor, and shall have and exercise all the powers and
authorities which by this Constitution the Governor is vested with, when
personnally present.

CHAPTER II. SECTION III. Council, and the Manner of settling Elections by the
Legislature.
Art. I. THERE shall be a Council for advising the Governor in the executive
part of government, to consist of nine persons besides the Lieutenant Governor,
whom the Governor, for the time being, shall have full power and authority,
from time to time, at his discretion, to assemble and call together. And the
Governor, with the said Counselors, or five of them at least, shall and may,
from time to time, hold and keep a Council, for the ordering and directing the
affairs of the Commonwealth, according to the laws of the land.

II. NINE Counselors shall be annually chosen from among the persons returned
for Counselors and Senators, on the last Wednesday in May, by the joint ballot
of the Senators and Representatives assembled in one room: And in case there
shall not be found upon the first choice, the whole number of nine persons who
will accept a seat in the Council, the deficiency shall be made up by the
electors aforesaid from among the people at large; and the number of Senators
left shall constitute the Senate for the year. The seats of the persons thus
elected from the Senate, and accepting the trust, shall be vacated in the
Senate.

III. THE Counselors, in the civil arrangements of the Commonwealth, shall
have rank next after the Lieutenant Governor.

IV. NOT more than two Counselors shall be chosen out of any one district of
this Commonwealth.

V. THE resolutions and advice of the Council shall be recorded in a register,
and signed by the members present; and this record may be called for at any
time by either House of the Legislature; and any member of the Council may
insert his opinion contrary to the resolution of the majority.

VI. WHENEVER the office of the Governor and Lieutenant Governor shall be
vacant, by reason of death, absence, or otherwise, then the Council, or the
major part of them, shall, during such vacancy, have full power and authority,
to do, and execute, all and every such acts, matters and things, as the
Governor or the Lieutenant Governor might or could, by virtue of this
Constitution, do or execute, if they, or either of them, were personally
present.

VII. AND whereas the elections appointed to be made by this Constitution, on
the last Wednesday in May annually, by the two Houses of the Legislature, may
not be completed on that day, the said elections may be adjourned from day to
day until the same shall be completed. And the order of elections shall be as
follows: The vacancies in the Senate, if any, shall first be filled up; the
Governor and Lieutenant Governor shall then be elected, provided there should
be no choice of them by the people: And afterward the two Houses shall proceed
to the election of the Council.

CHAPTER II. SECTION IV. Secretary, Treasurer, Commissary, etc.
Art. I. THE Secretary, Treasurer and Receiver-General, and the
Commissary-General, Notaries-Public, and Naval-Officers, shall be chosen
annually, by joint ballot of the Senators and Representatives in one room. And
that the citizens of this Commonwealth may be assured, from time to time, that
the moneys remaining in the public treasury, upon the settlement and
liquidation of the public accounts, are their property, no man shall be
eligible as Treasurer and Receiver-General more than five years successively.

II. THE records of the Commonwealth shall be kept in the office of the
Secretary, who may appoint his Deputies, for whose conduct he shall be
accountable, and he shall attend the Governor and Council, the Senate and House
of Representatives, in person, or by his Deputies, as they shall respectively
require.

CHAPTER III. Judiciary Power.
Art. I. THE tenure, that all commission officers shall by law have in their
offices shall be expressed in their respective commissions. All judicial
officers duly appointed, commissioned and sworn, shall hold their offices
during good behavior, excepting such concerning whom there is different
provision made in this Constitution: Provided nevertheless, the Governor, with
consent of the Council, may remove them upon the address of both Houses of the
Legislature.

II. EACH branch of the Legislature, as well as the Governor and Council, shall
have authority to require the opinions of the Justices of the supreme judicial
court, upon important questions of law, and upon solemn occasions.

III. IN order that the people may not suffer from the long continuance in
place of any Justice of the Peace, who shall fail of discharging the important
duties of his office with ability or fidelity, all commissions of Justices of
the Peace shall expire and become void, in the term of seven years from their
respective dates; and upon the expiration of any commission, the same may, if
necessary, be renewed, or another Person appointed, as shall most conduce to
the well-being of the Commonwealth.

IV. THE Judges of Probate of Wills, and for granting letters of
administration, shall hold their courts at such place or places, on fixed days,
as the convenience of the people shall require. And the Legislature shall, from
time to time, hereafter appoint such times and places; until which
appointments, the said courts shall be holden at the times and places which the
respective Judges shall direct.

V. ALL causes of marriage, divorce and alimony, and all appeals from the
Judges of Probate shall be heard and determined by the Governor and Council
until the Legislature shall, by law make other provision.

CHAPTER IV. Delegates to Congress.
THE Delegates of this Commonwealth to the Congress of the United States,
shall, sometime in the month of June annually, be elected by the joint ballot
of the Senate and House of Representatives, assembled together in one room; to
serve in Congress for one year, to commence on the first Monday in November
then next ensuing. They shall have commissions under the hand of the Governor,
and the great seal of the Commonwealth; but may be recalled at any time within
the year, and others chosen and commissioned, in the same manner, in their
stead.

CHAPTER V. The University at Cambridge, and Encouragement of Literature, etc.
SECTION I. The University.
Art. I. WHEREAS our wise and pious ancestors, so early as the year one
thousand six hundred and thirty six, laid the foundation of Harvard College, in
which university many persons of great eminence have, by the blessing of GOD,
been initiated in those arts and sciences, which qualified them for public
employments, both in Church and State: And whereas the encouragement of arts
and sciences, and all good literature, tends to the honor of GOD, the advantage
of the christian religion, and the great benefit of this and the other United
States of America -- It is declared, That the PRESIDENT AND FELLOWS OF HARVARD
COLLEGE, in their corporate capacity, and their successors in that capacity,
their officers and servants, shall have, bold, use, exercise and enjoy, all the
powers, authorities, rights, liberties, privileges, immunities and franchises,
which they now have, or are entitled to have, hold, use, exercise and enjoy:
And the same are hereby ratified and confirmed unto them, the said President
and Fellows of Harvard-College, and to their successors, and to their officers
and servants, respectively, forever.

II. AND whereas there have been at sundry times, by diverse persons, gifts,
grants, devises of houses, lands, tenements, goods, chattles, legacies and
conveyances, heretofore made, either to Harvard College in Cambridge, in
New England, or to the President and Fellows of Harvard College, or to the said
College, by some other description, under several charters successively: IT IS
DECLARED, That all the said gifts, grants, devises, legacies and conveyances,
are hereby forever confirmed unto the President and Fellows of Harvard-College,
and to their successors, in the capacity aforesaid, according to the true
intent and meaning of the donor or donors, grantor or grantors, devisor or
devisors.

III. AND whereas by an act of the General Court of the Colony of
Massachusetts Bay, passed in the year one thousand six hundred and forty-two,
the Governor and Deputy Governor, for the time being, and all the magistrates
of that jurisdiction, were, with the President, and a number of the clergy in
the said act described, constituted the Overseers of Harvard-College: And it
being necessary, in this new Constitution of Government, to ascertain who shall
be deemed successors to the said Governor, Deputy Governor and Magistrates: IT
IS DECLARED, That the Governor, Lieutenant Governor, Council and Senate of this
Commonwealth, are, and shall be deemed, their successors; who, with the
President of Harvard-College, for the time being, together with the Ministers
of the congregational churches in the towns of Cambridge, Watertown,
Charlestown, Boston, Roxbury, and Dorchester, mentioned in the said act, shall
be, and hereby are, vested with all the powers and authority belonging, or in
any way appertaining to the Overseers of Harvard-College; PROVIDED, that
nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the Legislature of this
Commonwealth from making such alterations in the government of the said
University, as shall be conducive to its advantage, and the interest of the
republic of letters, in as full a manner as might have been done by the
Legislature of the late Province of the Massachusetts Bay.

CHAPTER V. SECTION II. The Encouragement of Literature, etc.
WISDOM, and knowledge, as well as virtue, diffused generally among the body of
the people, being necessary for the preservation of their rights and liberties;
and as these depend on spreading the opportunities and advantages of education
in the various parts of the country, and among the different orders of the
people, it shall be the duty of Legislatures and Magistrates, in all future
periods of this Commonwealth, to cherish the interests of literature and the
sciences, and all seminaries of them; especially the university at Cambridge,
public schools, and grammar schools in the towns; to encourage private
societies and public institutions, rewards and immunities, for the promotion of
agriculture, arts, sciences, commerce, trades, manufactures, and a natural
history of the country; to countenance and inculcate the principles of humanity
and general benevolence, public and private charity, industry and frugality,
honesty and punctuality in their dealings; sincerity, good humor, and all
social affections, and generous sentiments among the people.

CHAPTER VI. Oaths and Subscriptions; Incompatibility of and Exclusion from
Offices; Pecuniary Qualifications; Commissions; Writs; Confirmation of Laws;
Habeas Corpus; The Enacting Style; Continuance of Officers; Provision for a
future Revisal of the Constitution, etc.
Art. I. ANY person chosen Governor, Lieutenant Governor, Counselor, Senator,
or Representative, and accepting the trust, shall before he proceed to execute
the duties of his place or office, make and subscribe the following
declaration, viz. --

I, A. B. do declare, that I believe the christian religion, and have a firm
persuasion of its truth; and that I am seized and possessed, in my own right,
of the property required by the Constitution as one qualification for the
office or place to which I am elected.

AND the Governor, Lieutenant Governor and Counselors shall make and subscribe
the said declaration, in the presence of the two Houses of Assembly; and the
Senators and Representatives first elected under this Constitution, before the
President and five of the Council of the former Constitution, and forever
afterward before the Governor and Council for the time being.

AND every person chosen to either of the places or offices aforesaid, as also
any person appointed or commissioned to any judicial, executive, military, or
other office under the government, shall, before he enters on the discharge of
the business of his place or office, take and subscribe the following
declaration, and oaths or affirmations, viz. --

"I, A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify and declare,
that the Commonwealth of Massachusetts is, and of right ought to be, a free,
sovereign and independent State; and I do swear, that I will bear true faith
and allegiance to the said Commonwealth, and that I will defend the same
against traitorous conspiracies and all hostile attempts whatsoever: And that I
do renounce and abjure all allegiance, subjection and obedience to the King,
Queen, or Government of Great Britain, (as the case may be) and every other
foreign power whatsoever: And that no foreign Prince, Person, Prelate, State or
Potentate, has, or ought to have, any jurisdiction, superiority, pre-eminence,
authority dispensing or other power, in any matter, civil, ecclesiastical or
spiritual, within this Commonwealth; except the authority and power which is or
may be vested by their constituents in the Congress of the United States: And I
do further testify and declare, that no man or body of men has or can have any
right to absolve or discharge me from the obligation of this oath, declaration
or affirmation; and that I do make this acknowledgement, profession, testimony,
declaration, denial, renunciation and abjuration, heartily and truly, according
to the common meaning and acceptance of the foregoing words without any
equivocation, mental evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever.

SO help you GOD."

"I, A. B. do solemnly swear and affirm, that I will faithfully and impartially
discharge and perform all the duties incumbent on me as (...) according to the
best of my abilities and understanding, agreeably to the rules and regulations
of the Constitution, and the laws of this Commonwealth. So help me GOD."

PROVIDED always, that when any person chosen or appointed as aforesaid, shall
be of the denomination of the people called Quakers, and shall decline taking
the said oaths, he shall make his affirmation in the foregoing form, and
subscribe the same, omitting the words "I do swear," "and abjure," "oath or,"
"and abjuration," in the first oath; and in the second oath, the words "swear
and;" and in each of them the words "So help me GOD;" subjoining instead
thereof, "This I do under the pains and penalties of perjury."

AND the said oaths or affirmations shall be taken and subscribed by the
Governor, Lieutenant Governor, and Counselors, before the President of the
senate, in the presence of the two Houses of Assembly; and by the Senators and
Representatives first elected under this Constitution, before the President and
five of the Council of the former Constitution; and forever afterward before
the Governor and Council for the time being* And by the residue of the officers
aforesaid, before such persons and in such manner as from time to time shall be
prescribed by the Legislature.

II. NO Governor, Lieutenant Governor, or Judge of the supreme judicial court,
shall hold any other office or place, under the authority of this Commonwealth,
except such as by this Constitution they are admitted to hold, saving that the
Judges of the said court may hold the offices of Justices of the Peace through
the State; nor shall they hold any other place or office, or receive any
pension or salary from any other State or Government or Power whatever.

NO person shall be capable of holding or exercising at the same time, more
than one of the following offices within this State, viz. -- Judge of Probate
-- Sheriff -- Register of Probate -- or Register of Deeds -- and never more
than any two offices which are to be held by appointment of the Governor, or
the Governor and Council, or the Senate, or the House of Representatives, or by
the election of the people of the State at large, or of the people of any
county, military offices and the offices of Justices of the Peace excepted,
shall be held by one person.

NO person holding the office of Judge of the Supreme Judicial Court --
Secretary -- Attorney General -- Sollicitor-General -- Treasurer or
Receiver-General -- Judge of Probate -- Commissary-General -- President,
Professor, or Instructor of Harvard-College -- Sheriff -- Clerk of the House of
Representatives -- Register of Probate -- Register of Deeds -- Clerk of the
Supreme Judicial Court -- Clerk of the Inferior Court of Common Pleas -- or
Officer of the Customs, including in this description Naval Officers -- shall
at the same time have a seat in the Senate or House of Representatives; but
their being chosen or appointed to, and accepting the same, shall operate as a
resignation of their seat in the Senate or House of Representatives; and the
place so vacated shall be filled up.

AND the same rule shall take place in case any Judge of the said Supreme
Judicial Court, or Judge of Probate, shall accept a seat in Council; or any
Counselor shall accept of either of those offices or places.

AND no person shall ever be admitted to hold a seat in the Legislature, or any
office of trust or importance under the government of this Commonwealth, who
shall, in the due course of law, have been convicted of bribery or corruption
in obtaining an election or appointment.

III. IN all cases where sums of money are mentioned in this Constitution, the
value thereof shall be computed in silver at six shillings and eight pence per
ounce: And it shall be in the power of the Legislature from time to time to
increase such qualifications, as to property, of the persons to be elected to
offices, as the circumstances of the Commonwealth shall require.

IV. ALL commissions shall be in the name of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts,
signed by the Governor and attested by the Secretary or his Deputy, and have
the great seal of the Commonwealth affixed thereto.

V. ALL writs issuing out of the clerk's office in any of the courts of law,
shall be in the name of the Commonwealth of Massachusetts: They shall be under
the seal of the court from whence they issue: They shall bear test of the first
Justice of the court to which they shall be returnable, who is not a party, and
be signed by the clerk of such court.

VI. ALL the laws which have heretofore been adopted, used and approved in the
Province, Colony or State of Massachusetts Bay, and usually practiced on in the
courts of law, shall still remain and be in full force, until altered or
repealed by the Legislature; such parts only excepted as are repugnant to the
rights and liberties contained in this Constitution.

VII. THE privilege and benefit of the writ of habeas-corpus shall be enjoyed
in this Commonwealth in the most free, easy, cheap, expeditious and ample
manner; and shall not be suspended by the Legislature, except upon the most
urgent and pressing occasions, and for a limited time not exceeding twelve
months.

VIII. THE enacting style, in making and passing all acts, statutes and laws,
shall be -- "Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in
General Court assembled, and by the authority of the same"

IX. TO the end there may be no failure of justice or danger arise to the
Commonwealth from a change of the Form of Government -- all officers, civil and
military, holding commissions under the government and people of
Massachusetts Bay in New England, and all other officers of the said government
and people, at the time this Constitution shall take effect, shall have hold
use, exercise and enjoy, all the powers and authority to them granted or
committed, until other persons shall be appointed in their stead: And all
courts of law shall proceed in the execution of the business of their
respective departments; and all the executive and legislative officers, bodies
and powers shall continue in full force, in the enjoyment and exercise of all
their trusts, employments and authority; until the General Court and the
supreme and executive officers under this Constitution are designated and
invested with their respective trusts, powers and authority.

X. IN order the more effectually to adhere to the principles of the
Constitution, and to correct those violations which by any means may be made
therein, as well as to form such alterations as from experience shall be found
necessary -- the General Court which shall be in the year of our Lord one
thousand seven hundred and ninety-five, shall issue precepts to the Select men
of the several towns, and to the Assessors of the unincorporated plantations,
directing them to convene the qualified voters of their respective towns and
plantations for the purpose of collecting their sentiments on the necessity or
expediency of revising the Constitution, in order to amendments.

AND if it shall appear by the returns made, that two-thirds of the qualified
voters throughout the State, who shall assemble and vote in consequence of the
said precepts, are in favor of such revision or amendment, the General Court
shall issue precepts, or direct them to be issued from the Secretary's office
to the several towns to elect delegates to meet in Convention for the purpose
aforesaid.

THE said delegates to be chosen in the same manner and proportion as their
Representatives in the second branch of the Legislature are by this
Constitution to be chosen.

XI. This Form of Government shall be enrolled on parchment and deposited in
the Secretary's office, and be a part of the laws of the land -- and printed
copies thereof shall be prefixed to the book containing the laws of this
Commonwealth, in all future editions of the said laws.

JAMES BOWDOIN, President.
Attest, SAMUEL BARRETT, Secretary.


