CONSIDERATIONS ON THE SOVEREIGNTY, INDEPENDENCE, TRADE AND FISHERIES OF NEW
IRELAND, (Formerly known by the Name of NOVA SCOTIA) AND THE ADJACENT ISLANDS:
SUBMITTED TO THE EUROPEAN POWERS, That may be engaged in settling the Terms of
PEACE, among the NATIONS AT WAR.

(...) OF THE SOVEREIGN, FREE AND (...) COMMONWEALTH OF NEW IRELAND.

BY virtue of authority derived from the people of New Ireland, formerly known
by the name of Nova Scotia, comprehending the Islands adjacent, viz. St.
John's, Cape Breton, Newfoundland, etc. etc. these numbers are published and
forwarded for the consideration of the European Courts: the preceding numbers
more especially concern the people of New Ireland, and the United States.

A person vested with full power to act in behalf of the people of New Ireland,
in the treaty of peace, when this shall take place, will soon be dispatched to
Europe.

NUMBER IV. To the PEACE MAKERS. PERPETUAL PEACE ON SOLID GROUNDS.
And Abraham said unto Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee, between me and
thee, and between my herdmen and thy herdmen: for we be brethren. Separate
thyself, I pray thee, from me.

Genesis xiii. 8, 9. Righteousness exalts a nation.

Prove. xiv. 34.
AS the present contest between Britain and America must sooner or later come
to period, the future harmony of the present belligerant powers, the general
good of both Europe and America, and perpetuating peace on each side of the
Atlantic, will in all probability greatly depend on the footing on which
matters may be put at the treaty of peace; and yet among the various topics
repeatedly discussed in the public papers, little or nothing has been said on
this head. It certainly cannot be improper to bring the subject into view, and
excite the public attention, to a matter of so great moment, involving in it,
not only every individual of the present generation, but the happiness of ages
yet unborn. For this purpose, the following thoughts are submitted to public
consideration.

First, Respecting territory or dominion. The God of nature, by interposing the
vast Atlantic between Europe and America, seems evidently to have pointed out
the true natural connection of the one with the other, to be by trade and
commerce; and to have forbidden both to exercise rule or authority, except on
their own side of the ocean. As long, indeed, as any European power holding
possessions in America, treats the inhabitants so that they find their interest
and happiness best secured and promoted by such connection, so long may that
connection be expected to continue, and no longer. Whenever this ceases to be
the case, that people, if able, will certainly revolt, and set up for
themselves; or, if not able, will watch for and embrace the first favorable
opportunity of extricating themselves from the yoke. This is a principle in
nature; and to expect the reverse is equally absurd as to expect rivers to turn
backward, or the ebbing and flowing of the sea to cease. European sovereignty,
therefore, as long as it exists in America, must ever be maintained by gentle
measures, engaging the affections of the people, and convincing them of their
interest in it. The moment the iron scepter is substituted in the place of the
olive wand, that moment the connection begins to dissolve; and by continuing to
enforce their authority by violence, it is eternally broken. Thus it has been
between Britain and the American states; insomuch that were both parties
desirous to return to their former connections, it would be in the nature of
things impossible for human wisdom to devise a plan, which the mutual
jealousies and distrust unavoidable in such a case, would not utterly and
inevitably defeat. Were Britain, therefore, to be influenced solely by a regard
to her interest, without the least attention to any other motive, she would
endeavor to settle matters on that plan which is best calculated to restore
friendship, and lay a foundation for obtaining advantage by an amicable
commercial intercourse; which from the very nature of things cannot be expected
in any other channel. But to obtain this, and to settle matters on a solid
basis, she must not only allow the independence of the thirteen states, but
must relinquish all claims of dominion over the part she yet holds on the
continent, especially her northern possessions, and allow them to legislate
for, and govern, themselves in the manner they may think best, either in union
with the other states, or separate from them. And whatever Britain or others
may think of it, and whatever means may be used to prevent it, to this
situation matters must and will come, by the natural and necessary course of
human affairs, before they rest in a per^^^^ state. The reasons are obvious;
her relinquishing her claims of dominion over the possessions she holds, would
appear to the people as an act of generosity, and tend to unite them to her
commercial interest, more than any restraint or force could possibly do, and
would at the same time convince the states, that she had laid aside all hostile
designs against America: and thus removing all ground of jealousy and
apprehension of danger, would open a door to mutual friendly intercourse; and
accomplish by the subtilty of the fox, what she cannot obtain by the force of
the lion. Whereas if she resolve to retain them, her fear of losing them, by
revolt or otherwise, will necessarily oblige her to a great expense in
fortifying, keeping up troops, etc. etc. which will probably overbalance all
the advantage derived from claiming them as hers; beyond what she might have by
a free trade, on the foot of their being their own masters. Her strengthening
these places will also naturally alarm the states, and perpetuate their
jealousy of her having still a design to attack them in some quarter, and
prevent return of friendship. It may also disquiet the minds of the people thus
retained, as though kept like vassals, when they see the states trade freely to
all parts of the world, and themselves confined to Britain; and in process of
time produce a revolt; and the fortifications Britain had made be turned
against herself: or should a war again break out between her and the other
maritime powers, some of them might seize perhaps those retained possessions,
and deprive her entirely of trade to them afterward; and besides, the
consequence of her retaining these possessions will be, either that differences
and disturbances will rise between those British subjects, and the subjects of
the states neighboring so near together, as in the case from which my motto is
taken; or they will attempt to set up for themselves and become independent; in
either of which cases, a war will probably ensue, and spread the flame through
Europe as well as America; which ought therefore to be guarded against, in the
most effectual manner, by every power that would wish the preservation of
peace. France wisely foresaw the danger, that might arise from such a vicinity
of different subjects; and therefore effectually to prevent future differences,
interwove in the ground work of the alliance with the states, a quit-claim to
act her former possessions in America; and certainly the danger of differences
arising between Britain and the states is far greater, than could in that case
have been supposed. In short, if Britain retains any part of her American
possessions, especially to the northward, a peace, whenever made, will not be
sheathing the sword, but laying it by for a season, to be presently employed
again, in the horrid scenes of bloodshed, massacre and war. The case with
respect to Spain to the southward is very different; there subsists no
animosity or jealousy; and both they and the states, have such a vast scope of
yet unexplored country lying behind them, that there is not the least
probability of any differences arising between them, from vicinity.

My next shall contain some observations upon the fisheries, and the charters
to the first settlers.

The work of righteousness shall be peace. Isaiah.

A. ^ N.P. of S.J.A. and N.I.

NUMBER V. To the PEACE MAKERS.
Deceit is in the heart of them that imagine evil: but to the counselors of
peace is joy.

Solomon. Prove. xii. 20.
THE next object of attention is the fisheries by Nova Scotia, the islands
adjacent, New-foundland, etc. etc. and here it is to be observed, that as
honesty is the best policy, and individuals ever find their true interest in
uprightness, and doing to others as they would wish to be done to themselves;
it is so also with nations, and their true political interest consists not in
making power, but justice and right, the rule of their conduct. The path of
policy, when viewed in this point of light, and indeed the only true one, is
plain and easy, entirely free from those crooked turnings and windings, as
falsely as frequently termed state policy, and which never fails, sooner or
later, to lead to destruction, those that walk in them.

On this sure and solid principle alone, I therefore proceed to observe, that
the God of Nature has wisely balanced to all parts of the habitable earth,
their advantages and disadvantages; and has so ordered matters, that the wants
of one nation are supplied by the redundance of those articles in another, and
so respectively throughout the whole: For this end, no doubt, to maintain a
mutual intercourse and exchange of benefits, among the various parts of the
great family of mankind; and thus to form a universal cement, by each
contributing to the supply of others, as the members of the body, to the
general good of the whole. -- What therefore Nova Scotia, Islands, Newfoundland
and States adjacent, etc. might want in other respects, it has pleased the
great Creator to make up to them in numerous shoals of fish along their coast;
as evidently designed in the first instance for their benefit, as the pearl
fishery in the gulf of Persia is for that people, or the salt on the coasts of
Portugal and the Islands, for the advantage of the inhabitants, or the quails
in the wilderness for the children of Israel; and in the second, to furnish
them with a staple for trade and intercourse with their brethren of mankind;
that they might mutually benefit, and be benefited by one another: and
accordingly all nations have ever agreed, that the sea, lying along the coast
of a country, with the particular advantages derived from it, as really as the
land on which they dwell, belongs to the inhabitants.

On this principle, each European power claims their adjoining sea, and would
esteem it an intrusion and insult, should any others pretend to claim an equal
right. And on this universally confessed principle, when Queen Elizabeth, A. D.
1578, made a grant to Sir Humphry Gilbert, confirming to him, his heirs and
assigns for ever, all the lands he might discover in North America, as far
northerly as sixty-eight degrees of north latitude, not already occupied or
claimed by any Christian power; the adjoining seas were equally granted and
confirmed to him as the land; and by virtue of this grant, Newfoundland was
settled, and in King James's first and second charters for Virginia, A. D. 1606
and 1600, comprehending the whole country between the latitudes thirty-four and
forty-five, from sea to sea, the adjoinining seas, with the islands, fishings,
etc. are equally and as expressly granted as the land: and in his third
charter, A. D. 1611, this sea extent is particularly mentioned, to the distance
of a thousand miles.

The right of European powers, to grant lands they never owned, is not now the
question, but it serves to show the sense of nations on this head; and as a
quit claim to America, against any European pretensions to fisheries on their
coasts; as whatever claim there was by any European power, Britain had it, and
whatever right she had or claimed, she solemnly transferred and confirmed to
the inhabitants of the country. From all which it evidently appears, that the
fisheries on the coasts of Nova Scotia, and islands belonging thereto, with
Newfoundland, etc. etc. properly belong to the people inhabiting the adjacent
land, (otherwise the great Creator could have easily ordered the American sinny
tribes to the European shoars) and that they cannot in justice be deprived
thereof, by the intervention of others, any more than of the land on which they
are settled.

If, therefore, matters are allowed to rest on this universally acknowledged
and confirmed principle, inhabitants coming from whatever part they may, and
settling in the country, will find employment and support by the fisheries, and
commerce and a free trade will afford an ample supply to others; and things
being thus conducted in a natural easy channel, all future occasion of war or
bloodshed from this quarter will be effectually prevented, and a fair and
pleasing prospect opened of permanent peace. -- Whereas, should any European
power engross the fishery, besides the manifest violation of justice toward
the inhabitants of the adjacent lands or states, that power would possess such
undue advantages over others, not only in the article of fishing, but in a
nursery for seamen, to increase their marine and man their fleets, as to render
the safety of their neighbors exceedingly precarious, and perpetually endanger
the peace of both Europe and America. Suppose any one European power to have
fifty or sixty thousand men employed in the fishery, as might very readily be,
and certainly soon would be, if engrossed by any one, how easy would it be, for
such power to fit out and man a fleet, that would overturn the liberty of both
Europe and America, and give law to all the nations around? and still more so,
if that nation should possess a great extent of adjacent country, to furnish
materials for ship building, etc. whilst on the other hand, if the fishery be
carried on by the inhabitants of the adjacent country, to whom it properly
belongs, no such danger can be apprehended, as the idea of invading Europe, or
attempting to acquire any possessions there, would be too absurd and
chimerical, ever to enter the minds of a people, at so great a distance. This
is a matter so deeply interesting to European powers as well as America, that a
regard to their own advantages and safety loudly calls for their most serious
attention, and utmost exertions to prevent it. -- And to throw the fisheries
open to all, would be in effect confirming them to the few, who are already in
possession; for their knowledge of the business, and the case with which they
could interrupt their neighbors, by only altering the size of their fishing
vessels, and thereby discouraging adventurers, would, besides the flagrant
injustice mentioned above, be opening a door to frequent debates and quarrels,
among the subjects of the different powers, which could not fail to involve
them in a war more expensive, than all the advantage they derived from the
fishing could compensate. Besides the nations lying most convenient, and having
the greatest number of vessels, would, in such case, have a peculiar advantage
over those more remote, and whose marine are not so numerous; and might very
probably, after a while, entirely exclude them from any share. For a few
European nations to divide it among themselves, would be equally unjust, and
equally dangerous to the peace and safety of their neighbors, and even to
their own peace among themselves. There remains, therefore, no prospect of
peace and safety, but in resting the matter on the true principle above; which
the interest of both Europe and America, if duly considered, on the large scale
of mutual advantage and perpetuated peace, will most certainly lead them to
adopt.

It has been alleged, that the affair of the fishery will be settled by the
powers now at war, when a peace comes to be made: but it ought to be
considered, that it belongs not to any of them to dispose of them, unless by an
act of violence, and confidence in their power to the subversion of justice and
right.

Britain, France, and the states, may dispose of their own property as they see
meet; but may not in justice meddle with that of others. The fisheries on the
banks of Nova Scotia, islands adjacent, Newfoundland, etc. belong to the
inhabitants there, by the grant of the great creator; and the European claim,
such as it was, transferred and confirmed them to them. If any allege, these
places belong to Britain, and she may dispose of them as she may think proper;
I reply, the charter for Newfoundland (as mentioned above) confirms to the
inhabitants there a right to both land and sea, not to be revoked or forfeited;
and whatever part that people may act, either toward the subjects of Britain
or others, all that Britain can do, according to the express declaration of the
charter, is to declare them "out of the allegiance and protection of Britain;
and to be no longer avowed, maintained or defended by her;" but may not rob
them of their just natural or acquired rights. And the grant for the settlement
of Nova Scotia was unconditional, absolute, and without any exception or
reservation whatsoever; or wheresoever, of all rights royalties, privileges,
franchises, etc. both by sea and land, and likewise the power of government, by
laws to be made by their own legislatures, was given for encouraging the
settlement of the country, which would have been the true interest of Britain,
to have strictly adhered to and fully complied with: and therefore the people
consider themselves, equally entitled to their lands and coasts, and to as free
a government of their own, from under the control of any other, as any of the
American states; and hope through the blessing of God to maintain it: and hence
it is that though their memetropolis has been held by the British through the
present war; and their strength is not sufficient to free themselves as yet of
the imposition, they have notwithstanding taken no active part on that side,
but wait for a favorable season of deliverance, and to assert their
sovereignty, independent freedom and just rights inseperably connected
therewith. Upon the whole, should peace be established on the above foundation,
it will open the fairest prospect of a long uninterupted series of tranquillity
to both Europe and America, all ground of disquiet and disturbance being
entirely removed. But if matters be unhappily settled on the footing of Britain
retaining any part of American possession, especially to the northward, and the
fisheries to be monopolized by one, or divided among more, or fewer of the
European powers, whether the states have a share or not, it must appear evident
on a small degree of reflection, the issue must be, in all probability, another
war in a short space of time, involving in it the inhabitants on both sides the
atlantic, which the true interest of all concerned would certainly lead them by
all means to prevent.

And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace of them that make peace.

James iii. 18. A. ^ N.P. of S.J.A. and N.I.

NUMBER VI. To the PEACE MAKERS.
Therefore in all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye
even so to them: for this is the law and the prophets.

Mat. vii. 12. The golden and unering rule.


THE eager desire of most people in America to see peace return, makes the
terms, on which it ought to be settled, an object of very great consequence;
and unless the subject be better understood than at present it generally seems
to be, we shall have much greater reason to deprecate peace, than a
continuation of the war. Peace to America cannot consist in a mere cessation
from hostilities, and withdrawing of armies; but on the principles, on which
these events may take place, in Europe. Articles of pacification are little
else than a resolution to cease from hostilities, until one or other of the
parties have recovered from the losses sustained by the war, or recruited their
finances. Modern treaties of perpetual frienship and peace, scarcely ever exist
as long as ancient truces, which had no other object but a renewal of the war,
after a few years breathing. These kinds of pacification can never answer any
valuable end to America; the principles on which she ought to make peace,
should be such as would secure her from new wars, if she means to be happy, or
to enjoy the best advantages of a revolution. Many will say, what occasion to
write on a subject so distant? first show us that there is a prospect of
overtures. To this I reply, that we are at least twelve months behind in
information on the subject; and should the terms on which we ought to sheath
the sword become the topic of occasional conversation, for the whole time; we
should not be too well prepared for entering on the business: and I think the
political state of Europe, make overtures probable by the close of the
campaign. The object is large and very extensive, embracing the interests not
only of the belligerent powers, but of every principal state in Europe as well
as America. We are young and not over expert in the knowledge of every national
concern: all men can see what fate must await us, if we discover as little
skill in negotiation as in finance, or many other objects of public attention.
It is not uncommon, for a nation to recover, by the terms of pacification, as
much as she lost by the sword; and though the war be unfortunate, the peace may
be advantageous. It requires a man to be well acquainted with the circumstances
and interests of his own nation, and of those powers with whom he may either
formally or eventually be connected, as well as those of the enemy, to be
qualified to assist in a negotiation for peace. Whenever that event takes
place, if the terms be good and proper for America, she may enjoy perpetual
tranquillity, and be on terms of amity and friendship with every nation, which
may visit her coasts, or enter her ports; and it is plain therefore that the
pacification must comprehend the general and common interests of all. But if
the terms be not such as comprehend all, she stands a very great chance to
change enemies; but never to enjoy untroubled security. Dear bought experience
has taught us to know, that the scalping knife and tomahawk are equally
employed, to butcher our innocent back settlers, while any nation possesses
territory either to the eastward, or in any other quarter, on this side of the
Missisippi. Canada, Nova Scotia, and Louisiana, in the possession of France or
Great Britain, are alike hostile to America; and she could never be safe in the
neighborhood of either.

France, whose motives will appear the more just, and measures more generous
and disinterested, the more they are examined, has wisely ceded all her claims
on these countries. Had she discovered any reluctance on this head, she would
have sown the seeds of jealousy and dissolution in the very vitals of the
treaty of amity, into which she has entered with the American States. By
cheerfully relinquishing her claim, she has removed all cause of uneasiness,
and destroyed every apprehension of sinister designs, and united them to her
for ever: but as much as it is her interest and theirs to be on terms of
friendship with each other, so much it is the interest of both, that Britain
retain no claim to any part of these countries; and a peace without our
independence and connection with them, would only be the cause of new wars, and
involve both in the repetition of their present troubles and expense: for
Britain to be our neighbor is to have Britain our enemy. No proverb more true
than that, "He who injures, can never forgive," and Britain having once
injured, can never forgive America. To live at peace, therefore, with each
other, British power must be as far removed from us as her islands are: this
therefore, though too little thought of, is a point of the last consequence;
but there is one other, perhaps less attended to, which is yet of more
importance, and on the right settlement of which, the freedom and extension of
our commerce will greatly, if not principally, depend; and it is a point, which
is equally interesting to every European power, whose subjects either are, or
may become merchants, and who wish to feel the enriching influence of commerce:
this is to prevent any European power claiming any share in our fisheries, and
to guarantee them only to the inhabitants of the adjacent states, to whom they
properly belong, as may appear more fully from the preceding numbers. --
Britain usurping it, became mistress of the ocean, and so would any other
European power. America possessing it, becomes only an object of a more
extensive and lucrative commerce, which must appear evident to every
intelligent person. Every part of America is possessed of a landed staple
commodity; excepting that, on the coasts of which, fish are caught in the
greatest abundance; to them Nature seems to have allotted this staple, and by
means of it to connect them with the distant nations: fixing peace on these
principles, America becomes the common mart of Europe, where every one will
find the article he wants, and the purchaser of what he has to dispose of. --
But divide it between any foreign powers, in whole, or in part, quarrelling,
confusion and animosity will be the unceasing consequence. Possession in common
of any property, which can be improved and enjoyed, is as impossible among
nations, as among individuals. The weaker must always suffer, and the
advantages in trade, which the European powers will possess, who do not also
possess a full share in the fishery, will be very small, and to divide it
amongst all, would be to sow the seeds of continual contention, and in a great
measure to defeat their intentions, in wishing our independence, and often
involve us in disagreeable altercations. -- They, who have the land, can alone
enjoy and improve the fishery to general and equal advantage: Europe will be
their market, and Europe will reap the benefits of their traffic; a general
circuitous and very profitable trade will be the consequence, and no one power
will possess any naval advantage over another. The justness and generosity of
the policy of France, in relinquishing all claims to the land, leaves no room
to doubt of their acting on the same principles, with regard to the fishery,
whenever applied to, on the subject; and the haughty and imperious conduct of
Britain to the mercantile and neutral powers of Europe, shows plainly what they
are to expect from her, should she continue to derive the supplies of seamen
from the fishery, which she has hitherto done.

It is therefore the interest of all Europe to turn their eyes to this object,
and to oblige Britain to give up every pretension thereto. On this head, the
stipulations ought to be very clear and decisive; and that power alone should
possess it, in whose possession it becomes an inexhaustible source of general
advantage to all, without proving a bone of contention to any. Let them act
wisely, and they will reap plentifully, but neglecting the present opportunity,
they will one day feel the folly of their inattention.

I shall conclude by observing to those powers that are in pursuit of imaginary
honor, that in a righteous cause, and the just defense of a man's country, all
actions of valor are indeed just reasons of praise; but in all other cases,
victory and conquest are no more than murder and rapine; and every one is to be
detested as the greatest enemy to mankind, that is most active herein. Those
are only true heroes, who most benefit the world, by promoting the peace,
welfare, and good of mankind: but such as oppress it with the slaughter of men,
desolation of countries, the burning of cities, and the other calamities which
attend war, are the scourges of God, and the greatest plagues and calamities
that can happen to it; and which are never sent into the world but for the
punishment of it; and therefore ought, as such, to be prayed against, and
detested by all mankind.

ALEXANDER the great, and Julius Caesar, were two of the most eminent
conquerors perhaps to be met with in history, yet their victories and and
conquests were so far from being advantages to them, that on the contrary they
terminated in their death and ruin, the whole royal families of Philip king of
Macedon, and of Alexander the the great his son, were utterly extirpated within
the space of the (...) years; (reckoning from the 334th year (...) Christ, when
Alexander entered upon his exp^^^^tion against Darius;) and they, their wives,
and all that were descended of them, died violent deaths. Thus these two kings,
who by their oppressive and destructive wars had made many tragedies in the
families of other princes, and people, had them all at length, by the just
ordination of providence, brought home to their own.

Julius Caesar fought fifty battles without missing of success in any one of
them, unless at Pharus, where he swam for his life; and once at Dyrrachium, and
in these battles he is said to have slain one million one hundred and ninety
two thousand men; which proves him to have been the great cutthroat of the age
in which he lived. What is the fruit he reaped from these victories? His own
blood is shed in the senate, being slain there, even by some whom, he had most
highly obliged: and dying childless, his nephew Octavius, whom he had adopted,
swam to the empire also in torrents of blood; and at length left it to the
posterity of Authony, whom he had conquered: for none of Octavius's (i. e.
Augustus's) posterity ever enjoyed the empire. These bloody men were raised up,
in the holy and righteous providence of God, as scourges in his hand, for the
punishment of the wickedness of the age in which they lived; the work was
God's; but it being malice, revenge and ambition, that excited them to be the
instruments in the execution of it, they justly had for there reward thereof
that destruction by which they fell; (...) reputed the greatest pests and
plagues (...) kind. But such is the folly of men, and (...), that they usually
make the actions of war, bloodshed, and conquest, the subjects of their highest
encomiums; and those their most celebrated heroes, that most excel therein.

I shall further add, that neither Britain nor France, can expect to hold any
part in America, but by shedding of innocent blood and loss of the affection of
the people. Let people therefore from every quarter of Europe, come and settle
in America, there can he no cause of complaint when all people of fair moral
characters, from every quarter, will meet with equal encouragement. What can
Europe have to fear from a number of their own people? Nor will there be any
great danger of any one state, injuring another; as by their several
constitutions, such a quick rotation of their officers of government, will
prevent their forming plans or schemes, against either their neighbors or
constituents. But should any European powers endeavor to enslave them, and
even gain their point; their victories would tend to no other purpose, than to
find them employment by producing new wars: for the business of every conquest
is twofold, -- to win, and to preserve; and though they might imagine their
power to be great, they must expect that those they conquer, will endeavor to
shake off the yoke as fast as possible; for what people chooses to be under
foreign dominion? But should they cease and decline attacki^^ (...) hostile
manner with bayonets and (...) murdering of ministers of the (...) the country
with scenes of horror (...) and woe, they may have our friend^^^^ for it is in
vain that confidence is reposed in a conquered people: there can be no sincere
friendship between the oppressors and the oppressed. Even in peace, the latter
think themselves entitled to the rights of war against the former.

Your true interest, therefore, appears to be only trade and commerce, which
can be no other way obtained, but by gaining the good will of the people. By
that means millions, may be made annually, which will be vain to expect from
any other plan of murder and shedding of innocent blood. We will therefore, if
you please, enter into a treaty with you, and with all mankind, of lasting
friendship.

The many and great advantages in trade and commerce, which European powers in
general, and the maritime in particular, will derive from their adopting such a
plan, are very obvious; which, with the disadvantages that will unavoidably
attend a contrary conduct, shall be the subject of some subsequent numbers.

Now therefore come thou, let us make a covenant, I and thou, and let it be for
a witness between me and thee. That I will not pass over to thee, and that
thou-shall not pass over unto me for harm, Genesis xxxi. 44, 52.

A. ^ N.P. of S.J.A. and N.I.


