AN ORATION, DELIVERED MARCH 16, 1780, BEFORE THE PATRON, VICE-PRESIDENTS AND
MEMBERS OF THE AMERICAN PHILOSOPHICAL SOCIETY, HELD AT PHILADELPHIA, FOR
PROMOTING USEFUL KNOWLEDGE.

BY TIMOTHY MATLACK, ESQUIRE,

A Member of the said Society and Secretary of the Supreme Executive Council of
the State of Pennsylvania.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY STYNER AND CIST, IN SECOND-STREET, M.DCC.LXXX.

TO THE REPRESENTATIVES OF THE FREEMEN OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA, IN
GENERAL ASSEMBLY MET, THE GUARDIANS OF THE STATE, THIS ORATION IS DEDICATED

BY THEIR MOST OBEDIENT FAITHFUL SERVANT, THE AUTHOR.

PREFACE.
THE following Oration was delivered immediately after the Law for
incorporating the Philosophical Society was passed by the General Assembly of
Pennsylvania. It was composed at a short Notice; the Gentleman appointed to the
annual Duty of Delivering an Oration before the Society, having declined it, in
Consequence of his being nominated to an important Office, which required his
immediate and very close Attention.

PERFORMANCES of this Kind are sometimes altered and amended after they have
been delivered, and perhaps it is justifiable to do so; but to me it always
appeared uncandid and unwarrantable. This, therefore, is published Word for
Word as it was delivered, except only what follows from the Mention of Captain
Biddle's Fall, Page 10, to the End of that Paragraph, which I found myself
unable to pronounce: I could neither pronounce it, nor get clear of the Idea
for some Time. The Publication of that Part will apologize for some Hesitation
in one or two Paragraphs following it.

To deliver an Oration which took up an Hour and ten Minutes, before as
respectable an Audience as ever was collected within the same Compass in any
Country, would not have been an easy Task even to one accustomed to speak in
Public; and the polite and highly obliging Attention which was paid during the
whole Time, alone, enabled me to go through it, unpractised in the Art of
speaking as I am. It would be great Injustice to my own Feelings, if I
neglected to acknowledge that kind Indulgence in the most grateful Terms.

AN ORATION, etc.
IT is now but seven Years since the reverend and learned Gentleman The Rev.
Doctor W. SMITH.
who first began the annual Duty of this Day, delivered that copious, though
concise Oration, which, with a masterly Hand, at once points out our Object and
animates to the Pursuit.

THE Year following the ingenious Doctor Rush gave a learned Discourse upon the
Diseases of American Natives, compared with the Diseases of Europe: A Discourse
which will convey to future Times many useful Remarks, which the present Day
alone could afford.

IN the Year 1775 my worthy Friend Mr. Rittenhouse, an amiable Member of this
Society, delivered an Oration on the Science of Astronomy. A Subject so copious
and brilliant must have warmed and animated even the coldest Genius -- must
have inspired Sentiments and Reflections worthy of Attention; but in his Hands
it appears truly great, majestic and sublime. Opening and unfolding the
wonderful Scene, he bears us with him through the stary Heavens, and marks out
the Footsteps of them all, as they dance in solemn Round through the Immensity
of Space; -- and, while the delightful Scene is before us, -- while the Mind is
impressed with a pleasing Astonishment, -- is wondering at the beauteous Order
of the glittering and stupendous Frame, calling our Attention to still higher
Things, he points to the "thick Darkness" where HE dwells, whose awful Fiat
spoke them into Being: -- And, looking back, he says, And all yonder Stars
innumerable, with their Dependencies, may perhaps compose but the Leaf of a
Flower in the Creator's Garden! Who can hear this -- hear his Creator thus
magnified, and not feel a living Soul leap for Joy within him!

THESE are some of the early Fruits of this Society: And thus it is, that fair
Science, while her right Hand guides and supports Man through the World, her
left always points toward Heaven.

HE who reads the last mentioned Oration will be the wiser and the better for
it; but he will no longer wonder that five Years have elapsed and not one
Oration since delivered. It Is a humbling Consideration, that our Blessings have
each their attendant Inconveniences: -- This, by excelling too far, has damped
and discouraged where it ought to have roused and emulated.

THE learned and ingenious Gentlemen of this Society, best qualified for this
annual Task, have for various Reasons, or Pretenses, declined the Duty; while
I, in all Respects unequal to it, have ventured on the Attempt, as the most
pointed Proof, that could possibly be given, of my full and firm Reliance on
your Candor.

I have but one Apology to offer: -- It is an Act of Duty, not of Choice. --
All cannot excel -- it is impossible; -- and I am content to stand a Foil to
such distinguished Brightness -- such uncommon Luster.

WHEN, a few Days ago, you appointed me to the Duty of this Evening, entirely
unprepared for the Discharge of it, I had not even thought of a Subject on
which to speak; but, sitting down to consider of it, the Seals of the State lay
before me: On the Face a Plow, a Sheaf of Wheat, and a Ship: On the Reverse,
Liberty, represented by a Female Form, with a modest, but animated and
determined Countenance, -- in her right Hand a drawn Dagger, -- her left Foot
vigorously and firmly pressing to the Ground the horrid Head of Tyranny,
represented by a huge, grim, furious Lion, exerting a last convulsive Effort to
rise and devour her: The Motto, "Both cannot survive."

How just a Picture of the Contest between these United States and prostrate
Britain, still haughty, desperate and furious in her Fall! How tempting a Theme
for Declamation!

BUT, to what Purpose shall it be pursued? Has not the youthful, blooming
Genius of America roused her Sons to Arms? A brave well disciplined Army is
already in the Field: -- Men, whose Intrepidity in Battle does them Honor; but
whose Firmness, Magnanimity and Perseverance, in contending with the Rigors of
the Seasons, and unusual Hardships of War, have not been equaled by Mankind: To
such Men as these it were Insult to offer a Motive beyond the Feelings of their
own Hearts, and the Honors they have already earned, to excite them to do all
that human Hands can perform. And Thousands of Citizens, fired by the great
Example, stand ready to join with them when the Occasion shall require it. Our
gallant Officers who have led them on, are, by Experience, become Masters in
the Art of War. Foreigners of the first Distinction, led by a Love of Liberty,
have left their native Country and united with us in the glorious Contest.
Impartial History will represent the Conduct of the Marquis De La Fayette, in
joining our Army at the Time he did, as one of those Events which do the
highest Honor to human Nature. While every Friend to Liberty, of all Countries,
admired the patriotic Sentiments which distinguished that young Nobleman, his
Conduct, Courage and Intrepidity endeared him to our great General and the
whole Army.

The Baron De Stuben, the Father of Discipline in America, has rendered
Services to these United States which it is not easy to describe. And however
sensible we may be of their Importance, and of his steady Perseverance through
the greatest Difficulties, it will not be in the Power of the present Age to
make him a just Recompense: Posterity must remain indebted to him, and will
undoubtedly do Justice to his Memory.

Highly sensible of the great Merit of many other Foreigners who have early
joined us in this Contest, I should rejoice exceedingly in the Opportunity of
doing them that Justice to which their great and faithful Services, have
entitled them; but in the mean time there will not, I am confident, be found
among them a Man who will feel himself hurt by the Justice done to these two
great Examples, -- which, to speak my Sentiments freely, show more real
disinterested Love of Liberty than is recorded in the Annals of any Time or
Country.


A kind protecting Providence has sent us a great General, whose Heart is
animated with the purest Flame that ever warmed a Patriot Breast. A wise and
powerful King, inspired with Benevolence to Mankind, has made our Cause his
own. The hardy Sons of America have dared to meet her Enemies on that Element
which Britain once, proudly boasting, styled "her own." -- Alas! too boldly
dared the unequal Combat: There the brave neglected Biddle, impelled by too
much Virtue, nobly fell. -- And, oh! forgive the falling Tear, which a fond
Father's swelling Heart rolls reluctant down his Cheek at the Remembrance. I
mourn a darling Son, once the fond Hope and Comfort of my Heart -- That
dreadful fatal Blast, which rent the Randolph to Splinters, scattered his
mangled Limbs in the Air -- and they fell, blacked and disfigured, a Prey to
the Fishes of the Sea. -- I mourn his Loss, but would preserve his Name, --
Beloved by all that knew him, esteemed and highly honored by his brave Captain,
He was a Midshipman on Board that Ship, and on her Return from her first Craize
at Charlestown, Captain Biddle distinguished him by presenting him with a very
handsome Sword, as a Mark of his great Esteem and Affection. He was then but 17
Years of Age.


he fell in the most glorious Cause -- and, it is just to say, he lived and died
unconquered, and from Infancy to that awful Hour the Voice of Fear or of
Complaint was never heard from his Lips! -- But, wherefore do I weep? -- It Is
my Glory that I had such a Son to fall in such a Cause.

LEAVING then this brighter Theme, I had still before me Agriculture, and its
Attendant, Commerce. Here my Education would have led me to prefer Commerce --
that mighty Chain which girds the Globe and unites all Mankind in one common
Interest: -- Each bestowing and receiving equal Benefits -- the peculiar
Produce of every Quarter of the World is handed to all its Inhabitants.

BUT, reflecting that the Support of the brave Army now fighting our Battles
for us, and that Commerce which will one Day raise this State to high
Importance, both depend on Agriculture, it claims a first Consideration among
the Arts. Cowley thought justly when he said, The Plow, in a Field arable, is
the most honorable Escutcheon. And I beg your Pardon for the Boast, that my
Ancestors, some of whom inhabited this Country more than a Century ago, were
all of them Husbandmen.

IT will, I suppose, be expected that something should be said of the Rise,
Progress and Antiquity of Agriculture.

To relate the Custom of the Chinese Emperors, from Time immemorial offering
Sacrifices and Prayers to Chang-ti, their Idol, to obtain a plentiful Harvest;
or to describe what are impiously called the divine Honors, paid, many Ages
past, to Ceres Queen of Sicily for introducing Wheat into Europe, and
parcelling out Fields to the Inhabitants of her Kingdom, would lead to
melancholy Reflections on the Weakness and Folly of human Nature. And it would
wear the Face of Ridicule seriously to enquire, whether Cicero derived his Name
from the Honor acquired by his Ancestor, famous for raising of Peace, or from a
Vetch said to be upon his Nose. But we have, on the present Occasion, the
highest Authority and of the greatest Antiquity to refer to: I mean the sacred
Writings. Agriculture was undoubtedly the first Employment in which Mankind
were engaged. Indeed, so far as relates to this World, it was the main Design
for which he was created: For it is a Remark, made by the inspired Penman,
That, after the Creation of the Earth and of every Plant of the Field, "there
was not a Man to till the Ground." And immediately after he was created and the
Garden of Eden planted, the LORD GOD took the Man, and put him into the Garden
of Eden to dress it and to keep it. From hence we may reasonably suppose, that
his Knowledge of Agriculture was intuitive, perfect and complete; but what
Portion of this Knowledge, immediately derived from the Deity, he retained
after he was expelled from that happy Seat we are not informed. Certain it is,
however, that Adam's two Sons took each a separate Part of this great Business
-- the Elder became a Tiller of the Ground and the Younger "a Keeper of Sheep."
After the Flood Noah retained so much Knowledge, that he began to be an
Husbandman, and planted a Vineyard, and drank of the Wine, and was drunken.
There can be no Doubt, but that such Abuse of Knowledge, from whatever Source
it might have been derived, must naturally tend to lessen, if not destroy it.
The Event was such as ought to have been expected: -- As Mankind degenerated
their Knowledge in Agriculture declined; and, when they laid aside the Practice
of it, they became brutally savage. The whole History of Mankind is one
continued Proof of this Fact -- and what is daily before our Eyes in the
Conduct of the savage Tribes of America is a striking Example. On the others
Hand, as Knowledge and Virtue have dawned upon various Nations, they have paid
greater Attention to Agriculture: And it is a general Rule, which has a very
few Exceptions in Favor of Trade and Commerce, that in Proportion to the
Attention which has been given to Agriculture and the Respect paid to
Husbandmen, the Bands of Civil Society have been strengthened, the Arts have
flourished and Nations have increased in solid Riches, Honor and real
Happiness. When the Empire of Rome had risen to the Fullness of its Glory, and
produced those great Men, whose Sentiments and Conduct remain to this Day as
Lessons of Wisdom and Virtue, they held it infamous to neglect or despite
Agriculture. -- And it has been remarked, that Cato thought it real Praise to
say that a Man was much addicted to Tillage. This Sentiment was so generally
adopted by the Romans of that Time, that the most honorable Patrician Families
derived their Names from the Branches of Agriculture, which distinguished their
Ancestors: Of which the best Historians give the clearest Testimony. And the
present Age has produced still more honorable Testimonies in Favor of this
Science.

To show that the wisest and best Men of our Day have given their Countenance
to Agriculture, we need only say that Lewis the Sixteenth of France, the Friend
of Mankind, the Father of his People, and the illustrious Ally of these United
States, cultivating the Fields which surround his imperial Palace, has held and
guided the Plow with his own royal Hands. And so great has been the Improvement
of this Science under that Prince and his immediate Predecessor, that I have
the best Authority to say, it has within eighteen Years Past doubled the annual
Produce of his Kingdom.

GREAT Prince, it is not an empty Compliment, but solid Truth, that there is
not a Gem in thy imperial Crown, but derives new Luster from thy Wisdom -- new
Brilliancy from thy Benevolence! While those which once ornamented the Crown of
thine Enemy, new-set by Folly have lost their Luster -- and the largest and
most valued shaken from their Place by the convulsive Efforts of Pride and
Madness, have fallen from his his foolish Head!

THE Experiments made by Duhamel, while he held the important Post of Inspector
General of the Marine of France, laid the Foundation for the Improvements in
Husbandry lately made in England, and is a strong Proof what great Things may
be done by persevering Genius; but those who expect to build a System of
Agriculture upon those Experiments, accurate as they are, have not well
considered the Subject. We must build upon Experiments made in our own Climate,
differing greatly from that of France.

INDEED, our Circumstances differ so widely from those of the European World,
that in some Cases it is clearly right to pursue a Conduct directly the Reverse
of theirs: In old Countries, filled with People -- overburthened with
Inhabitants, it is their Interest to improve Lands to the utmost possible
Perfection; on the contrary in new Countries, where there is Land in Abundance
and but few People, we ought to make the most of our Labor.

THE first Settlers of Pennsylvania, full of English Ideas of Farming, cleared
little Patches of Land with infinite Labor, cutting up every Tree and Grub by
the Root, until they broke their Hearts with the Labor -- and when they had
done, new and fertile as the Lands then were, they hardly obtained themselves
Bread. The Labor was Herculean: Many were discouraged, and Numbers actually
returned to England. The poorer Settlers, urged by Necessity, ventured to sow
and plant in Fields, from which the Timber was cut down and burned -- and some
hastily girdled the Trees and sowed their Grain, expecting but little Increase.

BUT, the Lands being rich and the Surface light, produced better Crops than
were expected, and much beyond the Proportion of Labor bestowed, when compared
with those who thought themselves far better Farmers. The Practice soon became
common and greatly facilitated the Settlement of the Country. And new Settlers
on our Frontiers continue the Practice to this Day, as the best for them which
can be devised.

HAD the first Adventurers introduced the great Breed of Holland Cattle, it is
probable they would all have perished. It was found difficult to preserve
through Winter the better chosen hardy small Breed -- Yet there is no Doubt the
larger Breed is more profitable in well improved Grass Countries, where Beef is
the Farmer's Object; and they are accordingly introduced into the Eastern
States.

THE Drill-Plow is the greatest Improvement lately made in Husbandry, and will
beyond a Doubt be generally introduced among us in the plain Country to
incredible Advantage. I am well aware that there will require some considerable
Attention to this Plow, and the Manner of using it in these States, before it
will, or ought to be introduced. To follow the Rules laid down by European
Authors, will be destructive. Our Air is much drier than theirs, and therefore
more Attention must be given to the Time when the Ground is plowed.
But the first Trials made in Pennsylvania, happening to be in a very dry
Season, did not succeed -- and the Drill-Plow was in great Danger of being
condemned. For the same Year Wheat sowed in the old broad-cast Way produced
good Crops every where.

IT was soon discovered that Indian Corn, which had been neglected for some
Time and then plowed in a dry Season, was injured; while that which had been
duly attended, being plowed at the same Time, was greatly benefited. The latter
had shot its Roots below the Reach of the Plow, while the former was turned out
by it and perished for Want of Moisture. -- This accounted for the Want of
Success with the DrillPlow, and further and more encouraging Trials were made.
These Things are mentioned, to show that in forming a System of Agriculture for
these States we must depend on Experiments made in this Country.

I shall now offer a few Observations on several Branches of Agriculture; but
it will not be expected, in a Discourse of this Kind, that so extensive a
Subject should be fully treated of.

BEFORE I enter upon this Part of the Subject, let me remind you of what
deserves your serious Attention, and may require the Aid of the Legislature. A
mischievous destructive Infect has seized upon and made dreadful Havoc among
the Wheat This Insect has also seized upon the Indian Corn in some Parts of
New Jersey.
in several of the neighboring States, and has threatened to invade
Pennsylvania. Such an Enemy is more to be dreaded than a British Army and ought
to be opposed before they get a Footing among us. A British Army may be
repelled by Force -- may be restrained by Retaliation; but if this Infect
should once get Possession of our Fields, the Consequence may be dreadfully
fatal. It may not be in our Power either to repel or to restrain them. It has
been said, that by threshing the Wheat immediately after Harvest, the Egg of
this Infect will not hatch in the Grain. If this be so, effectual Means should
be devised to have it done by every Body, every where -- left the Neglect or
Indolence of a few bring Calamity or Destruction upon all. But should early
threshing be found ineffectual, Kilns may be erected to dry the Grain. A few
Experiments with a Thermometer will point out the Degree of Heat necessary to
destroy the Infect and her Eggs -- and those Experiments ought not to be
delayed. There is Reason to hope that our Labor will not be lost -- as few
Enquiries have ever been diligently pursued which have not been blessed with
some useful Discovery -- sometimes even threatened Calamities have produced the
happiest Consequences.

THE severe late Frost last Spring, by destroying the Farmer's Hope in his Crop
of Winter-Grain, terrified us with the dreadful Idea of a Famine. But the
Consequence was, that uncommon Industry and the greatest Exertions were used in
sowing and planting Oats, Buckwheat and Indian Corn. The Event afforded an
Example of what Industry could do, convinced Thousands of Farmers of the real
Value of those Summer-Grains, and produced a happy Abundance throughout the
State.

THE best Preventive against the Smut in Wheat was discovered by an Experiment
which seemed to have no Relation to it: -- A Ship Load of Wheat being sunk, was
taken up after it was soaked with Salt Water and rendered unfit for making of
Bread; upon Trial it grew very well, and the Cargo was bought by the Farmers
and sowed in different Parts of the Kingdom. -- At the following Harvest all
the Wheat in England was smutty, except only the Produce of this Seed, which
was all clean from Smuttiness. An important and unlooked for Discovery, which
greatly encouraged persevering Enquiry.

THE Time is fast advancing in which Manures will be of great Importance --
indeed they already are so in the older settled Counties. Hitherto little
Enquiry has been made after Marles, or other native Manures. The Husbandman has
contented himself with the Use of Lime where it could be obtained, and he has
supposed it was a Manure on all Lands in all Conditions; but this has been
doubted with great Appearance of Reason. A late Author has insisted, that Lime
is a Manure only where there is a full Supply of Oils in the Land, and that it
operates by uniting with the Oil, and thereby rendering it capable of mixing
with Water, and becoming the Food of Plants. This appears to be a great leading
Point and worthy of being enquired into, -- I therefore beg Leave to suggest an
Experiment.

FLAX is known to impoverish Lands more than other Plants do -- probably by
extracting a greater Quantity of Oil. The same Field will produce several Crops
of Flax, one after another, in Ireland, where they pull it before the Seed is
formed.
Upon Lands then which have been exhausted by Flax, lay a full Proportion of
Lime only on one Part of the Field, and on the other Part of the same Field lay
the same Proportion of Lime and with it the Flaxseed raised upon it, first
bruising the Seed, but not extracting the Oil. It Is easy to form Conjectures of
the Event in both Cases, but Experiment only can give us the Information we
want.

PUTREFACTION A dead Colt, which had lain until it was so far putrid as that
the Hair would readily rub off, being drawn across a Grass Lot in the Month of
May, to be buried in one Corner of the Field, produced so great an Effect on
the Grass it passed over, for at least twenty Rods, that its Growth was very
remarkable, and its Effects were so lasting that the Direction the Colt was
drawn in remained plainly visible both in the Color and Strength of the Grass
for three Years afterward.
produces wonderful Effects on Vegetation -- The Roots of common Green Grass
will penetrate the Earth six Feet deep where Animals have been buried at that
Depth. Enquiries on this Subject promise important Discoveries -- and he who
dedicates a few Days to this Purpose will deserve Honor.

BUT to proceed on my Subject: Two Plow-Horses, harnessed, proper, support the
Arms of the State. The Figure is just, and shows the Sentiments of her Councils
concerning the Plow, that great Instrument of Blessings to Mankind, which,
simple as it is, deserves our first Consideration and every possible Attention
of Genius to improve it. The Plow was sent by Heaven to mitigate the Sentence
passed upon Adam.

NEXT to the invaluable Drill-Plow, which will save in Seed Corn only the whole
Tax on the Field, the Bucks Country Plow, with a short Moldboard, is justly
esteemed the best. By turning over the Furrow shorter and quicker than any
other, it breaks and greatly loosens the Soil; and, if plated with Steel I say
plated with Steel rather than with Iron, because Steel is not only much the
best; but, whenever the Use of it becomes general, it will be found in the End
much the cheapest: For, however paradoxical it may appear, the high Price of
Steel is owing to the small Quantity of it now used; as the Smallness of the
Quantity heretofore used was a Consequence of its high Price. The Expense of
converting Iron into Steel is very small, and is nearly paid by its Increase of
Weight in the Process, which is very simple. British Tyranny restrained us from
making of Steel, to enrich her Merchants and Manufacturers, but we can now make
it ourselves as good as theirs: And the Day will come when our Horse-shoes
shall be of Steel; perhaps even the Whole of our Coulters and Plowshares. If
ten times the Quantity of Steel now used were consumed, the Steelmaker could
well afford to abate seven-eighths of his present Profit; and the Husbandman
will find his Interest in having as many of his Instruments made of Steel as
are improved by it. Few People are aware how much stronger Steel is than Iron,
when Steel is only hammered and not hardened.
, will work lighter and freer than any other Plow used in Pennsylvania.

IT has long been controverted, whether Horses or Oxen are best suited to the
Plow and most profitable to the Husbandman? In the Eastern States the Ox is
preferred; in this State Horses are chosen: perhaps in both Cases upon just
Ground and from fair Trials. But it is plain that the Attention in Breeding of
them, which is due to both these Animals, is not paid to either of them. Men
are apt to say, that "any Thing will do for the Plow." The Sentiment is unjust,
and greatly injurious to the general Welfare: For, as the Plow is infinitely
the most important Service to which the Labor of Horses is applied, so also
does it require the best Horses in the World -- and no wise Farmer will ever
own a mean one while he can obtain a better. The Plowman's Day is spent whether
his Horses walk faster or slower, whether they are strong or weak, and do
little or much. The Labor of the Plow-Horse is hard, long continued and in the
extreme Heat of our Summers; he ought therefore to be strong, vigorous and
healthful, and his Lungs clear and sound. This cannot be denied, but the
Question is, What Kind of Horses possess those Qualities in the highest Degree?

UPON this Subject I know Men of the best Understanding are not agreed, but I
beg Leave to speak my Sentiments freely, and leave them to be justified or
condemned by Experience.

THOSE who introduced Horses of the Blood, as they are called, among us,
probably had in View to promote the Breed of Race-Horses, -- and our young Men
chose out the lightest boned and gayest Mares to breed from, with the still
lighter boned Stallions of the Blood, consequently the Colts were small and of
little Worth. By this Means the Blood fell into Disgrace; but a few large
heavy-boned strong Mares with those Horses produced most excellent Plow-Horses.
Since that Time the half-bred Horses have been rising in Reputation: They are
now most esteemed where they have had the fullest Trial -- and, if proper Care
be taken to choose from among the true Barbs those Stallions which have the
largest Bones, the fullest Chest, the strongest Loins and shortest
Pastern-Joints, they will with our heaviest Mares bring the best Plow-Horses
for this Country. Those Horses are stronger in proportion to their Weight, walk
faster, have clearer Lungs, and are hardier than any others. The great
Dray-Breed cannot be brought to stand hard Service in our Summers, nor be
taught to walk with any tolerable Speed. Among the half-bred Horses, there will
be found those fit for the Saddle, for traveling Carriages, and for the
Purposes of War. A Stallion to breed good Plow-Horses for this hot Climate,
must have sound Lungs. And the best Mode of trying them, is by long Races with
heavy Riders; but Racing is disgraced by its Connection with Gaming. If these
can be separated, this Mode of trying the Wind and Strength of breeding Horses
will certainly be advantageous; but if they cannot be entirely separated, it
were better to plow with Asses than destroy the Morals of a People -- as Gaming
does.

BUT, useful as Horses are, too great a Number will eat up a fruitful Country.
Of this the Pride of Britain affords a striking Example: The Food given by that
People to their useless Horses, is worth the Interest of one-fourth Part of
their enormous national Debt. Infatuated and ripe for Destruction as that
People are, we must not expect they should see this; or seeing, shun the Evil
-- But we ought to derive Instruction from their Errors, as well as from their
Improvements.

WHEN our Farms are more divided, and the Meadows become insufficient to
support the increasing Number of Horses, Oxen will then be introduced --
because one Acre of Land will produce more Cabbages and Carrots, which are good
Food for Oxen, than five Acres of the same Land will produce of Hay. And as the
Lands by long Use will require to be plowed deeper, the Husbandman must make
himself Amends, for the Want of Speed in Oxen, by the Advantage gained in their
superior Strength. And when the Comparison is made between Horses and Oxen, let
it be remembered, that an Ox taken from the Plow in perfect Health and Strength
and made fat in a short Time, affords the Best of Beef for present Use. -- And
let it also be remembered, that the savory Surloin, served up at the
Harvest-Board, deserves a distinguished Place at the well-earned Feast -- A
Feast such as Heliogabalus, with a thousand Dishes before him never tasted --
such as the Epicure may look on and envy, but is too lazy, too indolent to
enjoy: Industry and the cheerful Labors of the Field give a Relish to it, which
Art, poisoning her Votaries, can never imitate. The Husbandman at the Head of
his Table, surrounded by his assisting Neighbors and their industrious
healthful Sons -- his Heart elated with Joy, and his Countenance filled with
Benevolence, affords the strongest Picture of perfect human Happiness: The
sparkling Nectar of his Orchard passes from Lip to Lip, and Wit, brightened by
the Joys of Harvest and chastened by his Presence, inspires every Heart with
Cheerfulness, good Humor and Mirth, -- while the careful Wife and the attentive
dutiful Daughter, with Pleasure sparkling in their Eye, watch every Look and
prevent every Wish. -- It Is their Care, their Ambition that nothing shall be
wanting. When were Princes waited upon with such watchful Attention? When were
they served by those so much and so deservedly beloved? Wealth cannot purchase
such a Feast, not Royalty command it: It Is reserved for the Husbandman, whose
own Hands have earned it: It Is reserved for him by whose Labors all Mankind are
fed.

As to Clothing, both for Winter and for Summer, it is within our Power: --
Our Sheep afford a warm Covering to keep off the chilling Blasts of Winter. --
Our Flax and our Silkworms offer us a light, cool, decent Dress for Summer. --
The Importance of these need not be insisted on -- they are evident.

OUR British Enemies raised up an Empire once the Admiration of the World, and
they boasted that its Foundation and Support was a Wool-Pack: -- Their Woollens
exported to every Quarter of the Globe, purchased and centered in that Island
the Produce of every Country, civilized and savage; -- but becoming insolent
and unjust, she raised up the Rod of Oppression against her Children and her
Neighbors, and the righteous Hand of Heaven has humbled her in the Dust -- she
has fallen detested and despised -- an Object of Hatred and of Contempt -- Upon
that wicked and foolish Nation we have been too long dependent -- Let us forget
them for-ever; or remember them only to profit by their Example.

THE Sheep of this Country are not subject to Disease as they are in England.
The Rot is unknown among us. There is a Disease among Sheep occasioned by
Moisture in low Grounds, which has some of the Characters of that fatal Disease
the Rot; but it has never yet appeared to be infectious.
They are easily kept, and with less Care than is taken of them in any other
Country. The Wool which they produce, both in Pennsylvania and New Jersey, is
finer, stronger and fulls more than any Wool of which Britain can boast. Of
this our Wool Hats, the best in the World, is a full Proof.

OUR Cloths last longer than any imported from Europe. and by assorting the
Wool, as is done in other Countries, they will full as even and wear as smooth.

HUSBANDMEN who have not pen-folded their Sheep, have no Idea of the great
Value of their Manure. It is within my Knowledge, that a Farmer in New Jersey,
who possessed a Tract of poor Land, by keeping an hundred Sheep greatly
enriched the Whole. It became highly valuable, and will now yield more than
double the Crop of Grain it would have done thirty Years ago with equal
Tillage. And in the mean time he has made an Estate by his Sheep. But if we
clothe ourselves with Wool, we must part with our large Breed of Dogs. The
small Breed of Dogs answer all the Purposes of the Farmer as well as the larger
ones, even on the Frontiers.
They destroy the Sheep, and the Husbandman is discouraged.

WERE there no Considerations arising from Interest or Necessity to influence
our Determination respecting the Keeping of Sheep, one should think that the
Pleasure which is seen in the Countenance of an affectionate industrious Wife,
looking on her Husband and Children clothed with Garments spun by her own
Hands, greatly deserves our Regard and Attention. Feelings such as these, are
the strong Motives and great Rewards of Industry -- They act silently indeed;
but irresistibly: Nor are those happy Feelings confined to the Mother only, the
Daughter has her Triumphs too. Look at a modest, blooming, ruddy Lass dressed
in a well finished Homespun -- her Eye sparkles with Pleasure, and she strives
in vain to mask a decent virtuous Pride in her Dress. Our young Men, to while
away an idle Hour, may toy and frolic with some tawdry fluttering Thing,
flounced off with foreign Frippery; but whenever their sober Thoughts lead them
to settle in the World, they turn their Eye upon the prudent homespun Lass --
with her they hope for Happiness -- Her Industry has already shown that she is
worthy of their Love -- while the other falls to the Lot of some idle Fopling,
vain and thoughtless as herself.

IN a Country like this, there is no Bounds to Industry. When Things useful and
convenient are obtained, Ornament and Elegance are within its Reach: -- When we
have clothed ourselves in Wool, a single Effort will clothe us in Silk. The
Experiments already made under the Patronage of this Society, leave no Doubt of
our Success: Plant the Italian Mulberry, and in a few Years the Famer's Wife
and Daughters will clothe themselves in Silks, more lasting and obtained with
less Labor than any other Manufacture. And, in Spite of what Pride and Envy may
suggest, Silks will fit the neatest and shine brightest on the Backs of those
by whose Hands the Silkworm has been fed: Nor can the proudest Empress of
India show an equal Title to wear them. Female Industry deserves the highest
Reward, and has in all Ages obtained Praise.

WHEN Solomon, whose Wisdom has never been excelled, speaks of a good Wife,
with what Force and Elegance he describes her Industry. You will indulge me in
repeating a Sentiment of his on this Subject: She is not afraid of the Snow for
her Household: for all her Household are clothed in Scarlet, She makes herself
Coverings of Tapestry, her Clothing is Silk and Purple. -- And her Husband is
known in the Gates, when he sits among the Elders of the Land. How must the
Female Heart rejoice in the well earned Praise, when, as Solomon expresses it,
her Children rise up and call her blessed, her Husband also, and praises her.
The Praise of Solomon is not confined to the good Wives of his People; it
extends equally to all Nations. Let us then look round among those of
Pennsylvania -- let us seek out the Thousands to whom it justly belongs -- let
them be honored and be loved, for their Price is far above Rubies. Their Hands
will make us truly rich.

SPEAKING of the Mulberry Tree, it would be unpardonable to omit the Remark,
that this Tree, like the Walnut, enriches the Ground it grows upon and is a
most valuable Ship Timber.

EXPERIMENTS made on the Vine in this Country, afford no very flattering
Expectations of present Success; -- perhaps the native Grape has been too much
neglected. Whether Wines are necessary or not, all Mankind from the Days of
Noah to this Day, have had a strong Desire to drink of them. -- Commerce at
least will introduce enough of them; but should they be imported for common
Use, the Produce of the Country would not pay for them. The Husbandman would
drink up his whole Crop, and remain in Debt. He would have nothing to give
toward the Defense of his Country. It would stand an inviting easy Prey to the
first bold insolent Invader.

BUT, Thanks to that kind Providence which governs all with equal Wisdom and
Benevolence, we have no real Need of foreign Wines. Our Orchards yield us a
Juice, which, well improved, may justly vie with the best the World can afford.
The Art of Fermentation will bring this delicious Drink to Perfection. And our
Fields produce Hops and Barley in Abundance: These afford a Liquor, which, when
the Sons of Britain were brave and virtuous, was their Boast. It is a Fact,
that those who drink Beer well tinctured with the Hop, are not afflicted with
Agues; while those who drink Spirits of any Kind, are doubly afflicted with
them.

PENNSYLVANIA has generally taken the Lead in Agriculture; -- but it must be
acknowledged her Husbandmen are greatly behind-hand in Fruit Trees, both of the
Orchard and of the Garden. It is a Remark made by Foreigners from all
Countries, that more Flesh is eaten by the People of this State and New Jersey
than by any other Nation. Hence many fatal Diseases take their Rise, especially
Dysenteries and putrid Fevers. Against which, it is well known, full ripe
Fruits are the most effectual Preventives and the most sovereign Remedies. The
Effects produced by the best Kind of freestone Peaches in Dysenteries, renders
it probable that a general Cultivation of that Fruit alone would within twenty
Years save more Lives than we have lost in the present cruel and bloody War --
a War rendered glorious by the great Prize we have gained in the Contest.
Surely then this Society, whose Object is to apply useful Knowledge to Practice
for the Benefit of Mankind, will think the Propagating of Fruit Trees an Object
of their immediate Attention.

THE many great Advantages derived from our happy Connection with France, may
draw our Attention from the lesser; but it is far from being an inconsiderable
one, that we now have an Opportunity of cultivating the most excellent Fruits
of that fine Country -- her Cherries -- the great Variety of her rich melting
Pears -- her luscious Plumbs -- her blushing Nectarins -- and, above all, her
delicious Peaches. Little Difficulties ought not to discourage us -- the great
one is overcome: -- That destructive Worm which so long triumphed over us, is
at last conquered. A Bank of Earth raised round a Fruit-Tree, at once secures
it from the Worm and renders it doubly fruitful, and it is scarcely the Labor
of a Minute annually.


FRUITS were the first Food of Man, and it is wonderful that in this Country,
in which they will grow even to Admiration, the Husbandman should toil through
the Heats of Harvest and not provide for his Table a Desert of wholesome
cooling Fruits; which alone are wanting to make his Table the most plentiful
and the most happy. This strange Deficiency must be owing to Want of Knowledge
in Grassing and Inoculation. The unwholesome sour Trash found almost every
where is full Proof -- it can be accounted for no other way. The Practice of
this Art is so easy, so expeditious, that it is impossible it should be
generally known and so entirely neglected: Let us then devise some Means to
teach it to every Boy within the State. Their Parents will rejoice in it. Some
kind-hearted worthy Man in every Township of the State will dedicate a Day or
two in a Year to this useful and benevolent Purpose, and teach every Boy
upwards of ten Years of Age. Notice being given of the Time appointed, all
would attend, and all may be instructed even in a few Hours. A few plain
Instructions on the Subject of Grassing and Inoculation may be printed and
given to each Boy to keep the Instructions upon his Mind. -- These shall not be
wanting wheneveer this Plan is attempted.
If some Public Honors are found necessary, to incite the Attention of Youth,
let him who excels wear a graceful rural Crown and be treated with more than
common Respect. A Plan of this Kind, well digested and faithfully executed,
cannot fail of Success. It would fill our Country with Fruit Trees and make of
it a new, a delightful and more lasting Eden than that from which our first
Parents were driven. A Garden in which Knowledge and the Practice of Virtue
would restore to Man every earthly Happiness he was created to enjoy.

MANKIND have talked of a Milennium -- a Thousand Years of perfect Peace and
Happiness -- and some have looked for it to happen about this Time. Whenever
the Prophecies of this great Event shall be fulfilled, and the whole Earth
become one fruitful Eden, the benign Sun of that happy Day will rise upon a
perfect Knowledge of Agriculture, a sober persevering Industry, and a virtuous,
chaste Enjoyment of the Fruits of the Field.

IN our Endeavors to promote the Interest and Happiness of our Country, let us
follow the wise Example of France -- Let us apply to the intelligent Husbandman
in every Part of the State, and collect the real Knowledge among us -- let us
examine, digest and arrange it into Science: Suggest Experiments, which may
determine doubtful Cases, or lead to new and still further Improvements. Time
cannot be better employed -- A Portion of it dedicated to so useful a Purpose,
will obtain the ready and cheerful Assistance of every Man in the State. To do
good is delightful: -- And that Country whose Citizens make its Welfare not
only the Object of their Business, but of their Pleasure, cannot fail to become
wise and happy, and must rise to a Height of Riches, Strength and Glory, which
the fondest Imagination cannot readily conceive.

THE Star-bespangled Genius of America, leaning upon and embracing her fond
Sister Genius of France, points to Agriculture as the stable Foundation of this
rising mighty Empire. It Is our Business, our Duty, to build it up with all our
Strength. The great plain written Volume of Nature is open before us: -- Let us
read with Diligence, and a Knowledge in her Ways will rapidly increase -- her
whole System of Vegetation may perfectly be understood. -- And I feel a solid
present Joy in the Certainty that Agriculture, as a Science, will ere long be
taught within these Walls. This Oration was delivered in the University.
That, under the Auspices of a Patriot Legislature, that Science will give the
last Polish and brightest Glow to a learned and useful Education -- There
cannot be a Doubt: -- So obvious are the Advantages, that even Parsimony would
prompt us to adopt the Plan. And what is there taught among Mankind of higher
Importance and more real Use? I dare boldly affirm, that he who can add one
Bushel of Wheat to the Increase of a Field, is greater than he who has ravaged
a Province, or conquered a Kingdom. Husbandmen compose the great Majority of
our Citizens. Their Voice will long be the Law of the Land: Their Knowledge and
Virtue must fix among the Nations the Reputation of the State: Their Industry
and Skill in Agriculture will determine the Value and Extent of our Commerce --
the Importance and Worth of our Alliance. When Husbandmen are liberally
educated, Agriculture and the State will flourish together -- will rise to
their utmost Perfection. -- And this will soon come to pass.

WE have seen the Representatives of the People liberally endowing that
University in which the future Husbandman, Patriot and Statesman in one must
receive his Instructions in Wisdom and Virtue. May their Descendants enjoy the
Benefits for Ages to come -- Their Fathers have deserved it.

IN the Midst of a careful and anxious Solicitude to support the present
unavoidable and just though distressing War, and the Hurry, Confusion and great
Difficulties which attend it, we have seen the same Patriotic Legislature, with
a truly Christian Benevolence, attending to the Cries of our Fellow-Men, though
differing in Color from us, though dishonored and disgraced by Slavery -- we
have seen them loosing the Bands of Oppression, Alluding to the Act for the
gradual Abolition of Slavery in Pennsylvania.
and thereby drawing down the Blessing of Heaven upon us. -- With a Readiness
which engages our highest Respect and decent Acknowledgment -- with a
Liberality of Sentiment which adds to the Honors they had justly acquired they
have by a solemn Act incorporated and enlarged the Towers of this Society. Men
who thus dedicate their Time and Abilities to promote the Interests of
Learning, Liberty and their Country, are far above vulgar Praise -- are
entitled to far different Returns than Thanks and Compliments. We owe to them,
and to the great Cause which they have espoused, a strenuous and unremiting
Exertion of every Power we possess, for the true and real Interest of the
State, by promoting and extending useful Knowledge through every Part of it,
and, if possible, throughout the whole World.

WHILE the Balance of Justice The "Seal of the Laws of Pennsylvania" is, -- The
Hand of Justice, holding an even Balance and the Eye of Providence over it.
is held in such Hands, and the overseeing Eye of Providence is acknowledged to
be upon us -- while Agriculture is honored, and the great Republican Virtues of
Industry and Economy are duly respected -- while the Owners of our widely
extending Fields cultivate them with their own Hands -- while our Citizens of
all Ranks remain armed and trained for Defense -- and while Learning is
cherished and encouraged among us -- Force can never conquer, nor Fraud enslave
us. But, standing upon those mighty Pillars whose great Foundations GOD himself
has laid, a whole happy People with one Voice shall triumph for ever in
"VIRTUE, LIBERTY, INDEPENDENCE." The Motto of the Great Seal of the State.



