LETTERS ON APPRECIATION.
NUMBER I.
TO meddle with the subject of the Currency was long deemed a matter of the
highest imprudence; and though all saw and felt its decline, few had the
hardiness publicly to declare it. But the depreciation became, at length, an
object of such magnitude, and was so intimately connected with every movement,
both political and military, that every eye became familiarized to it. The laws
acknowledged it, and the newspapers, in successive essays, proclaimed it
aloud. Various have been the schemes for remedying the evil; and appreciation,
appreciation, has been the cry from one end of the Continent to the other. To
combat the general voice, may be thought to savor of either folly or vanity.
But as no injury can now happen to the public, from even torturing the subject
into every shape, I am willing to risque the imputation; and venture on the
ocean of finance with my little bark. An ocean, much of which remains
unexplored, and in which fog banks and islands of ice are often mistaken for
land. If I perish with my little visionary crew by the falling of some mighty
projecting promontory, future voyages must beware of my fate.

IT may be necessary to premise, that in the sundry calculations which I may
take occasion to exhibit, I shall generally make use of whole numbers; as the
nature of the subject precludes accuracy.

BY the resolves of Congress in January, 1779, it appears they had emitted 123
millions of dollars. And in September following, in their circular letter, they
state the amount expended to be about 160 millions; and then proposed
continuing the emissions till they should reach 200 millions, exclusive of 33
millions borrowed on interest. I presume the said 200 millions are now
completed; for if in eight months (viz. from January to September) the
expenses were 37 millions, when depreciation was on the general average 15 1-2
for 1, the remaining four months would undoubtedly consume 40 millions, because
the average depreciation since September has been 35 1-2 for 1.

DURING the two first emissions, of 3 millions each, the money I believe
continued at par, no actual diminution of value having taken place. How the
depreciation has since gone on, may be seen by a table I shall subjoin to this
letter, taking gold for the standard; which, by the by, has ever been behind
every other commodity in advance of price. As we have no account of the
quantities of all the several emissions, or the dates at which they were
actually issued, it is in the breast of Congress alone, to determine with
precision, how far the depreciation has kept pace with the quantity, and from
thence in some measure to ascertain, whether the quantity alone, or some other
concomitant causes, have produced the effect. Was I to judge from mere
conjectural appearances, I should suppose the value of money has been
principally affected by its relative quantity, when compared with the quantity
of commodities for sale. For instance, if 10 millions of dollars, at 7 s6 each,
were sufficient for a medium of trade, when we had 40 millions of saleables,
and we should at any time have 200 millions of dollars, I should suppose money
would be depreciated as 20 to 1, because, not being of intrinsic value, or
capable of exportation, there would be 20 times the number of bidders for every
article on sale (for money is in fact the buyer or bidder) and of course the
possessors of money could as well afford to give 20 prices for an article, as
they could formerly to give one price. But if the quantity of saleables should
be reduced to one half, or 20 millions, I should then say that the depreciation
was actually 40 for 1; because there was 40 times as much money as was
necessary for a medium. This I presume is plain reasoning. But to come nearer
to the matter of fact, I must observe that, from the best information I have
been able to collect, the current money of America formerly never exceeded 16
millions of dollars, when the value of merchandise might be estimated at about
45 millions.

I fancy it will be readily allowed, that we have not at present above one
fourth part of the quantity of saleables which we had formerly, consequently
not much above 11 millions in value. Then, if 16 millions of money conducted
the business of 45 millions of saleables, How much is necessary to negociate 11
millions? The answer is, About 4 millions. And this proportion of money will be
deemed very sufficient, if we recollect, that 6 millions of running cash served
the whole business of England in Sir William Petty's time, when the saleables
amounted to 42 millions and a half. Now as we have of Continental money about
200 millions, at a time when 4 millions would answer the purpose, it is evident
there is fifty times as much as is necessary, and the money is in fact
depreciated to fifty for one. I do not bring land into the account of
saleables, as the amount would be too uncertain to attempt; but I should
suppose the local emissions of the several States, together with the value of
Loan-Office money issued under the denomination of Certificates, may be deemed
fully to counterbalance any allowance for the sale of real estates; especially
when we reflect, that very considerable loans have been made since the 33
millions mentioned, in September.

I am very sensible, that I am obliged to assume my premises, as no certain
data can be formed, yet I conceive I am not much beside the mark; for if we
reason back from effects to causes, we shall find, that on an average the
prices of saleables are more than 50 for 1, and thence discover the medium to
be 50 times more than is wanted. And I am the more convinced of the truth of
this conjecture from the late prices of goods; which have in some measure
become stationary or fixed. For though the quantity of money has been daily
increasing, yet the quantity of goods, for some time past, crowded in upon us,
has in some measure counterbalanced the quantity of money; whereby a kind of
equilibrium has been established, and trade has fairly regulated itself. The
merchants endeavored to advance the prices, but the money on hand was not
sufficient to bear it; and it is just now, relatively, as scarce as when it
passed equal to hard money. Should Congress continue striking at the rate of 10
millions a month, and 10 millions present value of goods should be imported in
each month, I think I might venture to assert, that no further real
depreciation could take place. As to any more capricious turns, they could not
be durable. The general equilibrium between the quantity of goods, and the
quantity of money would soon be restored.

THEN taking for granted, that the real depreciation is fifty for one, the
grand question arises, "What is to be done?" Some cry, stop the press, and
raise by taxes and loans sufficient for the exigencies of government; some are
for a sudden appreciation to the rate of twenty for one; some for a foreign
loan; and others for calling in the whole money, and re-issuing about one sixth
part, which, say they, will be as valuable as the whole; and the remaining 5
6th to be funded, and carry an interest. These several modes resemble the
prescriptions of anxious friends, standing round a sick bed -- Some would bleed
-- some physic -- one is for poultices, another for a bath of bitter herbs,
whilst poor dame nature is laboring incessantly to throw off the disorder by
her own efforts, and would often succeed, if not interrupted by the ignorance
of quacks. That the money has depreciated, we well know; and many have fatally
felt its effects; but those partial evils I presume are pretty generally at an
end. All old contracts are either settled or the proffered payments absolutely
rejected; for he who can bear to lose 19 s6 in the pound, will not be ruined by
the other six pence. Let the debtor pay it into the Treasury, and the Laws
support him as long as conscience will bear it. Present dealings are for ready
money -- not a moment's credit is allowed -- the cash is paid, or the bargain
void.

"Stop the presses" -- easily said -- But how are the current expenses to be
supplied? -- "Raise taxes" -- Every State on the Continent, is at it as hard as
they can drive, and law after law has been passed for supplying the quotas
called for by Congress. In November 1777, five millions were required, in 1779
fifteen millions and forty-five millions. Yet I believe not one will assert,
that even one fourth part of the whole is paid into the Treasury. In September
last, they tell us, no more than three millions had been received. To expect
that a country can be brought to pay taxes, voluntarily, to support the whole
demands of the year, in the midst of an expensive war, is as absurd, as to
suppose the rent of a house will in one year pay for the building of it;
nothing but an anticipation of the taxes can effect it. A young country, like
America, can by no means be supposed to have such an overplus of riches as to
furnish the sum wanted. In England they have long been compelled to borrow, in
time of war, and the accumulating interest has nearly ruined the nation; they
can now scarce levy taxes sufficient to pay the interest; for during the whole
interval of the last peace, they have not, I think, paid four millions into the
sinking fund.

"BORROW money then -- at home -- of foreigners -- any where -- rather than
have fresh emissions." -- What borrow on interest, when you may have it
without! -- Send your resources to foreign Courts when you may keep them at
home! -- I would ask, what is the difference between striking a million of
Bills of 50 dollars each, and issuing Loan Office Certificates for the same
amount in notes of 500 dollars each? With respect to the quantity of paper,
there is none; for Certificates are now as liable to circulation, as the money
itself. We are not to conclude that the Certificates will remain more dormant
than the money did. He who puts money into the Loan-Office, may be presumed to
have no immediate use for it; and that it was innocently resting in his chest,
without rushing into circulation to increase the sum current; and whenever it
becomes convenient to make a purchase he would either bring out the cash or the
Certificate. Therefore to pay an interest of 6 per cent for money received at
the Loan Office, is in my humble opinion to involve the country in a lasting
tax, purely for the benefit of monied men. A tax which every man of small
capital, artisan and labourer, must annually contribute to raise, without the
least benefit to themselves. From the first moment a Loan-Office was projected,
I conceived it an error in politics, and it has brought on the country the
great evil of a contrariety of interests.

WE see a great depreciation has happened of near 50 for 1, and every man who
at the first paid 5000 l. into the Loan-Office, has in fact sunk his stock to
100 l. and so in proportion to the different dates at which they lent to the
public; and many of these have been foreign lenders upon the credit and honor
of the Continent. Now all these people have an interest different from the
people at large, and must be continually wishing for a restoration of the value
of the money; whilst the rest of the community who have gradually borne a share
of the loss by depreciation from time to time, and have settled and squared all
their transactions conformably thereto, cannot have a wish to see the money
return to its original value. All they have to desire is, that the value may
remain where it is, or if it still declines, that they may bear no more than
their proportion of the loss.

IT may be asked what mode of settlement is to be adopted between government
and the money lenders. Policy would answer emit as much fresh money as will pay
off the whole debt immediately, and justice would add, let such an addition be
made, as will amply reimburse the lenders, estimating the value of money at the
time of subscribing. Perhaps some medium between the two, might be proper; for
as people at large have borne their share of the depreciation, these
subscribers could not expect to set down whole. I don't pretend to determine,
what such medium should be. I only contend for the immediate dissolution of the
Loan-Office; for why should the Community be burdened with an addition of
taxes, merely to pay an interest to monied men, for lending paper to
government; when that very paper could be as well made without any other
expense than striking it; and the larger these bills the better; if a thousand
dollars each, it might help to retard the circulation, and lessen the charge of
printing and signing. It is to be observed, that the whole of my reasoning on
this subject turns upon the assertion, that Loan-Office Certificates are money
to all intents and purposes, and operate in proportion to their quantity, equal
to a like sum of Continental bills -- if I am wrong my conclusions fall to the
ground.

LOANS on interest in England are absolutely necessary; because real gold is
paid into the treasury by the subscribers, but could their government
manufacture that gold, as cheap as we can manufacture paper, will any man
suppose they would prefer taking it up on interest? surely no; the habit we had
long been accustomed to, of using paper money, rendered it familiar to us; and
no one was alarmed with the consequences of an increasing quantity, yet it is a
debt to all intents and purposes; but being due to ourselves, the evil is not
so great as if Foreigners were our creditors. The experiment might prove
dangerous to Great Britain, should she attempt to carry on a war with paper
money, otherwise she might pledge her funds for redeeming it and save the
interest, but her complicated trade and connection with foreigners would
thereby be involved in great perplexity. It will be said, that much of the
circulating medium of Great Britain is already paper: I grant it with this
difference, that it is not legal tender, and a man can at any moment convert it
into actual hard cash. But I have rather wandered from the point: I only mean
to prove, that it is highly injurious to America in the present state of
things, to have a Loan-Office. As to foreign Loans with a view to serve the
Currency, every argument used against Loans amongst ourselves, applies with
equal force against them, with this important addition, that the interest would
be an actual drain of the wealth of our country. In the former instance it
would only drain people of moderate and small fortunes for the benefit of the
rich; but in the latter both rich and poor would lose for ever the interest so
paid. How far Foreign Loans may be requisite to supply the Continent with such
Foreign necessaries, as we have not the means of paying for at present, is a
consideration which does not come within the present question.

I shall here insert the table of depreciation the greater part of which I had
from a trader, whose business required his accounts to be kept in hard money,
and agrees with accounts kept by some others with whom I have compared. And yet
I am aware it cannot correspond with all, who may have kept such accounts,
because the rates of exchange, between different persons, have often varied on
the same day; I only mean to demonstrate the general gradual depreciation; and
the table here produced, will come near enough to the truth, for the use I
propose making of it in my next letter.

1777. Exchange. 1779. Exchange. March 1st. 2 April 1. 12 1-2 April do. 14. 14
May 20. 2 1-2 27. 16 June do. 31. 22 July 5. 3 May 1. 22 Aug. Sept. do. 16. 24
Oct. Nov. June 2. 22 December 4 10. 20 1778. 16. 20 January do. 30. 18 Feb.
March 5 July 6. 18 April 6 11. 19 May 5 24. 20 June 18. 4 August 20 July 4
Sept. 1. 20 Aug. Sept. 5 10. 22 October 16. 25 Nov. Dec. 6 30. 28 1779. October
12. 30 January 1. 7 Nov. 8. 32 15. 8 15. 33 1-3 20. 9 20. 40 Febr. 5. 10 25. 40
15. 10 30. 45 March 1. 10 December. 9. 45 25. 11 19. 42 1-2 ^5. 40 ^1. 38

NUMBER II.
IF taxes will not supply the present exigencies, and Loans, both domestic and
foreign, are rejected; you say appreciate the money to 20 for 1 by acts of the
several Assemblies, and oblige the venders of goods and tradesmen to charge
their goods and work at that rate. Has not this mode been attempted three
several times, and universally failed? Did not general discontents and murmurs
prevail? Was not every artifice used to elude the scheme? Were not goods
secreted? And did not one State take the advantage of the other, in either
buying up from their neighbor, or refusing to have intercourse with them? Did
not Congress (aware of the evils it produced) recommend the discontinuing such
regulations? And is it not probable the same inconveniences will still arise?
And after the people have been worrying and perplexing each other, will it not
be likely to fall through? as trade carried on under restraint will be for ever
attempting to break the fetters. But should success attend the attempt, it
would produce the very evil I would wish to avoid. An evil of the most alarming
nature; converting an imaginary into a real debt, and riveting on the Continent
a succession of taxes, which we should scarce ever be able to get clear of.
Suppose we consider this subject a little more minutely. We will, for
argument's sake, allow of the desired appreciation in its utmost extent; that
by some magical stroke the whole Continental money, calling it 200 millions,
should become equal to gold and silver; that a Continental dollar would
purchase as much as a hard dollar would; why truly we should suddenly arrive at
the possession of immense riches, provided we could export this same money as a
commodity, and import, in lieu thereof, the production of other countries; but
as no one can expect this can happen, what is to be done with it? The excess of
quantity is far beyond the value of saleables; is the surplus to be locked up?
No, we will put it to interest with such as want: But this cannot be; for those
who are to be the borrowers, cannot find materials to vest it in. What is next
to be done with this surplus? It appears to be a nominal not a real estate; it
lies dormant by us, and nothing is to be bought with it, for the proportion in
actual circulation answers every purpose. Is it to exist for ever in bits of
paper, under the denomination of money? Or is it to be destroyed? Burned by all
means* that, in case of another war, we may not have too great a redundance of
it, by striking afresh, and again bring on our backs this monster depreciation.
But how shall this same money be destroyed, in such equal proportions, as to
give general satisfaction? -- Very easily, by taxes. -- Agreed. We will now, if
you please begin to lay them, and try how long it will take to do the business.

Here is John Harrow, the farmer, for instance. He has a farm of 200 acres, and
raises 400 bushels of wheat per annum, which, at 20 l. per bushel, the present
price, is 8000 l. for which he shall pay the old accustomed rate of 1 s6 in the
pound; his tax will then be 600 l. per annum. -- But stop, the money is
appreciated. John Harrow cannot get above 8 s. per bushel for his wheat, his
400 bushels will only amount to 160 l. of consequence his tax of 1 s6 in the
pound will yield no more than 12 l. per annum; which is only one fiftieth part.
Very pretty, truly! Why, then if this 200 millions is to be made good money, we
shall take fifty years to pay off that portion of the debt, which would have
been paid off in one year, if the money had not appreciated: That is, John
Harrow, instead of selling 30 bushels of wheat one year, at 20 l. per bushel,
to raise his 600 l. he must now sell this same 30 bushels for 12 l. and have
the same to do every year for 49 years to come; which would in fact be a tax
upon John Harrow of 1500 bushels, instead of 30; and all this for the honor of
making our money good.

WE will now, if you please, bring it upon a more general scale: Pennsylvania
formerly raised by an 1 s6 tax about 25,000 l. per annum, at 7 s6 the dollar.
Now Pennsylvania being deemed 1-8th of the Continent, we may say the whole
Thirteen States would raise by a 1 s6 tax about 200,000 l. which is somewhat
about half a million of dollars. Thus we find it would take only about 400
years to sink the said 200 millions of dollars. But this same 400 years would
carry us to so distant a period, that few of the present generation could hope
to see a settlement of the account; and great frauds might be committed by our
successors; to remedy which, suppose, for the honor of the present race, we
should annually pay the whole of our incomes, or 20 s. in the pound, which will
raise just 13 times and 1-3; as much as the 1 s6 tax would, and so finish the
job in about 30 years. In the mean time, we may go abroad upon our travels,
whilst our estates are out at nurse, as the English phrase is; and at the end
of this quarter of a century we might return, and spend the remainder of our
lives in Peace and Plenty. But pray, who are to work your estates in your
absence? -- A good remark -- Why then, we must 'een drudge on as slaves during
the said 25 years, live on the husks and sell the grain, for the honor of
appreciation.

YOU ask next "how this enormous debt of 200 millions came upon us? Is it
possible we can have expended 50 mil. per annum honestly and fairly, or have
there been frauds and embezzlements?" All very fairly: The quantity of money
increasing daily beyond the medium necessary for circulation, a gradual
depreciation took place; every one having plenty of money to buy with, the
sellers advanced their prices, in proportion to the number of bidders, 'till at
length they rose on an average to about 50 for 1. "And have the public expenses
been managed in this way?" Undoubtedly, all the late expenditures for the army,
navy, etc. have been on an average at that rate. Then, surely, the different
receivers, and all subsequent handlers of the money, who have made Congress pay
50 prices, ought not to have the same money made equal with gold; for, should
that be the case, the present money-holders would be enormous gainers, and the
Continent for 400 years to come must feel its effects. Then you would have the
money remain at its present value? Certainly, if it can be kept there; but by
no means carried back toward its former value.

BUT the depreciation will run on rapidly if we keep striking; for you intimate
that the taxes we may expect to raise, will be but as a drop in the bucket. --
Pray, what great public evil do you imagine has happened from the depreciation?
-- Oh! very great. Our money is good for nothing it will take an estate to go
to market, every thing is so high that common people can scarcely find money
enough to purchase the necessaries of life, putting taxes out of the question
which taxes they say must be raised or we shall be all ruined Suppose, I was to
assert in answer, that there is at presen no absolute necessity for high
government taxes, that the natural unavoidable tax of depreciation is the most
certain expeditious and equal tax that could be devised. Upon the (...) which
has lately existed, every possessor of money has paid a tax for it, in
proportion to the time he hold it. Like a hackney coach it must be paid for by
the hour. And this no man can escape. It is the very tax the Assembly of
Pennsylvania have, in vain, attempted to levy, by obliging every person to
disclose, on oath, the sum in his possession. I say, in vain; for I will
venture to predict, that the Assessors will not find out one fifth part of the
cash which is actually amongst us. But, depreciation is an Assessor that gets
at every farthing, and baffles every attempt to deceive. To make myself better
understood, I will state an account in double columns, viz. Continental and
Hard money, at the different dates of depreciation; though it is to be noted,
that I have no certain documents, as to time or quantity, and that I estimate
the depreciation by the price of gold, which has always been below every other
commodity. It will serve however to illustrate my reasoning. -- When this
account is examined, it will probably be thought very surprising, that the neat
expenses of 1779, when brought into gold, should fall so much short of those in
the preceding years. It cannot well be accounted for, but by supposing, that
the large sums received at the Loan-Office have made up the deficiency; but of
this we have no account later than September last. The only certain premises we
can proceed on, are; That two hundred millions of dollars have been issued;
that one hundred and twenty-three millions were expended December 1778; that
the remaining seventy-seven millions were expended in the year 1779; and that
the table of depreciation, in the foregoing part of this paper, is a true state
of the decline of the money, when compared with gold. Be the appearance what it
may, the fact is, that at whatever dates the two hundred millions have been
expended, the value of money at those dates must be taken for the real sum
expended; for though at one time it took six thousand dollars to purchase a
thousand barrels of flour, and at another time two hundred thousand dollars,
the actual expense to the country is exactly the same; it is the article
supplied, and not the nominal sum paid, which constitutes the real expenditure.

Dr. The United States in account with Continental Money.

1775. To paper money emitted by Congress, being the first emission, Dol. Hard
Dol. 3 mil. Exch. at par is 3 mil. 1776, June. To ditto ditto 3 ditto is 3 Dec.
To ditto ditto 9 ditto is 9 1777, June. To ditto ditto 23 ditto 2 1-2 is 9 2-10
Dec. To ditto ditto 27 ditto 3 1-2 is 7 7-10 1778, June. To ditto ditto 28
ditto 4 1-4 is 6 5-10 Dec. To ditto ditto 30 ditto 5 is 6 1779, June. To ditto
ditto 32 ditto 14 is 2 2-10 Dec. To ditto ditto 45 ditto 28 3-4 is 1 5-10
Continental 200 mil. Hard Dol. 48 mil. Cr. By the present value of Continental
money at 40 for 1, say 200 mil. at this rate is 5 mil. By balance of the above
48 mil. of hard dollars sunk by depreciation, and is therefore an actual tax of
43 48

BY this state of the matter, the whole expenses have amounted to 48 millions
of hard dollars, 43 of which have been sunk in the time by depreciation. Now I
would ask the best financier amongst us, whether in four years he could have
levied a tax of 43 millions of hard dollars, in a more equal or less expensive
way? Here have been no commissions to pay, no embezzlements, no public
defaulters, and no appeals, except by the possessors of old contracts, who have
been ungenerously and unjustly paid off in current nominal value, under
sanction of laws, which ought long ago to have been repealed.

I can scarcely think it possible, that those who wish to see the money
restored to its original value, have ever adverted seriously to the subject. We
find, that Congress have expended, in the last four months, 40 millions of
dollars, besides the sums received at the Loan-Office. Now would any man, in
his senses, wish to have the Continent at the expense of above 10 millions of
hard dollars per month? Is he aware that at 4 s6 sterling per dollar, it
amounts to nine millions of sterling pounds for the said four months? A sum
almost twice as large as Great Britain expended in any four months of the last
war. This would be extravagance in the extreme, and the more inexcusable as the
nature of the case by no means requires it. Every man who now receives the
money, estimates it at the proper discount. If he sells a house, a horse, or a
piece of goods, he demands at least forty prices for them, and in many articles
vastly more, so as to have on an average near 50 prices; then, from what train
of reasoning are these money-holders to receive the value of a hard dollar, for
every Continental dollar thus obtained, at the fiftieth part of its value?
Should the war continue, emissions of some sort must run on, and the money will
inevitably sink in value; and, politically speaking, this would not be an evil,
for it would still operate as a gradual tax, affecting every individual in the
community. Let us, for argument sake, suppose that the war should last another
year. The expenses of that year added to the foregoing emissions would probably
stand, as follows:

Dr. The United States in account with Continental Money. Cr.

To the amount already emitted, Dol. Dol. 200 mil. Exch. 48 millions. January
To an emission of 10 50 200,000 Feb. To ditto 10 1-2 52 1-2 200,000 March To
ditto 11 55 200,000 April To ditto 11 1-2 57 3-4 200,000 May To ditto 12 60 3-4
200,000 June To ditto 12 3-4 63 3-4 200,000 July To ditto 13 1-4 66 3-4 200,000
August To ditto 14 70 1-4 200,000 Sept. To ditto 14 3-4 73 3-4 200,000 Oct. To
ditto 15 3-4 77 1-4 200,000 Nov. To ditto 16 3-4 81 1-4 200,000 Dec. To ditto
17 85 1-2 200,000 Total, 359 1-4 mil. dol. 50 1-4 mil. Cr. By the value of
Continental money in 1780, Exch. hard dol. 85 1-2 But as gold has generally
been about 1-5 lower than any other commodity, there must be deducted from the
above 85 1-2 one fifth, viz. 17 The rate of exchange then is 68 1-2 for 1. At
which rate the whole debt of 359 1-4 dollars is 5 1-4 mil. By balance gained by
depreciation which has operated as an actual tax, 45 mil. hard money. 50 1-4
mil.

IN stating this second account, I have gone upon the principles of Congress
having emitted, for the four last months, at the rate of ten millions per
month; which at fifty for one, is 200,000 hard dollars. This sum I have taken
as the expenditure of every month, and have gradually varied the exchange,
exactly in proportion to the quantity increased, beyond the sums required for a
medium; from whence it followed, that as the rate of exchange advanced, a
proportionable addition to the monthly emission became necessary; and though
the emissions have amounted in this estimate to three hundred fifty-nine
millions of dollars, we find depreciation has still been our faithful friend,
and kept us from sinking under the burden. We find, notwithstanding the
enormous sound, that the sum of 5 1-4 millions of hard dollars would redeem
them all, without any person having a right to complain; for, having received
the money from time to time at the depreciated rate, no one could reasonably
object to reducing them to that real value.

WHEN the war is over, I should have no objection to a foreign loan, to pay off
the whole currency at the rate then existing, which no man could be displeased
with, and great confusions might be avoided. We should then know what was our
real debt, and apply ourselves in good earnest to sink both principal and
interest as fast as the country could bear it. But funding paper money with
paper money, and paying an interest for what we may have without, is an
imposition on the middle and poorer class of people, who will have nothing to
lend, but will be for ever paying taxes for interest money received by the
rich. I am therefore averse to a Loan-Office of any kind at the present; to
enormous taxes; and by all means object to every scheme tending to appreciation.

NUMBER III.
FROM the calculations which have been exhibited, it appears, that the real
debt of America, at the end of the year 1780, will probably amount to no more
than five millions and a quarter of hard dollars, exclusive of Loan-Office
Certificates; which sum will be sunk by an 1 s6 tax in 10 years. This is
evident from the principles we have already assumed, viz. that Pennsylvania is
estimated at an eighth of the Continent, and raises by an 1 s6 tax 25,000 l.
per annum. But, should the desired appreciation succeed, and the nominal sum,
of 359 1-4 millions of dollars, become equal to its declared value, it would
require near 700 years to sink the whole. It may probably be said, that a
sudden appreciation is not intended, and therefore the reasoning, here urged,
will not apply; to which I answer, that the evil of appreciation will be felt
in exact proportion to its retrograde motion. If the general appreciation
should average 30 for 1 in any given time, accounting back from the present,
and then remain fixed, I should say, that instead of 400 years tax, as supposed
in my former numbers, it would only take 100 years. If it was reduced to 20 for
1, it would take 200 years, if reduced to 10 for 1,300 years. Any appreciation
whatever will operate against the payment of the debts; it would produce an
effect to which the whole circle of politics could not produce a parallel, viz.
a government refunding to its inhabitants the taxes they have been paying; for
we must insist that depreciation is an actual tax, and that appreciation is an
actual refund. For instance: John Harrow, in June, 1779, when exchange was 20
for 1, sold a pair of oxen for 200 l. with which sum he could have bought two
pieces of linen, of 25 yards each, at 4 l. per yard, which formerly sold at 4
s. per yard. But John Harrow neglecting to make the purchase till December,
when exchange was 40 for 1, he could buy with the produce of his two oxen no
more than one piece of linen, because the price had risen to 8 l. per yard;
then, surely, it follows that John Harrow has paid a tax amounting to the value
of one ox. On the other hand, suppose John Harrow kept his money till this day,
and a paper dollar should pass equal to a silver dollar, his 200 l. would bring
him 40 pieces of linen, by which he would gain 38 pieces. But how think you is
the apparent gain to be provided for? Is it not by John Harrow, and every other
farmer and inhabitant, involving themselves either in a monstrous immediate
tax, or a duration of moderate taxes on them and their heirs, to the end of the
world, for aught we know.

NOR will the effects of appreciation be in any way equally distributed. The
monied man will become suddenly rich; but the poor man, who has seldom a week's
cash beforehand, will be for ever laboring under taxes, to repair the loss
entailed on the public by appreciation. Here it must be noted, that I reason
upon the supposition of a total and permanent appreciation, but I must so far
do justice to my own sentiments, as to declare my belief, that it is a matter
absolutely impracticable; for though, by strenuous efforts, it might be carried
into execution, and money be universally received at the declared value, I
contend that it would be but of short duration; that its quantity would
inevitably operate against its fixture; and continually pressing against the
unnatural barrier, like a river damned in its course, it would quickly overflow
the banks, and deluge the adjacent country with irresistible fury; tearing down
whole cities and villages in its way; thousands upon thousands would be ruined
by the attempt, and general confusion ensue. All which may be prevented by
suffering the stream to flow in its natural channel, without obstructions. Let
the money find its own weight, it will balance itself much better than can be
done by any attempt of ours.

SOME are apprehensive, that if a check is not given to depreciation, the
credit of the money will be reduced to so low an ebb, as to become entirely
stagnant. These timid politicians would do well to look back to the money in
its first stages of depreciation, and enquire of themselves, what they would
have thought, if some prying financier had assured them, that in less than 3
years its value should sink to 40 for 1, would they not have asserted, with
disdain, that the matter was impossible; that long before it arrived at such a
stage it would cease to circulate? Nor ought their false judgments to have been
too severely reflected on, for the subject was but little studied, and less
understood. But at present we can look back, trace its progress and define its
cause. And from a series of reasoning, pronounce with some certainty, that no
interruption to its passing can arise from its mere quantity. Should it
gradually sink, even to 1000 for 1, I freely declare my opinion, that it would
pass as current as at present, and would be relatively as scarce. Perhaps we
have not, in general, sufficiently attended to the subject; otherwise we should
not so hastily assert, that the depreciation has latterly run on with rapidity.
It is an error and arises from a want of considering the proper progression of
numbers.

WHEN the money sunk from one to two, we all agree that it sunk one in value,
when it fell from two to three, it is said to have sunken one more; but this I
deny, it only sunk half of one, and when it proceeded from three to four, its
gradation instead of being one, was only one third of one. In other words, when
it decreased in value from two to four, it fell no faster than in going from
one to two. From four to eight, from eight to sixteen, and from sixteen to
thirty-two, the actual decline is no greater than from one to two. Hence we
find, that when money passes from thirty to forty, it makes no larger step,
than it did in going from three to four, that is one third more. When once we
get into increased numbers, we should consider, that we proceeded by fractions.
Exchange rising from twenty to twenty-one, advances in fact only one twentieth.
From twenty to twenty-five is only an advance of five twentieths, or one
quarter; and from twenty to thirty it has only advanced ten twentieths, or one
half; and that it must run all the way from twenty to forty, before the
depreciation becomes as great as it did when it rose from one to two, or from
two to four; and the depreciation may continue from forty to eighty, without a
greater acceleration than it had in passing from one to two. To render this
subject a little more familiar, as well as to point out the injustice of the
present laws, respecting the payment of debts, we will once more call upon John
Harrow for an illustration. We will suppose John to pay an annuity out of his
farm of 32 l. per annum, which sum he usually raised by sending hickory wood to
town. Here the reader will observe that the rates of exchange, respecting the
dates, are merely imaginary, and not confined to the true state.

cords 1775. Exchange being at par, John sells 32 at 20 s. 32 l. 1776. Exch. at
2 for 1, he sells 16 at 40 s. 32 l. 1777. Exch. at 4 for 1, he sells 8 at 4 l.
32 l. 1778. Exch. at 8 for 1, he sells 4 at 8 l. 32 l. 1779. Exch. at 16 for 1,
he sells 2 at 16 l. 32 l. 1780. Exch. at 32 for 1, he sells 1 at 32 l. 32 l.

BY this we perceive, that in 1776, money falling from the full value to two
for one, John saved half of the quantity of wood which he cut in 1775 -- In
1777 he saved half of the quantity cut in 1776 -- In 1778 he saved half of the
quantity cut in 1777 -- In 1779 he saved half the quantity cut in 1778, -- and
in 1780 he saved half the quantity cut in 1779. When exchange went from par to
two, it only advanced one in number, and when it proceeded from sixteen to
thirty-two, though the depreciation was deemed alarming, its progress was but
just equal to the variation from one to two. In the first case he sent but half
the quantity he did the preceding year; and in the second case he likewise sent
but half the quantity; and thus we may go on to a very high amount. From the
rate of thirty-two for one, we must proceed as far as sixty-four for one,
before the money will suffer depreciation equal to the first alteration from
one to two, and it must then go on to one hundred and twenty-eight for one,
before it has made another stride similar to the first. Now let any person look
back to the late progress of depreciation, and he will find that he has less
occasion to be alarmed, at this day, then he had when it varied from one to
two. The jump then made, would have been truly alarming, if it had been
properly attended to, but a mixture of caprice, fear and interest, produced an
effect of which few were aware; and these causes continued to operate, perhaps,
till it arrived to four or six for one; by which time, I should suppose, that
the waves which had been excited by the agitation of the passions, were pretty
well subsided, and the surface of the financial ocean restored to its proper
level. Effects followed their causes, and the swell increased but as the wind
blew. The quantity of the money determined its value, and so it would probably
continue to an excess which I should not choose to enter on. I know of no
period to depreciation, or cause of stoppage from mere quantity. I am very
sensible that those who have given themselves the trouble to think on this
subject, will charge me with using needless repetitions, and laboring the
matter beyond what is necessary. But it is a subject of great importance, and
cannot be too fully and closely investigated. The more points of view we place
it in, the better it will be understood.

In Portugal they calculate in mille-rees; that is, in pieces of silver,
supposed to contain 1000 parts, being somewhat more than one of the Spanish
dollars; now a thousandth part of a dollar is a sum of which, at first view, we
have no adequate idea, when compared with a farthing, which is our lowest
denomination; but affixing to it a compound value, or calling it a mille-ree,
we can readily subdivide it low enough for every purpose of trade. Then suppose
depreciation should continue till it reached 1000 for 1, and we should change
the denomination of a dollar to a mille-dollar, that is to a dollar subdivided
into a thousand parts, we should as easily keep our accounts, and transact the
affairs of trade with as much precision, as if we were trading in hard dollars.
A paper bill instead of being called one dollar might represent the thousandth
part of a dollar, and answer every purpose of money, if the rate was once
established. And this mode of calculation might continue, even after the paper
dollars were all consumed by a foreign loan, and real gold and silver became
the only money current. Some may probably think I treat the point in too
visionary a manner; but I request them to sit down seriously to the subject,
and I will then venture to pronounce that they will inevitably fall into my
train of thinking.

THEY will quickly acknowledge, that it is not the amount of nominal dollars
which constitutes the debt of America; which alone arises from the real value
of home produce consumed, of foreign goods impo^^^d, and of labor, wages and
salaries paid; these constitute our debt. With respect to the nominal amount in
paper money, I contend that it is of small importance, whether the sum be
called 5 millions or 500 millions, with this proviso, that we do not, in the
latter case, transmute paper into silver, and determine at all events to pay a
hard dollar for every imaginary dollar emitted.

SUPPOSE the crew of Captain Cooke's ship, in his 3 years voyage round the
South-Pole, had carried their amusement of gaming to so high a pitch, that it
became necessary to pass notes of hand for the payment of the sums lost, and
that these notes had amounted to millions of pounds: Suppose they had even
divided the entire stock of provisions, and some had won from the others their
whole share. I would ask, whether the ship would be interrupted in her voyage
by such exchange of property, or would she be less able to proceed than if no
such gaming had happened. As a little Commonwealth, her internal resources and
abilities would undoubtedly remain the same; the rich must of necessity permit
the poor to partake of the stock for the common good of the voyage, and the
ship's general design of making new discoveries, would be prosecuted without
any other difficulties, than those naturally incident to the sea, and the
gradual decline of the ship's stock of provisions. If fresh supplies could from
time to time be procured, they might sail, play and pass notes from year to
year, till the ship's bottom could bear them no longer; but should it prove
impracticable to command such supplies, then, and not till then, the voyage
would from necessity terminate. So with America -- Whi^^ the country can supply
the actual necessaries of government, no excess of paper money can prove a bar
thereto. What we have most to fear is from injudicious attempts to give a value
to our currency beyond what its quantity demands.

I have endeavored to prove, that the decrease of the value of money has been
generally occasioned by its increased quantity; that in its progress it has
operated as a tax; that Loan-Office Certificates are money to all intents and
purposes, and therefore the interest arising thereon is a burden on the
community, without our deriving the advantage thereby proposed; that in good
policy, these Certificates should all be called in, and a just compensation
made to the holders; that foreign loans, during the present war, may prove
ruinous drains to the Continent, and can answer no one good purpose more
effectually than paper money would; that a total appreciation of the sum now
current, would bring us under a debt, which an 1 s6 tax for 400 years would
scarcely clear us from, when on the contrary it is evident, the same tax of 1
s6 would sink the whole in less than ten years, if the money should remain at
its present value. I have also endeavored to show, that depreciation has not
been so rapid as was generally thought; that an increase of quantity ought not
to alarm us; that the fear of its becoming stagnant is entirely groundless, and
that it would circulate as freely as at present, although the quantity should
be increased to a great excess.

IF the thoughts I have here thrown together should be deemed injurious to the
common interests of America, I should be obliged to the writer who would point
it out; and should be happy to be released from the dread which has long preyed
on my mind, that a general distress would be brought on the country by
appreciating the money. I declare upon honor, that I am no other way interested
in the event, than as a citizen of America; nor have I, in a single instance,
an advantage to make by depreciation, but am daily suffering by it. I have
stated my sentiments with candor, and submit them to the public; and all I ask
in return, is a candid perusal, and fair refutation, if I am wrong.


