THE CRISIS EXTRAORDINARY.
IT is impossible to sit down and think seriously on the affairs of America,
but the original principles on which she resisted, and the glow and ardor they
inspired, will occur like the undefaced remembrance of a lovely scene. To trace
over in imagination the purity of the cause, the voluntary sacrifices made to
support it, and all the various turnings of the war (...) its defense, is at
once both paying and receiving respect. The principles deserve to be
remembered, and to remember them ^^ghtly is (...). In this indulgence of
generous recollection we (...) by what we seem to give, and the (...) we become,

So extensively right was (...) which America proceeded, that it not only took
in every (...) and liberal sentiment which could impress the heart, but (...)
it the (...) interest of every class and order of men to defend the country.
The war, on the part of Britain, was originally a war of covetousness. The
sordid and not the splendid passions gave it being. The fertile fields and
prosperous infancy of America appeared to her as mines for tributary wealth.
She viewed the hive, and disregarding the industry that had enriched it,
thirsted for the honey. But in the present stage of her affairs, the violence
of temper is added to the rage of avarice; and therefore, that which, at our
first setting out, proceeded from purity of principle and public interest, is
now heightened by all the obligations of necessity; for it requires but little
knowledge of human nature to discern what would be the consequence, were
America again reduced to the subjection of Britain. Uncontrouled power, in the
hands of an incensed, imperious and apacious conqueror, is an engine of
dreadful execution* and woe be to that country over which it can be exercised.
The names of Whig and Tory would them be sunk in the general term of Rebel, and
the oppression, whatever it might be, would, with very few instances of
exception, light equally on all.

Britain did not go to war with America for the sake of dominion, because she
was then in possession; neither was it for the extension of trade and commerce,
because she had monopolized the whole and the country had yielded to it;
neither was it to extinguish what she might call rebellion, because before she
began no resistance existed. It could then be from no other motive than
avarice, or a design of establishing, in the first instance, the same taxes in
America as are paid in England (which, as I shall presently show, are above
eleven times heavier than the taxes we now pay for the present year 1780) or,
in the second instance, to confiscate the whole property of America, in case of
resistance and conquest, of the latter of which she had then no doubt.

I shall now proceed to ^^ow what the taxes in England are, and what the yearly
expense of the present war is to her -- What the taxes of this country amount
to, and what the annual expense of defending it effectually will be to us; and
shall endeavor concisely to point out the cause of our difficulties, and the
advantages on one side, or the consequences on the other, in case we do, or do
not, put ourselves in an effectual state of defense. I mean to be open, candid
and sincere. I see a universal wish to expel the enemy from the country, a
murmuring because the war is not (...) on with more vigor, and my (...) is to
show as shortly as possible both the reason (...).

The number (...) souls in England (exclusive of Scotland and Ireland) is seven
millions This is taking the highest number that the people of England have been
or can be rated at.
, and the number of souls in America is three millions.

The amount of the taxes in England (exclusive of Scotland and Ireland) was,
before the present war commenced, eleven millions six hundred and forty two
thousand six hundred and fifty three pounds sterling, which on an average is no
less a sum than one pound thirteen shillings and threepence sterling per head
per annum men, women, and children; besides county taxes, taxes for the support
of the poor, and a tenth of all the produce of the earth for the support of the
bishops and clergy The following is taken from Dr. Price's state of the taxes
of England, pages 96, 97, 98.

"An account of the money drawn from the public by taxes annually, being the
medium of three years before the year 1776.

Amount of customs in England, L. 2,528,275 Amount of the excise in England*
4,649,892 Land tax at 3 s. 1,300,000 Land tax at 1 s. in the pound, 450,000
Salt duties, 218,739 Duties on stamps, cards, dice, advertisements, bonds,
leases, indentures, newspapers, almanacks, etc. 280,788 Duties on houses and
windows, 385,369 Post office, seizures, wine licenses, hackney coaches, etc.
250,000 Annual profit from lotteries, 150,000 Expense of collecting the excises
in England, 297,887 Expense of collecting the customs in England, 468,703
Interest of loans on the land tax at 4 s. expenses of collection, militia, etc.
250,000 Perquisites, etc. to custom house officers, etc. supposed 250,000
Expense of collecting the salt duties in England, 10 d. 1-2 per cent. 27,000
Bounties on fish exported, 18,000 Expense of collecting the duties on stamps,
cards, advertisements, etc. 5 and 1-4 per cent. 18,000 Total, L. 11,642,653


. Nearly five millions of this sum went annually to pay the interest of the
national debt contracted by former wars, and the remaining sum of six millions
six hundred and forty two thousand six hundred pounds was applied to defray the
yearly expense of government, the peace establishment of the army and navy,
placemen pensioners, etc. consequently the whole of her enormous taxes being
thus appropriated, she had nothing to spare out of them toward defraying the
expenses of the present war or any other. Yet had she not been in debt at the
beginning of the war at we were not, and like us had only a land and not a
naval war to carry on, her then revenue of eleven millions and a half pounds
sterling would defray all her annual expenses of war and government within each
year.

But this not being the case with her, she is obliged to borrow about ten
million pounds sterling yearly, to prosecute the war she is now engaged in
(this year she borrowed twelve) and lay on new taxes to discharge the interest;
and allowing that the present war has cost her only fifty millions sterling,
the interest thereon at five per cent. will be two millions and an half,
therefore the amount of her taxes now must be fourteen millions, which on an
average is no less than forty shillings sterling per head, men, women and
children throughout the nation. Now as this expense of fifty millions was
borrowed on the hopes of conquering America, and as it was avarice which first
induced her to commence the war, how truly wretched and deplorable would the
condition of this country be, were she, by own remissness, to suffer an enemy
of such a disposition, and so circumstanced, to reduce her to subjection.

I now proceed to the revenues of America.

I have already stated the number of souls in America to be three millions, and
by a calculation I have made, which I have every reason to believe is
sufficiently right, the whole expense of the war, and the support of the
several governments, may be defrayed for two million pounds sterling, annually;
which, on an average, is thirteen shillings and four pence per head, men, women
and children, and the peace establishment at the end of the war will be but
three quarters of a million, or five shillings sterling per head. Now throwing
out of the question every thing of honor, principle, happiness, freedom, and
reputation in the world, and taking it up on the simple ground of interest, I
put the following case.

Suppose Britain was to conquer America, and as conquerors was to lay her under
no other conditions than to pay the same proportions toward her annual revenue
which the people of England pay; our share, in that case, would be six million
pounds sterling yearly; can it then be a question, whether it is best to raise
two millions to defend the country, and govern it ourselves, and only three
quarters of a million afterward, or pay six millions to have it conquered, and
let the enemy govern it.

Can it be supposed that conquerors would choose to put themselves in a worse
condition than what they granted to the conquered. In England, the tax on rum
is five shillings and one penny sterling per gallon, which is one silver dollar
and fourteen coppers. Now would it not be laughable to imagine, that after the
expense they have been at, they would let either Whig or Tory in America drink
it cheaper than themselves. Coffee which is so considerable an article of
consumption and support here is there loaded with a duty, which makes the price
between five and six shillings sterling a pound, and a penalty of fifty pounds
sterling on any person detected in roasting it in his own house. There is
scarce an article of life you can eat, drink, wear, or enjoy that is not there
loaded with a tax; even the light from heaven is only permitted to shine into
their dwellings by paying eighteen pence sterling per window annually; and the
humblest drink of life, small beer, cannot there be purchased without a tax of
nearly two coppers a gallon, besides a heavy tax upon the malt, and another on
the hops before it is brewed, exclusive of a land tax on the earth which
produces them. In short, the condition of that country in point of taxation is
so oppressive, the number of her poor so great, and the extravagance and
rapaciousness of the court so enormous, that were they to effect a conquest of
America, it is then only that the distresses of America would begin. Neither
would it signify any thing to a man whether he be what we call a Whig or a
Tory. The people of England and the ministry of that country know us by no such
distinctions. What they want is clear solid revenue, and the modes they would
take to procure it, would operate alike on all. Their manner of reasoning would
be short, because they would naturally infer that if we were able to carry on a
war of five or six years against them, we are able to pay the same taxes which
they do.

I have already stated that the expense of conducting the present war, and the
government of the several states, may be done for two millions sterling, and
the establishment in time of peace, for three quarters of a million I have made
the calculations in sterling, because it is a rate generally known in all the
states, and because likewise it admits of an easy comparison between our
expenses to support the war and those of the enemy. Four silver dollars and an
half is one pound sterling and threepence over.
.

As to navy matters, they flourish so well, and are so well attended to, in the
hands of individuals, that I think it consistent on every principle of real use
and economy, to turn the navy into hard money (keeping only three or four
packet*) and apply it to promote the service of the army. We shall not have a
ship the less; the use of them, and the benefit from them, will be greatly
increased, and their expenses saved. We are now allied with a formidable naval
power, from whom we derive the assistance of a navy. And the line in which we
can prosecute the war, so as to reduce the common enemy and benefit the
alliance most effectually, will be by attending closely to the land service.

I estimate the charge of keeping up and maintaining an army, officering them,
and all expenses included, sufficient for the defense of the country, to be
equal to the expense of forty thousand men at thirty pounds sterling per head,
which is one million two hundred thousand pounds.

I likewise allow four hundred thousand pounds for Continental expenses at home
and abroad.

And four hundred thousand pounds for the support of the severel state
governments, the amount then will be, For the army, 1,200,000 Continental
expenses at home and abroad, 400,000 Government of the several states, 400,00
Total 2,000,000

I take the proportion of this state, Pennsylvania, to be an eighth part of the
Thirteen United States, the quota then for us to raise will be two hundred and
fifty thousand pounds sterling; two hundred thousand of which will be our share
for the support and pay of the army and Continental expenses at home and
abroad, and fifty thousand pounds for the support of state government.

In order to gain an idea of the proportion in which the raising such a sum
will fall, I make the following calculation*

Pennsylvania contains three hundred and seventy five thousand inhabitants,
men, women and children, which is likewise an eighth part of the whole
inhabitants of the United States: therefore two hundred and fifty thousand
pounds sterling to be raised among three hundred and seventy five thousand
persons, is, on an average, thirteen shillings and fourpence sterling per head
per annum, or something more than one shilling sterling per month. And our
proportion of three quarters of a million for the government of the country, in
time of peace, will be ninety three thousand seven hundred and fifty pounds
sterling, fifty thousand of which will be for the government expenses of the
state, and forty three thousand seven hundred and fifty pounds for Continental
expenses at home and abroad.

The peace establishment then will, on an average, be five shillings sterling
per head. Whereas was England now to stop, and the war cease, her peace
establishment would continue the same as it is now, viz. forty shillings per
head; therefore was our taxes necessary for carrying on the war as much per
head as hers now is, and the difference to be only whether we should, at the
end of the war, pay at the rate of five shillings per head, or forty shillings
per head, the case needs no thinking of. But as we can securely defend and keep
the country for one third less than what our burden would be if it was
conquered, and support the governments afterward for an eighth of what Britain
would levy on us, and could I find a miser whose heart never felt the emotion
of a spark of principle, even that man, uninfluenced by every love but (...) of
money, and capable of no attachment but to his interest, would, and must, from
the frugality which governs him contribute to the defense of the country, or he
ceases to be a miser and becomes an idiot. But when we take in with it every
thing that can ornament mankind; when the line of our interest becomes the line
of our happiness; when all that can cheer and animate the heart; when sense of
honor, fame, character, at home and abroad, are intervoven not only with the
security but the increase of property, there exists not a man in America,
unless he be a hired emissary, who does not see that his good is connected with
keeping up a sufficient defense.

I do not imagine that an instance can be produced in the world, of a country
putting herself to such an amazing charge to conquer and enslave another as
Britain has done. The sum is too great for her to think of with any tolerable
degree of temper; and when we consider the burden she sustains as well as the
disposition she has shown, it would be the height of folly in us to suppose
that she would not reimburse herself by the most rapid means, had she once more
America within her power. With such an oppression of expense, what would an
empty conquest be to her! what relief under such circumstances could she derive
from a victory without a prize? It was money, it was revenue, she first went to
war for, and nothing but that would satisfy her. It is not the nature of
avarice to be satisfied with any thing else. Every passion that acts upon
mankind has a peculiar mode of operation. Many of them are temporary and
fluctuating; they admit of cessation and variety: But avarice is a fixed
uniform passion. It neither abates of its vigor nor changes its object; and
the reason why it does not is founded in the nature of things, for wealth has
not a rival where avarice is a ruling passion. One beauty may excel another,
and extinguish from the mind of a man the pictured remembrance of a former one:
But wealth is the phoenix of avarice, and therefore cannot seek a new object,
because there is not another in the world.

I now pass on to show the value of the present taxes, and compare them with
the annual expense; but this I shall preface with a few explanatory remarks.

There are two distinct things which make the payment of taxes difficult; the
one is the large and real value of the sum to be paid, and the other is the
scarcity of the thing in which the payment is to be made; and although these
appear to be one and the same, they are in several instances not only
different, but the difficulty springs from different causes.

Suppose a tax was to be laid equal to one half of what every man's yearly
income is, such a tax could not be paid because the property could not be
spared; and on the other hand, suppose a very trifling tax was laid to be
collected in pearls, such a tax likewise could not be paid, because it could
not be had. Now any person may see that these are distinct cases, and the
latter of them is a representation of ours.

That the difficulty cannot proceed from the former, that is, from the real
value or weight of the tax, is evident at first view to any person who will
consider it.

The amount of the quota of taxes for this state for the present year, 1780
(and so in proportion for every other state) is twenty millions of dollar,
which at seventy for one is but sixty four thousand two hundred and eighty
pounds three shillings sterling, and on an average is no more than three
shillings and five pence sterling per head per annum men, women and children,
or five pence per head per month. Now here is a clear positive fact, that
cannot be contradicted, and which proves that the difficulty cannot be in the
weight of the tax, for in itself it is a trifle and far from being adequate to
our quota of the expense of the war. The quit rents of one penny sterling per
acre on only one half the state, come to upwards of fifty thousand pounds,
which is almost as much as all the taxes of the present year, and as those quit
rents made no part of the taxes then paid, and are now discontinued, the
quantity of money drawn for public service this year, exclusive of the militia
fines, which I shall take notice of in the process of this work, is less than
what was paid and payable in any year preceding the revolution, and since the
last war; what I mean is that the quit rents and taxes taken together came to a
larger sum then than the present taxes without the quit rents do now.

My intention by these arguments and calculations is to place the difficulty to
the right cause, and show that it does not proceed from the weight or worth of
the tax, but from the scarcity of the medium in which it is paid; and to
illustrate this point still farther, I shall now show, that if the tax of
twenty millions of dollars was of four times the real value it now is or nearly
so, which would be about two hundred and fifty thousand pounds sterling, and
would be our full quota, that this sum would have been raised with more case,
and less felt, than the present sum of only sixty four thousand two hundred and
eighty pounds.

The convenience or inconvenience of paying a tax in money arises from the
quantity of money that can be spared out of trade.

When the emissions stopped, the continent was left in possession of two hundred
millions of dollars, perhaps as equally dispersed as it was possible for trade
to do it. And as no more was to be issued, the rise or fall of prices could
neither increase nor diminish the quantity. It therefore remained the same
through all the fluctuations of trade and exchange.

Now had the exchange stood at twenty for one, which was the rate congress
calculated upon when they quoted the states the latter end of last year, trade
would have been carried on for nearly four times less money than it is now, and
consequently the twenty millions would have been scared with much greater ease,
and when collected would have been of almost four times the value they now are.
And on the other hand, was the depreciation to be at ninety or one hundred for
one, the quantity required for trade would be more than at sixty or seventy for
one, and though the value of the tax would be less, the difficulty of sparing
the money out of trade would be greater. And on these facts and arguments I
rest the matter, to prove, that it is not the want of property, but the
scarcity of the medium by which the proportion of property for taxation is to
be measured out, that makes the embarrassment we lie under. There is not money
enough, and what is equally as true, the people will not let there be money
enough.

While I am on the subject of the currency, I shall offer one remark which will
appear true to every body, and can be accounted for by nobody, which is, that
the better the times were, the worse the money grew; and the worse the times
were, the better the money stood. It never depreciated by any advantage
obtained by the enemy. The troubles of seventy six, and the loss of
Philadelphia in seventy seven, made no sensible impression on it, and every one
knows that the surrender of Charlestown did not produce the least alteration in
the rate of exchange, which for long before, and for more than three months
after, stood at sixty for one. It seems as if the certainty of its being our
own made us careless of its value, and that the most distant thoughts of losing
it made us hug it the closer, like something we were loath to part with; or that
we depreciate it for our pastime, which, when called to seriousness by the
enemy, we leave off to renew again at our leisure. In short our good luck seem
to break us, and our bad make us whole.

Passing on from this digression, I shall now endeavor to bring into one view
the several parts I have already stated, and form thereon some propositions,
and conclude.

I have placed before the reader, the average tax per head paid by the people
in England; which is sorty shillings sterling.

And I have shown the rate on an average per head, which will defray all the
expense of the war to us, and support the several governments without running
the country into debt, which is thirteen shillings and fourpence.

I have shown what the peace establishment may be conducted for, viz. an eighth
part of what it would be, if under the government of Britain.

And I have likewise shown what the average per head of the present taxes are,
namely, three shillings and five pence sterling or five pence per month; and
that their whole yearly value in sterling is only sixty four thousand two
hundred and eighty pounds. Whereas our quota to keep the payments equal with
the expenses, is two hundred and fifty thousand pounds. Consequently there is a
deficiency of one hundred and eighty five thousand seven hundred and twenty
pounds, and the same proportion of defect, according to the several quotas,
happens in every other state. And this defect is the cause why the army has
been so indifferently sed, clothed and paid. It is the cause, likewise, of the
nerveless state of the campaign, and the insecurity of the country. Now if a
tax equal to thirteen and fourpence per head will remove all these
difficulties, make people secure in their homes, leave them to follow the
business of their stores and farms unmolested, and not only keep out, but drive
out the enemy from the country; and if the neglect of raising this sum will let
them in, and produce the evils which might be prevented, on which side, I ask,
does the wisdom, interest and policy lie? Or rather would it not be an insult
to reason to put the question. The sum when portioned out according to the
several abilities of the people, can hurt no one, but an inroad from the enemy
ruins hundreds of families.

Look at the destruction done in this city. The many houses totally destroyed,
and others damaged; the waste of senses in the country round it, besides the
plunder of furniture, forage and provision. I do not suppose that half a
million sterling would reinstate the sufferers, and does this, I ask, bear any
proportion to the expense that would make us secure. The damage on an average
is at least ten pound sterling per head, which is as much as thirteen shillings
and fourpence per head comes to for fifteen years. The same has happened on the
frontiers, and in the Jersies, New York, and other places, where the enemy has
been, Carolina and Georgia is likewise suffering the same fate.

That the people generally do not understand the insufficiency of the taxes to
carry on the war, is evident, not only from common observation, but from the
construction of several petitions, which were presented to the assembly of this
state, against the recommendation of congress of the 18th of March last, for
taking up and funding the present currency at forty for one, and issuing new
money in its stead. The prayer of the petitions was, That the currency might be
appreciated by taxes (meaning the present taxes) and that part of the taxes be
applied to the support of the army, if the army could not be otherwise
supported. Now it could not have been possible for such a petition to have been
presented, had the petitioners known, that so far from part of the taxes being
sufficient for the support of the army, the whole of them falls three fourths
short of the year's expenses.

Before I proceed to propose methods by which a sufficiency of money may be
raised, I shall take a short review of the general state of the country.

Notwithstanding the weight of the war, the ravages of the enemy, and the
obstructions she has thrown in the way of trade and commerce, so soon does a
young country outgrow misfortune, that America has already surmounted many that
once heavily oppressed her. For the first year or two of the war, we were shut
up within our ports, scarce venturing to look toward the ocean. Now our rivers
are beautified with large and valuable vessels, our stores filled with
merchandise, and the produce of the country has a ready market, and an
advantageous price. Gold and silver, that for a while seemed to have retreated
again within the bowels of the earth, is once more risen into circulation, and
every day adds new strength to trade, commerce, and agriculture. In a pamphlet
written by Sir John Dalrymple, and dispersed in America in the year 1775, he
asserted, that, two twenty gun ships, nay, says he, the tenders of those ships,
stationed between Albermarle sound and Chesapeak bay, would shut up the trade
of America for 600 miles. How little did Sir John Dalrymple know of the
abilities of America!

While under the government of Britain, the trade of this country was loaded
with restrictions. It was only a few foreign ports she was allowed to sail to.
Now it is otherwise; and allowing that the quantity of trade is but half what
it was before the war, the case must show the vast advantage of an open trade,
because the present quantity under her restrictions could not support itself;
from which I infer, that if half the quantity without the restrictions can bear
itself up nearly, it not quite, as well as the whole when subject to them, how
prosperous must the condition of America be when the whole shall return open
with all the world. By trade I do not mean the employment of a merchant only,
but the whole interest and business of the country taken collectively.

It is not so much my intention, by this publication, to propose particular
plans for raising money, as it is to show the necessity and the advantages to
be derived from it. My principal design is to form the disposition of the
people to such measures which I am fully persuaded is their interest and duty
to adopt, and which needs no other force to accomplish them than the force of
being felt. But as every hint (...), I shall throw out a stretch, and leave
others (...) make (...) improvements upon it as to them may appear reasonable.

The annual sum wanted is two millions, and the average rate in which it falls
is thirteen shillings and fourpence per head.

Suppose then that we raise half the sum and sixty thousand pounds over. The
average rate thereof will be seven shillings per head.

In this case we shall have half the supply we want, and an annual fund of
sixty thousand pounds whereon to borrow the other million; because sixty
thousand pounds is the interest of a million at six per cent. and if at the end
of another year we should be obliged, by the continuance of the war, to borrow
another million, the taxes will be increased to seven shillings and sixpence;
and thus for every million borrowed, an additional tax equal to sixpence per
head must be levied.

The sum then to be raised next year will be one million and sixty thousand
pounds: One half of which I would propose should be raised by duties on
imported goods and prize goods, and the other half by a tax on landed property
and houses, or such other means as each state may devise.

But as the duties on imports and prize goods must be the same in all the
states, therefore the rate per cent. or in what other form the duty shall be
laid, must be ascertained and regulated by congress, and ingrafted in that form
into the law of each state; and the moneys arising therefrom carried into the
treasury of each state. The duties to be paid in gold or silver.

There are many reasons why a duty on imports is the most convenient duty or
tax that can be collected, one of which is, because the whole is payable in a
few places in a country, and it likewise operates with the greatest ease and
equality, because as every one pays in proportion to what he consumes, the
people in general consume in proportion to what they an afford, and therefore
the tax is regulated by the abilities which every man supposes himself to have,
or in other words every man becomes his own assessor, and pays by a little at a
time when it suits him to buy. Besides, it is a tax which people may pay or let
alone by not consuming the articles; and though the alternative may have no
influence on their conduct, the power of choosing is an agreeable thing to the
mind. For my own part, it would be a satisfaction to me, was there a duty on
all sorts of liquors during the war, as in any idea of things, it would be an
addition to the pleasure of society, to know, that when the health of the army
goes round, a few drops from every glass become theirs. How often have I heard
an emphatical wish almost accompanied with a tear, "Oh, that our poor fellows
in the field had some of this!" Why then need we suffer under a fruitless
sympathy, when there is a way to enjoy both the wish and the entertainment at
once?

But the great national policy of putting a duty upon imports is, that it
either keeps the foreign trade in our own hands or draws something for the
defense of the country from every foreigner who participates it with us.

Thus much for the first half of the taxes, and as each state will best devise
means to raise the other half, I shall confine my remarks to the resources of
this state.

The quota then of this state of one million and sixty thousand pounds will be
one hundred and thirty-three thousand two hundred and fifty pounds, the half of
which is sixty-six thousand six hundred and twenty-five pounds; and supposing
one fourth part of Pennsylvania inhabited, then a tax of one bushel of wheat on
every twenty acres of land, one with another, would produce the sum, and all
the present taxes to cease. Whereas the tithes of the bishops and clergy in
England, exclusive of the taxes, are upwards of half a bushel of wheat on every
single acre of land, good and bad, throughout the nation.

In a former part of this paper I mentioned the militia fines, but reserved
speaking to the matter, which I shall now do: The ground I shall put it open
is, that two millions sterling a year will support a sufficient army, and all
the expenses of war, and government, without having recourse to the
inconvenient method of continually calling men from their employments, which of
all others is the most expensive and the least substantial. I consider the
revenue created by taxes as the first and principal thing, and fines only as
secondary and accidental things. It was not the intention of the militia law to
apply the militia fines to any thing else but the support of the militia,
neither do they produce any revenue to the state, yet these fines amount to
more than all the taxes; for taking the muster roll to be sixty thousand men,
the fine on forty thousand who may not attend, will be sixty thousand pounds
sterling, and those who muster, will give (...) portion of time equal to half
that sum, and if the eight classes should be called within the year, and one
third turn out, the fine on the remaining forty thousand would amount to
seventy two millions of dollars, besides the fifteen shillings on every hundred
pounds property, and the charge of seven and a half per cent for collecting in
certain instances, which on the whole would be upwards of two hundred and fifty
thousand pounds sterling.

Now if those very fines disable the country from raising a sufficient revenue
without producing an equivalent advantage, would it not be to the ease and
interest of all parties to increase the revenue, in the manner I have proposed,
or any better, if a better can be devised, and cease the operation of the
fines. I would still keep the militia as an organized body of men, and should
there be a real necessity to call them forth, pay them out of the proper
revenues of the state, and increase the taxes a third or fourth per cent. on
those who did not attend. My limits will not allow me to go farther into this
matter, which I shall therefore close with this remark; that fines are, of all
modes of revenue, the most unsuited to the mind of a free country. When a man
pays a tax, he knows the public necessity requires it, and therefore feels a
pride in discharging his duty; but a fine seems an atonement for neglect of
duty, and of consequence is paid with discredit, and frequently levied with
severity.

I have now only one subject more to speak to, with which I shall conclude,
which is, the resolve of congress of the 18th of March last, for taking up and
funding the present currency at forty for one, and issuing new money in its
stead.

Every one knows I am not the flatterer of congress, but in this instance they
are right; and if that measure is supported, the currency will acquire a value,
which without it, it will not. But this it not all: It will give relief to the
finances until such time as they can be properly arranged, and save the country
from being immediately double taxed under the present mode. In short, support
that measure, and it will support you.

I have now waded through a tedious course of difficult business, and over an
untrodden path. The subject on every point it could be viewed was entangled
with perplexities, and inveloped in obscurity, yet such are the resources of
America, that she wants nothing but system to insure success.

COMMON SENSE. POST.
Philadelphia, October 4, 1780. P. S. While this paper was preparing for the
press, the treachery of General Arnold became known, and engrossed the
attention and conversation of the public; and that, not so much on account of
the traitor as the magnitude of the treason, and the providence evident in the
discovery. The matter, as far as is at present known, is thus briefly related.

General Arnold about six weeks before had obtained the command of the
important post of West Point, situated on the North river, about sixty miles
above New York, and an hundred below Albany, there being no other defenceable
pass between it and the last mentioned place. At what time, or in what manner,
he first entered into a negotiation with the enemy for betraying the fort and
garrison into their hands, does not yet appear.

While Arnold commanded at West Point, General Washington and the minister of
France went to Hartford in Connecticut, to consult on matters, in concert with
Admiral Terney commander of the French fleet stationed at Rhode Island. In the
mean time Arnold held a conference with Major Andre, Adjutant General to
General Clinton, whom he traitorously furnished with plans of the fort, state
of the garrison, minutes of the last council of war, and the manner in which he
would post the troops when the enemy should attempt a surprise; and then gave
him a pass, by the name of Mr. John Anderson, to go to the lines at the White
Plains or lower, if he Mr. Anderson thought proper, he being (the pass said) on
public business.

Thus furnished, Andre parted from Arnold, set off for New York, and had nearly
arrived at the extent of our lines, when he was stopped by a party of militia,
to whom he produced his pass, but they, not being satisfied with his account,
insisted on taking him before the commanding officer Lieut. Col. Jamieson.
Finding himself in this situation, and hoping to escape by a bribe, he offered
them his purse, watch and a promise of any quantity of goods they would accept,
which these honest men nobly and virtuously scorned, and consistent with their
duty took him to the proper officer. On examination there was found on him the
above mentioned papers and several others, all in the hand writing of General
Arnold, and finding himself thus detected, he confessed his proper name and
character; he was accordingly made a close prisoner, and the papers sent off by
express to West Point, at which place General Washington had arrived soon after
the arrival of the packet. On this disclosure, he went in quest of Arnold, whom
he had not seen that day, but all that could be learned was, that Arnold had
received a letter some short time before, which had much confused him, since
which he had disappeared. Colonel Hamilton, one of General Washington's aids,
with some others were sent after him, but he having the start eluded the
pursuit, took boat under pretense of a flag, and got on board the Vulture sloop
of war lying in the North river; on which it may be truly said, that one
vulture was receiving another. From on board this vessel he addressed a letter
to General Washington, which, in whatever light it may be viewed, confirms him
a finished villain.

The true character of Arnold is that of a desperado. His whole life has been a
life of jobbs; and where either plunder or profit was the object, no danger
deterred, no principle restrained him. In his person he was smart and active,
somewhat diminutive, weak in his capacities and trifling in his conversation;
and though gallant in the field, was defective in the talents necessary for
command. The early convulsion of the times afforded him an introduction into
life, to the elegance of which he was before a stranger, and the eagerness of
the public, to reward and encourage enterprise, procured him at once both
applause and promotion. His march to Quebec gave him fame, and the plunder of
Montreal put the first stamp to his public character. His behavior at Danbury
and Saratoga once more covered over his crimes, which again broke forth in the
plunder of Philadelphia, under pretense of supplying the army. From this time,
the true spring of his conduct being (...) he became both disregarded and
disesteemed, and this last instance of his treachery has proved the public
judgment right.

When we take a review of the history of former times, it will turn out to the
honor of America, that, notwithstanding the trying variety of her situation,
this is the only instance of defection in a general officer; and even in this
case the unshaken honesty of those who detected him heightens the national
character, to which his apost^^^ serves as a foil. From the nature of his
crime, and his disposition to monopolize, it is reasonable to conclude he had
few or no direct accomplices. His sole object was to make a monied bargain; and
to be consistent with himself, he would as readily betray the side he has
deserted to, as that he deserted from.

But there is one reflection results from this black business, that deserves
notice, which is, that it shows the declining power of the enemy. An attempt to
bribe is a sacrifice of military fame, and a confession of inability to
conquer; as a proud people they ought to be above it, and as soldiers to
despise it; and however they may feel on the occasion, the world at large will
despise them for it, and consider America superior to their arms.

C. S.



PHILADELPHIA: SOLD BY WILLIAM HARRIS in SECOND-STREET, FIVE DOORS BELOW MARKET
STREET. [PRICE FOUR DOLLARS SINGLE, OR THIRTY SIX DOLLARS THE DOZEN.]


