The Agency and Providence of God acknowledged, in the Preservation of the
American States.

A SERMON PREACHED AT THE ANNUAL THANKSGIVING, DECEMBER 7th, 1780.

BY NATHAN STRONG, Pastor of the first Church of CHRIST in Hartford.

PUBLISHED BY DESIRE OF THE HEARERS.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN, M. DCC. LXXX.

A SERMON.
JOB V. 12 -- 16. He disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their
hands cannot perform their enterprise. He takes the wise in their own
craftiness: and the counsel of the froward is carried headlong. They meet with
darkness in the day time, and grope in the noon day as in the night. But he
saves the poor from the sword, from their mouth, and from the hand of the
mighty. So the poor has hope, and iniquity stops her mouth.
WHEN we consider the works of God, composed of the material and intellectual
systems, with their varying orders, constitutions and operations of being; they
give us a most grand idea of the immensity and infinite perfection of the
creator. Universal nature is constituted with such wisdom, and adorned with so
many glories, that the Father of it must be a Being, in himself glorious and
wise infinitely above our comprehension.

LOOKING back to the time of creation, when divine council brought forth, and
completed the birth of nature, we are apt to conceive it a period the most
filled with divine glory of any which has happened; containing more bright
discoveries of the Godhead, than any which have succeeded; and that there was
in that work some more immediate exertions of his power and wisdom, than have
since been generally exercised. Doubtless that period and work did contain
discoveries of such immense perfection, as will forever delight and astonish
all his rational and virtuous creatures; but then, I imagine, we ought rather
to conceive the time of creation, as the beginning of a new era, of which every
succeeding part is as glorious, and as much filled with marks and displays of
God's infinite perfection, as the first was. When supreme power, wisdom and
goodness had given existence to created nature; the way was prepared for the
same perfections to be exercised in preserving, governing and determining its
several parts and powers, to the purposes for which they were designed, both in
his natural and moral government.

THE universal and constant providence of Jehovah, is as bright a display of
himself as creation was. Inattention and irreligion are the principal reasons
it is not thus conceived. The universe, the material and intellectual systems,
with all their parts and all their powers, are under a constant direction of
the Deity. He not only upholds the secondary powers or second causes which are
operating; but points them to the ends which he has in design, in such a
manner, that an attentive and pious mind cannot overlook his agency.

COULD we comprehend the divine plan -- could we look through the scheme of
Heaven, we should doubtless see that all natural events, all political events,
and all the wisdom of this world, are permitted and designed by the Most High,
for the benefit of his moral government, to display his own glory, and bring
eventual perfection and blessedness to the universe. The doctrines of the Holy
Scripture confirm these ideas -- they teach us that those natural events, which
in our view have the smallest possible influence, even the falling of a hair
from our heads, do not happen without a divine ordering; and if there be a
particular direction of heaven therein, infinite wisdom means thereby to
accomplish some important end. If there be a divine direction in all those most
minute events, how glorious, and of what infinite energy must be the constant
exertions of Godhead! which operate upon the whole, keeping all the parts in
order, and directing them to the greatest final perfection. This view of divine
providence gives us as venerable an idea of the GREAT SUPREME, as we can have
from considering him the self-existent GOD, and creator of the universe -- This
view of the subject teaches us, that a study of divine providence is one of the
most important and improving Christian duties; one of the best means for
acquiring just apprehensions of the divine character and will, and for exciting
adoration, Christian reliance and gratitude. Men's lusts are so opposed, not
only to God and truth, but to the happiness and most essential privileges of
human nature; that if there were not a constant superior influence, controuling
the whole, all order, peace, improvement and civil and social rights would be
lost in the confusion and violence of iniquity. These providential influences
are meant in the scriptures, when they speak of the Lord bringing light out of
darkness, and order out of confusion -- the wrathful exertions of men, which he
permits, are overruled to praise him and promote his cause, the remainder of
wrath he restrains.

THE MOST HIGH has exercised a special agency, through every age of the world,
for the preservation of his church; which is the reason that the gates of hell,
and the designs of wicked men, have never prevailed against it. Many events
happen in so singular and extraordinary a manner, that is is impossible a
devout mind should not see in them the hand of a GOD. The ordering of things is
often such, though we cannot call it miraculous, as to carry evidence of a
divine interposition, nearly equal to any miracle which could be wrought. A
people or individuals experiencing such interpositions in their favor, ought
publicly and fervently to adore, the wisdom and goodness by which they are
preserved.

THE duties to which we are particularly directed this day, are the most devout
GRATITUDE and THANKSGIVING to the GOD of HEAVEN, both for public and private
blessings. No subject of meditation is more proper to quicken our devotion,
than a recollection of that kind and constant providence, by which our land and
its interests have been preserved, in the midst of great dangers; and at sundry
times, in such ways as have demonstrated a divine interference. The works of
the Lord are great, sought out of all them that have pleasure therein; and he
has made his wonderful works to be remembered.

OUR text points us to a particular consideration, of that providential agency,
which brings down the proud feelings and high looks of men, and destroys
the designs of the wicked, who are powerful, crafty, and wise to do evil. He
disappointeth the devices of the crafty, so that their hands cannot perform
their enterprise. The highest wrought policy of men is stopped in its course --
the gradual and irresistible execution of the divine counsel arrests their
measures, by enfeebling their hand, and enervating the instruments on which
they depend. He takes the wise in their own craftiness, and the counsel of the
froward is carried headlong. The policy they use is often overruled to baffle
itself, or to take themselves in the snare, which was laid for others; so that
their highest expectations fall headlong into ruin. They meet with darkness in
the day time -- where they did not expect it. Thinking their designs wisely
concerted, and so powerfully supported that they cannot fail; the Almighty
interposes at an unexpected time, and by unexpected means shows that the
weakest instruments, under his direction, are more powerful than the
craftiness, wisdom and strength of man.

IN this way, He saves the poor from the sword, from their mouths, and from
the hand of the mighty -- So that the poor has hope, and iniquity stops her
mouth. So that those who are engaged in a righteous cause, whatever
difficulties assault them, ought notwithstanding to trust in the Lord, who can
deliver in his own way by his own instruments, and in his own time -- So that
those who contemn the superintending influence of Jehovah, and despise divine
and human obligations are compelled to stop their mouths; being convinced by
his glorious works, that there is a God who protects such as trust in him, and
holds in his hand the reins of universal government.

You remember, my brethren, the extraordinary instance of Ahitophel's counsel
being turned into foolishness. -- King David in circumstances almost desperate,
striving against the rebellion of an ungrateful son, and accompanied by a
faithful, but small band, was flying from place to place, for his own personal
safety. -- Ahitophel was a politic man, full of stratagem, and renowned for the
soundest wisdom; so that his counsel, which he counseled in those days, was as
if a man had enquired at the oracle of God. Had the traitorous Absalom, who was
at this time in great force, adopted his advice, and followed hard upon his
royal father, while his numbers were small and fatigued, they must in all
probability have fallen an easy prey. By a particular influence of heaven,
Absalom was inclined to adopt other counsel, which was given on purpose for his
destruction. A short delay afforded time for the country to rise, and save
their injured and beloved sovereign, from an unnatural destruction. Thus
Absolom's affairs suddenly sunk from the fairest prospects, into irretrievable
ruin -- this was the work and influence of GOD!

PERMIT me to remind you of another instance, which is likewise recorded in the
scripture -- the deliverance of Israel by the elevation of Mordecai, and the
fall of Haman. Mordecai was a Jew, and the only one who was capable of being
the patron of his people, who were then in captivity, subjected to the severest
bondage -- Haman was a proud, tyrannical favorite at the Babylonian court,
maliciously designing to destroy the Jews, and planning the most cruel means
for their total extirpation -- He had even built the gallows, upon which he
designed Mordecai their chief man should be hanged, so sanguine were his
expectations! What he esteemed a private affront was the ground of his enmity
against the whole nation; and as a means of revenge, and to dispossess them of
the royal favor, he accused their religious laws and institutions, which
distinguished them from all other people, and which they observed for the honor
of Jehovah, even in their captive state. The Lord, whose eye sees all things,
beheld and determined to vindicate himself, his institutions and his people,
and he disconcerted the infernal design by a concurrence of events, apparently
uninteresting in themselves, but in the connection his infinite wisdom arranged
them, sufficient for the great design. It so happened on a certain night, that
the king could not sleep -- for his entertainment and probably to invite
repose, he ordered the book of records to be read -- It was found recorded,
that in former time Mordecai had detected and disclosed a treason against the
life of the king; and upon enquiry that he had never beeen rewarded. God
inclined him to reward this instance of fidelity, though it had been long
forgoten. It was proposed to Haman, What should be done to the man whom the
king delighted to honor? He proposed the most extravagant honors, proudly
thinking to receive them himself, and was ordered immediately to confer them on
Mordecai -- this turned the balance, and from that hour, every event concured
for Haman's destruction, until he died in the place prepared for Mordecai, who
succeeded him in the royal favor, and the Jews were delivered. That one
sleepless hour of the king, was a necessary link in the chain of means for
Israel's deliverance. Who may not see the hand and counsel of the LORD in all
this! -- Human life is full of such interpositions; whereby the counsel of the
froward is carried headlong, those who cannot defend themselves preserved, and
iniquity obliged to stop its mouth.

LET us next take notice of GOD's dealings with us his people. We ought piously
and gratefully to recognize the divine influence, and ordering of events, since
the commencement of the war in which we are now engaged. The God of heaven has
marvelously wrought for us! Sometimes by darkening and infatuating the counsel
of our enemies -- Sometimes wonderfully interposing to derange their measures
and break their force -- Sometimes by inspiring our people with an irresistible
enthusiasm, which dares to attempt and execute the greatest enterprises --
Sometimes by affording us supplies in an extraordinary way, which no ordinary
means could procure -- and often by discovering the snare which was laid in
darkness, and observed only by his eye which sees in the darkness, as in the
light.

IT seems that divine counsel has some great desings to accomplish in this
land. The pious observer of his providence may see, that from the time of its
first discovery, he has been preparing the stage by the energy of unerring
wisdom, for some very grand exhibitions, which will probably display his glory
to all the nations of the earth, and improve social happiness and rights to a
higher degree of perfection than has yet taken place in the world. The manner
of its settlement is one of the most extraordinary events recorded in history;
religion was the motive, and though piety is now much decayed, may we not hope
that the interests of Messiah's kingdom, which influenced the first
adventurers, shall be yet most gloriously advanced thereby. Our rapid
population is viewed with wonder, wherever it is known, there is not an
instance equalling it in the history of the world. The commencement of the
present war, was the opening of a new era, every part of which is filled with
wonders, discovering that there is a God, who rules and does his pleasure
among the kingdoms of the world. When this controversy began, not a mind among
us anticipated the length to which it would run, nor the great political
changes it has produced. -- We viewed it as a family quarrel, which must and
would be accomodated -- in this we judged from our own feelings, being ignorant
of God's design. It now appears, that the Lord designed it for a complete
separation of the British empire. And considering it as fixed by God's
appointment, that a separation should take place; may we not see his wisdom and
goodness to us in determining the time. The event has been generally esteemed
premature, as hastened, unhappily for us, by the necessity of self-defence. --
But is not this a mistake? We had received every possible benefit from the
connection, and were beginning to be endangered -- we had learned the British
arts -- had drank at her fountains of science -- made her most valuable
improvements our own -- were rich enough for a virtuous and free State; -- and
were beginning to import her luxury, effeminacy and irreligion. Had the
national connection continued longer, a familiar intercourse would have
introduced into this new country, that declension of morals, which has usually
been produced in an old empire, by their luxury and pride; and the arts of a
corrupt court, might have seduced so many of our own citizens, as to render an
emancipation more difficult, even though we had increased both in riches and
numbers. Thus we see the goodness and the the care of God, exercised for the
preservation of our virtue, even in appointing the time for this separation.
And let us not measure the councils of Heaven, upon the narrow scale of
self-regard; the Most High is governing the world for the advancement of
virtue, and may not this event be propitious to the interests of morality in
Great Britain, by drying up some of the sources of that luxury, which through a
great part of the nation, has effaced almost every impression of revealed
religion, and of a superintending providence. The Most High had the means in
readiness, and in order for the accomplishment of his own purpose -- He often
raises up wicked men as instruments to execute what he has decreed; and in the
present case permitted those, whom we called our fathers and brethren, and whom
we reverenced and loved as such, to entertain evil designs against us --
designs fraught with impolicy, injustice and oppression.

THERE were at that time, wise men in the British Senate who foresaw the
consequences, and prophesied the tragic effects, as they have since happened,
urging their opinions by the united weight of good policy, justice and mercy --
but in vain! As in the case of Pharaoh, so in this; the Lord permitted those
who held the reins of government, to harden their hearts, and shut their eyes
against wisdom; probably it was, that he might bring us out from under their
dominion with a high hand, and so as to display his glory before the nations of
the earth. Had not an infatuation been permited it is impossible they should
have remained so long ignorant, of the state* feelings, and united sentiments
of the people in this country, as is evident from their measures, they did --
had it not been determinied by the Most High, that they should believe a lying
spirit, it would have been impossible to give such credit as they did, to a few
evil persons, who escaped from among us, and whose own private interest led
them to deceive. This infatuation and diffusion for several years retarded the
vigorous efforts of our enemies; and was permitted left the storm should gather
more fast, or in greater force, than we were prepared to receive it -- this
permission of divine providence was kind to us, but fatal to them -- thus the
Lord destroys the wisdom of the wise! By viewing the subsequent schemes of
British policy, we may see, how he carried the counsels of the froward
headlong; for it is certain, that most of their counsels have turned upon their
own heads, and hastened the events, which they wished to (...). Their menaces,
instead of intimidating, made us united and determined -- their rashly blocking
up and annihilating the privileges of our ports, suspending the rights of
legislation, and annulling by their own sovereign acts all the barriers of
freedom; set before us at once in glaring view, the horrors of tyranny, and
taught us that liberty was worth contending for, through the greatest
severities -- Their haughty rejection of our suppliant, patient and
long-continued applications for redress, erased from our hearts those filial
feelings toward them, which it would have been their highest wisdom to
cultivate; and opened our eyes to see, that there is none good but one, that is
God, and that we had, in time past, implicitly trusted in them for justice and
protection, as we ought to have trusted in him alone -- Their pronouncing us
out of the protection of their laws, taught us the necessity of seeking it, in
an Independent Constitution of our own -- Their employing a foreign mercenary
force, gave us good grounds for applying, and other European nations for
interfering in the controversy, and assisting us -- Since they deigned to make
overtures for conciliation, every proposal has been so marked with
insidiousness and pride, as to unite us more firmly instead of dividing, which
they wished; and teach us that there is no hand, beside that of the Almighty,
in which we can trust ourselves with safety.

I MENTION these instances, to exemplify the providence of GOD in carrying the
counsel of the froward headlong, and permitting them to adopt measures, which
hastened what they meant to prevent.

NEXT let us view the events which have happened in our own country, and see in
them both the wonderful influences and interposition of the MOST MERCIFUL. To
what cause, but the immediate influence of Jehovah, can we impute the
astonishing union, both of sentiment and feeling, which pervaded through the
whole American empire, though of prodigious extent, and divided into many
provinces; each of which had its separate legislature, its own ideas of law and
government, and its own peculiar manners, customs and jealousies. A sympathy
unfelt before, instantaneously and reciprocally circulated, by which the
injuries of every part were felt and resented through the whole -- when some of
the first ministerial measures were speciously covered and designed to be
enforced by our own luxury; the whole body of the people seemed to have an
intuitive view of the consequences which would follow, if they received the
alluring bait, and determined to deny themselves any gratification, rather than
admit a precedent which might be drawn into dangerous practice hereafter. When
such wisdom, foresight and union, are found in the whole body of a people
circumstanced as we then were; they must be imputed to the extraordinary
influences of the Most High.

THE same energy of heaven, which had before given union and the most
sympathetic feelings through the whole; when the time for enterprise and action
was come, waked up a most astonishing enthusiasm in the minds of every order,
class and condition of people; by which many things were attempted, and many
performed, which in some measure supplied our deficiencies and want of
antecedent military preparations. It was the Lord who raised up and inspired
the country with confidence in a commander, who was formed by his own infinite
wisdom, on purpose for the great design of vindicating American freedom. -- Our
eastern coast was most impregnable, both by its natural situation, and position
of ground, and the unanimity of its inhabitants, and could by no means be
esteemed a key to the country; on all which accounts it was the most improper
place, the enemy could have chosen to open the bloody scene: And had they
instead of that occupied the position they now hold, where a naval force may
cooperate with and defend one on the land, a single campaign in the unprepared
situation we then were, might have decided the whole contest. -- The LORD
directed where they should attempt, that they might be baffled! Some of the
first military rencounters, though bloody, were ordered by infinite wisdom to
check the rage of the enemy, and show them that they had undertaken a serious
task; and at the same time teach us our own consequence in the field, and that
we were able, under GOD, to defend ourselves.

SOON after the commencement of hostilities, when we were upon the brink of
destruction, through want of military stores and the habiliments of war:
Providence threw into our hands, by the capture of a store-ship, the very
necessaries which we most wanted -- An interposition of Heaven, which ought
never to be forgotten! Several times since we have had supplies, both of
clothing and provision, sent in the same manner, at the time when, and to the
places where they were needed. -- The prodigious number of captures made from
the enemy upon the seas, has generally afforded us a comfortable supply of
foreign articles; which appears surprising when we consider the greatness of
their naval force, and the smallness and inexperience of our own; and shows us
that the Lord directs in all these things. In the second year of the war, a
formidable naval and land force was sent against one of the most southern
States in the confederacy: As things were then circumstanced with that country,
any considerable success of the enemy, must have detached several States from
the union, and been much more fatal to our cause, than their late success in
the same parts can be. -- He who directs the events of war, determined that
the design should be defeated for that time, in a most surprising manner, by a
body of men hastily drawn together, and whom they viewed with contempt. --

THERE have been several gloomy periods, in which the arm of the LORD and the
counsel of the ALMIGHTY, have wrought salvation for us, in a wonderful manner.

WE remember the time, after the conquest of a considerable part of the States
of New York and New Jersey, when (...) force, flushed with victory, and aiming
toward the capital of our councils -- Our army, except a brave handful, was
disbanded, and every thing in a state of distraction. -- In this hour of great
decision, when, as the country was circumstanced, a few weeks of vigorous
action must have determined the fate of America; our enemy were not permited to
discern the importance of the moment! Thinking the work done, and sitting down
to eat and drink the spoils of cruelty, they were taken in their own craftiness.

PLEASE to turn your attention to the succeeding campaign. The British force in
America was then very great; composed of two grand armaments, the northern and
southern. One of the most fortunate events we could then wish, was such a
destination of those two formidable powers, that they might not act in concert,
and bring their united efforts to a point, and thus form a separation between
the northern and southern States. By some influence their councils were
darkened! Providence led their southern armament from the most important place
of action, by a lengthy rout through the waters of Virginia, where more than a
year was spent without any thing decided, and that great force was finally
obliged to quit its conquests, and return with ignominy.

IN the north, appearances were more gloomy, for a season a cloud rose so black
that all coutenances gathered paleness -- every thing that had happened in that
quarter, for a long time before, was calculated to inspire the enemy with
precipitation and a rash confidence -- they possessed themselves of those
fortresses on which we depended, in such a manner as wrought their pride and
presumption to the highest pitch -- the Lord was preparing them for a fall! He
allured them into a snare from which they could never escape! By means the most
different from human concerting, he delivered their whole armament into our
hands, and brought wonderful salvation to our country. This was the Lord's work
and marvelous in our eyes! and prepared the way for our being known and
acknowledged among the nations as brethren.

THERE has been at many times, and in diverse ways, a surprising interposition
of providence, in the discovery of treasons and conspiracies against the state,
and its most important servants. I shall mention only one, which is a recent
instance of deliverance, and ought to be remembered this day, with the most
devout gratitude. The discovery of a traitorous plot which had been for a long
time concerting and maturing in the cabinet of darkness, under the nuture of
instruments vile enough for the perpetration of any crime, however repugnant to
the laws of God and nature -- this conspiracy was so ripe for execution, that a
day or two more intervening before the discovery, might have sealed the doom of
America, by the massacre of our brave and virtuous commander, and many others
who have distinguished themselves in defense of the country; and the key to our
territories, our magazines, our arsenals, our soldiery in the hands of an
insulting foe.

WAS it not the God of heaven who preserved us in this danger? surely it was.
The treason was arranged -- it was ripe for execution -- the principal
instrument of treachery, was one prepared for any wickedness, and placed by the
unsuspecting confidence of his country, in a situation, and with full power to
accomplish his design -- the whole was hid from man -- how awful is that hour
in retrospective view! The Lord saw, and he wondered that there was no
deliverer, therefore his own arm brought salvation, and his wisdom saved us! He
directed the steps of a triumvirate of virtuous young citizens, to an
unfrequented station -- His providence placed them as a centry, to take the
man, who had been a principal emissary in concerting the plot; and thus the
discovery was made, which saved our country from a destruction in prospect of
which the enemy already exulted. Let us praise him who directs the times and
the seasons -- he lives forever, his dominion is from everlasting to
everlasting -- all the inhabitants of the earth are reputed as nothing before
him -- He does according to his will in the army of heaven and among the
inhabitants of the earth, and none can say to him what do thou. The
instances I have mentioned, are only a few from among many, in which the kind
direction, influence and interposition of providence might be observed -- the
subject is far too copious for the limits of a single discourse, and to treat
it justly, requires much greater discernment than I f^el myself to possess --
The works of God's providence, are immense as his nature; and happy are those,
who by a knowledge of his operations, are led to adore and love his being, and
rejoice in his government -- we ought, my brethren, to review the great events
which have taken place within a few years past, not so much to gratify
curiosity, as that we may see in them the greatness, holiness and loving
kindness of Jehovah.

OUGHT we not likewise this day to recognize divine goodness* in providing us
with plenty of food -- our stores are filled with good things; and though some
part of the season was such as excited our apprehensions, the event has taught
us they were groundless, and that the Lord can direct the seasons better than
man -- It is very common, that we sinfully suspect and are jealous of
Providence, while God is ordering nature, in the best manner, to give us a rich
supply.

LET us remember with gratitude, the extraordinary health, which has attended
us through the year past. I presume the oldest person in this place, cannot
recollect an instance of so little sickness and so few deaths. Some of our
friends have been taken from us, but the proportion, compared with our numbers,
is small; and so far as I have heard, the like extraordinary health has
prevailed both in our armies and among the people in general. While we rejoice
in the preservation of life and health another year, let us not wax wanton and
forget our mortality. Sickness and death must come -- the solemn decree, dust
thou art, and unto dust thou shall return, must be accomplished -- the Lord
grant that we may all live in readiness for the change.

THE blessings which have been mentioned, great as they can be represented, are
but temporal and worldly favors -- they are only the smallest of God's
benefits, and only valuable as they assist us to glorify him, serve our fellow
men, and prepare for eternity. With what fervent gratitude, we ought to adore
the wisdom and mercy which has brought life and immortality to light! Which
pities us under a most awful condemnation and death, and offers pardon through
the atonement which Jesus made by the sheding of his own blood -- which invites
us to become parties to the covenant of grace, and receive the remission of sin
and the sanctification of our natures, and the indwelling influences of the
HOLY GHOST -- which has given us many great and precious promises, offering to
make us partakers of a divine nature, and heirs of glory together with CHRIST
-- which sets before us the blessedness of heaven, the Lord himself to be our
portion. Blessed be the Lord God of Israel who has visited and redeemed us --
who has raised up an horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant
David. Let us therefore serve before him in holiness and righteousness all the
days of our lives.

I CONCLUDE with some very brief remarks by way of inferrence.

1st. WE are taught to adore GOD's providence, and consider his government of
the world as a most illustrious display of his glorious nature. The events
which take place before our eyes, are parts of a plan most highly wrought, by
infinite wisdom, goodness and justice. By reason of the depth of his designs
and works, and the scantiness of human understanding, we know but a small
portion of his ways. But that his agency might not be forgotten, some instances
are so ordered as to flash conviction upon the mind, that nature in its
minutest operations, is under the direction of a God, who by small causes is
producing great events, and accomplishing most important purposes in his moral
kingdom.

2d. WE are taught to whom the glory of every salvation is to be attributed. We
have considered some instances of deliverance, which are manifestly the effects
of a divine interposition and the special ordering of heaven. These instances
were designed by God to bear testimony for himself, that he is the author of
every salvation; and though we do not see his hand so clearly in all, they are
nevertheless his work. On the other hand, we should remember that calamity
comes not out of the dust, but was appointed and is accomplished by all
searching wisdom, to answer the purposes of his own council.

3dly. WE are taught not to trust in ourselves -- not to depend on our own
wisdom and strength. To exercise our own power and wisdom for preservation, and
for obtaining all needed blessings, is an indispensable duty, and the sluggard
has no reason to expect God will save him; but when this is done we should
look to the Almighty to give efficacy to our endeavors, to preserve, bless and
prosper.

IF we trust in the arm of man, or the wisdom of a creature, the Lord will
confound them; for it is his usual course to bring low the proud and exalt the
humble, that all the earth may know the Lord reigns.

IF, my brethren, we design to invite the divine protection, let us rejoice
that the Lord reigns, and commend ourselves and the public to his holy
protection and keeping -- let us be just, and merciful, and honest, and humble
adorers of God's providence -- let us do our duty to our country ourselves and
posterity, and then look to him who has so often wrought gloriously in our
favor, for the continuance of his goodness -- that he would make our land
glorious and a praise through the whole earth, and that he would finally
receive us to his blessed kingdom.

AMEN.

