THE SENTIMENTS of an AMERICAN WOMAN.
ON the commencement of actual war, the Women of America manifested a firm
resolution to contribute as much as could depend on them, to the deliverance of
their country. Animated by the purest patriotism, they are sensible of sorrow
at this day, in not offering more than barren wishes for the success of so
glorious a Revolution. They aspire to render themselves more really useful; and
this sentiment is universal from the north to the south of the Thirteen United
States. Our ambition is kindled by the same of those heroines of antiquity, who
have rendered their sex illustrious, and have proved to the universe, that, if
the weakness of our Constitution, if opinion and manners did not forbid us to
march to glory by the same paths by the Men, we should at least equal, and
sometimes surpass them in our love for the public good. I glory in all that
which my sex has done great and commendable. I call to mind with enthusiasm and
with admiration, all those acts of courage, of constancy and patriotism, which
history has transmitted to us: The people favored by Heaven, preserved from
destruction by the virtues, the zeal and the resolution of Deborah, of Judith,
of Esther! The fortitude of the mother of the Macchabees, in giving up her sons
to die before her eyes: Rome saved from the fury of a victorious enemy by the
efforts of Volumnia, and other Roman Ladies: So many famous sieges where the
Women have been seen forgeting the weakness of their sex, building new walls,
digging trenches with their feeble hands, furnishing arms to their defenders,
they themselves darting the missile weapons on the enemy, resigning the
ornaments of their apparel, and their fortune, to fill the public treasury, and
to hasten the deliverance of their country; burying themselves under its ruins;
throwing themselves into the flames rather than submit to the disgrace of
humiliation before a proud enemy.

Born for liberty, disdaining to bear the irons of a tyrannic Government, we
associate ourselves to the grandeur of those Sovereigns, cherished and revered,
who have held with so much splendor the scepter of the greatest States, The
Batildas, the Elizabeth's, the Mary's, the Catharines, who have extended the
empire of liberty, and contented to reign by sweetness and justice, have broken
the chains of slavery, forged by tyrants in the times of ignorance and
barbarity. The Spanish Women, do they not make, at this moment, the most
patriotic sacrifices, to increase the means of victory in the hands of their
Sovereign. He is a friend to the French Nation. They are our allies. We call to
mind, doubly interested, that it was a French Maid who kindled up amongst her
fellow-citizens, the flame of patriotism buried under long misfortunes: It was
the Maid of Orleans who drove from the kingdom of France the ancestors of those
same British, whose odious yoke we have just shaken off; and whom it is
necessary that we drive from this Continent.

But I must limit myself to the recollection of this small number of
achievements. Who knows if persons disposed to censure, and sometimes too
severely with regard to us, may not disapprove our appearing acquainted even
with the actions of which our sex boasts? We are at least certain, that he
cannot be a good citizen who will not applaud our efforts for the relief of the
armies which defend our lives, our possessions, our liberty? The situation of
our soldiery has been represented to me; the evils inseparable from war, and
the firm and generous spirit which has enabled them to support these. But it
has been said, that they may apprehend, that, in the course of a long war, the
view of their distresses may be lost, and their services be forgotten.
Forgotten! never; I can answer in the name of all my sex. Brave Americans, your
disinterestedness, your courage, and your constancy will always be dear to
America, as long as she shall preserve her virtue.

We know that at a distance from the theater of war, if we enjoy any
tranquillity, it is the fruit of your watchings, your labors, your dangers. If
I live happy in the midst of my family; if my husband cultivates his field, and
reaps his harvest in peace; if, surrounded with my children, I myself nourish
the youngest, and press it to my bosom, without being afraid of seeing myself
separated from it, by a ferocious enemy; if the house in which we dwell; if our
barns, our orchards are safe at the present time from the hands of those
incendiaries, it is to you that we owe it. And shall we hesitate to evidence to
you our gratitude? Shall we hesitate to wear a clothing more simple; hair
dressed less elegant, while at the price of this small privation, we shall
deserve your benedictions. Who, amongst us, will not renounce with the highest
pleasure, these vain ornaments, when she shall consider that the valiant
defenders of America will be able to draw some advantage from the money which
she may have laid out in these; that they will be better defended from the
rigours of the seasons, that after their painful toils, they will receive some
extraordinary and unexpected relief; that these presents will perhaps be valued
by them at a greater price, when they will have it in their power to say: This
is the offering of the Ladies. The time is arrived to display the same
sentiments which animated us at the beginning of the Revolution, when we
renounced the use of teas, however agreeable to our taste, rather than receive
them from our persecutors; when we made it appear to them that we placed former
necessaries in the rank of superfluities, when our liberty was interested; when
our republican and laborious hands spun the flax, prepared the linen intended
for the use of our soldiers; when exiles and fugitives we supported with
courage all the evils which are the concomitants of war. Let us not lose a
moment; let us be engaged to offer the homage of our gratitude at the altar of
military valor, and you, our brave deliverers, while mercenary slaves combat
to cause you to share with them, the irons with which they are loaded, receive
with a free hand our offering, the purest which can be presented to your virtue,

BY AN AMERICAN WOMAN.

IDEAS, relative to the manner of forwarding to the American Soldiers, the
Presents of the American Women.
ALL plans are eligible, when doing good is the object; there is however one
more preferable; and when the operation is extensive, we cannot give it too
much uniformity. On the other side, the wants of our army do not permit the
slowness of an ordinary path. It is not in one month, nor in eight days, that
we would releve our soldiery. It is immediately; and our impatience does not
permit us to proceed by the long circuity of collectors, receivers and
treasurers. As my idea with regard to this, have been approved by some Ladies
of my friends, I will explain them here; every other person will not be less at
liberty to prepare and to adopt a different plan.

1st. All Women and Girls will be received without exception, to present their
patriotic offering; and, as it is absolutely voluntary, every one will regulate
it according to her ability, and her disposition. The shilling offered by the
Widow or the young Girl, will be received as well as the most considerable sums
presented by the Women who have the happiness to join to their patriotism,
greater means to be useful.

2d. A Lady chosen by the others in each county, shall be the Treasuress; and
to render her task more simple, and more easy, she will not receive but
determinate sums, in a round number, from twenty hard dollars to any greater
sum. The exchange forty dollars in paper for one dollar in specie.

It is hoped that there will not be one Woman who will not with pleasure charge
herself with the embarrassment which will attend so honorable an operation.

3d. The Women who shall not be in a condition to send twenty dollars in
specie, or above, will join in as great a number as will be necessary to make
this or any greater sum, and one amongst them will carry it, or cause it to be
sent to the Treasuress.

4th. The Treasuress of the county will receive the money, and will keep a
register, writing the sums in her book, and causing it to be signed at the side
of the whole by the person who has presented it.

5th. When several Women shall join together to make a total sum of twenty
dollars or more, she amongst them who shall have the charge to carry it to the
Treasuress, will make mention of all their names on the register, if her
associates shall have so directed her; those whose choice it shall be, will
have the liberty to remain unknown.

6th. As soon as the Treasuress of the county shall judge, that the sums which
she shall have received, deserve to be sent to their destination, she will
cause them to be presented with the lists, to the wife of the Governor or
President of the State, who will be the Treasuress-General of the State; and
she will cause it to be set down in her register, and have it sent to Mistress
Washington. If the Governor or President are unmarried, all will address
themselves to the wife of the Vice President, if there is one, or of the
Chief Justice, etc.

7th. Women settled in the distant parts of the country, and not choosing for
any particular reason as for the sake of greater expedition, to remit their
Capital to the Treasuress, may send it directly to the wife of the Governor, or
President, etc. or to Mistress Washington, who, if she shall judge necessary,
will in a short answer to the sender, acquaint her with the reception of it.

8th. As Mrs. Washington may be absent from the camp when the greater part of
the banks shall be sent there the American Women considering, that General
Washington is the Father and Friend of the Soldiery; that he is himself, the
first Soldier of the Republic, and that their offering will be received at its
destination, as soon as it shall have come to his hands, they will pray him, to
take the charge of receiving it, in the absence of Mrs. Washington.

9th. General Washington will dispose of this fund in the manner that he shall
judge most advantageous to the Soldiery. The American Women desire only that it
may not be considered as to be employed, to procure to the army, the objects of
subsistence, arms or clothing, which are due to them by the Continent. It is
an extraordinary bounty intended to render the condition of the Soldier more
pleasant, and not to hold place of the things which they ought to receive from
the Congress, or from the States.

10th. If the General judges necessary, he will publish at the end of a certain
time, an amount of that which shall have been received from each particular
State.

11th. The Women who shall send their offerings, will have in their choice to
conceal or to give their names; and if it shall be thought proper, on a fit
occasion, to publish one day the lists, they only, who shall consent, shall be
named; when with regard to the sums sent, there will be no mention made, if
they so desire it.

PRINTED BY JOHN DUNLAP.


