PRESIDENT CLAP, ON TERRESTRIAL COMETS.

CONJECTURES UPON THE NATURE AND MOTION OF METEORS, WHICH ARE ABOVE THE
ATMOSPHERE.

BY THOMAS CLAP, A. M. LATE PRESIDENT OF YALE COLLEGE.

NORWICH: PRINTED BY JOHN TRUMBULL, FOR THE SUBSCRIBERS. (...).

CONJECTURES UPON THE NATURE AND MOTION OF METEORS, etc.
UPON several observations made upon sundry Meteors, which have appeared in
Europe and New England, I have collected the following general phenomenon:

I. THEY appear like round balls of fire, or globes of red hot iron, or white
hot iron, ready to melt, as large as the sun or moon, in the meridian, commonly
surrounded with a flame which appears like a tail, with streams and sparkles
net so bright as the body. They frequently exceed the light of the moon, and in
some instances that of the sun, so as to make a shadow in the clearest sunshine.

II. THESE Meteors have been seen passing through the air, at all points of the
compass, over a space of ground above 100, and sometimes above 500 miles long,
and above 100 miles wide, with an exceeding great velosity. I could never get
observations accurate enough, to determine the velocity with any degree of
exactness. Doctor Halley supposes it to be above 300 miles, and Doctor Pringle
about 1000, in a minute. I rather suppose it does not exceed 500, for the
reasons hereafter mentioned.

III. To each particular person observing, who stands in or near the line of
their course, they seem to rise while they are coming toward him, and to fall
when they are going from him, as the sun rises and sets, seemingly at a small
distance. But by comparing the observations made by several persons standing a
little out of the line of their course, at the distance of 50, 100, or 500
miles from each other, it appears that at their first approach or appearance
they are 50 or 100 miles distant from the earth; then they come within 20 or 30
miles of it; and afterward are at the distance of 50 or 100 miles again; which
different distances seem to arise principally from the curvatur of the earth.
Or if these several distances of any one Meteor have not been accurately
determined on both sides of its nearest approach, yet it is evident, that so^e
Meteors, during the time in which they have been observed, have been coming
nearer to the earth, and others going farther from it.

IV. (...) transit, m^ke a continual whizzing or humming (...) like a great
number of drums, or g^^s, or distant (...) heard presently after they pass by.
And about ^he (...) nearest the earth, or a little after, the body of the
Meteor seems to (...) ^omb, with a great explosion of flames, streams, and
sparkles; and (...) after the^e is a very loud noise, sometimes like terrible
thunder, so as to (...) the ground and houses, like an earthquake, or like the
report of a very large (...) ^and; or, as some say, as loud as a thousand
cannon fired together, at 20 or 30 miles distance. And when it is cloudy,
noises ^ke distant cannon or rumbling thunder, have been heard passing through
the air, without any distinct light.

V. ALTHOUGH these Meteors, by reason of their extreme velocity and great
distance, generally become invisible in about a minute after they pass by; and
as they recede from any person, presently make but a small angle with the
ho^zon, and seem to be suddenly intercepted by horizontal clouds, houses, etc.
yet there is no sufficient evidence that any of these high Meteors, which have
moved 100 miles or more, ever did really fall to the ground, or become wholly
extinct; though after the emission of so much of their fire in the explosion,
they are not so bright, and have no flame or tails.

VI. THESE Meteors generally appear as often or oftener than once in 20 or 30
years. Near ten of them have been seen in England within these 100 years; as
related in the P^ of. Trans. Abr. vol. II. page 200; vol. IV. by Jones, part
II. page 134 135, 136, 137, 150; vol. VIII. page 121, 123; with that in 1758,
ingeniously treated upon by Doctor Pringle. Three or f^ur such Meteors have
been observed in New England within these 50 years; but as they have been
generally supposed to be of the same nature with thunder, lightning, shooting
stars, and such like lower Me^eors, which seem to have no existence above two
or three minutes, there have not been such critical observations made upon them
as I could wish may be made hereafter. Yet these general phenomenon, I take to
be as certain as can ordina^y be collected from such sudden, transient, and
unexpected observations, generally made by the lower sort of people: And have
therefore been led to conjecture a new Theory of the nature and motion of these
high Meteors.

Now to assign a natural cause or reason for any thing, is to resolve it into
the general laws of nature, by which the wise Creator governs the world; and to
show its connection with other things, according to those general laws by which
we find the universe is governed, so far as we are acquainted with it. And the
fewer laws we have recourse to, which will solve all the apparent phenomenon,
the greater is the probability that we have hit upon the true theory. And,

I. IF the apparent diameter of these fiery globes is equal to those of the sun
or moon, in the meridian, and subtends an angle of above half a degree, at the
distance of 50 miles from the observer, then it is evident that their real
diameter is half a mile at least.

II. IT seems evident that these globes are solid and firm, at least as to the
external parts.

1. BECAUSE, they preserve their globular shape and motion throughout their
whole course, and after the explosion. For if they consisted only of
inflammable matter, of the nature of pulvis fulminans, or a train of
gunpowder, fired at one and, (as some of the lower Meteors seem to do) there
would be no probability that they would inva^iably preserve their exact
globular shape; but would melt down, bu^n up, or dissipate with such an intense
heat, as must cause or accompany such a vast explos^^^ of flame and sound.

2. BECAUSE, they are strong and firm enough to withstand the force of so great
a shock as is given at the explosion. The noise is generally represented as
being equal to loud thunder, a large cannon near by, or a thousand cannon at
the distance of 20 or 30 miles. And I suppose that a thousand cannon fired at
the distance of 25 miles, give just as loud a report as one cannon at the
distance of a quarter of a mile. The greatness of the explosion being in a
sesquiplicate ratio of the distance heard The undulations of sound are
propagated from a sonorific body in concave shells, increasing very much like
the blowing up of a bladder The whole pressure of the air upon the inside of
the shell, is equal at all magnitudes, taking the whole shell together; but
lesser upon each particular part or spot, as it grows bigger. The magnitude of
the sound is in proportion to the solid content of the spherical shell; and the
audibility of it (at any particular distance) is in proportion to the pressure
upon any particular part, at that distance. Therefore, as the solid content of
the sphere is to the superficies, or as the cube of any number is to the square
of the same number, so is the magnitude of a sound to the distance heard. Or
multiply the distance by the square root of itself, and it gives the magnitude
of the sound.

Cube. 1 8 27 64 125 216 343 512 729 1000 Magnitude. Square. 1 4 9 16 25 36 49
64 81 100 Distance. Root. 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10

Thus in the explosion of gunpowder: supposing 31 cubic inches to a pound.

Quantity. I Cubic inches, 1 310: 10 lb 620: 20 lb. 930: 30 lb. 1240: 40 lb.
Distance. I Miles, - 1 1-2 68 109 141 173

So the found of a bell according to its weight.

Quantity. 1 oz. 16: 1 lb 100 lb. 500 lb. 1000 lb. Distance. 5 rods. 30 640: 2
miles. 1890: 6 3000: 9

Mountains, contrary or confused winds, and such accidental causes, may
sometimes interrupt the sound, so as not always to be heard exactly in this
proportion.


. And if the Meteor is about 30 miles high, where the atmosphere is 500 times
more rare than it is upon the earth, in order to produce the same sound to our
ears, it must be equal to 500,000 cannon fired upon the earth. And if this
explosion is made by an elastick fluid, as violent as gun powder, then the
matter of this globe must be as strong and firm as the iron of cannon, and the
sides of the same proportional thickness, which is about 50 rods, in order to
stand such a violent shock. If this explosion is caused by an elastick fluid,
(...) the nature of electrical fire, as I shall afterward show, then the
firmness of the globe must be almost the same. For when a body is charged with
it, at or near the instant when it is discharged, the sire is retained in it
with as great a force, as that with which it is discharged, or would strike
against another body. So that the force with which the fire goes out, by any
elastick spring, or repulfive power, is impressed on the body it leaves. Or if
it be drawn out by the attraction of some other body, the force of that
attraction is taken off from the body it leaves, which will have the same
effects upon it. And hence a large phial or jarr, when it is overcharged with
electrical fire, will sometimes burst, like a bomb, and that although it was
strong enough to withstand the weight or expansion of the air, which is 15lb.
on every superficial inch; and such a pressure upon a sphere half a mile in
diameter, will lie above 5,000,000lb

IF it should be objected, the clouds are not solid bodies, and yet they emit a
violent explosion; -- to this I reply, that the explosion of thunder and
lightning is but very small, in comparison with that of a Meteor; for, thunder
is rarely heard 10 miles, whereas, a Meteor may be heard above 100; and the
thunder must be within half a mi^e, to be heard as loud as a Meteor at the
distance of 30. And upon computation of the different distances and rarity of
the air, it will appear, that the explosion of thunder is not a 10,000th part
so great as that of a superior Meteor; and yet a cloud, containing 5,000,000
t^ns of water, when it discharges it^ electrical fire, re^oils as much as a
cannon, in proportion to its weight, and is so violently agitated, that the
small bubbles are suddenly dashed together into drops, which immediately fall
down in rain. And if the explosion of a Meteor is so great, when the noise
heard is only equal to the report of a single cannon near by; how great must it
be in those instances, where it causes an earthquake 40 or 50 miles round? It
seems impossible that there should be such a prodigious forcible explosion,
without making an alteration in its perfect globular shape, unless it be very
rigid and firm Since these balls of fire have been observed to accompany
earthquakes, I would propose it, to be considered, whether the explosion of
Meteors may not oftentimes be the cause of earthquakes, as well as the eruption
of subterraneous fires.
.

3. THEIR solidity appears from their extreme velocity for many hundreds of
miles: For, if a mere flame, smoke, or powder, or any thing not strongly
cemented together, was shot out of a cannon at the velocity of 500 miles a
minute, it would immediately diffipate or dissolve: Or, if so great a body
should continue together, it would necessarily drive before it a large column
of air, which, by the resist^nce of the vis inertiae, would be extremely
condensed, and the friction of it, by the sides of the Meteor, would presently
wear it away, unless it was very hard and fi^m. The round ball always runs
away, and leaves the flame, tail and sparkles behind it; just as a cannon ball
leaves the fire and smoke, or the nucleus of a comet runs before its tail. Upon
these considerations, it seems evident, that the globe of these Meteors is a
firm, solid substance; at least, as to the external part. -- I would, then,
observe,

III. THERE is a continued whizzing, humming, or rumbling noise, like distant
drums, guns, or thunder, made by these Meteors, and heard presently after they
pass b^, about a quarter so loud as the explosion: I suppose this is caused by
the friction of the Meteor upon the atmosphere; -- for a cannon ball, of six
inches in diameter, passing through the air, with 1-25th part of the velocity
of the Meteor, will make a humming noise, which is generally heard two miles.
Now, if we multiply the square of the difference of the velocities, into the
square of the difference of the diameters, we shall find that the resistance of
the air upon the Meteor is, to that upon a cannon ball, as 17,000,000,000 to 1.
See Newton's Princip. Math. Book II. Prop. 35. Cor. ^.
And 6,700,000 being the square of that number of which 17,000,000,000 is the
cube, will represent the proportion of the distance in which the humming of the
Meteor will be heard farther than that of a cannon-ball: And being diminished
to a 500th part on account of the rarity of the atmosphere, the proportion will
be as 13,400 to 1. And because the humming of the cannon-ball is heard but a
50th part so far as the report of a cannon, that number must be divided by 50,
which will make the humming noise of the Meteor equal to the report of 268
cannon, at the distance of 25 miles. And the exprosion of the Meteor being
represented to be equal to 100 cannon at that distance, the hummingn^se will be
14th part of it. And this humming noise will be less, as the distance or
altitude of the Meteor is greater.

IV. THE great explosion and flame attending these Meteors, is caused by the
discharge of electrical fire, collected by the friction of the atmosphere, and
emitted about the time, or a little after, it approaches nearest to the earth,
and becomes overcharged. I suppose electrical fire is not essentially different
from common fire, and is a kind of universal element diffused, in some degree,
into almost all bodies in the universe, and, by friction, may be collected into
a much greater quantity in some particular bodies: And, when the whole suddenly
rushes out in one place or stream, it is there so greatly collected or
condensed, like the rays of the sun in a focus, that it becomes common fire,
capable of inflaming any combustible matter; and, by the extreme celerity of
its motion, so violently agitates the air, as that its elastick spring becomes
sensible to the ear. Common experience teaches, that when a collection of
visible fire is once begun, the friction of the air upon it, at the velocity of
half a mile a minute (as in the blowing of a pair of bellows) will inflame and
increase it to a very great degree: And, therefore, it is reasonable to
suppose, that the friction of the air, at the velocity of 1000 half miles in a
minute, (the force of which is 1,000,000 to 1) will collect fire where it was
not begun before, or but in a low degree; as all bodies grow warm by friction:
And, we find by experience, that fire is often collected by soft bodies, which
do not make so great a resistance as condensed air, though moved with a
velocity much ^ess than that of a Meteor. -- Dr. Boerhave, on Chemistry, page
249, speaking of collecting fire by friction, says, The surfaces of two bodies
being applied together, one may pass so swiftly by the other, as that nothing
but fire, the swiftest body in nature, can succeed immediately into the vacant
places; and by that means it becomes collected, in the path of the moving body,
and so it has, as it were, a fiery atmosphere around it. And, (page 231) that
balls exploded in the night, out of great guns, grow h^t in their passage
through the air, so as sometimes to appear ignited. And if a cannon-ball will
collect some visible degree of electrical fire, then the Met^or, which (...)
above twenty five times the velocity, and consequently above six hundred times
the struction, may collect such a quantity of electrical fire, as may be
sufficient to answer all the phenomenon. For a soft piece of leather moving
upon an electrical globe or tu^e, with the velocity of two and an half feet per
second, or 150 feet, which is a thirty fifth part of a mile, in a minute, will
collect a large quantity of electrical fire in a very short time. And I suppose
150 superficial inches of leather, passing over an electrical globe or tube,
with the velocity of 150 feet a minute, and each inch p^ssed with a force equal
to the weight of one pound, will be sufficient to raise a large spa^k or shap
of electrical fire; especially after the globe is once sufficiently warmed. The
mo^ion of the leather being at the rate of a thirty-fifth part of a mile a
minute, and that of the Meteor 500 miles, the proportion of their velocities is
as 1 to 17,500; and the momentum or effect produced will be just the same,
whether we take the number of pounds weight in the air (pressing upon the
globe) at the velocity of the Mete^, or else 17,500 times so many pounds at the
velocity of the leather.

A GLORE passing very swiftly through the air, drives before it a column of air
almost equal to itself. The elastick force of the air will not be sufficient to
overcome its vis inertiae, so as suddenly to protrude the air much before it,
or on either fide. By the mo^ of sound, we see that the elasti^k spring o^ the
air will not move it more than 12 miles in a minute, which being no a fortieth
part of the velocity of a Meteor, is very inconsiderable in this case. And as
action and re^ction are always equal, the vis (...) of the air, and (...)
velocity communicated to it, by its resist ^nce against the Meteor, makes the
some action upon the Meteor as it would do ^f the air w^ non elastick News.
Prin. B. II. Prop. 33. Cor. 3.
. The Meteor in two minutes moves through a cilinder of air 1000 males long and
hal^ a mile in diameter; which being taken one place with another, 500 times
rarer than common air, is equal in weight to two miles of common air or 12 feet
of water; which, upon computation of 76lb. for every cubic foot, is
5,000,000,000lb. As the Mete^ moves 17,500 times faster than the ^ea^ber on the
tube, multiply the number of pounds by that ^um, and the product will be
87,500,000,000,000, equal to the number of pounds, moving with the velocity of
the ^eather, which being divided by 150lb. (which make one electrical snap) the
quotient will be 583,000,000,000, the number of electrica, snaps collected.

AND that the Meteor will contain such a quantity, is evident, because a phial
holding a p^^t charged with electrical fire, will give a snap which can be
heard 50 feet, or 100th part of a mile. A cannon is heard 100 miles, which is
10,000 times so far as the phial; which being multiplied by the square root of
itself, gives the quantity of the expresive force, or sound, which is heard so
far. Then 10,000x100=1,000,000, the number of electrical snaps which are equal
to the report of a cannon, and consequently 500,000,000,000 snaps are equal to
500,000 cannon. N^w the Meteor being a sphere ha^f a mile in diameter, contains
574,000,000,000 pints, which wi^^ give the number of snaps beforementioned
equal to 500,000 cannon; besides a seventh part overplus which may remain in
the Meteor.

AND to show that 1,000,000 electrical snaps are equal to the report of a
cannon: I suppose that a quantity of powder equal to a cube of near (...) 10th
part of an inch, on ea^h side, being fi^ed out of a proper instrument, will
make a report which may be heard 50 feet, like an electrical snap; and
1,000,000 such quantit^es, which is about 20lb. being fired out of a cannon,
will be heard 100 miles.

As all these proportions agree among themselves, it is probable they may be
near the truth; but if they are not, they will equally serve to end the mind
into a conception, how it is possible that such a vast solid body may be so
charged with electrical fire, as to give an explosion equal to the report of a
cannon near by, or to 1000 cannon at the distance of 30 miles.

V. THIS mighty body, which if it be near as solid as iron, must weigh about
2,000,000,000 tons, cannot be raised up, near 100 miles from the earth, by any
laws of nature that we are acquainted with. Water, when rarefied into the
finest m^sts or bubbles, cannot be carried up above 3 or 4 miles by the weight
of the atmosphere; and when it is condensed to about an 800th part of the
weight in its natural state, it immediately falls down again. Much les^ can it
be carried up 40 miles where the air is near 3000 times as light. And it seems
absolutely impossible, that it should be carried up 100 miles, which is double
the utmost extent of the atmosphere. O^ if we could suppose it possible, that
any kind of matter could be rarefied so as to be carried up so high, yet when
it comes to be consolidated, a thousandth part so much as these Meteors, it
must ^ail directly down.

VI. IT is beyond the power of any laws of nature, already known, to give such
a heavy body such a prodigious projectile velocity, above 20 times so great as
tha^ of a cannon ball; and by multip^ving the difference of their weights into
the difference of their ve^oc^ties, it appears that the momentum or force
impress^d must be above 3,000,000,000,000 so great. All other bodies moving in
the universe, that we know of, were at first let in motion by the immedia^e
hand of the omnipotent Creator; and are since continued in motion according to
the simple laws of projectil^ and centripetal force And as our surest reasoning
in these things is by way of analogy, according to the known laws of nature, we
must conclude that these M^teors are governed by the some general laws; and as
all the (...) estial bodies, are so remote that they can have no sensible
influence upon them, when they are within 100 miles of the ear^h, it is evident
that he earth must be the attractive central body, round which they revolve; as
the secondary planets revolve round the primary, or rather as comets revolve
round the sun in long elipses, near to a parabol^.

VII. I SHALL therefore calculate the motion of these Terrestrial Comets round
the earth, on the same principles as D^ctor Halley calculates the motion of
comets round the sun.

1. A BODY revolving in a circle, at the distance of 4000 miles from the
center, which is about 25 from the surface, will perform its revolution in 84
minutes. For as the cube of the moon's distance is to he square of its
periodical revolution in minutes, so is the cube of 4000 to the square of 84,
which is 300 miles in a minute: But if it revolves in an elipses, near to a
parabola, its velocity is augmented as 7 to 10, nearly, and will be 428 miles
in a minute: The annual and di^rna^ motion of the earth may make a smali
difference.

2. As the area of a circle 0,785 is to 84 minutes, so is 1^3d to 35, the time
in which at will describe a q^adrant or a parabola, with the velocity of a
circle.

3. As the square root of 2 is to 1, so is 35 minutes, the time as in a circle,
to 25, the time as in a parabola. Therefore, the Meteor describes a quadrant,
or 100 of mean motion, in 25, which is 4 degrees of mean motion, and 6 6
angular motion from the perihelion, in one minute. Upon these data I have
calculated the following table of the motions of this Perrestrial Comet. The
first column contains the minutes of time before and after the perihe^ion or
perigee: The second, the degrees of mean motion: The third, the degrees of
angular motion: The fourth, its distance from the center of the earth: And the
fifth, its distance from the su^face of the earth, supposing its least
distance, at the perigee, is 25 miles: The sixth, its motion from the perigee,
in its orb^ts, in miles.

Time. Mean motton. Ang. motton Did. from cen^ Did. fr surf Did. in orbit.
0^ 0 0 0 4,000 25 0 1 4 6 6 4,0^1 36 428 2 8 12 8 4,045 70 854 3 12 18 2 4,101
126 1,280 4 16 23 45 4,177 202 1,700 25 100 90 0 8,000 4,025 lb. or 60 240 118
15,076 24h. 5760 160 58 140,2^0

To a person who stands at the perigee, at the distance of 428 miles, it will
appear almost in the horizon.

THIS calculation seems to answer exactly to all the apparent motions of these
Terrestria^ Comets, and particularly that they appear first to be 50 or 100
miles distant from the earth, then, in their course, to come within 20 or 30
miles of it, and afterward are at a greater distance again; as may be clearly
seen in the delineation annexed: It also seems to determine its real velocity
with a greater precision than the most critical observations hitherto made:
For, if it moves less than 300 miles in a minute, it must, in a little time,
fall to the earth; and if it moves more than 428, it must go off in an
hyperbola.

THE preceding calculation is founded upon the known laws of motion, in which
we cannot be mistaken; but we have room for different conjectures about the
number and periodical revolutions of these Terrestrial Comets; yet we are
circumscribed within certain limits. On the one hand we must not suppose that
their number is so great, or that their periodical revolutions are so frequent,
as to exceed observation: On the other hand we must not suppose that their
periodical revolutions, and transverse diameters, are so great, as that, in
their a^ogee, they would be in danger of being carried away, or greatly
disturbed in their motion, by the attraction of Venus, or any other celestial
body. It seems most natural to suppose, that there are more than one, and that
their orbits are very differently situated, like those of the sorar Come^, in
order to account for their different motions to all parts of the Heavens:
Though, if we should suppose that the^e is but one only, it seems possible that
all these various mo^ons might be accounted for, by the diurnal and annual
motion of the earth, and the constant attraction of the moon, in its various
longitudes and latitudes, upon the Meteor, in the several parts of its orbi^;
which must constantly change the situation of it, and may possibly, in length
of time, carry its inclination, apogee and nodes, to every part of the Heavens.
B^ the observations which have been made, it seems evident, that one has been
seen in each country, oftener than on^e in 30 years. Upon the^u face of the
terrestrial globe, there are 1000 countries, each about 500 miles ^quare; so
that 30 of them may appear somewhere in the world within the comp^ of a year,
and yet (...) seen in each particular country so often as once in 30 years. Let
us, then, conjecture for the present, until we have farther light by more
accurate observations, that there are 3 such Comets revolving round the earth,
whose mean distances are about as great a^ ^he moon's, and, therefore,
performing about 30 revolutions in a year; then one of them will appear in ea^h
country of 500 miles square, once in 27 years: And so often, at least, they
have been in fact seen in Old England and New. This conjecture, I think, will
full^ solve all the various p^aenomena of ^hese Meteors which have hitherto
been observed. And if their periodical revolutions are ^ce in a month, they
will lose but little of their heat in their apogee, and so will be prepared to
receive and emit a large quantity of fire when they come near the earth:
Indeed, by their friction upon the a^mosphere, the^ will lose near an hundredth
part of their velocity, and so, in length of time, will be in danger of falling
to the earth, sooner than the planets are of falling to the sun. But this may,
in some measure, be p^evented, by the greater density and pr^ssure on the lower
side -- the explosion toward the earth may cause it a little to recoil from
it; -- and a wise Providence may so order the situation of their orbits, as
that once and a while the attraction of the moon, or some other heavenly body,
may accelerate their motion and enlarge their orb^ts. As M. Whiston supposes,
the Comet, at the flood, accelerated the motion of the earth, and made its
annual revolution 5 days and a quarter longer than it was before.

OUR observations have heretofore been so imperfect, as that we cannot easily
determine minute circumstances; but the general theory seems highly probable,
if not certain, that these superior Meteors are solid bodies, half a mile in
diameter, revolving round the earth in long elipses, their least distance being
about 20 or 30 miles; that, by their friction upon the atmosphere, they make a
constant rumbling noise, and collect electrial fire; and, when they come
nearest to the earth, or a little after, being then overcharged, they make an
explosion as loud as a large cannon.

I SHALL add one conjecture respecting the use and benefit of these Meteors. --
It is possible that, by their violent explosion and agitation, they may cleanse
and purify the air, and render it more salubrious to mankind; much more than
thunder and lightning. There is an observation in the Phil. Trans. Abr. Vol.
VIII, page 519, which seems much to favor this conjecture; it is in these
words: A Meteor was seen over England and Ireland, and at Venice, at the same
time: It appeared like a great ball of fire, which burst with an explosion
which shook great part of the island, and seemed to set the whole atmosphere on
fire. This Meteor put a^ end to the Catarrh and Diarrhea, and restored a
general health.



The line A B, represents part of the earth's circumference. The line C D,
represents the top of the atmosphere. The line E F, represents part of the
orbit of the Meteor. The figures 1 2 3, represent the distance of the Meteor,
in minutes of time, from the perigee.
SCALE, 200 miles to an inch.

If the least distance of the Meteor from the earth, at the perigee, be 20
miles; then its distance from the perigee and from the earth in the several
minutes and parts of a minute of time, from the perigee, will be as follows:
Minutes and parts of a^m. 0 1-4 1^ 3-4 1 1 1-4 1 1-2 1 3-4 2 2 1-4 2 1-2 2 3-4
3 3 1-4 3 1-^ 3^4 4 Distance from pertgee. 0 107 214 321 428 535 ^42 748 8^4
960 1067 1174 1280 1385 1490 1595 1700 Distance from earth. 20 20,7 22,8 26,4
31,4 37,8 45,5 54,6 65,2 77,^ 92,2 104,8 120,7 138,1 156,8 175,9 196,8


