Mr. Cumings's SERMON DELIVERED APRIL NINETEENTH, 1781.

A SERMON PREACHED AT LEXINGTON, ON THE 19th OF April, 1781. Being the
Anniversary of the Commencement of Hostilities between Great Britain and
America, which took Place in that Town, on the 19th of April, 1775.

By HENRY CUMINGS, A. M. Pastor of the Church in Billerica.

Hitherto has the LORD helped us.

SAMUEL. There are many devices in a man's heart; nevertheless the council of
the LORD, that shall stand.

SOLOMON. BOSTON: Printed by BENJAMIN EDES and SONS, IN TATE STREET.
M,DCC,LXXXI.

A SERMON.
PSALM LXXVI.10. "Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee: the remainder of
wrath shall thou restrain."


THOUGH GOD, (for wise reasons, best known to himself) has permitted sin to
enter into the world; yet, we may be sure, he will not suffer the purposes of
his goodness to be frustrated by it; but will, in some way or other, overruled
this worst of evils, for good; and make sinners themselves, (contrary to their
design and intention) the instruments of promoting the great ends of his moral
government, and the occasional causes of benefit to others, at the same time,
that they expose themselves to misery and ruin, which will inevitably come upon
them, either in this world or in that to come, or in both, as a just punishment
for their wickedness, unless prevented by repentance.

IT cannot be doubted, but the infinitely wise GOD knows how to promote his own
glory, by those ungoverned lusts of envious, discontented and proud mortals,
which are a prolific source of continual mischief and misery, both to
particular persons and societies, and whereby thousands and ten thousands are
involved in great troubles and grievous distresses, all the days of their
lives. And as GOD knows how to promote his own glory, by the lusts of men, so
we have reason to believe that he will do it, (as he has done it already in
innumerable obvious instances, from the beginning of the world) either by
laying restraints upon those lusts, or overruling their operations in such a
manner, as to make them contribute (in direct contrariety to their natural aim)
to the execution of his own gracious purposes; or by taking occasion from them,
to exhibit such remarkable displays of his power, wisdom and goodness, as shall
be admirably adapted to beget and cherish adoring thoughts of his being,
perfections, and providence, and to produce all those external honorary acts of
worship and homage, which he requires of us.

WE live in an angry and provoking world. Ever since the fatal apostasy of our
first parents, the wrath of man has been at work to spread misery and
wretchedness over the face of the earth. Hateful and hating one another, is too
much the character of by far the greater part of the human race. It seems
indeed, that it must be evident to every one, that the happiness of social life
depends essentially upon the exercise of mutual benevolence and the constant
reciprocal interchange of kind and friendly offices; but yet, as if men were
entirely ignorant of the vast advantages of love and harmony, peace and
friendship, it may, with truth, be affirmed of the generality, that they "Live
in hatred, enmity and strife
"Among themselves, and levy cruel wars,
"Wasting the earth, each other to destroy."


THROUGH the prevalence of pride, envy, ambition, avarice, and other corrupt
lusts, the earth is full of the habitations of violence, cruelty and war. These
passions are the grand source of mutual jealousies, animosities, enmities,
reproaches, insults and injuries; they lead directly to a violation of every
moral obligation, and of every principle of social virtue; their natural fruits
are injustice, unrighteousness and oppression, from whence come strife and
contention, discord, tumult and disorder; and when they are inflamed with wrath
and armed with power, they generally drive matters to extremity, pushing men
into such arbitrary and cruel actions and pursuits, as enkindle the flames of
war, which it often requires a vast effusion of human blood to extinguish.

BUT when we see or feel the sad effects of the disorderly passions and baneful
distempers of human nature, our comfort is, that the Lord God omnipotent
reigns, who can and will answer his own most wise purposes thereby, or set
bounds thereto, as to his infinite wisdom shall seem best. This comfortable
doctrine is clearly contained in the text. We may rest assured, that the
supreme governor of the world, will not suffer the wrath of man, of a weak and
impotent mortal, (how much soever advanced above his fellow mortals) to
overthrow his government, or defeat the counsels of his wisdom; but will cause
it to praise him; that is, (as was just now suggested) he will either so check
and restrain it, or so manage and overruled the operations of it, as to make it
subservient to the ends and designs of his providence, and the occasional cause
of such events, as shall show forth his perfections, and induce every attentive
and pious observer, to praise and glorify him.

I DOUBT not, my hearers, but you can recollect instances that have fallen
under your own observation, wherein the lusts of particular persons have been
either remarkably restrained, or remarkably overruled, as occasions of good,
where evil was designed and intended. Every instance of this kind, that comes
within our view, should lead us to admire and adore the wisdom and goodness of
God, who disappointeth the evil designs of sinners, and causes even the
operation of their lusts to be productive of events, in favor of those, whom
they meant to injure.

SACRED history furnishes us with many instances, to this purpose. I will
mention a few of them, which will serve, at once, to illustrate the meaning of
the text, and to suggest some thoughts and reflections, suitable to the present
occasion.

THE story of Joseph, in the book of Genesis, affords one instance, to this
purpose. Instigated by pride, envy, anger and unreasonable resentment, his
brethren sold him into Egypt. They had nothing in view, in this base and
unnatural action, but the gratification of their own unruly passions and
corrupt lusts; but the wisdom of GOD overruled it for good, contrary to their
expectation and design. They thought evil against their innocent brother, when
they sold him for a slave; but this heinously wicked action of theirs, was the
occasion of his promotion to high honor and authority in the Egyptian court,
whereby he was enabled to save his father's house, and much people alive in a
time of famine.

ANOTHER pertinent instance, we may find in the history of Pharaoh, in the
beginning of the book of Exodus. The wrath and madness of Pharaoh, and the
cruelties which his haughty and savage temper prompted him to exercise upon the
children of Israel, in order to check their growth, and secure them in a state
of dependence and base servitude, prepared the way, under the government of
Providence, for their remarkable deliverance; and afforded occasions for a
series of such wonderful displays of the power of GOD, as could not but excite
all pious observers, to pay him their devout honors and adorations. And the
destruction, which Pharaoh's pride and obstinacy plunged him into, was no less
remarkable, than was the deliverance of Israel. From whence it is natural to
observe, that proud aspiring mortals are often ensnared in the work of their
own hands, and defeated by the very measures which they take to carry their
iniquitous schemes into execution. There are many devices in a man's heart,
says the wise man, but the counsel of the Lord, that shall stand.

THE great men, the princes and potentates of the earth, who are entrusted with
the management of the affairs of states and kingdoms, are as much subject to
the control of an higher power, as any of the lower ranks and classes of
people. They are all at the disposal of the supreme Governor of the world,
whose providence, as it is concerned in all occurrences and events, and in all
the vicissitudes of human affairs, so does more especially interpose in the
rise and fall of empires, and in all the great revolutions that take place
among the nations of the earth. In ways and by means unthought of and
unforeseen, the profoundest policies and most promising schemes of restless
ambition, are often disconcerted, and the measures adopted by it, made to
terminate in its own confusion. When this is the case, we have always reason to
adore the providence of that Almighty Being, who presides over the world, and
is the disposer of all events.

THOSE men, who are actuated by a lust of power and domination, seem,
sometimes, to be judicially left of GOD, to use such methods, for the promotion
of their ambitious schemes, as have a direct tendency to defeat their
enterprises, and to preserve to others those important rights and liberties, of
which they endeavor to rob them, for the sake of aggrandizing themselves. The
conduct of Rehoboam, after the death of his father Solomon (as it is recorded
in the twelfth chapter of the first book of Kings) affords a very striking
example of this kind. As soon as Rehoboam came to the throne of his father, the
people applied to him, with their petitions, for a redress of grievances: But
Rehoboam, despising the moderate counsels of the aged and wise, and following
the imprudent advice of young and unskilful courtiers, as being more agreeable
to his own aspiring and ambitious views, answered the people roughly, and
rejected their petitions with insult. In consequence of such ill-treatment, ten
tribes revolted, and set up another king over them: Of this revolt and
revolution, Rehoboham himself was the immediate occasional or procuring cause.
His pride and haughtiness, alienated from him the hearts of the greatest part
of his subjects, and divided his father's dominion into two kingdoms. But it is
very observable, that it is expressly said, The cause was from the Lord; and
this is assigned as the reason why Rehoboam, adhering to the imprudent counsels
of raw and rash politicians, rejected, with affrontive insolence, the
reasonable petitions of the people. This revolution being agreeable to the will
of GOD, Rehoboam was left to his own folly, which kept the things of his peace
out of sight, and influenced him to take a step, which provoked the most of the
tribes to throw off their allegiance, and reject him from being king over them.
Thus GOD often takes the wise in their own craftiness; causing the measures
which they principally depend upon, for accomplishing their ambitious designs,
to produce events directly contrary to their views and expectations.

BY their wrath, by their vindictive resentments, the haughty and ambitious,
are sometimes precipitated into actions, for the gratification of their pride
and revenge, which not only issue in their own ruin, but in the advancement of
those whom they meant to destroy. Haman (of whom we have a particular account
in the book of Esther) is an instance, in proof of this. In the fierceness of
his wrath (the occasion of which, it may be presumed you are not ignorant of)
Haman plotted the destruction of Mordecai, and all the Jews in the kingdom of
Ahasuerus; and had the address to obtain a decree from the king, for that
purpose. But this infernal plot terminated in his own utter ruin, and led the
way to Mordecai's promotion, affording, at the same time, an occasion for a
signal display of the wisdom and goodness of Providence, in the deliverance of
the Jews from the destruction that was just ready to fall upon them. This
instance, with that of Pharaoh before mentioned, will sufficiently justify the
following observation, viz. that,

GREAT and important revolutions, in favor of the cause of righteousness and
liberty, are sometimes brought about, by means of the cruel and vindictive
measures, which powerful oppressors take, to promote their ambitious views, and
to keep others in awe and servile dependence. Wrath and cruelty are generally
rash and precipitate, and calculated to raise a spirit of indignation and
desperate opposition, in those who feel the sad effects of them. The haughty
tyrant, who endeavors to advance his oppressive schemes, and to set himself up
above all law and justice, by severities and cruelties, dictated by wrath, does
thereby frequently work out his own disappointment, and is forced eventually to
acknowledge his impotence, and to own a power above himself.

BUT when the power of oppressors is so great, as to bear down all opposition,
and compel people to a servile submission, it is to be considered as a just
judgment of GOD, who sometimes causes the wrath of man to praise him, by
employing it to punish a people for their sins. And herein we may observe the
unsearchable wisdom of GOD, who, while man (unnecessitated by any foreign
impulse) is impiously and wickedly gratifying his lusts, makes those very lusts
subservient to his providence, for the punishment of others. This is admirably
set forth in the conduct of the Assyrian monarch (as the same is recorded in
the tenth chapter of the prophecy of Isaiah.) GOD was pleased to make use of
this haughty tyrant, as a rod, for the correction and chastisement of his
people; wisely managing the distempers of his proud and ambitious mind, for the
punishment of the Jews, for their sinful defections from him. But as the
Assyrian acted freely, being under no constraint, it was no excuse for him,
that GOD made his pride and ambition, instrumental in bringing his righteous
judgments on the Jewish nation; but his conduct was highly affrontive to
Heaven, and exposed him to the righteous resentments of the Supreme Governor.
Wherefore, says GOD, when I have performed my whole will on Zion and Jerusalem,
I will punish the fruit of the stout heart of the king of Assyria, and the
glory of his high looks.

IN the instances that have been mentioned above, we see, that so far as GOD
permits the wrath of man to exert itself, he will overruled the operations of
it, for advancing the important purposes of his government; and we are fully
assured that he will, in no cases, suffer it to break out farther, than shall
redound to his praise and honor. The remainder of wrath he will restrain; that
is, he will set bounds to it, and render it unable to accomplish what it aims
at. Thus (as we are informed in the 37th chapter of the prophecy of Isaiah) he
restrained Sennacherib's wrath, and forced him to quit his enterprise against
Jerusalem. Sennacherib carried his boasts and menaces to such an height, as
implied a defiance of the great Lord of heaven and earth; but the GOD whom he
defied interposed, and prevented his attempting what he designed, by the
miraculous destruction of one hundred and eighty-five thousand of his army in
one night; thus putting an hook in his nose, and a bridle in his jaws, and
obliging him to return home ashamed. Such miraculous interpositions of
providence for restraining the wrath of man, cannot indeed be rationally
expected, in common cases; but GOD can do this as effectually, without a
miracle, as with, as will appear from what will presently be offered.

SHOULD GOD permit the wrath of man to do all that it designs, what havoc and
devastation, what mischief and wretchedness, would it spread through the world?
This world, at best, is a very turbulent scene; but it would be much more so,
did not providence lay restraints upon the lusts and passions of ill-designing
men, and prevent their going to such lengths in mischief, as they wish. It is
happy for the world, that man's power is not equal to his wrath; and that
those, who, instigated by an evil temper, form mischievous projects, are often
hindered from executing them; at least, to that extent, which they desire.

THERE are many ways, wherein GOD checks and restrains the wrath of man, and
defeats its pernicious devices, when, and so far as he pleases.

SOMETIMES he does this by raising a spirit of fear, whereby men are
discouraged from undertaking or prosecuting those mischievous enterpri^es,
which their wrath and corrupt lusts would otherwise prompt them to undertake
and pursue. As GOD has the hearts of all men in his hands, and turns them
whithersoever he will, as the rivers of water, so there is reason to believe
that, by secret influences, he does sometimes raise and sometimes depress the
natural spirits of men, for the promotion of his purposes of judgment or of
mercy. Every one who is acquainted with, and firmly believes the divine
philosophy of the scriptures, must be clear in this, that GOD can, and
frequently does, by immediate impressions on the mind, so effectually
dishearten and intimidate those, whose vindictive passions would lead them into
all manner of mischief and cruelty, as either to confine the operations of
their wrath to themselves, or to render it weak and impotent, faint and
irresolute, in its attempts against others. The tyrants of the earth are, no
doubt, often thus restrained* Faintness is sent into their hearts, and fear
takes hold on them, which serves as a barrier against that torrent of wrath,
which would otherwise spread destruction and desolation all around them. Again,

SOMETIMES GOD restrains men's wrath by interposing unthought-of accidents,
obstacles and difficulties, which entirely disconcert their measures and
overthrow their mischievous schemes and devices. The race is not to the swift,
says the royal preacher, nor the battle to the strong, neither yet bread to the
wise, nor yet riches to men of understanding, nor yet favor to men of skill;
but time and chance happens to them all: by which he doubtless means to teach
us, that there is a secret providence concerned in all human affairs, which
sometimes presents men with unexpected opportunities, or interposeth accidents,
which no human wisdom could foresee; which sometimes produces events contrary
to human probabilities, giving success to very unlikely means, and defeating
the swift, the strong, the learned, the industrious, and those that are best
versed in men and business, of their several ends, and designs. All nature is
at the beck of the great Creator, who, when he pleases, can employ any part
thereof, to disappoint the devices of the crafty, and carry the counsels of the
froward headlong. What we call second causes, are entirely dependent upon the
great first cause, to whom they owe all their force and energy; and who can,
and, no doubt, often does (either immediately by himself, or mediately by
subordinate agents) occasionally susspend, retard or quicken their influence,
to frustrate the most promising schemes of men, and thereby to humble their
pride, to teach them their dependence, and to promote his own most wise
purposes. Secret and hidden causes he often sets to work, whereby unforeseen
and unexpected events are produced, which overthrow the schemes of human pride,
ambition and revenge. By storms and pestilences, by disasters and misfortunes,
which no human skill could foresee, or power obviate, he frequently cohibits
the wrath of the mightiest potentates, and crushes the mischievous machinations
of his people's enemies into abortion.

FURTHER, GOD sometimes checks and restrains the wrath of men, by leaving them
to judicial infatuation, whereby they are led to adopt counsels and measures,
tending, in the natural course of things, to defeat their designs, and
overthrow their enterprises. When men are pushing forward their iniquitous
schemes with the greatest zeal and vehemence, and have the most flattering
prospects of success, they are sometimes, by an unaccountable imprudence, led
to reject the counsels most favorable to their designs, and to embrace those
that lead directly to disappointment. The story of Absalom, in the second book
of Samuel (not to mention again the case of Rehoboam) furnishes an instance of
this kind. Absalom raised a rebellion against his father David; but in
prosecuting his ambitious views, he was remarkably influenced to adopt
measures, calculated to defeat and disappoint him. The sage advice of
Ahithophel, a judicious and skilful counselor, though most favorable to his
designs, was turned into foolishness in his sight, and he was left to comply
with counsels of a different nature, which issued in the ruin both of his
wicked projects, and himself. This was the Lord's doing. And thus GOD sometimes
judicially hides wisdom from the wise, and leaves them to pursue such imprudent
methods, as directly tend to disappoint their hopes, and frustrate their most
promising schemes.

ONCE more, another way wherein GOD restrains the wrath of man, is, by rousing
those who suffer, or are likely to suffer by it, to stand in their own defense;
and inspiring them with courage and resolution, to oppose and resist, to the
utmost, all the mischievous efforts of the ambition, wrath and anger of those
proud aspiring mortals, who would, if possible, rob them of their natural
rights, and plunge them into a state of servility. And this is the most usual
method of Providence, for restraining and curbing the disorderly passions and
corrupt lusts of ambitious and revengeful men. Sometimes indeed GOD is pleased
to interpose in an extraordinary way, for the deliverance of his people from
the rage and wrath of their enemies; to take their controversy, as it were,
into his own hands; and to work salvation for them, by means, in which their
own agency is not at all concerned: but most commonly, it is by the right use,
of those means of preservation and safety, which he has put into their power,
that he defends and saves them. There is nothing more irrational than to
neglect such means, and depend upon miraculous protections. When GOD purposes
to restrain the wrath of his people's enemies, he usually rouses a spirit of
opposition, stirs them up to make a resolute resistance, and animates and
excites them to the most vigorous efforts for the maintenance of their rights.
And whenever a people are enabled to baffle and disappoint their enemies, and
defeat their attempts to gratify their ambition or revenge, they ought to
ascribe the glory to GOD, whose interposing providence has prospered their
endeavors, and crowned their enterprises with success.

AND now, my hearers, as the subject does naturally suggest such reflections as
are suitable to this Anniversary, you may very reasonably expect an application
of what has been said, adapted to the present occasion. This therefore will now
be attempted.

IN the rise and progress of the present war, we have seen both parts of our
text verified, in innumerable instances. The wrath of man has been made to
praise GOD, by producing events contrary to those, which it aimed at. The wrath
of man has also been restrained, defeated and confounded, and after all its
vaunting boasts, been obliged to own its impotence and weakness. And, in short,
though GOD has permitted the wrath of man to plunge us into great troubles and
distresses, as a just punishment for our manifold impieties and vices, yet he
has hitherto so managed and overruled it, so curbed and checked it, as to
afford the clearest evidence of his powerful providence, which presides over
the world, and governs all things.

THE pride, avarice and ambition of Great Britain, gave rise to the present
hostile contests. From this source originated those oppressive acts, which
first alarmed the freemen of America; and provoked them, after petitioning in
vain for redress, to form plans of opposition and resistance. This conduct of
America exasperated the British administration, and roused all their wrath
Transported with angry resentments, they proceeded from oppression to open war,
in order to frighten and compel us into a submission to those arbitrary and
despotic schemes, which they were determined, at all hazards, to carry into
execution. But those vindictive and sanguinary counsels and measures, which, in
the vehemence of their passions, they adopted, for this purpose, have, by the
providence of GOD, contrary to their expectations, involved them in the most
perplexing difficulties, by uniting thirteen provinces of America, in that
declaration of independence, which they now wish us to rescind.

I BELIEVE it will be obvious to every one, who will take a survey of the
violent and hostile proceedings of Great Britain, and of the measures she took
to intimidate these states, and awe them into unconditional submission, prior
to their declaration of independence, that every part of her conduct, was
calculated to produce this great event; having a direct tendency to plunge the
people of America, into a state of desperation, by cutting them off from every
chance of maintaining their liberties, in any other way, than by erecting
themselves into an independent nation, and opposing force with force. Now, when
we consider, that, before our breaking our connection with Great Britain, the
methods and measures used and pursued by her, in order to accomplish her
unrighteous designs against us, and promote her ambitious views, did all
uniformly tend to reduce us to the necessity of taking that step, does it not
seem, as if she had been left to judicial infatuation, and that her conduct can
best be accounted for, by saying, as in the case of the revolt of the ten
tribes from Rehoboam, The cause was from the Lord? This (as has been observed)
is expressly assigned, as the reason why Rehoboam hearkened not to the people,
but answered them roughly. And may we not, with equal propriety, assign this as
the reason, why the British king, instead of hearkening to the cries and
prayers of his loyal subjects in America, should either treat their complaints
and petitions with neglect, or answer them only with insult and additional
injuries, and send forth his fleets and armies, to awe them into silence, and
force them into servile submission? May we not reason thus; The cause was from
the Lord, therefore the king of Great Britain, judicially blinded to his own
interest, hearkened not to the prayers and petitions of the oppressed and
aggrieved people of America; but took such violent methods, in order to compel
them into slavish passive obedience, as reduced them to the disagreeable
necessity of a revolt and final separation? Had our petitions and prayers been
properly regarded, and moderate pacific measures pursued, we should have
entertained no thoughts of a revolt; for even after hostilities had commenced,
we were ardently desirous of continuing united with our mother country, if such
an union could have been preserved, without making a sacrifice of our
liberties. I am persuaded, we may safely appeal to that Being, who searches all
hearts, to justify us, when we declare, that it was far from our intention or
inclination to separate ourselves from Great Britain; and that we had it not
even in contemplation to set up for independency; but on the contrary,
earnestly wished to remain connected with her, until she had deprived us of all
hopes of preserving such a connection, upon any better terms than unconditional
submission. It was her refusing to grant us better terms, that united these
states, and formed the confederation, which has connected them together like a
band of brethren, and, of many members, made them one compacted and
well-cemented body. And that she should insist upon this, and, depending upon
her power to crush us, should reject and trample under foot all our petitions,
and come against us with hostile force, in order to establish an absolute
despotic dominion over us, argues that she was left to her own folly (as
Rehoboam was) to pursue measures contrary to her peace, and which, in the
natural course of things, tended to produce that revolution, which has
dismembered the British empire, and raised so great a part of it to a state of
independence.

AND as the wrath of Great Britain, under the overruling providence of GOD,
first occasioned this great revolution, so her wrath has hitherto been defeated
in all its powerful efforts to reduce us back to a state of dependence; which
can be ascribed to nothing but the interposition of a powerful Providence,
laying restraints upon her, and weakening her hands, so that she could not
perform her enterprises. For if we look back, and consider the strength of our
enemies, and our own weak condition, when the awful scenes of war first opened
upon us, we cannot but acknowledge it to be owing to the special interposing
power of the Supreme Disposer of all things, that we were not soon overcome,
but have been enabled to maintain our cause hitherto, in many severe conflicts,
through several bloody campaigns.

WHEN we consider how unprepared and unprovided we were for the contest, when
hostilities first commenced; that we were without money, without ammunition,
without magazines, without clothing for soldiers; that we had neither military
discipline nor any regular settled civil government; that we were destitute of
that assistance from foreign powers, which we have had since; and, in short,
that under the greatest disadvantages, being deficient in all military
preparations, we were forced into a war, with an enemy, well prepared and well
provided with all essentials for the conflict, having a numerous and
well-disciplined army, commanded by skillful and experienced officers, who had
been bred to arms; and a navy superior to any in Europe, which gave them the
empire of the seas, and rendered their resources almost inexhaustible; when we
consider these things, what reason have we to adopt the language of the
Psalmist, and say, If it had not been the Lord, who was on our side, our
enemies would have swallowed us up quick? Especially, when we consider further,
the peculiar hazards and difficulties we were subjected to, from internal
enemies, who under the pretext of neutrality, or the disguise of friendship,
were constantly plotting mischief against us, and doing all that they could,
with safety, to weaken our hands; to discourage and dishearten us; to obstruct
our operations; to perplex and entangle our affairs; and to aid and assist the
British forces. The principal advantages gained, at one time or another, by our
professed enemies, who have openly waged war against us, have been greatly
owing to assistances afforded them, by secret enemies among ourselves, who, had
not the mercy of GOD prevented, would, before now, have ruined their country.
We have therefore abundant reason to be thankful to the sovereign Ruler of the
world, not only that he has hitherto protected us against the open violence of
our avowed foes; but also that he has guarded us against the treacheries and
treasonable conspiracies, of false and disaffected persons, whom we have
harbored in our own bosoms; and defeated those hidden and mischievous
artifices, which they have used to work our destruction.

THE scene of war, in which we have been involved, has been chequered with an
alternate succession of favorable and unfavourable events. Sometimes we have
met with disappointments and defeats, when we had raised expectations of
success. At other times we have been prospered, even beyond our most sanguine
expectations. In several instances our enterprises have been crowned with
wonderful success, exceeding our most flattering hopes. And, on the whole, we
have great reason to adore the providence of GOD, who has hitherto remarkably
restrained the wrath of our enemies; mercifully defended and protected us; and
supported our righteous cause, by many signal interpositions.

To every attentive observer, it must be obvious, that the wrath of
Great Britain, so far as it has been permitted to exert itself, has contributed
to bring about and establish our independency. It has evidently been the
occasion of events, which have raised us to an honorable consideration among
the European powers, and induced some of them openly to espouse our cause, and
aid us by a friendly alliance. It is also worthy of observation, that the
wrath, which has been enkindled in American breasts, has been overruled for
the promotion of the same great ends. Great Britain first prepared fuel, and
then put fire to the combustibles, which she had prepared, for setting the
passions of America into a flame. And the wrath, which she has thus roused in
America, has been wisely managed by Providence, for checking and restraining
her rage and vengeance. Her conduct has not only been the occasion of stirring
up a noble spirit of liberty throughout America, and kindling into a blaze
every spark of virtuous patriotism, and true courage; but of firing the mind
with honest indignation and resentment; yea, of transporting the passions, in
some instances, among individuals, into criminal excesses. But even these
excesses of the passions, have, by Providence, been made to conspire with
better principles, and more laudable springs of action, to strengthen the
opposition to British tyranny, and check the career of British rage and cruelty.

FAR be it from me to justify any excesses of wrath and anger. I am no advocate
for outrages, even on the most provoking occasions. But I cannot but observe,
that, as on the one hand, it will not be denied, that the human passions have,
in some instances, among particular persons broken forth into a criminal excess
of riot; so, on the other, it cannot but be acknowledged, that there have been
many instances of a very culpable indifference and tameness of temper, which,
without any emotion, could behold the impending ruin of the country, or have
quietly submitted to concessions fatal to liberty.

WE are not to suppose, that either reason or religion requires the total
suppression of the passions. It is both rational, and a duty, to stir them up
into exercise, when suitable objects are presented to view. None of our
original passions, are in themselves vicious. They become vicious only by their
exorbitancy. It is the excess of them that is criminal. While they are tempered
with prudence and discretion, and kept within due bounds, they may be indulged
to advantage upon many occasions.

THOUGH rage, and inflamed wrath, are no essential properties of patriotism;
yet patriotism, without feeling or sensibility, is a mere name. The passionate
appearance of the same love of one's country, and of the same determined zeal
for promoting the honor and interest of it, will indeed be different, in
different constitutions. A patriot of a calm and dispassionate temper, though he
cannot but feel just resentment at the wrongs, and injuries done to his
country, and show a steady resolution to do all, that in him lies, to maintain
his country's cause, against all its enemies, will yet not show the same
vehement warmth, that will discover itself in a patriot, of a more sanguine and
fiery temper, nor be so liable to be betrayed, by a fierce zeal, into imprudent
and rash measures.

AND here let me observe, that to me it seems an argument of the wisdom of GOD,
that (as there are few comparatively possessed of virtuous principles; and as
even the best principles, without a stimulus from the passions, would remain
dormant and inactive; and as the generality are influenced by their passions
only, which need something to restrain and direct them, or to rouse them up,
when the public good calls for great and general exertions) Providence has so
ordered it, that there should be a diversity of tempers and constitutions among
men, to be both a spur and a check to one another; that the more warm and
vehement might give an active spring to the more cool and sluggish, and, on the
contrary, the more calm and moderate be a curb to the more sanguine and hasty;
and that the two extremes, meeting with those, who are more equally tempered
with due proportions of zeal and prudence, all might happily unite; and, by the
mutual collision of their different tempers and passions, be enabled to collect
their several powers, into one combined and vigorous effort, for carrying into
execution, every necessary enterprise, against a common enemy, and for the
promotion of the welfare and prosperity of society.

BUT whatever we may think of the ends of Providence, in ordering such a
diversity of tempers among men, this is certain, that GOD will so manage the
most disorderly, turbulent and boisterous passions, as to make them promotive
of the designs of his government, or lay such restraints upon them, that
instead of frustrating, they shall really subserve the purposes of his wisdom.
Of this we have had the clearest evidence, in a variety of instances in the
course of the present war; which affords substantial ground for a rational hope
and trust in GOD, for the future.

HAD the power of Great Britain been equal to her wrath, what a miserable and
wretched situation should we have been in, before now! From the rage and
vindictiveness, which she has discovered; from the threats which she has thrown
out; and from the barbarous cruelties which have marked her steps in the
prosecution of the present war (especially when she gained any advantages over
us) we may easily infer what would be our unhappy fate, should her wrath
prevail, at last, and force us to surrender at discretion. In this case, all
would be seizure and process, confiscation and imprisonment, blood and horror,
insolence and arbitrary punishment. For so it always has been, and always will
be, when what is called a rebellion is suppressed, and the supposed rebels
obliged to throw themselves unconditionally upon the mercy of their incensed
prince.

GREAT BRITAIN indeed, since our alliance with France, has made a show of
offering a redress of grievances, and of granting us even more than we asked
for, before our declaration of independence; on condition of our re-uniting
ourselves with her, in violation of our national faith and honor, which we have
solemnly plighted to our generous ally; but should we comply with this
condition, what security could we have of her lasting friendship? Philip, of
Spain, when he found that his arbitrary proceedings had thrown his subjects, in
the low countries, into a ferment and flame, and raised such an opposition to
his government, as he was unable immediately to suppress, was once prevailed
upon by the representations of the governess, the Duchess of Parma, to hearken
to their complaints and petitions, and grant a redress of grievances; in
consequence of which, things in general, soon returned to a toilerably quiet
and peaceable state. But notwithstanding this seeming compliance with the
desires of his subjects, Philip only meant to gain time, being determined, as
soon as circumstances should be more favorable, to prosecute his ambitious and
tyrannical schemes. Accordingly, in a little while, he commissioned the Duke of
Alva, at the head of a large army of veteran troops, to carry the same into the
most rigorous execution: This conduct of his, rekindled the flame, and revived
those commotions, which eventually cost Spain a great part of her low country
provinces. Should we, in contradiction to our solemn engagements to others,
return to our connection with Great Britain, upon the plan proposed by her
commissioners (who, by the way, are not empowered to ratify any thing) we might
soon, after the example of the low countries, be again obliged to separate from
her, and to fly to arms for our defense. And in this case she would have a
fairer chance of subjugating us, and we should be in the utmost danger of
falling a prey to her power and wrath, because, having violated our faith with
foreign powers, they would hardly be persuaded to trust us again, or to afford
us those supplies and succors, that we might stand in need of.

IT is doubtless the ardent desire of every one, now present, to see a speedy
and happy end to the war. But can any suppose, that a separate composition with
Great Britain, upon her terms, would restore public peace and tranquillity, and
close the scenes of war? Have we not rather reason to believe, that it would
oblige us immediately to engage in her quarrel with those, who have befriended
us in our distress, and assist her in avenging herself upon them, for the aid
which they afforded us? A separate peace with Great Britain, upon any other
plan, than that of equality and mutual independence, would plunge (...)
directly into a war with France and Spain, who would have reason to resent such
a flagrant violation of our national faith and honor. And probably it would
also arm many other European powers against us. We can therefore have no
hopeful prospect, of enjoying the blessings of peace, or of enjoying them long,
but upon the plan of independency.

THE appeal has been made to Heaven, and Heaven has hitherto supported us, and
restrained the wrath of our enemies. Trusting in GOD therefore, we should take
courage still to stand fast in the liberties, wherewith he has made us free,
without fondly desiring any dishonorable and dangerous compositions.

BUT though from the great things which GOD has done for us, we are encouraged
to hope, that his providence will, in due time, work complete salvation for us,
if we continue to exert ourselves, as becomes free men; yet no one can
certainly tell what will be the issue of the present contest, or how it will
terminate. The volumns of futurity are looked against human inspection; nor is
it possible to ascertain the event of any human enterprise or undertaking. Our
concern should be, to make the great Governor of futurity our friend, as we
desire the kind assistances of his propitious providence, to bring our enemies
to make peace with us, upon terms of honor, justice and equality.

AND here, let me observe, that nothing darkens our prospects more, or gives us
more reason to be fearful, as to the event of the present contest, than the
great and general prevalence of unrighteousness among us. He must have been
very unobserving, who does not know, that by means of unrighteousness, the
body-politic has been, and still is, laboring under a dangerous disease* the
whole head being sick and the whole heart faint, and there being but little
soundness, from the crown of the head to the sole of the foot.

THE goodness of our cause does not make success certain. A good cause often
suffers, and is sometimes lost, by means of the sin and folly of those, who are
engaged in it. This is a consideration, which ought to lie with weight on our
minds, at the present day, and engage us to put away the evil of our doings,
and keep ourselves from every wicked thing.

WHEN Solomon says, righteousness exalts a nation, he asserts no more, than
what the experience of all ages has found to be true. For righteousness not
only procures the smiles of a propitious Providence upon a people; but also
tends, in the natural course of things, to promote their prosperity; being
adapted to prevent dissentions and discords among them, to cement them together
in the firmest union, and, by preserving public and private credit, to enable
them to collect their force and strength, when the case requires, for repelling
an invading enemy, and defending themselves against all the hostile attempts of
aspiring ambition. The effects of unrighteousness are very different; for
unrighteousness not only provokes GOD to withold his blessings from a people;
but it also tends, in its own nature, to entangle and perplex their affairs,
and to render them weak, and unable to oppose any violent assaults of arbitrary
power, by creating among them internal strife and contention; by dividing them
into angry parties; by destroying mutual trust and confidence; and so rendering
it extremely difficult, and next to impossible, to unite them in measures,
necessary for their safety and defense against a common enemy, or the despotic
views of designing ambition.

WE have therefore reason to fear, if unrighteousness should continue to
abound, that the righteous Judge of the world, will cease to restrain the wrath
of our enemies, and, leaving us in the hands of our own folly, permit them to
execute the dreadful purposes of their furious resentments, as a just
punishment for our obstinate perseverance in our evil ways. But if we will put
away our unrighteousness, cease to do evil, and learn to do well, we shall have
grounds to hope, that the righteous Lord, who loves righteousness, will still
be our friend and patron, and enable us to maintain our cause, against the
utmost force of our enraged enemies, until they are brought to reason or ruin.
For, "To the righteous, GOD is near,
"And never will their cause forsake."


THOUGH GOD is pleased to employ the wrath of our enemies, as a rod of
correction, to punish us, for our sins; and may permit them to proceed to great
lengths, in the prosecution of their arbitrary and unrighteous schemes, in
order to teach us righteousness, and make us pious and virtuous; yet their
conduct is nevertheless odious and abominable in his sight, and will not (as we
have reason to believe) pass unpunished. We may therefore assure ourselves,
that when we leave our sins, and become an obedient people, GOD will bring to
naught all their mischievous designs, either by disposing them to peace, or by
leaving them to follow the lead of their own haughty temper, until they plunge
themselves into destruction. For GOD often turns the oppression of the
oppressor upon his own head, and causes him, in the end, to fall into the pit
which he dug for others. And a people, who have smarted under the cruel rod
of oppression, may rationally expect this, when they are suitably prepared for
salvation by repentance and reformation. For the most powerful and successful
oppressors, are only rods of GOD's school (like the proud Assyrian
beforementioned) and when he has answered the designs of his providence by
them, he usually lets loose his wrath upon them, and punishes them for their
arrogance, pride and mischievous ambition. The destruction which sometimes
falls upon such men, is finely described in the fifteenth chapter of the book
of Job, from the 31st verse to the end, which I will give you in the words of
an elegant modern version: "Woe to the man, who by oppression climbs,
"Drunk with successes, and secure in crimes*
"For bitter change shall come; untimely blast
"His boughs shall wither, and his fruit shall cast.
"As when the vine her half-grown berries showers,
"Or poisoned olive, her unfolding flowers.
"Know, all ye wicked, all ye venal crew,
"Your splendid tents the shulking bribe shall rue;
"A fire it kindles, and the flame supplies,
"'Till the gay scene a dismal desert lies.
"See now oppression (and its boasted gain)
"Conceived, and ushered into birth in vain;
"The flattering crime, which so much anguish bred,
"Turns all its plagues on its own parent's head."


BEFORE I conclude, let me apply myself, in a few words to the militia of this
town, who appear under arms, on this memorable occasion.

SIRS,

THE manner of your observing this day, in commemoration of the commencement of
the present war, the scene whereof, was first opened in this place, does you
honor, as it gives an evidence, at once, of your piety, and of your patriotism
and firm attachment to the cause of your country. With honest indignation we
recollect the day, when the storm of British vengeance, which had been long
gathering, first burst upon your heads, in the wanton massacre of several of
your brave fellow citizens and soldiers. The memory of those, who have
magnanimously jeoparded their lives, and shed their blood in their country's
cause, will ever be dear to us. We particularly retain an honorable remembrance
of those, who first fell a sacrifice to British wrath; and feel emotions of
sympathy toward their surviving relatives, who cannot but be sensibly affected
on this occasion. We would also join with you, in grateful acknowledgments to
GOD, who mercifully checked the wrath of our enemies in its first eruptions,
and caused it to recoil back on their own heads. We doubt not, but from the
warmth of honest resentment; from a love of liberty and of your country, you
will persevere to oppose and resist those insolent and haughty enemies, of
whose wanton cruelty, you have had too melancholy a specimen, to permit you to
expect much mercy at their hands, should they gain their point.

LET me now observe, that your appearing equipt in military armor, as soldiers
prepared for war, naturally leads to reflections on the pernicious influence of
those corrupt lusts of human nature, from whence come wars. They who would be
glad to live peaceably with all men, are often unhappily forced into
contention, and obliged to take arms, and engage in hazardous contests, in
order to defend their lives and liberties, against the evil designs of
unreasonable men, who when they suppose they have power and strength to
accomplish their purposes, scruple not to give unbounded scope to their pride,
covetousness and ambition; which passions are mortal enemies to the rights of
mankind, and the source of that slavery and cruel bondage, under which so many
of the nations of the earth groan at this day.

A CONSIDERATION of the pernicious influence and effects of these corrupt lusts
and passions should engage you and should engage us all, to mortify them in
ourselves. For where they prevail, they not only lead to a conduct prejudicial
to the peace and welfare of human society, but make men slaves in the worst
sense, how much soever they may hate the name.

WHILE therefore, you are engaged with a laudable zeal in the cause of civil
liberty, you will permit me to remind you, that there is another kind of
liberty of an higher and nobler nature, which it is of infinite importance to
every one to be possessed of; I mean that glorious internal liberty, which
consists in a freedom from the dominion of sin, and in the habit and practice
of all the virtues of a good life. This is that noble and exalted liberty of
the sons of God, of which our savior speaks, when he says, If the son of God
shall make you free, then shall ye be free indeed. And this, once gained, will
inspire you with the greatest magnanimity and fortitude, in the cause of
outward liberty. For the righteous are bold as a lion.

To conclude. Let us all, with that ardor and earnestness, which the importance
of the thing requires, labor after this glorious liberty of the sons of God;
that when we shall quit this tumultuous warring world, (having acted our parts
well in it) we may be admitted to those peaceful mansions, where, free from
strife and contention, and all the pernicious effects of ungoverned wrath and
ambition, we shall enjoy a blessed immortality, in the tranquil uninterrupted
possession of every felicity that our natures are capable of.

AMEN.

