Mr. CLARK's ELECTION SERMON, MAY 30, 1781.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY JOHN HANCOCK, Esquire; GOVERNOR; HIS HONOR
THOMAS CUSHING, Esquire; LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR; THE HONORABLE THE COUNCIL, AND THE
HONORABLE THE SENATE AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES, OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF
MASSACHUSETTS, MAY 30, 1781.

BEING THE FIRST DAY OF GENERAL ELECTION, AFTER THE COMMENCEMENT OF THE PRESENT
CONSTITUTION, AND INAUGURATION OF THE NEW GOVERNMENT.

BY JONAS CLARK, A. M.

PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN LEXINGTON.

N. B. Several passages omitted in the delivery of this Di^^^u^^e, are now
in^^^^^^.

BOSTON, ( Commonwealth of Massachusetts.)

PRINTED BY J. GILL IN C^^^^-STREET, (...) ^. E^ES (...)

Commonwealth of Massachusetts. In SENATE, May 30, 1781.
ORDERED, That Walter Spooner, Samuel Adams, and Charles Turner, Esquires, be
and hereby are appointed a Committee to wait upon the Rev. Mr. JONAS CLARK, and
return him the Thanks of the Senate for his Sermon delivered this Day before
his Excellency the Governor, the Council and the General Court, and to request
a Copy thereof for the Press.

Attest. JOHN AVERY, Sec'ry.

AN ELECTION SERMON.
PSALM XLVII. 8, 9. -- GOD sits upon the throne of his holiness: The Princes
of the people are gathered together, even the people of the GOD of Abraham; for
the Shields of the earth belong unto GOD: He is greatly exalted,
AT what time, or upon what occasion, the Psalm before us was composed, is
neither certain, nor easy, at this distance of time, to determine. -- "Many
have supposed it to have been penned, on occasion of bringing up the Ark to
Mount Zion." -- Others, "that it looks further, and is prophetic of the
ascension of the glorious Mediator, after he had finished his work on earth,
and the setting up his kingdom in the world."

FROM the sentiments it contains, it might also be considered as a Psalm
composed, and well adapted, for the congregation of Israel, when all the tribes
came to Hebron to receive David, and by their elders to make a league with him,
as their chief magistrate; and to establish him in the government. Vid. 2 Samuel
5. 1, 2, 3.


BUT, which, or whether either of these suppositions has any solid foundation,
must be left to the learned and judicious to determine. -- Be the primary
occasion, of this devout composition, what it may; it is beyond dispute, that
the subjects of it are interesting and important: -- Subjects well suited to
inspire the church and people of GOD, at all times, with a sense of his
government and their dependence, and of their indispensible obligations to
celebrate the glories of his perfections, herein displayed, as the ground of
their confidence and theme of their praise.

IN a word, it is an exhortation to the people of GOD, to praise the LORD, as "
The Great King over all the earth," who should subdue the people, their enemies
and oppressors under them, and the nations under their feet: And as that GOD,
who should choose their inheritance for them, and establish them in the quiet
possession and enjoyment of it.

AGREEABLY, in confirmation of this their confidence, it is said, in the text
-- That GOD sits upon the throne of his holiness: The Princes of the people
are gathered together, even the people of the GOD of Abraham; for the Shields
of the earth belong unto GOD: He is greatly exalted.

IN these words, we have a striking representation, -- a lively portrait of the
happy state of a people, or nation, in covenant with GOD, and favored with his
protection and smiles; of a people established in the enjoyment of the
blessings of a civil government, whose constitution is founded in principles of
liberty and equity, whose laws are administered with justice and righteousness,
and whose end is the glory of GOD, in the good of mankind. The Great GOD, as
the sovereign, the supreme ruler, sitting on the throne of his holiness, with
all the powers of government, originally and ultimately, vested in himself, and
exercised by him, agreeable to the eternal laws of righteousness and equity. --
The Princes of the people, their leaders, or deligates, are gathered together,
from all parts of the land, in the name of their constituents, and under the
direction and influence of their supreme ruler and sovereign, to consult the
public weal, to enact laws and to transact the great affairs of the nation and
of government. The people, the body of the nation, are there introduced, as The
people of the GOD of Abraham, in covenant with him, and devoutly acknowledging
their fealty to him, as their sovereign, and their dependence upon him and his
blessing, both for counsel and defense. And in fine, that nothing might be
wanting to complete the view, we have The Shields of the earth, representing
both the powers of government and the persons vested with them, exhibited, as
belonging to GOD, religiously devoted to his service and glory, or under his
direction and control, to carry to effect the purposes of his benevolence and
wisdom for the good of his people, or the designs of his justice and
righteousness in the government of the world. -- The whole is intended to show
-- 'That magistracy, or civil government, is of divine institution -- 'That the
end of it is the good of the governed -- and 'That, as all power and all
authority are derived from him, the glory of all should redound to his name; to
the end, that GOD, who sits on the throne might be greatly exalted.

THAT GOD, who created and preserves, of right, does govern the world, is a
truth, which the light of nature teaches, which revelation confirms, and a
truth, which the common sense of mankind in all ages, concurs to establish.

THAT the power, authority and sovereignty of GOD are absolute and
uncontrollable is a truth justly deducible from the preceding, and equally
indisputable.

THE sacred scriptures are far from being silent, or doubtful, upon a subject
so fundamental, so important. We frequently find all the powers of moral
government, in the highest sense, solemnly assumed by GOD, or devoutly ascribed
unto him, in the divine oracles. Hence GOD is introduced by the holy prophet,
as saying, "I am the LORD, and there is none else; there is no GOD besides me.
I form the light and create darkness: I make peace and create evil: I the LORD
do all these things." Isai. 45 5. 7.
"I will work, and who shall let it?" Ibid. 43, 13
-- And to show the vanity of oppugnation to his government or authority, it is
added, -- "Let the potsherd strive with the potsherds of the earth: But woe to
him that striveth with his maker." Ibid. 45 9.


AND what GOD has thus justly assumed, is devoutly ascribed to him by his
saints and people; and frequently mentioned as the ground of their confidence,
as well as the reason of their submission. -- At all times, yea, even in times
of perplexity and darkness, it was the language of GOD's people -- "The LORD
reigns, let the earth rejoice" Psalm. 97. 1.
-- "The LORD is our judge, the LORD is our lawgiver, the LORD is our king; He
will save us." Isai.
Holy David observes, that "the kingdom is the LORD's, and he is governor among
the nations." Psalm. 22. 28.
and to add no more, it is said -- That "The LORD sits King forever:" Psalm.
29, 10.
And, that "His Kingdom rules over all." 103, 19.


IN this light considered, the Deity is to be acknowledged, as that GOD, whose
power and authority are supreme, universal and uncontrollable.

IT is not, however, authority or power alone, that forms the character, or
gives an idea of the great moral governor of the universe; but this power, and
this authority, as tempered with wisdom, goodness, justice, truth,
faithfulness, and other moral perfections necessary to a government founded in
equity, exercised in righteousness, glorious to himself and a blessing to his
creatures.

IT would have been easy to an infinite being, to have carried to effect the
purposes of his government, by the influences of his spirit, or the word of his
power; but, for wise reasons, the supreme Ruler ^ath been pleased to employ
angels and men, a^ ministers in his kingdom; and to render even second causes
subservient to the great designs of his wisdom, justice and goodness, in the
government of the world.

FOR the glory of GOD, and the preservation of order and communication of
happiness, It is both natural and rational to suppose, that government subsists
among intelligent beings, of whatever rank, or degree in creation.

THIS conjecture is the more probable, with regard to the heavenly hosts, and
those bright intelligencies, who inhabit the celestial abodes, and are favored
with the nearest approaches unto GOD, from the account the sacred oracles have
given; of the various names, orders and degrees subsisting among them; as
Angels, Archangels, Thrones, Dominions, Principalities and Powers. Col. 1. 16.


SOMETHING of this kind, also, would, undoubtedly, have been advantageous, if
not necessary, to have perfected the felicity of mankind, had they continued in
a state of innocence and rectitude: And for the order, harmony and happiness of
society and the world, it is reasonable to suppose, that rule and government
would have taken place among men, however virtuous, benevolent, or just.

THE still greater importance of such an institution to the peace, liberty,
safety and happiness of individuals, of society and the world of mankind, since
sin, lust, passion, imperfection and every evil work have been introduced,
needs neither time to consider, nor arguments to prove.

WERE there no civil government, laws, magistracy, nor Shields of the earth,
for the preservation of peace, the guard of liberty, the protection of property
and the defense of life, it is easy to see, and, without a spirit of prophesy,
to foretell, what the event must be: -- that anarchy, confusion, blood and
slaughter, waste and destruction, would soon take place in the earth. -- The
weak would be devoured by the strong, the innocent, like righteous Abel, would
become an easy prey to the vicious, abandoned and ambitious: -- and the longest
sword must quickly determine the fate of mankind.

HENCE it appears, I had almost said, to a demonstration, that, under GOD, the
supreme ruler, this wise institution of civil government, this richest of
temporal blessings to mankind, takes its rise from Necessity.

IT is true, reason teaches the propriety, convenience points out the
advantages, and all the social affections concur to urge the importance of
civil government. But however engaging or interesting these arguments might
appear, to the wise, the benevolent, or judicious, they would be, at best, but
a feeble support to the peace and order of society, -- would never have availed
to establish government, over the lawless lusts of vicious, aspiring, or
blood-thirsty men. -- It is Necessity, Necessity alone, which combines men in
society, and gives rise to civil government. And had not mankind been
effectually convinced of this necessity, and taught to realize that there was
no living without it, it is very much a doubt, whether ever such an institution
would have taken place in the world.

THIS Necessity, in a great measure at least, is founded in and takes rise from
the lusts, the corruptions and vices of mankind.

IT IS not indeed pretended, that any one man, or any number of men, have any
natural right of superiority, or inherent claim of dominion, or governmental
authority over any other man, or body of men. -- All men, by nature, are free,
equal and independent, in this matter. It is in compact -- in compact alone,
that all just government is founded.

THE first steps, in entering into society and toward the establishment of
civil government among a people, is the forming, agreeing to, and ratifying an
original compact, for the regulation of the State, describing and determining
the mode, departments and powers of government, and the rights, privileges and
duties of the subjects.

THIS should be done by the whole body of the people; or by princes, leaders,
or delegates, by their choice, appointment, or consent.

THIS right in the people, whether emerging from a state of nature, or the yoke
of oppression, is an unalienable right -- a right which cannot be given up by a
people, even though ever so much inclined to sell or sacrifice it. -- Yea,
should a people be so lost to themselves, as, upon any consideration, to give
it up, it may justly be re-claimed, at least by the next generation, who cannot
be supposed to be deprived of their birthright, because their progenitors,
like Esau, despised and parted with theirs.

WHILE the social compact subsists, the whole state, and all its members, are
bound by it: -- a sacred regard ought to be paid to it. No man, order, or body
of men, in the state, have any right, power, or authority, to alter, change, or
violate the social compact. Nor can any change, alteration, or amendment, be
lawfully introduced, but by common consent. Any and every attempt of this kind,
endangers the whole.

IT remains, however, with the community, state, or nation, as a public,
political body, at any time, at pleasure, to change, alter, or even totally
dissolve the constitution, and return to a state of nature, or to form anew, as
to them shall seem meet.

THESE principles admitted, it is evident (...) no man, or body of men, however
wise, great or good; -- no state, nation, or power on earth, has any right to
make or impose a constitution of government upon another state or nation: Such
a constitution, however free, is a mark of dependence, a badge of slavery, the
most distant thought of which the high spirit of a free people would justly
despise.

EQUALITY and INDEPENDENCE are the just claim, the indefeasible birthright of
men: -- In a state of nature, as individuals; in society, as states or nations.
-- Nothing short of these ever did, or ever will satisfy a man or a people,
truly free, truly brave.

TRUE it is, a conquered nation is obliged to submit to the terms, the laws,
the conqueror is pleased to impose: But this being matter of compulsion and not
of choice, alters not the right. The claim to liberty and independence remains
the same. When opportunity offers, and power is attained, it is, beyond
dispute, the duty, as well as right, of such a people, of such a nation, to
assert their native liberty, to shake off the tyrant's yoke, to maintain their
equality and independence among the nations; and either resume their former, or
establish a new constitution of government, as they shall judge best.

UPON the whole, this is a right, the violation or infringement of which, upon
any consideration whatever, no man can justify upon the principles of reason,
the laws of nature, or rules of equity. -- Even GOD himself, the supreme ruler
of the world, whose government is absolute and uncontrollable, has ever paid a
sacred attention to this important right; has ever patronised this interesting
claim in the sons of men.

THE only constitution of civil government that can plead its origin, as
immediately from heaven, is, The Theocracy of the Hebrews. But even this form
of government, though dictated by infinite wisdom, and wrote with the finger of
GOD, was laid before his people for their consideration, and ratified,
introduced and established by their common consent.

WHAT form of government will answer the best purposes to society, and most
effectually display the glory of the supreme Ruler, in the good of mankind, is
a question truly delicate and important; and a question, which, in the hand of
a masterly politician, might admit of a discussion both interesting and
entertaining. But as neither time, nor capacity, will permit me to enter
largely into so high and critical a subject; it shall suffice to observe, --

THAT a little acquaintance with the world and the history of mankind, in the
several ages past, will clearly decide, that no one constitution, or form of
civil government, can be supposed to be equally adopted to answer the best
purposes of such an institution, in every society, nation or state.

THAT in the rise and progress of society, different modes of government have
been adopted and introduced, at different stages and successive periods, cannot
be doubted. -- And whether there has not been, in many instances, at least, a
gradation in the modes of government, keeping pace with the progress of
society, in the several ages of the world, similar to that gradation, which is
easily observed in the several stages and periods of human life; is a question,
with all deference, submitted to the candor and judgment of this respectable
assembly.

AT first sight, indeed, this circumstance may not have been observed; nor can
it be said to have been the case, without many exceptions. But, in an attentive
review of the history of mankind, have we not seen, in various instances, a
people emerging from a state of nature, and perhaps obscurity, with all the
life, vigor, heat and zeal, as well as undisguised simplicity of youth,
entering into society; and their pulse beating high for liberty, forming the
social compact upon principles of freedom, and establishing a constitution
purely popular -- A form of civil government, in which every man considers
himself a part of the authority, having a right to give his voice upon every
law, measure, or public act of the state?

IN a succeeding stage, have we not seen a people, perhaps the same, by gradual
alterations and improvements, or by some thorough reform or revolution, like
man arrived at mature age, for wisdom, firmness and strength, establishing true
liberty and a settled civil government, upon the more permanent Ba^^s of a FREE
COMMONWEALTH? And under this happy form, flourishing for ages, and in the
unmolested enjoyment of the sweets of freedom and the blessings of government,
rising to the height of strength and dignity, prosperity and glory?

MOREOVER, Have we not seen, at some distant period, this same society, state
or nation, like man passed the meridian of life, and beginning to feel the
infirmities of age approaching, by insinuating corruptions, by the influence of
parties, the malevolence of factions, and frequent disorders, warned of its
danger, and reduced to the necessity of strengthening the bands of society, and
the powers of government, by a monarchial constitution; and putting the reins
into the hands of a sovereign, with certain limitations, to guard, as much as
may be, the liberty of the subject and freedom of the state?

IN fine; -- Have we not seen, in the closing period, the same society, state,
or nation, like man, in the decline of life, bowed with the infirmities of age
and time, the constitution broken; the spirit of virtue, wisdom, liberty and
firmness gone; the political body, filled with vicious humors, attacked by
painful diseases, racked with malignant disorders, which surpass the political
physician's skill to heal or remedy? In a word, convulsed to the very
foundations, by internal oppressions and violences, by public tumults and
commotions; and divided and rent by the furious factions of wicked, designing,
artful and ambitious men, tending to and ending in bloodshed, slaughter and
civil wars, which nothing but the hand and sword of absolute power could
restrain, quiet or control -- and thus prepared to be an easy prey to the
daring tyrant, whose hand could seize, whose sword could secure it!!

IT is not, indeed, pretended, that this has been statedly or literally the
case, with nations that have entered into society, and established civil
government in the world. -- But whether, in the rise and progress of society,
and the modes of government which have been adopted by mankind, something of
this kind has not appeared, in various instances? And whether this, or some
similar gradation in the constitutions of government, at the several periods
and stages of society, are not natural and necessary, rational and just; and,
upon the whole, for the best, -- is humbly submitted to the learned, the wise
and judicious to consider.

CERTAIN it is, that as different societies and states may require different
modes of government; so the same societies or nations may require different
constitutions, at distinct and distant periods and stages of their existence.

WHEN Brutus the Elder greatly dared to attempt a radical revolution, from an
arbitrary to a free government, by the expulsion of the Tarquins, and the
establishment of a commonwealth at Rome; the virtue of his fellow-citizens,
seconded and supported him: And the glorious plan was carried to effect to the
inexpressible joy of every friend to liberty, to his country and the rights of
mankind. -- But when, from the same patriotic principles, Brutus the Younger,
by the death of Julius Caesar, several ages afterward, nobly attempted the
deliverance of his country from the shackles of tyranny, and the oppressor's
yoke; and to re-establish a free government; the virtue of his fellow-citizens
failed him; and Rome was enslaved, never -- never to enjoy the blessings of
liberty or a free government more! -- And this was her choice! -- otherwise she
would have roused, seconded and supported the arms and attempts of so faithful
a friend and so valiant an hero, in the glorious cause of freedom and his
country.

UPON the whole, the propriety or impropriety of this or that constitution or
mode of government, for this people or another, depends upon a variety of
circumstances; such as character, situation, manners, customs, trade,
connections, etc. -- of which the people, are, or, most certainly, ought to be
the best, if not the only competent judges. -- And happy is that people, who,
having the opportunity, have wisdom to discern and virtue to pursue their true
interest, in a matter of so interesting a nature, and such lasting importance.

MYSTERIES in government, secrets of state, -- those Arcana Imperii, by which
the artful and ambitious have inslaved the greater part of mankind, are totally
abhorrent to all principles of liberty, and naturally tend to sap the
foundations of civil government, in a free commonwealth.

A people have an unalienable right to know the constitution they enjoy, the
government they are under, the laws they are subject to, and what is justly
expected and required of them as subjects.

NEXT to a good constitution, therefore, the laws of the land are the
inheritance of the people. -- All laws should bear a resemblance and carry the
features, of the constitution; being deduced from its principles and founded in
its maxims. And, if I may be allowed the expression, the laws should flow from
the constitution, as the streams from fountain, and even grow out of it, as the
tree from the root, or the branches from the stock.

IT is also necessary to the well-being of society, that laws be adapted to the
state and necessities of a people, and to the circumstances and exigencies of
the community.

IT is of no small importance to the liberty of the subject, as well as the
support of governmental authority, in a free commonwealth, that laws be as few
in number, and as plain, concise and expressive, in their form, as possible.

IT has been often said, 'The more laws, the less government.' -- The
institutions of Lycurgus, the great founder of civil government in Sparta, and
the laws of Solon, the wise lawgiver of the Athenians, under the happy
influence of which those states, from small beginnings, rose to the height of
strength and glory, were few, plain, concise and expressive.

WHEN laws become numerous, or voluminous, it indicates the decline of virtue,
the weakness of government and increase of vice. -- For laws, taking life from
necessity, hold up to view the vices, or crimes, they are intended to suppress,
as the reason of their existence. -- Several ages passed, in the republic of
Rome, before any law existed for the punishment of a Parricide; evidently
taking for granted, either, that this crime had never been thought of, or that
it was of so atrocious a nature, that no Roman could be so debased as even to
commit it.

I only add, that to render laws effectual, to the purposes of their existence,
it has ever been the care of the wisest legislators, especially in free
states, to have such penalties annexed as are, not only apportioned to the
malignity, but, as near as possible, expressive of the nature, of the crimes
they are intended to punish, or suppress. Whether the multiplying sanguinary
laws and capital punishments, in a state, can be justified upon the principles
of equity, or even sound policy, is a question not unworthy the attention of
wise legislators. -- And whether punishing certain offenders, with loss of
liberty, and hard labor, at the (...), or elsewhere, in some places of public
re^or^, where they might be held up to view, as spectacles of justice in
terrorem for a certain term of years, or for life, according to the nature of
their crimes, would not answer the ends of government and the purposes of civil
society, better than even an ign^minious death; (...) submitted.


BUT laws, however good in themselves, or wisely adapted to the state and
necessities of a people, can be of but little advantage, unless duly observed
and carried to effect. Hence the necessity of appointing certain persons to be
rulers, of investing them with power and clothing them with authority, to
administer government, and carry the laws into execution.

CIVIL government, duly established and organized, is fitly compared to a
Shield, as it is instituted for the defense and protection of the subjects and
the state. And hence rulers and magistrates, being vested and entrusted with
the powers of government, are, with great propriety termed Shields of the
earth, in the words of our text. -- And as the powers of government give
existence to the ruler, to the magistrate: So it is with rulers and magistrates
to give life to the constitution and energy to the laws, by a faithful
admistration.

GOOD and faithful rulers are raised above their brethren, to places of honor,
trust and authority, not for themselves, but for the people, and the good of
society. They are entrusted with several powers of government, that individuals
may be protected and defended in their life, liberty, property and rights --
that the internal peace and order of society might be preserved; and that the
external defense, of the whole, against the encroachments, violence, assaults,
or invasions of enemies, or oppressors, might effectually be provided for.

IN this way, wise and faithful rulers are Shields to the state, and Shields of
the earth; as by this happy institution, under their administration, the wisdom
and strength of the whole state, may, at any time, be collected in defense of
the public, or of any part of the community, as occasion may require. And thus
every member is engaged for the peace, safety and defense of the state; and the
whole for the peace, safety and protection of every member: For these
obligations are mutual, and equally sacred and binding.

IN this light considered, rulers, by accepting a seat or an office in
government, are fitly said to pledge themselves, their faith and sacred honor,
and that in the most solemn manner, to the people for their fidelity: and to
them are they accountable.

BUT there is another argument, of yet higher importance, suggested in our
text, which demands the attention of rulers of whatever station; and may not be
passed over in silence.

IT is said, in the words before us, -- the Shields of the earth belong unto
GOD.

CIVIL government, as has been said, is of divine institution. GOD, as
Supreme, sits on the throne of his holiness. All power, rule, or authority
is derived from GOD. In the government of society, states and nations, men are
employed to carry his purposes of wisdom and goodness to effect. And hence
civil rulers are fitly styled -- "the ministers of GOD." -- R.m. 13, 4.
And in the languague of the text, it may be said, they belong unto GOD, in a
peculiar manner, and in various respects.

IT IS GOD, by his spirit and providence, who qualifies, raises up and calls
them forth to public view, in places of honor, trust and importance, in the
various departments of government. -- Men indeed, may act freely in all their
elections and appointments. -- But after all, a divine agency attends them: --
An all-superintending providence is religiously to be acknowledged. -- "the
lot" says the wise man -- "the lot is cast into the lap: But the whole
disposing thereof, is of the LORD." Prove. 16, 33.
And in terms yet more nervous and expressive, the Psalmist tells us, that
"promotion comes neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from the south:
But GOD is the judge. He puts down one, and sets up another." ^^al. 75, 6.


CIVIL rulers belong unto GOD, as it is his power with which they are vested,
in his name that they act, and by his authority that they administer government
and discharge the duties of their several offices and departments, whether as
supreme or subordinate.

CIVIL rulers belong unto GOD, as he has explicitly directed them upon what
principles, in what manner, and with what views they are to act in office and
administer government. -- That they are to fear GOD -- hate covetousness --
shake their hands from bribes -- to Judge righteously -- to be no respectors of
persons in judgment -- not to be afraid of the face of man, but always to
realize, that the judgment it GOD's. Deuteronomy. 1. 17. etc.


CIVIL rulers, the Shields of the earth, belong unto the LORD, as the end of
their administration is the glory of GOD, and that he might be greatly exalted,
in the good of mankind. -- Hence the apostle -- He is the minister of GOD to
thee for good. Romans 13. 4.


IN fine; civil rulers, the Shields of the earth, belong unto GOD, as they are
under his immediate inspection, as they are accountable to him for the whole of
their conduct, in this character, and as their reward is with him, "GOD
stands," says the psalmist "in the congregation of the mighty: He judges
among the GODS." Psalm. 10. 1.


DEEPLY penetrated with a sense of the importance of these considerations, a
good ruler has the most engaging, as well as awakening, motives, to a faithful
discharge of duty, and the most substantial arguments to support him, under the
weight and care of government.

IT is, indeed, readily admitted, that rulers, in devoting the^^ ^ime, talents
and capacities to the service of the public, have a just claim to respect and
support; and, in an upright discharge of their trust, they have a right, not
only to a pecuniary reward, in proportion to the dignity of their stations, and
importance of their services; but also to the grateful acceptance and cheerful
approbation of an obliged people. And it is very happy indeed, for both rulers
and people, when it may be truly said of persons in authority, as of Mordecai,
of old -- that "they are great among their fellow citizens, and accepted of the
multitude of their brethren, seeking the wealth of their people, and speaking
peace to all their seed." E^^^. 10, ^.


BUT should faithful rulers fail of so just, as well as pleasing, a return, as
has sometimes been the case, they are not without support, encouragement, or
reward.

THE fear of GOD, the sentiments of religion, the approbation of their own
minds, the acceptance of their judge and the rewards of his kingdom, are
sufficient to support them under every weight, and to excite them to fidelity
and perseverance, under every discouragement. -- Neither the frowns of the
great, nor the flatteries of the multitude; nor yet, the more pleasing charms
of future promotion, will ever be permitted to influence the measures, or
direct the conduct of the faithful ruler, acting under the influence of those
exalted sentiments, which religion inspires. But, realizing what he owes to
GOD, and what his country may justly require, he is faithful to the one, and
true to the other, even though the Ostracism "The Ostracism makes a great
figure in all the Greek history, and occurs frequently in that of the
Athenians," among whom it is generally supposed to have had its rise. -- This
peculiar law was originally designed, as a guard to liberty; though sometimes
abused, to the purposes of licentiousness and faction. "By this law men,
eminent to such a degree, as to threaten the State with danger, were banished
for ten years -- The method in which they proceeded to inflict the Ostracism
was this: Every citizen took a piece of broken pot or shell, on which having
wrote the name of the person he would have banished, he carried it to a certain
place of the forum, which was enclosed with rails; then the magistrates began
to count the number of the shells a for if they were less than six thousand,
the* vote did not take place; but if they surpassed that number, they laid
every name apart, and the man whose name was found on the greatest number of
shells was of course exiled for ten years."

This law speaks a people jealous of their liberty to an extreme. -- For,
however well intended; yet, through the craft of rivals in power, or the
insidiousness of ^^bitious and popular men, this punishment sometimes fell upon
the worthiest characters in the state. Aris^ides, by the wisdom of his
councils, the firmness of his courage and the inflexibility of his integrity,
at home, abroad, in peace and war, had proved himself an illustrious patriot,
acquired the surname of the just and obtained the character of the most worthy
and virtuous of the Athenians -- But these very virtues and this high
reputation, were artfully improved, by his rival Themistocles, as arguments
against him, and to prove him a man dangerous to the state. "It may form
strange (say the writers of the universal history) that Themistocles could
raise the popular rese^^^ent against a man amiable from peaceable virtues, yet
he reflected it by c^usi^g it to be whispered (...), Aristides having assumed
the name of just, and acting frequently as an umpire between contending
parties, had insensibly erected a monarchy, though without pomp or guards. --
On a sudden, and when it was least expected, citizens and countrymen flocked to
the forum and demanded the ostracism. -- When the magistrates signified to him,
tha^ the ostracism fell upon him, he retired modestly out of the forum, and as
he went out, he lifted up his eyes to heaven, and said, I beseech the Gods,
that the Athenians may never see that day, which shall force them to remember
Aristides!" -- vid. universal Hist. vol. 6. p. 377. 378, etc.
What an exalted spirit! What heroic sentiments! What a divine example! -- This
is the good ruler -- the true Patriot -- neither the ingratitude of his fellow
citizens, nor the unjust severity of his own cruel (...) could remove his love
from his country, or (...) his prayers for the blessing of heaven upon an
ungrateful people, who, for his faithful services, had just excluded him the
rights of society, and drove him into banishment.


of the Athenians should be his let, and the fate of the noble Pericles his
reward. Pericles, after many and eminent services rendered to the state, in the
course of a long and fath^ul administration, was unjustly, as well as
injudiciously, dismissed, disgraced and fined by the Athenians; and this at a
time when his presence, council, and direction were more needed than ever.
Ibid. p. 445.


CONSCIOUS integrity is a solid support. -- A support, which the world can
neither give nor take away. -- Like Cato, the virtuous roman Senator, "to have
done his duty," -- to have approved himself to that GOD, who sits on the
throne of his holiness, is more to the good ruler, the true Patriot, than the
approbation or applause of united worlds. With a serenity of mind, which no
words can express, such a ruler most cheerfully leaves it with heaven to
estimate his fidelity and apportion the reward. His only request is that of
pious Nehemiah, the faithful governor of Judea, -- "Think upon me, O my GOD,
for good, according to all that I have done for this people." Neh. 5. 19.


ANOTHER thing necessary to the ends of civil government, and to render it a
blessing to subjects and a Shield to the state, is the concurrence of the
people, with their rulers, in their faithful endeavors and unremitting
exertions, for internal peace and external defense.

A sacred regard to the constitution, a cheerful obedience to the laws and a
reverend submission to the authority of those who are vested with the powers of
government, are as much the duty of subjects, even in free states, as it is of
rulers to be faithful to the trust reposed in them by the people. The
obligations are mutually binding, equally indispensible, and equally necessary
to the liberty, safety, prosperity and happiness of society.

THE best constitution, the wisest laws, and the most faithful rulers are all
in vain to a perverse, restless, factious, remiss or disobedient people.

IF a people violate the constitution, trample under foot the laws, cast
contempt on authority and despise government; or fail, when lawfully required,
to make those exertions for defense, which the exigencies of the state may
demand; they must thank themselves, and not their rulers, for that ruin which
threatens and will most certainly overtake them. In the language of the
prophet, it may justly be said to such a people, -- "thine own wickedness shall
correct thee, and thy backslidings shall reprove thee." Jer. 2. 19.


THE apostle Paul observes, "that the powers that be, are ordained of GOD": And
justly considers civil government as an ordinance of GOD. And that rulers are
"the ministers of GOD", to a people, "for good." Vid. Romans 13. begin.
From hence he concludes, that a people should acknowledge their authority and
yield an obedient subjection: -- And expressly says, that they must needs be
subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. Ibid. ver. 5.


THE subjection here injoined is not absolute, or that passive obedience and
non-resistance, so absurdly preached up, in the darker ages of the world: But
that obedience and subjection to good and faithful rulers, which the social
compact and the laws of the land require. And without this, government is at an
end.

IF rulers are not seconded and supported by the people, in the exercise of
their authority, in the execution of the laws and the administration of
government, their best attempts, their most upright endeavors will never avail
to the purposes intended by such an institution.

IT is with the people to add life to the constitution, energy to the laws, and
dignity as well as strength to government: And that, both for internal peace,
order and freedom, and external defense, against all who openly oppose, assault
or invade the state.

IN a word, as by the social compact, the whole is engaged for the protection
and defense of the life, liberty and property of each individual; so each
individual owes all that he has, even life itself, to the support, protection
and defense of the whole, when the exigencies of the state require it. And no
man, whether in authority or subordination, can justly excuse himself from any
duty, service or exertions, in peace or war, that may be necessary for the
public peace, liberty, safety or defense, when lawfully and constitutionally
called thereto.

AS in the body natural, all the parts and members are necessary; and in their
places severally concur to the health, strength and beauty of the whole: So in
the body politic, a well regulated state, a similar adjustment takes place. --
And as all parts and members are necessary: So in their place and use, they all
concur to the health, safety and happiness of society; and to the beauty,
strength, glory and defense of the state.

WHEN the parts are disadjusted, the body is out of health, and the
constitution in danger -- So in the body politic, if the parts are disadjusted,
its health will be marred, its strength impaired and its constitution
endangered Thus when the legislative assumes and exercises the powers, by
constitution, vested in the executive department; the executive, those of the
judicial; or the judicial, th^se of the legislative; or either of them: Then
there is an evident disadjustment of the parts, in the body politic, which
tends to confusion in society, jumble in government, danger to the constitution
and destruction to the commonwealth. As far as human wisdom and foresight could
avail, to prevent any thing of this kind, the people of this State have assumed
and declared it, as one of their important rights; that in the government of
this Commonwealth, the legislative department shall never exercise the
executive and judicial powers, or either of them: The executive shall never
exercise the legislative and judicial powers, or either of them; The judicial
shall never exercise the legislative and executive powers, or either of them:
To the end, it may be a government of LAWS, and not of MEN. Great attention was
paid to this inestimable right. in settling the departments and adjusting the
powers of government, by those who assisted in framing our New constitution. --
How far they succeeded in so difficult a work and so critical an attempt, the
public will judge, and time and experience more fully discover -- At present,
however, it must be allowed, that the prospect before us is not unpromising.


IT is of the highest importance to the well being of society; that every man,
that all the members should know their place, and the duties of their station,
in the Commonwealth, whether in authority, or subordination: And every thing
that tends to an alteration, or abridgment, of the powers of government, on the
one hand, or of the rights of the people, on the other, should awaken the
attention of both rulers and people, and put all upon their guard.

FOR instance: The compromise of individuals, the plans of a junto, the schemes
of a faction, or the intrigues of a court for the disposal of offices or the
obtaining elections, have a threatening aspect on the liberties of the people,
the powers of government and the constitution itself. Julius Caesar would
never, perhaps, have had it in his power, to have totally subverted the
republic of Rome, usurped the government and seated himself on the imperial
throne, had not his way thereto been paved and prepared, by the private compact
and artful compromise between Pomper the Great, Crassus and himself, which
formed the first triumvirate, that appeared in that great Commonwealth. Pompey
and Caesar were not yet at open enmity, nor professed rivals; but the former
having taken various steps, which clearly indicated his ambitious views; the
latter could not content himself with any thing short of the same supreme power
to which his rival aspired. To accomplish the purpose of this ambition, Caesar
considered the consulship as an essential step. In order to his advancement to
the consulship, as well as to effect his ultimate designs, Caesar found it
necessary to avail himself of the influence not only of Crassus his rich and
powerful friend, but also of Pompey his rival; and to serve himself of both:
And this gave rise to the artful compromise we have mentioned. In this
remarkable compact, Pompey and Crassus, as well as Caesar, had undoubtedly
their views: But to adopt the words of celebrated historians, Caesar's
management, upon this occasion, was a masterpiece of policy, and the foundation
of his future grandeur. The two citizens, who at this time made the greatest
figure in the republic, without dispute, were Pompey and Crassus: but these two
powerful citizens were declared enemies, and, all things considered, much upon
a level. As they both had great interest, Caesar plainly saw, that he could
never obtain the consulship without gaining one or other of them to his cause;
but the difficulty was, which to choose. If he closed with Pompey, he would
meet with a strong opposition from Crassus's friends; and if he joined Crassus,
he was sure to have all Pompey's party against him. He therefore undertook to
reconcile the two rivals and by proposing to them a triumvirate, in which
should be lodged all the authority of the senate and people, he prevailed upon
them to make up their differences, and enter into a strict friendship with each
other. In order to make then confederacy the more indissoluble, they solemnly
bound themselves, by mutual oaths and promises, to assist each other, and to
suffer nothing to be undertake^ or executed without the unanimous consent of
all three.

Thus was the first triumvirate formed, by which Rome became a prey to three
men, who, by the interest of their united parties, arbitrarily disposed of all
the dignities and employments in the commonwealth. The public were long
strangers to the mysteries of this new cabal. Nothing more appeared to the
senate than the reconciliation of Pompey and Crassus; and Caesar was
congratulated by all ranks of men for having brought it about, Cato alone
foresaw the evil consequences of this new alliance, and exclaimed against it,
saying. That Rome had lost her liberty: but nobody hearkened to him 'till it
was too late to follow his prudent counsel. This association subsisted to the
death of Crassus, and was followed by the entire subversion of the republican
state. Vid. Univers. Hist. Vol. 13. p. 150. 151.




IN all such cases, therefore, " Obsta Principiis," is a good maxim, and worthy
the attention of all, And the first appearances of such baneful machinations
should be beheld with abhorrence and checked with severity, by all orders of
men in a free Commonwealth, as they are friends to their country and wish to
preserve the liberties of the people, the powers of government, or the rights
of the constitution, inviolate to the State.

THIS precaution is always necessary. -- It is more especially of importance
when first entering into society; or when a radical revolution takes place, and
a new form or constitution of government is introduced. -- Bad precedents are
growing evils; and fatal consequences commonly attend them, if not seasonably
checked and effectually crushed.

THE last thing which we shall mention, as necessary to the well being of
society and the happiness of a free state, is the cordial concurrence of all
orders of men, in authority and subordination, in a sacred regard to religion;
in a devout acknowledgment of their dependence upon GOD, his providence and
blessing, for all the benefits they expect to derive from a settled civil
government.

THIS sentiment is evidently suggested in the words of our text. -- The people,
whose princes are here introduced as gathered together to consult for the
common good, and transact the public affairs for the government and defense of
the nation; -- The people, whose rulers are here termed shields of the earth,
and justly said to belong unto GOD; In a word, the people, in whose settled
government and flourishing state, GOD, the supreme ruler, is said to be greatly
exalted, are fitly styled the people of the GOD of Abraham, -- a people in
covenant with GOD. -- A people of his fear -- of his praise. -- A people deeply
impressed with a sense of the Deity, his government and providence; and a
people who cordially acknowledge their dependence upon him and their
indispensible obligations to fear and obey him, and to preserve and exercise a
sacred regard to his worship, and to the doctrines and duties of that holy
religion, which he had taught by his word.

THE importance of religion and morality, and a devout acknowledgment of the
government of heaven, to he support of order and government among men, and to
the liberty, safety and happiness of society, is what reason teaches, and what
the common sense, as well as universal practice of mankind, in all ages and
nations, concurs to confirm.

IN civilized nations, and where civil government has been established, many
cities and places of importance may be found without walls, without guards, and
even without weapons or any preparations for common defense: But it is not easy
to find any without, a temple, an ^^tar, a grove or some other place appointed
and appropriated to the purposes of religion, the acknowledgment of heaven, and
the worship of the Deity, in some shape or other.

IN all the free states of Greece and the great Republic of Rome, the regard
that was paid to the worship of the gods and the rites of religion, was
constant, punctual and expensive; and in many instances, especially on great
occasions, rose to the height of superstition. And no affair of importance to
the liberty of the people, or the safety of the state, in peace or war, was
undertaken, without a religious acknowledgment of their dependence upon heaven
and the influence of the gods.

"THE great CAMILLUS who was twice saluted 'The Deliverer of his country,' to
awaken in his fellow-citizens a sense of the importance of religion, appealed
to the Romans whether they ever had better success than when they carefully
served GOD, or worse than when they neglected him."

"XENOPHON very justly observes, 'That Cyrus, one of the best and greatest
kings of Persia, laid the foundation of that powerful empire, not so much by
his valor, as by his religious acknowledgment of heaven, and his liberality in
the worship and service of GOD."

BUT to instance from a yet higher authority: Does not the holy prophet of the
LORD both reprove and exhort the king of Judah, in terms which clearly express
the high importance of a sacred regard to the precepts of religion and
morality, to the safety, happiness and flourishing state of a people, in that
plain and faithful expostulation -- Did not thy father eat and drink, and do
justice and judgment, and then it was well with him? He judged the cause of the
poor and needy, then it was well with him: Was not this to know me? says the
LORD. Jer. 22. 15, 16.


WHEN the Supreme Ruler of the world gave notice to Moses, the great lawgiver
of the Hebrew nation, that the period of his administration was hastening, and
the time near at hand, when he must quit the high station he held at the head
of the commonwealth of Israel, for a more exalted seat of immortal glory in his
kingdom above, -- It is said, He called a solemn assembly of the people; and
having recapitulated the heads of the constitution GOD had given them, and
rehearsed a summary of the statutes and precepts of the religion he had made
known unto them, he closed his address, and took his leave of them, with this
expressive and pathetic exhortation, saying, "Set your hearts unto all the
words which I testify among you this day: For it is not a vain thing for you;
because it is your life: And through this thing ye shall prolong your days in
the land whether ye go over Jordan to possess it." Deuteronomy. 33. 46 and 47.


THE truth is, religion, more especially as taught by the word of GOD, and
enforced by the powerful arguments and engaging motives of the gospel of Jesus
Christ, is the source of liberty, the soul of government and the life of a
people. -- Its doctrines are sublime, its precepts excellent, its motives
persuasive and endearing, and its rewards rich, glorious and all divine,

RELIGION inspires the soul with the noblest sentiments, inflames the heart
with the purest affections, and forms the man for every virtue, -- for every
service, which GOD or his country may either expect or require.

ITS benevolent precepts are all contained in love to GOD and love to man. And
where this divine affection takes place, inspires the soul, warms the heart,
influences the temper and governs the conduct; piety to GOD, and justice and
charity to men, will mark, distinguish and dignify the character. And the same
divine principle, penetrating the hearts of the various orders of men in
society, and pervading the state, cannot fail producing the happiest effects.
-- Vice and immorality, wickedness and unrighteousness, in every form, in every
character, will soon disappear: And justice, temperance, truth and lov^, --
every virtue, every grace which adorns human nature, or tends to the peace and
happiness of society, will quickly take their place.

UNDER the sacred energy of so god-like a principle, rulers will become true
patriots, real benefactors; the people willing and obedient subjects: And all
orders of men will most cheerfully concur in every measure which wisdom can
dictate for the common good.

IN a word, religion among a people, in its power, purity and governing
influence, is the guardian of liberty, the strength of government, the energy
of laws, the band of society, and both the glory and defense of the state.

IN times of prosperity, a people, that have made GOD their fear, and religion
their care, may rest assured of the establishment and continuance of their
flourishing state.

IN times of perplexity, when dangers surround, oppressors threaten, or enemies
invade, such a people have GOD for their refuge: And committing their cause
unto him, in the way of well-doing, may humbly expect that light will arise in
darkness, that the power of the oppressor shall be broken, that their enemies
shall not prevail against them, and that GOD will maintain their right and
their cause.

AT all times, under all circumstances, at home, abroad, in peace and war, such
a people may safely and cheerfully leave all their concerns in the hands of
GOD; and in filial confidence of his presence, protection and blessing, may say
with the Psalmist -- "The LORD is on my side, I will not fear: What can man do
unto me?" Psalm 118. 6.
-- Happy is that people that is in such a case: Yea, happy is that people,
whose GOD is the LORD. 144. 15.


IN the above representation, we have seen the fair side of the question:
Government a blessing, and the shields of the earth, as they ought to be,
employed for the good of mankind. But it may, notwithstanding, be justly said,
that this is not always the case. And the question may still be asked -- How,
then, can it be asserted, "That the shields of the earth belong unto GOD?"

UPON this question it may be observed, -- That it is admitted, that THE
SHIELDS OF THE EARTH may be reversed. -- The powers of government may be
abused. Rulers, however promising at first, may become oppressors. Yea, this
has been too often the fact. But should this be the unhappy case; and,
contrary to the just expectations of GOD and men, should the shields of the
earth be reversed, and turned against those whom they were intended to defend,
it alters not the truth or propriety of the assertion. "The shields of the
earth still belong unto GOD:" and "the LORD still sits on the throne of his
holiness."

SUCH is the nature of the divine government, and such the wisdom of the
Supreme Ruler, that good is brought out of evil. Even the oppressors of mankind
are the servants of GOD; and their oppressions are so overruled as to be
subservient to the designs of infinite wisdom and goodness, in the moral
government of the world.

THE shields of the earth reversed, the powers of government abused, may be and
are overruled in providence, so as to be productive of great good to society
and mankind.

SUCH, indeed, is the inertia of mankind in general, that they are more prone
to undue submission, than the contrary. Even a bad government is better than
none, in the estimation of the greater part of the world. And so great is the
risque, the uncertainty and danger attending the attempt of a revolution, that
it is not an easy matter to persuade a people, even under an undue exercise of
power, to rise and resist. They will bear much, and long, before they can be
brought to unite in such an attempt: but there are degrees of oppression beyond
bearing; and which mankind, unless totally lost to all sentiments of liberty,
and entirely broke to the yoke of slavery, will not submit to. And it is wise
in GOD, and happy for a people, when the strides of oppression are permitted to
be so great, and the violences of oppressors so hastily increased, as to rouse
them effectually before it is too late.

OPPRESSORS are fitly called, "The rod of GOD's anger, and the staff in their
hand is his indignation," Isai 10. 5.
They are wisely employed by the Supreme Ruler, to correct the errors, reprove
the vices, and reform the disorders of societies, nations and states. They are
more especially improved to rouse and restore the true spirit of liberty, when
declining; and to bring on a total revolution, if necessary, to the
preservation or restoration of so inestimable a blessing.

INSTANCES of this are too numerous and too well known, to admit of dispute.

As it was the afflicted state of GOD's people Israel, that moved him, in
mercy, to send Moses to deliver them: so it was the oppressions of Pharaoh and
the cruelty of the taskmasters, that gave weight to his messages, and
effectually roused them, in the face of every danger, to assert their freedom,
and attempt their deliverance from the Egyptian yoke.

CHRISTENDOM would never have been roused, with firmness, to have attempted to
free themselves from the hierachy of Rome, had not the oppressions of that
power put them upon the expedient.

IT was a long series of injuries, and intolerable oppressions and cruelties,
which taught the United States of Holland to assert their native freedom,
independence and sovereignty, against the power of Spain, then at the meridian
of its strength and glory.

BRITONS would never have so frequently resisted their kings, and flown to arms
in defense of their invaluable rights, had not the iron rod of oppression
convinced them of the necessity of such strenuous exertions, to preserve and
protract the remains of liberty among them.

IT was the oppressor's hand, in church and state, which drove our worthy
ancestors from their native land, in the face of every danger, every distress,
to seek a secure retreat for the unmolested enjoyment of Liberty, civil and
religious, in the inhospitable wilds of America.

AND the same oppressive hand, which pursued and persecuted this injured people
over the wide Atlantic, from time to time, in lawless claims upon their rights
and liberties, under GOD and providence, has been the means of preserving and
transmitting that glorious spirit of liberty, for which the Colonies of America
have been so illustrious, in the several periods of their existence.

AND, to add no more; a series of oppressive measures, and lawless claims of
abitrary power adopted and pursued by the Court of Great Britain, in open
violation of the most sacred chartered rights; -- arms to enforce obedience; --
and the power of the British legislature to " make LAWS binding upon the
Colonies, IN ALL CASES WHATSOEVER," being openly assumed and declared, roused
and raised the spirit of LIBERTY, in the FREEBORN SONS of AMERICA, to the
highest pitch. And, no other alternative being left them, but the SWORD or
SLAVERY; these Colonies hessitated not a moment, but unitedly declared their
choice of the former: And GREATLY DARED TO BE FREE!!!

THE important Die was cast; and the glorious ERA of Liberty commenced! -- The
sword of the oppressor was drawn; and the innocent blood of our brethren slain
at the opening of the interesting contest, was the cement of the union, and
seal of the freedom of these injured American States! Lexington was the place
in which a just GOD was pleased to permit hostilities between Great Britain and
America, to commence. The persons who first ^ell victims to the sword of the
oppressor, and who were PROTOMARTYRS in the glorious cause of LIBERTY and their
country, were inhabitants of the town; and it was my lot to be an eye witness
of that horrid scene of bloodshed and slaughter which opened the war! -- To be
an eye witness of the unprovoked, ungenerous and unjust assault of about eight
hundred British regular troops, upon fifty or sixty undisciplined Americans,
who neither molested, nor had it in contemplation to oppose them, unless drove
to it by the Britons, in defense of themselves, their rights and their country.
-- To see the sword of violence drawn, the INNOCENT BLOOD of our brethren
murderoust, shed, and the flames of war bursting upon us, without notice,
without provocation; when war was neither proclaimed, nor so much as
professedly threatened: and this by a prince and nation which for ages past,
had sustained the character and gloried in the appellation of The Parent State:
-- By a nation, from whom we had a just right to look for protection and
defense, against every lawless invader: -- To see war commenced upon us by such
a nation, so related for no other reason but because we were unwilling to give
up our most sacred rights, as free men and a free people; and this too, with
various circumstances of indignity and insult, was, and must have been,
affecting and distressing indeed! -- And the more so to us, a people, who,
'till these unhappy and impolitic measures -- 'till this unjust and barbarous
war took place breathed loyalty to our sovereign, and the sincerest affection
and respect for the Mother country. Language would fail to represent, and words
to express, the feelings of a free, a brave, a generous, a loyal people, upon
such an alarming occasion! -- Nor can it be justly supposed, that any but those
who have seen and felt the shock, can form an adequate idea of its real and
interesting effects.

But however distressing, savage, or severe these barbarous measures of a blood
thirsty oppressor, might, at that time, appear to the inhabitants of Lexington,
who were called by Providence to receive the shock -- however unrighteous and
cruel it might seem to the injured, the freeborn funs of America: -- The hand
of GOD and of Providence was in all these things. The wisdom and goodness of
the Supreme Ruler should be devoutly acknowledged, as gloriously displayed, in
overruling th^se acts of outrage, barbarity and murder, as the means of the
greatest good to this injured and oppressed land.

This ungenerous unjust and barbarous manner of opening the war, has effected
more, perhaps, in the cause of freedom and America than the wisdom and counsel
of all the American States, or even united worlds, could have done. This ill
aimed severity and murderous cruelty of the British troops and the British
court, have answered the most valuable purp^ses to the American cause. -- It
confirmed the resolute, strengthened the weak, established the doubtful,
encouraged the timid, gave a spring to the faint-hearted, roused the stupid,
and (...) the perverse: and happily produced that union of sentiment, and those
exertions of power, in the noble contest, which no other measures in human
probability, would have ever effected And to apply the expressive words of
Joseph to his brethren, it may fitly be said -- to the haughty Britons -- "As
for you, ye thought evil against us; but GOD means it unto good, to bring to
pass as it is this day, to save much people alive." Genesis 50. 20.




ALL AMERICA heard the alarm, deeply felt the wound, and bravely rose to
revenge their brethren's blood, and join the common cause!

To Heaven the appeal was made! -- By Heaven, the claim was supported! -- That
GOD, who sits upon the throne of his holiness, the Governor among the
nations, the Patron of the injured and oppressed, has plead our cause, and
maintained our right to freedom, equality and independence: And given us a name
among the nations of the earth.

THE wisdom of the counsels, the firmness of the resolutions, and the equity of
the measures of the United States, in Congress assembled; and in the states
respectively: -- The exertions that have been made, in the cause of liberty and
of mankind; and the success which has attended: -- The Articles of
Confederation which have been formed and completely ratified, by all the
States, as the basis of freedom and mutual support: -- And the glorious
revolution, that has taken place in America; as they do honor to human
nature, and engage the attention of an admiring world; being transmitted by the
pen of the faithful historian, will be a subject of most pleasing
contemplation, to all true lovers of liberty and the rights of mankind, in
succeeding generations, to the end of time.

IN the rise and progress of this interesting contest, the smiles of heaven
have appeared, in the supplies afforded, in various instances, when needed
most; by captures from the enemy. Witness the large ship taken from the enemy,
by the ^^ave Capt. Mugford, in 1776, and sent into the port of ^^^ston, laden
chiefly, with Powder, to the amount (if I mistake not) of about 1500 barrels;
and this at a time when we were in the m^st critical situation, for want of
such a supply of that essential article.

Witness also several other large and valuable vessels, taken by our
privateers, and sent into Salem, or elsewhere; laden with firearms, mortars,
ordnance stores of various kinds, clothing, provisions, etc. etc. -- Articles
necessary, useful, seasonable and important, to our military operations -- In
these, and many other instances, the providence of GOD has been apparent and
wonderful, in the course of the war; and ought to be gratefully remembered and
devoutly acknowledged, by this people.


the generosity of friends, and the kindness of strangers: And also in the
generous support, and effectual assistance, of those powerful states, who with
a benevolence of spirit, and magnanimity of conduct, which does honor to
themselves and mankind, have essentially favored and patronized our cause.

THAT GOD, who girded Cyrus, of old, and called him his shepherd, to raise up
his afflicted people, oppressed under the Babylonish yoke, and to restore them
to their country, their religion, their liberties, Should it be said here,
"That the Jews were not restored to their liberties, by the decree of Cyrus,
upon their return from Babylon; but were still a dependent people; and even
Tributaries to the Persian princes." -- It might be answered, -- 'That it is
readily granted, the children of Israel were not restored to a state of perfect
freedom and independence, by the decree of Cyrus, upon their return from
Babylon to (...) -- It is acknowledged they were still dependent on the Persian
kings. -- Nor could they, in the situation and circumstances, in which they
were at that time, have desired to be less dependent, upon that powerful court,
than that generous decree of Cyrus made them -- Just emerging from a long and
distressing captivity, it is easy to believe, they were not in a capacity to
support and defend themselves in their former independence; even though it had
been granted them, in the fullest sense. -- It was their safety and happiness,
that GOD appointed Cyrus his and their shepherd that under the wing of his
patronage and protection, they might securely return to their country, take
possession of their lands, rebuild their cities and the temple, restore the
worship of GOD according to the Levitical institution; and re-establish their
laws, polity and government, agreeable to that divine constitution, which GOD
had given to their fathers, by the hand of Moses. -- In short, the revolution,
in the affairs of the Hebrew nation, which took place under this benevolent
prince, and in consequence of the above mentioned decree, was a glorious
revolution -- A revolution, in and by which the people of GOD were redeemed
from captivity, and restored to their country, their possessions, and their
laws, liberties and religion, in all their peculiarities; and to a greater
degree of national freedom and independence, than ever they could have expected
or promised themselves, in their late depressed, scattered, inslaved and
captivated state. Agreeably we find not only the decree of Cyrus; but the
several prophecies which have referrence to it, or to him as the deliverer of
GOD's people; and even other eminent prophecies, concerning the return of the
Jews from the Babylonian captivity, expressly representing their restoration, in
general, as full and complete; and without any let or draw back. For further
light and satisfaction upon this subject and question, vid, and comp. these
following places and passages in scripture. Ezra, chap. 1. throughout chap 6
first part. Isai 44. 28. Ibid 45. 1 -- 5. and 13. Jerem 29. 10. and especially
that illustrious prophecy, Jerem. 30 chapter 18, 19, 20 and 21 ver.

I only add, that, in my reference to Cyrus, and the prophecy concerning him,
the judicious reader will easily see, that the main point in view, was not to
illustrate the compleatness, or degree, of that freedom and liberty, to which
GOD's people were raised, by the kind, the generous and effectual interposition
of Cyrus, for their redemption and restoration; but the hand of GOD and the
wisdom and goodness of his all superintending providence, in directing the
measures, influencing the policy and overruling the conduct of men, princes
and kings, of states and nations, and powers on earth, for the effecting the
purposes of his benevolence, in the support and relief of an afflicted people,
and the redemption and salvation of the injured and oppressed.


and their possessions, inspired the King of France, and the powerful nation
under his government, from principles worthy the character of a great -- a
benevolent Prince, and a wise and politic nation, early to favor the cause of
these injured infant states: And finally to take a decided part, and make our
cause there own, by a public treaty, both generous and just, and nobly founded
in principles of equality and independence.

THE advantages resulting to the United States of America, from their happy
alliance with so puissant a Prince and so powerful a nation, in the course of
the war, are too many to be enumerated, too important to have escaped notice,
and too well known to need a mention.

THE accession of the power of Spain to the common cause, brightens the
prospect. And the late addition of the United States of Holland, and, probably,
of Russia, and all the powers of the armed neutrality, in consequence of the
unjust measures and unheard of outrages of Britain, must, under GOD, give the
clearest assurances of an happy issue; and of the complete establishment of the
freedom, independence and sovereignty, of the United States of America; if we
are not criminally wanting to ourselves.

AMIDST the convulsions, the ravage, bloodshed and distress that have attended
the war; -- amidst the great and complicated exertions, we have been called to
make, in this all-interesting contest, we have seen, to the glory of GOD and
honor of America, a degree of internal peace, order and unanimity, far beyond
what could have been expected, in a struggle of this nature, and in effecting a
revolution so extensive and important.

IN a word, to the honor of GOD, who sits upon the throne of his holiness,
as Governor among the nations, to the joy of America, to the disgrace of our
enemies, and the astonishment of the world, we have seen these infant states,
in the midst of the alarms and shocks of a distressing war, and in the face of
every danger, rising from a state of dependence and obscurity, to a state of
liberty, independence and sovereignty. And with a spirit of wisdom, firmness
and resolution, which, perhaps, has never been equalled, forming constitutions
and establishing government, upon the basis of freedom and the solid
foundations of justice and equity.

UNDER the smiles of heaven upon this Commonwealth, in particular, have we not
seen the social compact formed, and a constitution of government ratified,
introduced and established, with a degree of unanimity, which could scarcely
have been looked for, in a matter of so delicate a nature and such lasting
importance? -- A Constitution, which, for the solidity of its principles, the
liberality of its sentiments, the importance of its rights, the wisdom of its
arrangements, the propriety of its boundaries, the adaptedness of its
institutions, and that spirit of liberty which inspires the whole, may justly
vie with any other upon the continent, if not in the world.

UNDER this happy Constitution we have seen, to universal satisfaction, that
blessed prophecy, concerning GOD's people, after their return from captivity,
literally fulfilled unto us. -- " Their congregation shall be established
before me: -- their nobles shall be of themselves, and their Governor shall
proceed from the midst of them." Jeremiah 30, 21, 2^.


THE energy and happy effects of a Constitution, thus formed, ratified,
introduced and administered, have been too clearly seen and too sensibly felt,
by this greatful people, to admit of dispute, or even a doubt.

MAY we not, -- yea, rather, ought we not, upon this joyful occasion, in a deep
sense of our obligations to heaven, to ascribe the glory of all to GOD, and
devoutly acknowledge that this is the LORD's doing; it is mavelous in our
eyes! -- Psalm.


THIS day, which defuses the smile of freedom, -- the joy of liberty, in the
countenance of the true Patriot, of every friend to his country and mankind, is
a fresh evidence of the care and benevolence of heaven to an injured people, --
a new testimony that GOD has not forsaken an oppressed land.

THIS day is great, as it is the first, on which we commemorate the goodness of
GOD, the supreme ruler, in the blessings of a settled government, under a
Constitution established on the purest principles of liberty and equity.

THIS day is great, as it is the first, appointed by the constitution, for the
stated meeting of the Princes of this people, -- the fathers of the
Commonwealth, in General Court: And it is also great, as it commences an ERA
of Anniversaries, for the same joyful purposes, -- to commemorate and partake
of the blessings of LIBERTY and a FREE GOVERNMENT, which (we trust in GOD) will
(...), but with time itself!! --

ON this joyful day we are invited to see GOD, the supreme ruler, on the throne
of his holiness, the savior and defense of an afflicted land: "The princes of
the people of the GOD of Abraham gathered together": And "The Shields of the
earth," The rulers of every department, devoting themselves to the service of
GOD and their country, in devout acknowledgment of his government, to the end,
that GOD might be greatly exalted, in the good of his people, by their
administration.

To add luster to the joy of this day, we behold, a second time raised to the
chief seat of government, in this Commonwealth, by the free suffrages of the
people, a Gentleman, whose patriotic principles early engaged the attention of
his fellow-citizens; -- whose uniformity of conduct, in the several offices he
sustained, effectually gained their esteem; -- whose firm attachment to the
liberties of his country, and determined resolution, at every risque and in the
most trying times, to do all in his power to support them, established their
confidence: -- In a word, a Gentleman, whose disposition, ability and
integrity, in the service of this and the United States, have been tried and
approved; and whose name is illustrious, both as proscribed by Britain, and as
authenticating that glorious act, by which the United States of America are
forever separated from her, and declared to be a free and independent NATION.

As this is the highest mark of esteem and confidence, in the power of an
obliged people to give; it cannot fail of being a support to His EXCELLENCY,
under the weight and perplexing cares of government, and a pleasing inducement
to those returns of attention and fidelity, in the duties of his high station,
which they may justly expect.

WE are also happy, this day, in beholding the next seat of government filled
with a Gentleman, whose amiable disposition, excellent qualifications,
patriotic spirit, long experience and faithful services, in various
departments, have endeared him to the people, and established a confidence in
him, as worthy that exalted station, to which he is called by the general voice
of the citizens of this free Commonwealth.

AND to complete the gladness of our hearts upon this joyful occasion, we see
the princes of the people, the honorable, the members of the Senate and House
of Representatives, delegated by the suffrages of their brethren, from all
parts of the state, gathered together and in General Court assembled, to
consult the common good and transact the important affairs of government --
And, as the first step of importance, we behold these princes of the people,
these Shields of the earth, in solemn assembly, in GOD's holy sanctuary, met,
religiously to acknowledge their dependence upon GOD, the supreme ruler, and
devoutly to implore his presence, direction and blessing. -- O may that GOD,
who sits on the throne of his holiness, who is the fountain of wisdom and
Father of lights; -- even that GOD, whose ear is ever open to the sincere
prayers of his people, send them his blessing and an answer of peace!

MAY the most high GOD take these SHIELDS of the earth, this day, under his
immediate care and patronage, guidance and direction. May the spirit of GOD and
of glory descend and rest upon his EXCELLENCY, his HONOR, the honorable, the
Council, to be chosen, the Senate and the House of Representatives: And may the
divine presence and blessing attend them this day, and in all their councils,
debates and governmental acts, through the whole course of the year. Thus may
it appear to all this people, that the LORD has directed their choice; and
that these Shields of the earth, these rulers of the people, do, indeed, belong
unto GOD, are devoted to his service and instruments of his glory.

THAT plainness of speech which has been adopted in the whole of this
discourse, may well superceed the necessity of any particular application, by
way of address. -- The whole is intended as an humble address to the fathers of
this Commonwealth, and to this respectable assembly. -- If any thing has been
suggested worthy attention, or adapted to the occasion, we trust in the candor
of the assembly for a cordial reception. Whatever is of a different complexion,
is not likely to be made better, by any thing further added, to render it more
acceptable.

OUR political fathers, however, will permit me, with all deference, to
observe, --

'THAT the elections of this day; and which, agreeable to the social compact,
are to take place, as the first business of the General Court, (however
limited) are justly considered, as interesting and important.

WHEN we consider the importance of the executive department, to a due
administration of government; -- The high rank of Counselors; -- How much the
power of the Chief Magistrate is limited by their advice, in the disposal of
places, the appointment of officers, and other things interesting to the
community -- or the important influence they have in the administration of
government, and the management of the great affairs of the Commonwealth; -- it
should influence to the wisest use of that power of election, with which the
honorable Senotors and Representatives, by Constitution are vested.

IS the election limited? -- Still there is a choice, -- A choice, which made
with wisdom and fidelity, may be of great utility to this Commonwealth.

IT is no impeachment of the abilities, honor or integrity of any man, to
suppose, that, in a body of wise, great and good men, there may be different
talents and improvements, and distinct characters, that may have an opening for
exercise, and shine with a peculiar luster, in different departments of civil
government.

WHAT these talents and characters are, how to be distinguished, in whom to be
found and where to be placed, for the purposes of government, and best good of
the Commonwealth, is not for me to determine. But certain it is, these are
questions of no small importance to the public good: And questions, to which
our honored civil fathers will give that attention, which their interesting
nature demands.

NOT only to preserve, as distinct as possible, the several departments of
government, that so they might be a mutual check upon each other; but also to
give dignity to government and energy to the laws, as well as ease to
administration, were evidently in view, by adopting this branch in the
constitution: And it cannot be doubted, that, not only those who assisted in
adjusting the constitution, but also the people at large promised themselves
much from this high department.

THE election of counselors, therefore, however limited, will always be justly
considered as a sacred deposit in the hands of the General Assembly, of the
highest importance to the liberty and safety, the peace and prosperity of this
Commonwealth. And, with all deference, it may be said by the people, upon such
an occasion, "We claim it as our right, That, among those who are returned for
Counselors and Senators, the persons best qualified to serve GOD and their
country in that exalted department, be elected to the council board." And may
GOD send a perfect lot! --

THE foundations which have been so happily laid in our new constitution, are
to be established: and, we trust, in the hands of wise and faithful rulers, and
by a good administration they will be established for "The FOUNDATIONS OF MANY
GENERATIONS."

MUCH depends upon the steps that have been and are still to be taken, under
this constitution: and to derive the benefits and blessings we promise
ourselves and posterity from it, the greatest care should be taken, not only to
preserve the constitution itself, in all its parts, sacred and inviolate; but
also, as much as possible to have the genuine spirit and principles of it
inspiring the laws, and directing the exercise of the powers of government.

WE have seen, in the pr%ceeding discourse, a specimen of the importance of
attention and fidelity in rulers, and something of the nature of the engaging
and powerful motives hereunto: As also the glorious rewards which those are
entitled to who are faithful and persevering in the discharge of the duties of
their several offices and stations. And surely there never was a time when the
calls of GOD, of provividenc^ and our country, to the practice of these
virtues, were greater than the present.

MANY things, interesting in their nature, and important in their consequences,
demand the attention of our civil fathers, in the several departments of
government; but especially in the General Court. -- Inattention and remissness
are at all times inexcuseable, in those who have accepted seats in government
or places of trust and authority; And I need not observe, that at such a day as
this, they must be criminal indeed! The laws, distributive justice, the order
and peace of society, the internal policy and government of the Commonwealth
and the trade and commerce of the land, a^^ subjects which statedly call for
the care and attention of rulers and government. -- The (...) wretched state of
our medium, by which trade is obstructed, the poor oppressed, the course of
justice, in matters of property, retarded; the community defrauded, the public
faith and public credit perplexed, is truly affecting, and demands immediate
consideration; and if any thing within the limits of human wisdom and
penetration can yet further be thought of, to remedy so great an evil, it is
fervently hoped, it will not escape the notice of the General Court.

THE declining state of religion, morality and virtue; and the great prevalence
of vice and immorality, irreligion and profaneness, in almost every form, and
in the various orders and ages of men; it is humbly conceived, are subjects,
not only important in themselves, but of the highest consequence to the
wellbeing of society, and call aloud for the interposition of rulers, who are
ordained of GOD to be a terror to evil doers and to evil works. In vain do the
teachers of religion and even the ambassadors of Christ preach and teach the
importance of religion, the excellence of virtue, and the necessity of
morality, justice, temperance, truth or righteousness; while vice, in its
various forms, is winked at by authority, and iniquity established by law.

I WOULD not be understood, as supposing this to be our case; but rather to
express an earnest desire to prevent it, by those timely exertions which wisdom
and policy, as well as piety and godliness, teach us to make, for the glory of
GOD and good of society. -- And certain it is, that much depends upon those in
authority, and much is expected, and much may be done by our civil fathers, by
well-judged and well-executed laws, for the suppressing and punishing of vice
and immorality, and the encouragement and support of religion and virtue.

BUT after all, it is by example, a living example, of justice and
righteousness, temperance and chastity, faithfulness and integrity; and that
glorious assemblage of christian graces and moral virtues, by which human
nature is adorned, and society rendered happy, that rulers give energy to laws,
effectually suppress vice in its various forms, encourage virtue, and introduce
and promote a thorough reformation among a people. -- Virtue in high stations
shines with an increased luster, has an extensive influence, and sweetly
atracts the attention and engages the imitation of all around. -- But without
this, reproofs are in vain, punishments ineffectual, and laws to little or no
purpose.

IN a word, a want of attention to religion and virtue, in rulers or people,
may blast our wisest counsels, sap the foundations of our most raised
expectations and bring confusion on all our measures.

WITH grateful souls and thankfulness to heaven, we revere and admire the
wisdom, the piety and policy of our forefathers, in the early and effectual
care they took, even while weak-handed and yet in an infant state, for the good
education of children and youth. -- Laws, for the support of grammar schools,
in the several towns, were made, established and sacredly regarded. Colleges
were founded and endowed, and cheerfully and generously supported. -- These
institutions have been, for several generations, the sources of light, of
knowledge, of literature, of liberty and religion; and under GOD, the happy
means of forming many worthy characters, for eminent usefulness, both in church
and state. And to these institutions, we are not a little indebted for that
knowledge to discern, that wisdom to state, and that spirit to defend our
rights and liberties, civil and religious, for which the inhabitants of these
States have been so justly celebrated, in the present contest; and which have
introduced and established that glorious revolution which has taken place in
America. May the present generation be impressed and inspired with the same
excellent spirit; and may it be encouraged and prevail, in those that succeed,
to the end of time!

THE University at Cambridge, the American academy of arts and sciences, and
all other institutions for the promoting of literature, are most fervently
commended to the care and patronage of the civil fathers of this Commonwealth.

BUT it is not so much in the high seize in science, to which the learned
few may arrive, as in the diffusing common and useful knowledge in all orders
of men, that the liberty and safety of a free Commonwealth consists. The former
may flourish, and in fact have been encouraged, and carried to an eminent
height of glory, in despotic states, while the latter has been depressed; and
even at the same time, that it has been the ungenerous policy of persons in
power, to frown upon, and artfully to discourage the means of common education,
and to keep the multitude in the lowest state of ignorance, that thus they
might be fit tools to carry to effect the purposes of oppression and arbitrary
power; and be continued in a state of slavery, without ever knowing, either the
loss of their liberty, or their rights as men.

IT has been said, 'The law is the inheritance of the people.' -- I wish to
GOD, that multitudes of the people of this Commonwealth, had no reason to
complain, that they have been abridged of a precious part of this inheritance,
in that too general neglect and contempt, with which the law, for keeping
grammar SCHOOLS in the several towns, has been treated for a number of years
past. -- In the name of GOD, our country and posterity, it may be pertinently
asked -- What becomes of the children of the poor, -- the widow, and them that
have no helper, when so useful, so necessary a law is trampled under foot! --
How can rulers be said to be shields of the earth, and to belong unto GOD,
while authority is despised, and the laws evaded, dispensed with, or set aside
with impunity? -- In fine, may it not be asked, whether more is not to be
^eared, with regard to the liberties of a people, and the well-being, safety
and prosperity of a free state, from the shameful neglect of the instruction of
children and education of youth, in society, than from the sword of an enemy,
or the power of an oppressor? A number of other questions might have been
pertinently asked here: -- A: -- What becomes of the oaths of grand jurors,
upon the question, 'Whether their towns are provided with grammar school
masters, according to law? -- *What sort of schools have been kept? -- 'What
kind of masters have been, at least, too often, employed, -- "What the orders,
the prayers, the means of instruction and education, in th^se schools are? --
*Whether any schools, at all, have been kept, and how long, or what proportion
of the year, in to was where the aforementioned law has been evaded, dispensed
with, or set aside? etc etc -- The answer to these, or other questions upon
this subject. I leave to those who know what belongs to school education, and
to all candid, impartial, wise and judicious observers, to make.

Two things were, undoubtedly, in view, by our worthy ancestors, in the
standing law for grammar-schools: Both tending to promote learning and
knowledge in the community. -- One was, 'that towns being obliged, under
certain penalties, to provide themselves with well qualified grammar school
masters, the people in general, the poor, as well as rich, might without
immediate personal expense be provided with good means of instruction and
education for their children.

The other was, that parents or friends, whose circumstances were not affluent,
might be induced to encourage a g^ni^s and inclination for ^^aring, in
promising children or youths, by giving them a liberal education; upon this
presumption, that as soon as they had perfected their studies at College, and
received the honors of an academical education, they might immediately support
themselves, by engaging in schools: -- An employment suitable to their
character, honorable to themselves, and useful to society. -- And I believe it
may, with the greatest truth, be added, that this consideration has often
determined parents and others, to give their sons, or other promising youths, a
public education; which otherwise they would not. And thus many a good scholar
and worthy character, has been introduced to public usefulness, is church or
state, which, but for this law, must have been lost to the public, and remained
in obscurity.




RULERS are styled shields of the earth, as it more especially belongs to them,
to look to the protection of society and provide the defense of the state.

STANDING armies are abhorrent to the first principles of freedom, and
dangerous to the liberties of a free Commonwealth. The sword, in the hands of
the free citizens, is the protection of society, and the safety and defense of
a people truly brave; truly free. -- May I be permitted to ask, whether the
sword is in the hands of all the inhabitants of this Commonwealth? -- Whether
all the people have arms? -- Or, whether, having arms, they are taught the
art-military, and the use of their arms, so as to be effectually prepared to
oppose an invading enemy, upon the shortest notice? Had I seen or known of the
late excellent and well-adjusted militia act, before the writing and delivering
this discourse. I should not, perhaps, have troubled the audience with these
plain and interesting questions: every thing necessary to a well-regulated
militia, being fully comprehended and provided for in the act. -- I most
sincerely wish it may be strictly observed.


THAT GOD, who fitteth upon the throne of his holiness, in the rise, progress,
and even unto the present state of the great contest, in which we are engaged,
has gloriously appeared for our help and support, in numberless instances. And
it is not easy to suppose, nor is it agreeable to the general course of divine
providence, that such beginnings, -- such goodly foundations, as, at this day,
are seen, in the rising States of America, should be crushed or overthrown. --
But their deliverance, their freedom and independence may be greatly checked,
and their rise, growth and glory, shamefully retarded, by the inattention or
remissness of rulers, or the negligence and languor of the people.

HAD the glorious success of our arms at the Westward, and the surrender of
General Burgoyne and his whole army, in the year 1777, been followed with
spirited measures, and backed with those exertions, which wisdom and sound
policy dictated, and which the United States were able to have made; we may
rationally suppose, it might have gone far toward the reduction of the enemy
and hastening a peace, upon terms of justice and equality. -- How this success
was improved, is not pleasing to remember! -- May past omissions prove lessons
of wisdom, for time to come.

THE present year is important, and seems to open upon us, big with the fate of
America, -- of Europe, and, perhaps of the world of mankind. -- This is the
interesting crisis, for which the enemy have waited, and to which they have
looked, with anxious expectation, as the period for the success of their arms
and the subjugation of America. And it is both natural and just to suppose,
that this year all their strength, and all their rage, will be put forth, with
the utmost energy of exertion. -- May GOD ALMIGHTY defeat and disappoint them!!
-- But can we expect, if we are wanting to ourselves, or reluctant and
negligent in making those strenuous exertions, to which we are so loudly
called, by GOD and our country, that the desired success will attend?

To rouse all our attention, and give the spring to the noblest exertions, may
we realize more deeply than ever, the greatness of the cause, and how much is
depending upon its success. May we seriously contemplate the distresses of our
blending country; and with all the feelings of humanity, call into view, the
sufferings of our brethren in the hands of the enemy, and the ravage, the waste
and destruction, which mark the steps of British cruelty, throughout the land,
and now take place in the Southern States! -- Above all, may we attend to the
voice of our brethren's BLOOD, which cries for vengeance from the ground! -- To
the MANES of our slaughtered friends, who first felt a sacrifice to the
oppressor's rage, and suffered as MARTYRS in their country's cause! -- To the
MANES of all these brave commanders and ILLUSTRIOUS HEROES, who have nobly
fought and nobly bled in its defense! --!

O MY fathers and brethen! ALL! All is yet at stake! -- All may yet be lost, if
we rise not, as one man, to the noble cause! -- How inglorious must it be, for
want of attention, for want of exertion, to ship-wreck in the harbor -- to
fail at last? -- Where, then, the pleasing scenes of LIBERTY, INDEPENDENCE and
SOVEREIGNTY, which we have promised ourselves? -- Where the glorious
foundations of FREEDOM and safety, which our CIVIL CONSTITUTIONS have laid? --
And where the beautiful superstructure of government and laws, which has been
erected upon them? -- Alas! -- They are dashed, they vanish, they are gone --
lost! Forever lost!!!

BUT can this be the event? Shall this be the fatal end, the shameful issue of
all the glorious exertions that have been made, -- of all the bitter sufferings
that have been endured -- of all the precious blood that has been shed? Is
this possible? Can it ever once be? Forbid it RIGHTEOUS HEAVEN! Forbid it, O MY
COUNTRY! -- -- America rises, indignant, at the slavish thought. -- Her
FREEBORN SONS are not so lost to the sentiments of liberty, the love of their
country, or the feelings of humanity, as to bear the most distant idea of such
a disgraceful end, to this glorious contest. Nor can they ever be so debased,
as to retain a wish to survive the loss of liberty, or their country's ruin. --
Much less to stand the tame spectators of the sacrifices, that (in such a case)
must and will be made, of noble patriots, wise counselors, faithful rulers,
brave commanders, and illustrious heroes, and, in fine, of the best friends and
best blood of AMERICA, by the AX or HALTER, to satiate the rage and glut the
malice of a British conqueror! Or, perhaps, that which is still more affecting
and degrading -- to be doomed to waste away the remains of a wretched life in
poverty, chains, slavery, or a cruel imprisonment!

THAT this has been the end of civil wars, when the struggles for liberty have
failed of success: And that such has been the fate of those, whom conquering
oppressors have been pleased to stigmatize, with the names of REBELS and
TRAITORS, numberless instances in the most celebrated histories, abundantly
prove.

IT IS after the war is closed, whether by conquest or submission, that the
bitterest revenge takes place; and under the pretense of law, justice or
necessity, it is then, that the worthiest characters are sacrificed, the
noblest patriots ^all, and the richest blood of a nation flows.

THIS was the case at Rome, and these the consequences that attended their
civil wars, from time to time. This was especially so, in those between Marius
and Sylla, by which that great republic was, for many years, convulsed to its
foundations. In their turns, during the contest, both Marius and Sylla stained
the streets of Rome with the blood of her most venerable senators and worthiest
citizens. But the cruelty of Sylla, after he had conquered the party of Marius,
and gained the summit of absolute power, over the whole commonwealth, was
beyond the power of description, and I had almost said, of belief itself. To
confirm the above representation, to show that it is not too high colored, and
to give a specimen of what a people may justly expect from a conquering TYRANT
at the close of a civil war; I beg leave to insert a passage or two from an
authentic history of Rome.

The taking of Praeneste and Norba put an end to the civil war in Italy. Sylla
therefore, having placed in all the Italian provinces such governors as were
entirely at his devotion, and pitched several little camps in different
districts, to keep the country in awe, returned to Rome, which he entered at
the head of his troops. The same day he assembled the people in the Comitium,
and told them with an h^^g^^y air, that he had conquered: but that those who
had made him take up arms against his country, should expiate the blood they
had made him shed, with their own. I will not spare one, said he, who has borne
arms against me. They shall all perish to a man. These words, from a man who
was absolute master of their lives and fortunes, made the most resolute
tremble. They filled the whole city with dread and horror; and the
consternation was doubled the next day, when they saw fixed up in all public
places, a list of proscribed persons, containing the names of forty senators
and sixteen hundred knights. If any man gave shelter to a person proscribed,
though his son, his brother, or his father, death was the certain reward of his
humanity; whereas the assassin was recompensed with two talents, though a slave
had murdered his master, or a son his father. -- The tyrent chose such agents
to execute his decrees, as had even less pity than himself. The chief of those
was the infamous Cataline. -- At the head of a band of assassins, he scoured
the streets, and killed many knights and senators before they knew they were
proscribed. The persons named in the list were sought for in their own houses,
in the porticoes, and even in the temples; whence they were dragged to Sylla,
and cruelly butchered in his presence.

The massacre was not confined to those named in the list. Sylla extended his
revenge to all who had borne arms against him, of what rank soever, or
condition. Nay, his cruel agents took this opportunity to gratify their private
revenge and avarice, confounding the most innocent and peaceable with the most
guilty, out of some private grudge, or purely for the sake of their wealth and
rich furniture. In short, the slaughter was so dreadful, that Sylla was
reproached with it even by his best friends. Among others, a young senator,
named Caius Metellus, ventured one day to ask him in full senate, when he
designed to put a stop to the calamities of his fellow citizens. We do not
intercede said he, for such as you have resolved to destroy: but only desire
you to free those from uneasiness, whom you have determined to save. Sylla,
without seeming to take this bold speech amiss, answered cooly, that he knew
not yet whom he should save. Name to us then, replied Metellus, those you are
determined to destroy, That I will do, answered Sylla, very smartly, and
immediately caused a new list to be fixed up of eighty citizens, whom he
proscribed, most of them senators, and persons of great distinction. The next
day he proscribed two hundred and twenty more, and an equal number the third.
Among these was Marcus Marius, who was nearly related to the great Marius, and
highly favored by the people. -- He was seized by Cataline, and put to death,
after having suffered the most exquisite torments tyranny could invent. He was
whipped through all the streets of Rome, and, after this ignominious punishment,
carried beyond the Tyber, where by Sylla's barbarous agents, his eyes were put
out, his hands and ears cut off, his tongue torn out, all his joints
dislocated, and his bones broken. One Marcus Plaetorius, being moved at such an
affecting sight, could not help pitying the unfortunate young man; which so
offended Sylla, that he ordered him to be killed on the spot And now after nine
thousand senators, knights, and citizens had been inhumanly murdered by Sylla's
agents, he assembled the people, and told them, that he had proscribed as many
as he could think of at present: and as for those he had forgot, they should be
proscribed too, as soon as he could call them to his memory!

This was the scene in the city of Rome -- What awful havoc, then, must the
same measures of cruelty have made in the other cities and states of that great
Commonwealth! -- But no comment is necessary.

Vid. Univars. hist. vol. xiii. page 83, 84, etc.




WHEN, mad with loyalty, the British nation restored their flattering tyrant,
Charles IId. a scene of blood was opened, more affecting, perhaps, to the more
judicious part of the people, than all that had appeared in the civil war.
Notwithstanding the exile-king promised every thing to regain the throne; and
upon his return and restoration, made public proclamation of an act of amnesty
or general pardon; not only the king's judges, so called, but many of the
worthiest characters were soon attainted and proscribed: And it was quickly
found, that nothing short of the best blood of the nation, would be a sacrifice
sufficient to appease his own resentment, or his father's ghost.

THE same, or perhaps, more affecting scenes will probably be opened in
America, should we fail of success in the present contest; or should these
United States be ever subdued by arms, or cajoled by arts, to a return and
submission to Britain. -- But this is an event, which (we firmly trust) will
never take place.

UPON the whole: in our united counsels and exertions, we may yet hope, and
even assure ourselves, that GOD who who sits upon the throne of his
holiness, will behold our state, hear our prayers, and still maintain our right
and plead our cause. -- That he will hasten the period of our present
distresses, and give us to see, in his own way and time, the liberty,
independence, sovereignty and glory of the UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
established on a foundation that shall never be moved.

AND what a bright, what a glorious scene of liberty and felicity does such an
happy issue of this great and interesting contest, present to our view? --
America, redeemed out of the hands of her enemies -- the United States,
delivered from the oppressors yoke; the secure retreat of injured innocence and
the happy asylum of the oppressed and distressed. -- The seat of justice and
equity, of freedom and empire -- extensive in trade and flourishing in commerce
-- abounding in riches and wealth -- and illustrious in literature -- in arts
and sciences; -- and, above all, glorious in the knowledge and practice of the
pure and peaceful religion of our LORD AND SAVIOR JESUS CHRIST: -- And the
unborn millions of succeeding ages, uniting in their grateful acknowledgments
of praise and thanksgiving to GOD the supreme ruler, for that spirit of wisdom,
liberty, patriotism and bravery, with which he was pleased to inspire the
patriots and heroes; and even the whole body of the people of the present
generation: -- and, in fine -- THIS PEOPLE, THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, a
name, a praise and a glory among the nations, throughout all generations, to
the end of time.

THAT such may be the end, such the reward, and such the important and lasting
effects, of this great and glorious contest, may GOD, of his infinite mercy,
grant, through Jesus Christ, our LORD

AMEN.
ERRATA.
PAGE 3, line 24. read, delegates. Ibid. line 31, read, are then. P 10, l 21,
r. in dangers. P. 14. l. 23, r. monarchical. P. ^0. l. 18, r. with the several
P. 26, note ^ l 2, r. faithful. P. 32, ^. a. l 6. r. the purposes of his
ambition. P. 39. l. 12, r. cheerfully. P 44. n. l. 24. r. so related and for.
P. 46, l. 2, r. has pled P. 47, n. l. 6. r. ordonance stores. P. 51. l. penult
r. grateful people. P 52. bot r. Psalm 118. 23. P. 62, l. 10, r. cheerfully. P.
65, l. 3. r. provide for.


