The OLD Man's CALENDAR.

A DISCOURSE ON JOSHUA XIV. 10. Delivered in the first Parish of Hingham, on
the LORD'S DAY, August 26, 1781, the BIRTHDAY of the Author, EBENEZER GAY.

Thus says the Lord of hosts, there shall yet old men and old women dwell in
the streets of Jerusalem: and every man with his staff in his hand for very age.

ZECHA. VIII. ^ Behold now, I am old, I know not the day of my death.

GENESIS XXVII. 2. I said, days should speak, and the multitude of years teach
wisdom.

JOB XXXII. ^ Nihil turpius est quam grandis natu Sen^x, qui nu^lum habet
argumentum, quo se probet diu vixisse praeter Aetatem.

SENECA. BOSTON: Printed by JOHN BOIL in Marlborough Street. MDCCLXXXI.

JOSHUA XIV. 10. (The latter part of the verse.)

-- And now, lo, I am this day fourscore and five years old.


THE numbering our days, so as to apply our hearts unto wisdom, is not
computing the definite sum total of them to know how many they shall be; but
the just reckoning them to be few and uncertain, and in consideration thereof,
to live them religiously. Yet, to keep an account of those which are past, may
be a help to the better improvement of those which may be to come, especially
in our old age, when the latter must appear very few indeed compared with the
former, and of the last importance to be spent well and wisely by us. The
observation of our birthday is to little good purpose, if we do not then with
religious seriousness consider, how many years old we are. There is not in this
assembly more than one person who can adopt the words of the text, and say, I
am this day fourscore and five years old. Yet, all the aged here may, with him,
receive instruction therefrom, to remember, as it becomes and concerns us,
how old we are. Forgetfulness is a common infirmity of old age. The decay of
memory is the first of their mental faculties which men feel, and are willing
to own, and do complain of. In some it is to that degree, that they are not
able to tell how old they are. But all that can count the number of the past
years of their lives, do not apply this knowledge to the good uses it might
serve them. That such of us who are old may so remember this, as that our minds
may be deeply impressed, our affections and actions duly influenced by the
consideration thereof, is the design of the present discourse.

1. REMEMBERING how old we are, the goodness of God in prolonging our days,
should be greatly admired and thankfully acknowledged by us. The boundaries of
human life have been different in the several ages of the world. There have
been gradual abbreviations of it from the first man, Adam, who lived nine
hundred and thirty years, to Moses, who lived an hundred and twenty. But then,
the term fixed by God was threescore years and ten. This has ever since been
the goal that stints our race. Some run beyond it, but the most do not reach
it. Of David, who lived just seventy years, it is said, that he died in a good
old age, and full of days -- being as many as those of a long life, in the
scripture-account, and of which there was a promise. The addition of ten or
fifteen years, was then, and is now, rare, and vouchsafed to very few
individuals of mankind. These are distinguished from the most of their
fellow-mortals in the length of their days, and are remarkable instances of
longevity; and should take special notice of it themselves, as does the pious
Israelite in the text, Caleb, the son of Jephunneh the Kenezite. He was one of
the twelve princes, heads of the tribes, whom Moses, when he came to the
borders of Canaan, sent to search the land: and the only man, beside Joshua,
the son of Nun, that animated the faint-hearted people to go in, and take
possession of it. Which he could do with greater assurance of success in the
attempt, because God had promised to give him Hebron, a city of the most
gigantic men, and impregnable walls, together with the adjacent country, for
his inheritance. To which he put in his claim unto Joshua, the captain of the
Lord's people, seven years after he led them into Canaan, and among the several
tribes. Caleb was probably the oldest man of the whole congregation that
entered into Canaan -- all his cotemporaries dying in the wilderness. And with
admiration and gratitude he reflected on the goodness of God, in the
preservation of his life to that time. Now behold, the Lord has kept me alive,
as he said, these forty and five years since the Lord spoke these words unto
Moses, even since the children of Israel wandered in the wilderness: and now
lo, I am this day fourscore and five years old.

AN instructive example, my aged brethren, is this unto us, to consider how
long God has kept us alive, and affect our hearts with an admiring and
thankful sense of the goodness of God therein toward us. The Author is the
Preserver of our lives, who has given us all things necessary to our
sustenance, convenient for our use, and pleasant for our enjoyment -- all those
things by which men live. He took us out of the womb, and did make us to hope
when we hung on our mothers breasts. He nursed our tender infancy, and guarded
our heedless youth: and having abtained help and mercy of him, we continue unto
old age. This should be mavelous in our eyes, while we see so many dying
around us ere they arrive at it. To God our escapes from death belong, and
should be thankfully ascribed, when the arrows of it are constantly flying so
thick about us. We have been a-like subject as others to mortal diseases and
fatal accidents, from which we have been preserved to this day. Our travel, as
Caleb's, has been through a wilderness, in which the carcases of the most of
that generation which set out with us are fallen. But God has kept us alive
amidst innumerable dangers that have surrounded us. On which if we look back,
our souls must be filled with wonder, and our mouths with praise, that we are
not destroyed from off the earth. Our frail bodies in which we dwell, are
houses of clay, whose foundation is in the dust: can we but marvel that in so
many years they are not mouldered down; or that they fell not long ago, when
the rain of affliction descended, the floods of sorrow came, and tempests of
adversity beat upon them. How often has God healed our diseases, and brought
us back from the gates of death, that we might praise him in the land of the
living? David in his old age reflecting how marvellously he had been holden up
from the womb to that time, said, "I am as a wonder unto many." Psalm 71. He
was most so to himself, that he was yet alive, when he thought of the troubles,
fatigues, and dangers he had been carried through. How melting the
consideration, that the long-suffering God has spared us, while we by our sins
have been continually provoking him to cut off the number of our months in the
midst! He has prolonged our days, which the indiscretions and extravagances of
our youth; the excesses of our appetites and passions would else have shortened.
We should remember all the way which the Lord has led us these so many years,
and thank him for the conduct of his kind providence in bringing us to a great
old age. O bless our God, ye people, and make the voice of his praise to be
heard; who holds our souls in life. Bless the Lord, O my soul, who redeemeth
thy life from destruction.

BUT, is it such a favor to live to old age, the days of which are evil, and
the years such as we are apt to say, we have no pleasure in them? I answer,
that life is the principal good, the foundation and capacity of our enjoying
any: and the lengthening it to old age is an instance and display of the
goodness of a faithful Creator, who has promised it them that follow him in
the way of his commandments; as also, that goodness and mercy shall follow them
to the end of their days. Isaiah 46.3.4. Hearken unto me, O house of Jacob,
says God, and all the remnant of the house of Israel, which are born by me
from the belly, and carried from the womb, and even to your old age I am he,
and unto hoar hairs I will carry you, I have made, and I will bear, even I will
carry, and will deliver you Such tender care of divine providence from the
beginning to the end of long life, as these words express, certainly demands
the thankful acknowledgments of the aged. Were we indeed to live only in this
world, so full of troubles we meet with in it from wailing infancy to querulous
decrepitness, it might not be thought so great a favor to live unto old age,
which is attended with peculiar inconveniences. The evil of these days, added
to that of the former of our lives, might seem more than a balance for the good
enjoyed in them all. In the judgment of wise Solomon, concerning a man whose
happiness is limited to this world, Ecclesi. 6. Though he live a thousand years
twice told, yet has he seen no good -- none that makes him happier upon the
whole, than if he lived not at all: -- has seen no more good than if he never
had been born. The vanity and vexation of spirit in a life more than twice as
long as Methuselab's, would eat out the heart of all the good in its sorrows
multiplying with the years of it, would render life an insupportable burden.
"For my part, says Mr. How, upon the strictest enquiry, I see nothing in the
life of man upon earth, that should render it for itself, more the matter of a
rational election (supposing the free option given him the first moment of his
being) than presently again to cease to be the next moment." If we can see more
good in the present life, on the supposition there is none to follow it, than
that heavenly man did, yet we must be sensible that our best days, as to
worldly enjoyment, are first passed, and if with them an end had been put to
our existence, we should have been so far happy as not to have seen the evil of
these days of old age; and we may have cause to think it had been well for us
not to have lived to them. But, since this life is in order to another, and we
are here in a state of probation and preparation for an everlasting life of
perfect felicity; and the good and evil received at the hand of the Lord are
improveable to our obtaining it, the prolongation of our days on earth is, on
this account, an advantage infinitely exceeding all the disadvantage thereof.
The just value of the present life is to be estimated by it is relation to a
future -- the dependence which our eternal well-being has upon it. It is the
precious season of working out our salvation, and making our calling and
election sure: the which requires, as diligent care and labor, so likewise
competent time. No part of it which is allotted to us for that purpose, should
we think to be redundant, but fear rather the whole will scarce be sufficient:
especially, when we consider how much of that which is past we have lost in
sloth and idleness. Did we set out early to follow God in a religious course of
life, and make as steady and speedy progress to the end, as human frailty
ordinarily admits, we may find the longest day of life short enough to perform
our journey to heaven. Length of days is a real advantage to our improving in
virtue, perfecting of holiness, and attaining to High degrees of glory at last.
They therefore to whom it is granted, may have great cause to thank God
therefore, whatever inconveniences attend their old age. And yet, it might be in
favor to others, that they died before the evil came; having lived long enough
to answer life's great end, and be ripe for heaven. -- Do any of us continue
wicked, that are waxed old? let not the riches of God's goodness, forbearance
and long-suffering, be despised, but adored by us. Is it less wonderful mercy
in him, that has kept us so long alive in our rebellion against him, than if
we had faithfully served him? How admirable is his patience that has born with
us to this day in our sins -- that he has spared us, when multitudes of our
coevals (not greater sinners than we) have been cut off in the midst of their
days? Is it no favor to be so long reprieved from death and hell, and to have
still opportunity to seek for pardon with the least hope of obtaining it, which
the damned have not? God is long-suffering toward us, not willing that any
should perish, but that we should come to repentance; for which the evil days
of old age may be a space given us, though not so convenient a season as we
have let slip, and irrecoverably lost. So that whatever our character be, we
should admire, and thankfully acknowledge the goodness of God in keeping us
alive.

2. To remember, as we ought, how old we are, brings death, and it is awful
consequence, in a near and affecting view to us. It conduces to make us know
our end, that it is near, it is near, and hastes greatly. This is a point of
wisdom, to which we should apply our hearts, to know practically, or with
serious regard to consider our latter end, that we shortly must die out of this
world, and enter on eternity. Of this we must needs be sensible, when we that
are old recollect how many years we have already lived -- many times more than
we can expect still to live. We have not the skill of numbering our days, if we
reckon not those to come very few indeed compared with those that are past. Men
judge better of the shortness of time when it is past, than when it is passing;
and by setting a lesser portion of it against a larger. "Few, said Jacob to
Pharaoh, when he was an hundred and thirty years old, have the days of the
years of my life been, and have not attained unto the days of the years of the
life of my fathers." Genesis 47.7. Do the days of the years we have lived seem
few? how much fewer, in a comparative view of them, must those we may have to
live seem to us? a day or a year to come, is not longer than one that is past.
If it appear so to us, we measure time falsely, and our mistake, by the least
consideration might be corrected. How long have I to live? said Barzillai to
the King -- I am this day fourscore years old. Every man that is so old or
older, should be as deeply sensible, that he has not long to live. It is vain
presumption in the young, but most unreasonable and absurd in the aged, to put
far away the evil day of death. Such is the common dotage on life, as to
occasion the remark, that there is no man so old but thinks he may live a year
longer. Were any of us sure that we should; is death at no greater distance to
be unregarded and unprepared for by us: The living know that they shall die.
From our age and the circumstances of it, we may with as much certainty
conclude that the time of our departure is at hand. The bodily frame is so
weakened, and such irreparable breaches are made in it, that it is dissolution
is daily to be expected. We may say as Job, Our breath is corrupt our vital
spirits are wasted, our days are extinct, the graves are ready for us. We are
tottering over them, and shall soon tumble into them. This consideration of the
near approach of death, (which is included in the serious remembrance of our
great age) would be available, in way of rational influence, to bring our
hearts unto wisdom, and engage us to a good improvement of the few uncertain
days which may be added to our so many past years, and so to live every day as
if it were our last. Considering ourselves so near the eternal world, our great
concern would be to get prepared for a speedy removal by death into it, and to
appear at that awful bar, before which nature in a very little time will set
us. "As a ship which has been long at sea tossed and weather-beaten, which is
shattered in it is timber, and has lest much of it is rigging, should do nothing
in that case but work toward the port, there to find it is safety and case; so
should a man, who having past many storms and agitations of this world, is
griveously battered and torn with age, strive only to die well, and get safe
into the harbor of eternal rest."

3. REMEMBERING how old we are, and therefore have not long to live, we should
review our actions, and repent of out sins. Happy are those aged servants of
God who, reslecting on their past behavior in life, can say with him in the
text, we have fully followed the Lord. But they cannot pretend they have done
to without many straying steps. Their rejoicing is this, the testimony of their
conscience, that in simplicity and godly sincerity, not with fleshly wisdom,
but by the grace of God, they have their conversation in the world. They still
look back with sorrow and shame on the sins of their youth, and renew their
repentance of all they committed before and since their conversion; and do not
think themselves so righteous in the sight of God, by imputation, or
sanctification, as not to need continue their repentance in old age, and to the
end of their days. Good men die repenting. A repentance unto life is better
completed, than begun, on a deathbed -- If any of us have lived impenitent to
old age, and are now to begin the difficult work, for which we have so little
uncertain time; let us not delay a moment longer to turn from our evil ways
unto the Lord, and follow hard after him. With what confusion must it cover us,
to recount the many years we have spent in sin, following worldly lusts and
vanities, and have irrecoverably lost the most and best of our time and
strength given us for the service of God, and the work of our salvation. Shall
we rob God, and defraud our own souls of the small remainder? It was good
advice of a Jewish Rabbi, Be sure to repent one day before thy death. If we
that are very old mean to do so, we must repent today; for we have least
reason to boast of tomorrow. -- But, can a man be born again, when he is old?
Can he be converted, and become a regenerate child of God, when he is grown old
in sin? It seems a miracle of grace that he should be so; but it is not to be
dispaired of as impossible -- nothing is so with God. To a repentance which is
unto salvation, the succor of divine grace is necessary; and we do not know it
is too late for us to seek it: soon will it be so, if we still neglect or
refuse it. Today, after so long a time of disobedience to the gospel, are we
called upon, not to harden our hearts. The goodness of God in keeping us alive
to this day, leads us to repentance, and encourages us to hope for pardon
and acceptance with God, through Jesus Christ, upon it. Wherefore has the Lord
waited, but that he might be gracious; and been so long-suffering toward us,
but that we might have this late opportunity of turning unto him? It is at our
infinite peril that we defer a day longer. "Wherefore is our day of trial
extended beyond the common term? Is it not indulged to the great need our past
conduct has of it? And shall our folly reverse the kind intention of that
indulgence?" So the blessing of long life which God has given us, will be
turned into a curse, as it is written, Isa. 65.20, The sinner being an hundred
years old shall be accursed -- the more accursed for dying so old an impenitent.

4. REMEMBERING how old we are, our hearts should be loosened from this world.
Our affections to, our cares about, and pursuits after, the things of it be
moderated. The consideration of our having lived so many years in it, and must
therefore soon leave it, is proper and useful to wean our hearts from it is most
desirable enjoyments. Barzillai found it so, when David invited him to go and
spend the rest of his days in a palace. "The king said unto Barzillai, come
thou over with me, and I will feed thee with me in Jerusalem. And Barzillai
said unto the king, How long have I to live, that I should go up with the king
unto Jerusalem? I am this day fourscore years old: and can thy servant diseern
between good and evil? Can thy servant taste what I eat, or what I drink? Can I
hear any more the voice of singing men, and singing women? Wherefore then
should thy servant be yet a burden unto my Lord the king? They servant will go
a little way over Jordan with the king: and why should the king recompense it
me with such a reward? Let thy servant, I pray thee, turn back again, that I
may die in mine own city, and be buried by the grave of my father, and of my
mother." The consideration of his great age prevailed against the love of the
world, which is deeply rooted in the hearts of men, and is wont, to continue
and increase until death. All it is alluring baits could not draw him from his
home to Jerusalem, where he might have lived in greater splendour, wealth and
delicacy. All that is tempting in this world -- the lust of the flesh, the lust
of the eye, and the pride of life, came abreast and assaulted him at once; but
he withstood them, by calling to mind how old he was. The grandeur and opulence
of a court-life, the dainties of a royal table, and charms of music, had no
force on him to embrace the king's grateful and generous offer. It much better
became him, he justly thought, who was so old, and he much rather chose to
retire to his private house, where he might pass his last days more free from
the dangerous temptations of an insnaring world, and better prepare for death
and the grave, to which he was so near. O that we who are old might learn by
this noble example, to get our hearts weaned from the world before we are
removed, as very soon we must be, out of it. Surely we forget how old we are,
while we mind earthly things, having all our thoughts and cares employed about
them. If this was our way in youth, and middle age, it was then our folly: much
more inexcusable is it now in our old age. What is more absurd and shocking
than to see men who are just going out of the world, loving it as fondly, and
scraping for it as eagerly, as if they were never to leave it? What are all the
honors, and riches, and pleasures of it to us, who can so little time enjoy
them? Did we retain a natural relish of them as quick and strong as in youth,
this thought might be enough to cool our thirst, and slacken our endeavors
after them, and abate our complacence in them. It is our shame and misery, if
our long experience has not taught us the vanity of this world. What did we
ever get by following it hitherto? Not any thing which satisfies us: nor shall
we, if we follow it to the end of our days. Vain will all our expectations from
this world be found. Is it not in a manner dead to us? And shall not we in
affection be dead to it? -- The aged servant of the Lord, who said, I am this
day fourscore and five years old, did indeed take a prudent thought and care to
secure for himself and posterity that part of Canaan which was allotted to him
by God, and confirmed with an oath by Moses. -- It is the inordinate love of
the world, such as excludes the love of the Father, and obstructeth our
following the Lord, which we are to take heed and beware of, as most
ill-becoming our age, who can need, or use the things of it but a little while.
And as to our children, which may live in this world after us, we should warn
them of the evil of covetousness, and not by our anxiety in providing for them
leave them an example of it. Can we not, in the faith of the dying Patriarch,
trust them to the care of a good God which has fed us all our life long unto
this day? Genesis 48.15.

5. REMEMBERING how old we are, let patience under the infirmities and
afflictions of these our evil days have it is perfect work in us. Few that are
much younger than Caleb, when he was fourscore and five years old, can say as
he did, "as yet I am as strong as I was at forty" -- the time when men are in
their full strength. If by reason of a more than ordinary firm constitution,
any live to be fourscore, yet commonly is their strength then labor and
sorrow. So decayed are they in body and mind, that they cannot do the business
nor enjoy the comforts of life; which is sometimes, though rarely, extended
farther. But the evil days usually come much sooner, the years in which men
say, they have no pleasure in them. And they are usually attended with such
weaknesses, pains, diseases, disquiets, miseries of various kinds, as make folk
(says the Roman orator) complain of a load lying upon them heavier than mount
Aetna. But the consideration of our great age, may help us to bear the
afflictions of it patiently, as knowing it is not long we have to bear them.
How full soever our evil days are of troubles, they are few, and will soon be
finished. They are few compared with our good days of youth, and health, and
strength, and rejoicing. Have we not many more years of mercy to remember and
thank God for, than we now have of affliction to pass through in this world?
Had we not enjoyed the good of the former, we had not suffered the evil of the
present. Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we not receive
evil? If we would not have lived to old age, why were we unwilling to die
before? If we would, why should we repine at the decays of a frail nature, and
be dissatisfied that we were made men? There is no temptation or trouble that
befalls us, but what is common to man. It is the condition of humanity to be
liable to such infirmities and inconveniences. We suffer them by a natural
unavoidable necessity. "These things in a long life, are like dust, and dirt,
and rain in a long journey." A few weary steps more will bring us to the end of
our's. -- In respect of the public state of things the days are evil, which
make these of old age the more so unto us. If it be not for want of enquiring
wisely concerning this, that we say the former days were better than these, and
we had more pleasure in them, yet, remembering how old we are, let us in our
patience possess our souls, submitting to the providence of God, and believing
that he has wise and good reason for suffering the times to be as they are.
Soon will there be an end, if not of these troubles, yet of our days, and we
shall see no more the evil work that is done under the sun. -- Should we have
the trial of out-living our serviceableness in the world, and be laid by as
vessels of no more use, the consideration of our being wasted and worn out with
age, should make us contented, and others also, to whom we may seem
burdensome; but shall not long be so. Passive obedience is that which God
calls us to in our age and weakness, and in which we must serve and honor
him in the conclusion of our labor.

IT is one, and not the least, of the melancholy circumstances of old age, to
have buried the most, or all, of our coeval friends, early acquaintance, and
dear companions in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, and be deprived of
the benefit and comfort of their society. For, whatever be the reason, though
we taste the wine of new friendship we have contracted, and it make our hearts
glad, yet we are apt to think the old was better. The hope of going ere long to
the spirits of just men made perfect, solaceth the minds of aged christians,
when they sit alone, and feel their want of the company of pious departed
friends, with whom they used to take sweet counsel. Having set down the names
of many who were gone before him into the world of spirits, Mr. Baxter writes
thus: "I name these for my own delight and comfort; it being pleasant to me to
remember what companions I shall have in the heavenly joys, and praises of my
Lord." Death dissolves not the union of souls knit to one another in holy love.
There is but a short absence, and they shall meet and congratulate in a better
world, where the communion of saints is perfected. -- While in this tabernacle
aged christians do groan, being burdened with many afflictions; but should
wait patiently for deliverance therefrom: which, though they have greater
reason, may be more difficult for them to do, because of the good hope and
earnest desire in them of passing through death to a state of rest and
happiness in heaven. This trial is peculiar to assured christians, who have the
most lively views and expectations of being with the Lord, when they shall be
absent from the body. The height of their piety increases the trial of their
patience in waiting for God's salvation. The delay of their hopes and desires,
is a singular exercise of their patience under the afflictions of this life:
especially, when they have many times thought themselves passed the storms and
agitations of this world, just at harbor, and have been put back again to sea.
The ship, however, is still under sail, and they are constantly making nearer
approaches to, and shall shortly reach their desired haven. Ye have need of
patience, says the author of the epistle to the Hebrews, that after ye have
done the will of God, ye might receive the promise: for yet a little while, and
he that shall come will come, and will not tarry.

6. REMEMBERING how old we are, let us wholly, and more closely follow the Lord
to the end of our lives -- hold on our way of faithful obedience, and not be
tired by the length of it, and be weary of well doing. We should take heed that
we suffer not decays of grace with those of nature; but while our outward man
is perishing, our inward man be renewed day by day. Our diligence should be
quickened, our zeal promoted amidst, and even by our bodily weaknesses, has they
intimate the time of working out our salvation is short. We do not, as Caleb
did, retain our natural vigor to be employed in the service of God, nor can we
expect our youth will be renewed in old age, as sometimes it has been after
sickness; yet waiting upon the Lord, we may (according to his promise) renew
our spiritual strength, and mount up with wings, like eagles (when they have
renewed their plumes, and fly toward heaven, in earnest desires and endeavors
after higher degrees of grace and holiness. Are we not too apt to grow remiss
in the business of religion, dull and sluggish in the performance of the duties
of it; and to think our age will excuse this in us? -- whereas this
consideration should urge us to greater diligence in the important work, for
the accomplishment of which we have so little time remaining. Have we not still
much to do, that we may be prepared as we wish to be for death and eternity?
and O how short a time to do it in? we that are so near the grave, where there
is not work, should do with all our might that which we are infinitely
concerned to finish well. Old age has some peculiar advantages for the
business of religion, which we should embrace. It disableth us from following
the world in eager and incessantly laborious pursuits; and so we may the more
fully follow the Lord in the easier ways of godliness, and mind the one thing
needful. It abateth the violence of sensual inclinations; and it exempteth from
many temptations to sin, into which youth betrayeth men. It allows us not to
run with the profane and dissolute to the excess of riot -- excuses us from
conformity to the world in its vain fashions, and shuts us out of much idle
time -- wasting company, that we might converse with God in secret, by reading,
meditation, and prayer. And we should not deprive ourselves of the benefit of
public ordinances of worship, so long as we are any ways capable of giving our
profitable attendance. Psalm. 92.13.14. Those that be planted in the house of
the Lord, shall flourish in the courts of our God. They shall still bring forth
fruit in old age: they shall be fat and flourishing. We should diligently
improve all means and advantages to our thriving in grace, and abounding in the
fruits of righteousness, even in old age. The prophet says of the millenial
state, Isa. 65.20. There shall be no more an old man that hoth not filled up
his days. Our last will be empty days, if they be passed in the slothful
neglect of our duty. Let none such be put into the Calendar -- be joined to the
days of our years, or come into the number of the months. Let our days to the
very last of them be filled up with religious virtue, and a long life
completed in us -- So will our old be truly "honorable age:" Whereas, nothing
is more shameful, than to have no other proof of our living long, than that we
have been threescore and ten, or fourscore years and more, in the world.

7. REMEMBERING how old we are, we should be willing, when our time comes, to
die. If the consideration of our great age has the forementioned effects upon
us, it may be of this comfortable use to us at the close of our days. It is a
common saying, the young may, the old must, die. These die in course, and by
necessity of nature. Of which necessity we should make a virtue, in being truly
willing, at the call of God and nature, to leave this world, in which we have
had so large a share of life. To die willingly, and go away rejoicing in hope
of eternal life, is the crowning virtue of a good life. It does honor to
religion, and might convince the infidel and ungodly part of mankind of its
reality and excellence; and that a holy life is indeed the best, which has so
peaceful and happy an end. And surely, they that have followed the Lord to a
good old age, should be willing and glad, and only wait for leave, to go to
him; although the passage be through the valley of the shadow of death. It
becomes such to be satisfied with long life. And if at the end of it, they
feel any reluctance to a departure hence, to say unto the lingering spirit, as
good old Hilarion did, "Go forth, O my soul, why do thou pause and stop? have
thou served God these threescore and ten years, and art thou afraid to die?"
The very learned and pious Matthew Mead, when he was dying, said, "I am going
home, as every honest man should, when his work is done; and I bless God I have
so good a home to go to." O how welcome is the day of such a man's death, and
more to be rejoiced in by him, than the day of his birth. -- To our so great
advantage in life, and comfort at death, might it be for us, my aged friends,
to remember how old we are.

HAD I room therefore in this Discourse, calculated more especially for the use
of the aged of this flock of the Lord's people, I would address my young
hearers, and exhort them betimes to learn the holy art of numbering their days,
so as to apply their hearts unto wildom: and recommend to their imitation also
the example of faithful Caleb, who followed the Lord from his youth; as his own
conscience testifies when he was so old, as he tells us in the text, and God
also bare him witness. Forty years old (at which age men are reckoned young)
was I, says he in the context, when Moses the servant of the Lord sent me from
Kadeshbarnea, to spy out the land -- and I wholly followed the Lord. The same
testimony God himself gave of him. Commending the obedient spirit which then
was in him, says, Numb. 14.24. My servant Caleb followed me fully. In the Book
of Ecclesiastus, chap. 46, verse 10, it is to his honor recorded, "The Lord
gave strength unto Caleb, which remained with him to his old age, so that he
entered the high places of the land, and his seed obtained it for an
inheritance, that the children of Israel might see, that it is good to follow
the Lord." See here, my young people, an encouraging example for you to do so.
As you desire life and love many days, that you may see good, walk not in the
way of your hearts, but turn your feet now unto God's testimonies, and wholly
follow the Lord your God -- so you may arrive to a good old age: or, if you die
before, shall obtain an inheritance in the better country, that is, the
heavenly Canaan. -- O ye beloved children, my mouth is opened, my heart is
enlarged, to speak much unto you, and warn you to flee youthful lusts: but to
follow righteousness, faith, charity, peace, every christian virtue, with them
that call on the Lord out of a pure heart: that the friend of your souls may
have the joy to see you walk in the truth, following the Lord as dear obedient
children.

BUT it is time for me to put an end to this discourse.

I ASK of my hearers, young and old, a few minutes attention to the conduct of
divine Providence toward their aged Minister, in the prolongation of his life.

LO NOW, my brethren, I am this day fourscore and five years old -- A wonder of
God's sparing mercy! Sixty-three of these years have I spent in the work of the
ministry among you. One hundred and forty-six years ago, your forefathers came
with their pastor, and settled in this place. I am the third in the pastorate
of this church, which has not been two years vacant. Scarce any parish but
has had more in that office in so long a space of time. The people of this
have been steady to their own ministers, living to old age; have not been given
to change, nor with itching ears have heaped to themselves teachers. I bless
God, who disposed my lot among a people, with whom I have lived here in great
peace, eleven years longer than either of my worthy predecessors. The Rev.
Peter Hobart, and, The Rev. John Norton.
I have only to wish that my labors had been as profitable, as they have been
acceptable to them. I retain a grateful sense of the kindnesses (injuries I
remember none) which I have received from them. While I have reaped of their
carnal things to my comfortable subsistence, it has been my great concern and
pleasure to sow unto them spiritual things, which might spring up in a harvest
of eternal blessings. That their affections to me, as their pastor, have
continued from fathers to children, and children's children, has been
thankfully observed by me; and should have been improved as an advantage and
incentive to do them (in returns of love for love) all possible good. It is but
little I can now do in the work to which I am kept up so late in the evening of
my days, and my people may feel their great need of one more able in body and
mind to serve them in the gospel ministry. In this case, by brethren, I hope
that no partial regard to me, or parsimonious view to your worldly interest,
will hinder your timely providing yourselves with such an one. As much as I
dread and deprecate the being cut down as a cumberer of the ground in this part
of the Lord's vineyard; I would not with my useless old age fill up the place,
and deprive you of the help, of a profitable labourer in it. I submit to the
wisdom and will of God my own desire to finish my course of life, and the
ministry I have received of him together; while I make the humble
acknowledgment and prayer to him in Psalm 71. "O God, thou have taught me from
my youth, and hitherto I have declared thy wondrous works: Now also when I am
old and gray headed, O God, forsake me not, until I have showed thy strength
unto this generation." Caleb, when he was as old as I am, could say, As yet I
am as strong this day as I was in the day that Moses sent me; that is, when he
was forty years old. As my strength was then, even so my strength is now, for
war, both to go out, and to come in. -- It is far otherwise with me: yet, what
remains of the little strength I ever had for the ministerial warfare, I
would as gladly spend in the service of your souls, and assist you all I can in
your christian combat against the enemies which oppose your salvation. This
would I do, God enabling me, as long as I am in this tabernacle of frail flesh,
knowing that I must shortly put it off; and exchange the Sacred Desk for the
Silent Grave! -- But, O my soul, how awful the long -- the very long and strict
account to be given to God of thyself, and of thousands more committed to thy
charge, to watch also for their safety and everlasting happiness! Brethren,
pray for me, that I may find mercy of the Lord in that day: which if I should
fail of, it had been good for me, and perhaps for you also, perishing by my
neglect, that I had never been born. The consideration of which should excite
my utmost care and diligence to make full proof of my ministry, and engage your
attendance upon it in such a manner as will show you are not grown into a
weariness of it, which would render it unprofitable to you. I have been young,
and now am old. Your fathers despised not my youth for its weakness; nor have
you my old age for the infirmities that attend it: Which gives some
encouragement to hope that my long continuance with you is not so much to the
hinderance of the gospel of Christ, and detriment of your spiritual interests,
as I am often ready to fear. After some decay or interruption of the
Philippians' liberality to Paul, he thus writes unto them, Phil. 4.10. I
rejoiced in the Lord greatly, that now at the last your care of me has
flourished again. So has yours of me. I may add, as he does, not that I speak
in respect of want, which you have let me suffer in these difficult times. You
lay fresh engagements upon me to exert myself in the service of your souls; and
if the God of my life and health prolong the same any farther, I would go on in
the strength of the Lord God, to labor for your salvation, ardently aiming at
the gracious commendation which the minister of the church in Thyatira received
from Christ, Rev 2.19. I know thy works; and the last to be more than the
first. That mine may be more faithful, and more successful, God of his mercy to
me and you grant for Christ's sake.

AND now, brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which
is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them that are
sanctified.


