NOTES ON THE SLAVE TRADE.
IT may not be necessary to repeat what has been so fully declared in several
modern publications, of the inconsistence of slavery with every right of
mankind, with every feeling of humanity, and every precept of Christianity; nor
to point out its inconsistency with the welfare, peace and prosperity of every
country, in proportion as it prevails; what grievous sufferings it brings on
the poor NEGROES; but more especially what a train of fatal vices it produces
in their lordly oppressors and their unhappy offspring. Nevertheless for the
sake of some who have not met with, or fully considered those former
publications, and in hopes that some who are still active in support of slavery
may be induced to consider their ways, and become more wise, the following
substance of an address or expostulation made by a sensible Author, to the
several ranks of persons most immediately concerned in the trade, is now
republished.

"And first, to the Captains employed in this trade. Most of you know the
country of Guinea, perhaps now by your means, part of it is become a dreary
uncultivated wilderness; the inhabitants being murdered or carried away, so
that there are few left to till the ground; but you know, or have heard, how
populous, how fruitful, how pleasant it was a few years ago. You know the
people were not stupid, not wanting in sense, considering the few means of
improvement they enjoyed. Neither did you find them savage, treacherous, or
unkind to strangers. On the contrary they were in most parts a sensible and
ingenious people; kind and friendly, and generally just in their dealings. Such
are the men whom you hire their own countrymen to tear away from this lovely
country; part by stealth, part by force, part made captives in those wars which
you raise or foment on purpose. You have seen them torn away, children from
their parents, parents from their children: Husbands from their wives, wives
from their beloved husbands; brethren and sisters from each other. You have
dragged them who had never done you any wrong, perhaps in chains, from their
native shore. You have forced them into your ships, like an herd of swine, The
following relation is inserted at the request of the author.

That I may contribute all in my power toward the good of mankind, by
inspiring any of its individuals with a suitable abhorrence for that detestable
practice of trading in our fellow creatures, and in some measure at tone for my
neglect of duty as a christian, in engaging in a wicked traffic, I offer to
their serious consideration, some few occurrences of which I was an eye
witness. That being struck with the wretched and affecting scene they may
foster that humane principle, which is the noble and distinguished
characteristic of man.

About the year 1749; I sailed from Liverpool to the coast of Guinea, some time
after our arrival, I was ordered to go up the country a considerable distance,
upon having notice from one of the Negroe Kings, that he had a parcel of slaves
to dispose of, I received my instructions and went, carrying with me an account
of such goods we had on board, to exchange for the slaves we intended to
purchase; upon being introduced, I presented him with a small case of spirits,
a gun and some trifles, which having accepted, and understood by an interpreter
what goods we had, the next day was appointed for viewing the Slaves; we found
about two hundred confined in one place. But here how shall I relate the
affecting sight I there beheld, the silent sorrow which appeared in the
countenance of the afflicted father, and the painful anguish of the tender
mother, expecting to be forever separated from their tender offspring; the
distressed maid wringing her hands in presage of her future wretchedness, and
the general cry of the innocent, from a fearful apprehension of the perpetual
Slavery to which they were doomed. I purchased eleven, who I conducted, tied
two and two, to our ship. Being but a small vessel (ninety ton) we soon
purchased our cargo, consisting of one hundred and seventy Slaves, whom thou
may reader range in thy view, as they were shackled two and two together,
pent up within the narrow confines of the main deck, with the complicated
distress of sickness, chains and contempt; deprived of every fond and social
tie and in a great measure reduced to a state of desperation. We had not been a
fortnight at sea, before the fatal consequence of this despair appeared, they
formed a design of recovering their natural right, Liberty, by raising and
murdering every man on board; but the goodness of the Almighty rendered their
scheme abortive, and his mercy spared us to have time to repent: The plot was
discovered; the ring leader tied by the two thumbs over the barricado door, at
sun rise received a number of lashes; in this situation he remained till
sunset, exposed to the insults and barbarity of the brutal crew of sailors,
with full leave to exercise their cruelty at pleasure: The consequence was, the
next morning the miserable sufferer was found dead, steed from the shoulders to
the waist. The next victim was a youth, who from too strong a sense of his
misery refused nourishment and died disregarded and unnoticed till the hogs bad
fed on part of his flesh.


them who had souls immortal as your own. You have stowed them together as
close as ever they could lie, without any regard to decency or convenience --
And when many of them had been poisoned by foul air, or had sunk under various
hardships, you have seen their remains delivered to the deep, till the sea
should give up his dead. You have carried the survivors into the vilest
slavery, never to end but with life: Such slavery as is not found among the
Turks at Algiers, no, nor among the heathens in America.

May I speak plainly to you? I must. Love constrains me: Love to you, as well,
as those you are concerned with. Is there a God? You know there is. Is he a
just God? Then there must be a state of retribution: A state wherein the just
God will reward every man according to his work. Then what reward will he
render to you. O think betimes! before you drop into eternity: Think how, He
shall have judgment without mercy, that showed no mercy. Are you a man? Then
you should have a human heart. But have you indeed? What is your heart made of?
Is there no such principle as compassion there? Do you never feel another's
pain? Have you no sympathy? No sense of human woe? No pity for the miserable?
When you saw the flowing eyes, the heaving breast, or the bleeding sides and
tortured limbs of your fellow creatures. Was you a stone or a brute? Did you
look upon them with the eyes of a tiger? When you squeezed the agonizing
creatures down in the ship, or when you threw their poor mangled remains into
the sea, had you no relentings? Did not one tear drop from your eye, one sigh
escape from your breast? Do you feel no relenting now? If you do not, you must
go on till the measure of your iniquities is full. Then will the great God deal
with you, as you have dealt with them, and require all their blood at your
hands. And at that day it shall be more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah than
for you: But if your heart does relent; though in a small degree, know it is a
call from the God of Love. And today, if you hear his voice, harden not your
heart -- To day resolve, God being your helper to escape for your life --
Regard not money: All that a man has will he give for his life. Whatever you
lose, lose not your soul; nothing can countervail that loss. Immediately quit
the horrid trade: At all events be an honest man.

This equally concerns every merchant who is engaged in the slave trade. It is
you that induce the African villain to sell his countrymen; and in order
thereto, to steal, rob, murder men, women and children without number: by
enabling the English villain to pay him for so doing; whom you over pay for his
execrable labor. It is your money, that is the spring of all, that impowers
him to go on, so that whatever he or the African does in this matter, is all
your act and deed. And is your conscience quite reconciled to this? Does it
never reproach you at all? Has gold entirely blinded your eyes and stupefied
your heart? Can you see, can you feel no harm therein? Is it doing as you would
be done to? Make the case your own. Master (said a slave at Liverpool to the
merchant that owned him) what if some of my countrymen were to come here, and
take away my mistress, and master Tommy and master Billy, and carry them into
our country and make them slaves, how would you like it? His answer was worthy
of a man: I will never buy a slave more while I live. O let his resolution be
yours! Have no more any part in this detestable business. Instantly leave it to
those unfeeling wretches, who laugh at humanity and compassion.

And this equally concerns every person who has an estate in our American
plantations: Yea all slave-holders of whatever rank and degree; seeing
men-buyers are exactly on a level with men-stealers. Indeed you say, I pay
honestly for my goods; and I am not concerned to know how they are come by. Nay
but you are: You are deeply concerned, to know that they are not stolen:
Otherwise you are partaker with a thief, and are not a jot honester than him.
But you know they are not honestly come by: You know they are procured by means
nothing near so innocent as picking of pockets, house breaking, or robbery upon
the highway. You know they are procured by a deliberate series of more
complicated villainy (of fraud, robbery and murder) than was ever practiced
either by Mahometans or Pagans; in particular by murders of all kinds; by the
blood of the innocent poured upon the ground like water. Now it is your money
that pays the merchant, and through him the captain and African butchers. You
therefore are guilty: Yea principally guilty, of all these frauds, robberies,
and murders. You are the spring that puts all the rest in motion; they would
not stir a step without you -- Therefore the blood of all these wretches, who
die before their time, whether in their country or elsewhere, lies upon your
head. The blood of thy brother, (for whether thou will believe it or no, such
he is in the sight of him that made him) cries against thee from the earth,
from the ship and from the waters. O! whatever it cost, put a stop to its cry,
before it be too late. Instantly, at any price, were it the half of thy goods,
deliver thy self from blood guiltiness! Thy hands, thy bed, thy furniture, thy
house, thy land, are at present stained with blood. Surely it is enough;
accumulate no more guilt: Spill no more the blood of the innocent! Do not hire
another to shed blood! Do not pay him for doing it! Whether thou art a
Christian or no, show thy self a man; be not more savage than a lion or a bear.

Perhaps thou will say, I do not buy any NEGROES: I only use those left me by
my father. But is it enough to satisfy your own conscience! Had your father,
have you, has any man living, a right to use another as a Slave? It cannot be,
even setting REVELATION aside. It cannot be, that either war, or contract, can
give any man such a property in another as he has in his sheep and oxen: Much
less is it possible, that any child of man, should ever be born a Slave.
Liberty is the right of every human creature, as soon as he breathes the vital
air. And no human law can deprive him of that right, which he derives from the
law of nature. If therefore you have any regard to justice, (to say nothing of
mercy, nor of the revealed law of GOD) render unto all their due. Give Liberty
to whom Liberty is due, that is to every child of man, to every partaker of
human nature. Let none serve you but by his own act and deed, by his own
voluntary choice, away with whips, chains, and all compulsion. Be gentle
toward all men. And see that you invariably do unto every one, as you would he
should do unto you.


