TRUTH IS GREAT, AND WILL PREVAIL.

Buy the TRUTH, and sell it not.

King SOLOMON. Speaking the TRUTH in LOVE.

Apostle PAUL. Sold by PHILIP FREEMAN, in Union-Street, Boston.

* At JAMES ARNOLD's, in Providence, and at PHILIP FREEMAN's, in Boston, may be
had the Author's Baptist History of New England.

Truth is great, and will prevail.
THIS maxim has been assented to in all countries, and in all ages; but the
grand question has been, WHAT IS TRUTH? Pilate asked it, but waited not for the
answer. So far from it, that the fear of man moved him to give sentence against
the eternal SON OF GOD, who came into our world on purpose to bear witness unto
THE TRUTH. Jews and Gentiles were confederates in this hellish act, and all
nations and denominations ever since have been more agreed in opposing the
truth, than in any other point: Yet truth prevails still.

That there is one supreme BEING, whose kingdom rules over all, is the first
and capital article of truth, which no nation upon earth were ever able to
erase entirely out of their minds; for no government could ever be established
among themselves, without appeals to HIM for the truth of what was asserted,
and to avenge injustice, and the violation of contracts and engagements.

That it is the indispensable duty of every man to love his creator and
preserver with all his faculties and powers, and to love his neighbor as
himself, is a truth inseparably connected with the other: For while JEHOVAH
remains infinitely and unchangeably good, and we remain his offspring, our
obligation to love him can never be disannulled or abated; and his command, to
love our neighbors as ourselves, is as immutable as his perfections are.

That all mankind, in their natural condition, are in a state of revolt from
this heavenly ruler, is a truth as evident as the other; what need else could
there be for these appeals and restraints? The attempts that have often been
made against this truth, have always confirmed it, and have demonstrated the
corruption of the authors of those attempts. Nothing can discover a more mean
and dishonest disposition, than for a person to steal the property of another,
and then to labor to adorn and exalt himself therewith, while he tries hard to
sink the credit of the true owner, so as to set self above him: Yet this is the
very practice of all those who set up their reason above divine revelation. The
writings of the greatest men in Pagan countries are full of the intrigues,
adulteries, thefts and murders, of their imaginary deities; which, by God's
righteous judgment, and from their natural tendency, have produced like
abominations in their worshippers; because they changed the truth of God into a
lie. Romans i. 18 -- 32. And those who were favored with the oracles of God, and
yet did the same thing, thereby brought upon themselves a much greater
condemnation than the others did. Romans ii. 1 -- 24. If so, then what advantage
can it be to have those oracles? Answer, much every way: For what if some did
not believe? Shall their unbelief make the faith of God without effect? The
thought is to be rejected with the utmost abhorrence. Yea, let God be true, but
every man a liar; as it is written, that thou might be justified in thy
sayings, and might overcome when thou art judged. Romans iii. 1 -- 4. This is
the exact state of the controversy. Men have assumed the judgment seat, and
have arraigned the sayings of God to their bar. This practice began near the
forbidden tree, Genesis iii. 1 -- 6; and from that day to this men have been ever
learning, and yet, of themselves, were never able to come to the knowledge of
the truth; and that because the judge is the criminal, who cannot live in that
way any longer than he is kept in darkness; for whenever the authority of truth
takes place in his conscience, sin revives, and he dies; and his only way of
relief is by faith in the perfect obedience and atoning sacrifice of our great
surety, who offered himself without spot to God. Romans vii. 1 -- 12, Heb. ix 14,
and x. 1 -- 14. Unassisted reason could never go any farther in this respect,
than to move men to imbrue their hands in the blood of their own children, by
offering the fruit of their body for the sin of their soul: Yet many are now
guilty of stealing a finer dress for human nature, from the oracles of God, and
then of improving the same against the authority of the book they took it from;
so that instead of saying, let God be true, but every man a liar; their
argument is, that every man is not a liar, therefore in several points God does
not speak the truth! And it is a common thing for these reasoners, to claim a
power for themselves which they deny to JEHOVAH; and daily to practice that,
under his name, which, with reverence be it spoken, was never within HIS POWER
to do! Number. xxiii. 19, John x. 35, 2d Tim. ii. 13, Heb. vi. 18.

They often insist upon it, that men cannot deserve praise for doing right, nor
blame for doing wrong, unless they have power within themselves to act with
motive or against motive, as they please. If their voluntary actions are not
determined by what is within them, they say they are not free. Yet the same men
are positive, that God's choice of some to salvation, while he leaves the rest
to peris;h in their sins, must be determined by what he sees in them, and not
in himself; or else, say they, he would be a respecter of persons. Thus
self-determination is claimed for man, but is denied to God; directly in the
face of Christ, and the inspired apostle. Matt. xi. 26, Romans xi. 33 -- 36. The
evident cause of this horrid impiety, is a secret conceit, that there is a good
to be obtained which is better than truth, and for which truth may be dispensed
with, and contradicted; therefore, though it is impossible for God to lie, or
to deny himself, yet men often do it, in hopes of obtaining that imaginary
good. Indeed Christ calls us to deny ourselves, and to take-up our cross daily;
but it is only that corrupt and delusive self, which is set up against the
revealed will of God. He requires us daily to cross our lusts, and
self-righteous conceits; while Satan tempts us to cross the truth, and the
light of our own consciences; and can any rational soul hesitate a minute upon
which of them is to be regarded!

That all men have a power within them to act in every case as then seems best
to them, is a truth as fully given into by the advocates for divine
sovereignty, as by any free-willer on earth. Perhaps Dr. Owen opened and
defended the great doctrines of sovereign grace, as well as any man did in the
last century; and he says, to suppose that in all things of spiritual and
eternal concernment, men are not determined and acted every one by his own
judgment, is an imagination of men who think but little of what they are, or
do, or say, or write. Even those who shut their eyes against the light, and
follow in the herd,, resolving not to enquire into any of these things, do it
because they judge it best for them so to do Original of evangelical churches,
p. 101.
. And the greatest writer against a self-determining power in man, that our age
has seen, says, liberty is the power, opportunity or advantage, that any one
has to do as he pleases, or to conduct in any respect according to his
pleasure. And says he, it is demonstrable, and I think has been demonstrated,
that no necessity of men's volitions that I maintain is inconsistent with this
liberty. Edwards on the will; third edition, p. 38. Appendix, p. 2.
. With which I fully concur; for we can as easily put an end to our existence,
as we can keep from choosing what went present view or imagine to be best.
Pharaoh did so in all his attempts to hold Israel in bondage; and so he and his
people did, when they were glad to let Israel depart, with rich treasures: And
the Lord's design therein was, that they might observe HIS statutes, and keep
HIS laws. Psalm cv. 37 -- 45. Yet how unwilling are many, even in this land of
gospel light, to yield their souls to this authority? Being called by our
churches to act as their agent in this great affair, I have had cause to know
more of the aversion of many thereto, than most others have; of which take the
following plain account.

When a new plan of government was formed for the Massachusetts State, which
took in their old taxing laws for religious teachers, I was called to meet our
committee at Boston upon it, in February, 1778. And finding that said plan was
to be established or set aside by our next General Court, we drew up a
petition, directed to them, that it might be fixed, as a fundamental principle
of our constitution, that religious ministers shall be supported only by
Christ's authority, and not at all by assessment and secular force. This was
signed by many, in various parts of the State, which alarmed the ministers who
were supported by tax and compulsion; and one of them, who was called to
deliver the election sermon to that Assembly, said therein, the fear and
reverence of God, and the terrors or eternity, are the most powerful restraints
upon the minds of men. -- Let the restraints of religion once be broken down,
as they infallibly would be by leaving the subject of public worship to the
humors of the multitude, and we might well defy all human wisdom and power to
support and preserve order and government in the State Payson's sermon, p. 19,
20.
. And a gentleman who had been one of our legislators, hearing that some of his
townsmen were going to be baptized, on the 26th of June following, went at the
head of a large mob, and violently interrupted their worship upon their own
lands; for which breach of the public peace he was so far from receiving any
punishment, that he was one of the Convention that formed our present plan of
government, and is a member of the first legislature which has acted thereon.
In September, 1778, a minister of the first church in Boston, hearing of the
defeat of our army on Rhode Island, delivered a lecture before many of our
rulers, from the seventh of Joshua, wherein he tried hard to persuade them,
that one of the accursed things which caused that defeat, was because a new law
had not been made and enforced, to help ministers about their salaries. This
sermon being printed, a writer appeared in Mr. Gill's paper of October 8, with
a high commendation of it, and declaring that the representation made therein,
of the case of ministers, was with that noble plainness and fidelity which are
among the distinguishing characteristics of that gentleman. But (says he)
although the General Assembly has now been sitting for some time, no motion (as
I can learn) has as yet been made, or is likely to be made, for this purpose --
Are the The word clergy signifies heritage; and to avoid the censure of lording
it over the church, officers have usurped the name to themselves. Sec Dr. Gill
on 1 Pet. v. 3.
clergy then to submit to this treatment? Are they to remain subjected to
injustice and fraud! Now observe how God takes the wise in their own
craftiness. Ten years before, the same minister saw such danger of having his
party all taxed to bishops, that he said, we are in principle against all civil
establishments in religion. It does not appear to us, that God has entrusted
the State with a right to make religious establishments. -- Has the State of
England been distinguished by heaven by any peculiar grant, beyond the State in
other countries? If it has, let the grant be produced. If it has not, all
States have, in common, the same authority, in establishments conformable to
their own sentiments in religion; what can the consequence be, but infinite
damage to the cause of God and true religion! and such in fact has been the
consequence of these establishments in all ages, and in all places Chauncy
against Chandler, 1768, p. 152, 153.
. These, and other words of his, I, as agent for our churches, published in Mr.
Willis's paper, the very day that the above complaint against our legislature
was published by Mr-Gill, in the same street, in Boston; though at that time I
knew nothing of the publication of said sermon. A few days after I published
the unanimous vote of our churches, wherein they say, we solemnly declare for
ourselves, and believe we safely may for the whole, 120 Baptist churches in
New England, that we want nothing more in this respect, than to have what the
before-named Dr. Chauncy says is their principle, concerning religious liberty,
established in fact, and reduced to practice. And there has never been the
least degree of proof advanced since, to discover any want, either of
consistency, or of sincerity, in this declaration, though the united craft and
rage of learned teachers and lawyers have been vented against us therefore, to
an amazing degree. Crafty and bitter pieces, in ten different newspapers, have
since been published against me by name, by writers who have kept their own
names concealed Boston Gazette of Nov. 2, and Dec. 28, 1778, Jan. 18, Feb. 1,
and March 8, 1779. Chronicle of Feb. 10, and Ledger of May 22, 1780. Providence
Gazette, April 15, 1780. Boston Gazette. Feb. 5, and March 5, 1781.
. Whether this is most like to the heathen savages, or to the bloody court of
INQUISITION, let the public judge.

At length a minister of Rowley has come out, and published an address,
directed to the learned pastor of the first Baptist church in Boston (...) has
written much to good purpose for (...).
, and to the other regular Baptist ministers in the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, and in Rhode Island and Providence Plantations; wherein he says
of our churches in general, "do you, gentlemen, know this people in their
several dispersions through the country, what manner of men they are? I am so
acquainted with some of them, and am so well informed of many more, that I can
tell you, there are only a few, a very few of them, that appear to be serious
Christians. The most of them are first Separatists from the churches in which
they were educated, and that uncharitably and irreligiously, and not as
Baptists, and then turn out Baptists, to save themselves from paying any thing
to the support of the gospel where they live. They forsake our churches and
parishes in such a manner, as to show they pay no regard to church-covenants,
or the most solemn contracts for the support of a pastor that has been set over
them, by their own consent and choice. -- As for their religion, I have long
thought, from much observation, that the most serious part of it is that
religion which Mr. Edwards, in his treatise on religious affections, describes
as religion that is not connected with salvation. And what ministers have most
of them, to show unto them the way of salvation? No pastors to take the
oversight of them, but young, illiterate and bold itinerating preachers; such
as make a great noise, and often rail stoutly against churches, and their
ministers. -- These disciples of yours have no church discipline; any body is
received as a brother or sister, that turns Baptist, and cries up your party.
Besides all this, there are many round the country, that are not Baptists, who
yet join these your little churches. That is, they run to hear their preachers;
they are advocates for the party, and all the religion they have, they expend
with these people. These, most of them, are among the worst men and women in
our towns and plantations: The greatest haters of ministers and churches; such
as usually spend the sabbath at home, neglecting the ordinary instituted means
of grace. -- Alas! the consequence of the prevalence of this sect! They cause
divisions every where. In the State of New Hampshire, where there are many new
towns, infant settlements, if this sect get footing among them, they hinder,
and are like to hinder, their settling and supporting learned, pious and
orthodox ministers. And so the poor inhabitants of those towns must live, who
knows how long, without the ministry of the gospel, and of gospel ordinances?
You do or you may know all these things. And they being so, let me ask you a
serious question or two. 1. Whose cause are you serving, while you seek to
promote this sect and party, in opposition to the churches in the land? -- 2.
If you encourage, if you countenance and connive at such preachers as some
among your people are, are you in no danger of being partakers of other men's
sins, and guilty of the blood of souls?

"Should you ask me what evidence I have of your zeal to promote this sect or
party, and of countenancing these unqualified preachers? I answer, beside other
things (some of which we have had in print) you have had two grand Conventions
(the second of them upon adjournment) within a few months past, at a town in
the State of New Hampshire, to serve and promote this cause. At which
Conventions, these illiterate and unskilful preachers, and delegates from your
little churches around, were members. And one thing I heard of as a part of
your business at said Conventions was, to consult what measures you should take
to make void in part our new constitution of government; that part of it which
respects the public worship of God. And I heard that some of your people then
and there declared, that if they could not obtain it, they would help no more
in the war. -- 3. Don't you think, that if it should please God to revive pure
religion in this land, answerable to the prayer and hope of some of his
servants, this would confound your party-cause, as the clouds are driven before
the wind? I am yours, wherein ye are Christ's, JAMES CHANDLER Gill's paper of
Feb. 8, 1781. N. B. Our Convention last fall was in this State; and we know
nothing of the adjournment he speaks of.
."

Rowley, December 23, 1780.

This paper I received in Boston on February 13; and the same day received a
little pamphlet, wherein I and my brethren, in our exercise of discipline, are
accused of advancing fast in a way that will soon bring us, if a stop is not
put thereto, to outking all kings, outbishop all bishops, and outpope all
popes; signed by two Baptist brethren Remarks on a council at Chelmsford,
October 19, 1780, p. 12.
. And whether these two parties of accusers do not fulfill the words of the
inspired apostle (Acts xx. 29, 30) may be considered. It is a known fact, that
a minister of the first church in Boston has, for many years, acted at the head
of the teachers who are supported by tax and compulsion, and has written the
most to uphold that cause in New England, of any man upon earth. And I am
greatly mistaken if both he, and these Baptist accusers, have not openly
pleaded for the worst error that ever was known in this world; namely, that
perfect obedience to the moral law is not the indispensable duty of all the
human race. I meddle not with their internal state, any further than their
fruits discover the same; and shall begin with said minister in Boston.

After Robert Sandeman, with his satirical pen, had, in a convincing manner,
exposed the corruption of those who imagine, that reconciliation to God can
take its rise from any thing good in man, Dr. Chauncy published a volume of
sermons, in which he says, it is said by most Christian writers, that the first
man was so placed, under the natural or moral law of God, as that he must work
his way to life by perfectly doing all things commanded by it; insomuch that he
could not have obtained it, but by persevering obedience in every point of
duty, without the least failure. But this is said entirely without book. The
scripture nowhere insinuates, that he was under such a covenant of works. It
suggests, on the contrary, that God, in favor to him, did not put him upon so
severe a trial for life. His trial, if we may believe the sacred record of it,
was in a single instance, and this not of doing, but of forbearing to do. Genesis
ii. 16, 17. -- It would be the exact truth, should I say, that the parents of
men, while innocent, in common with their posterity since the lapse, could have
obtained life in no way but that of grace through faith His 12 sermons, 1765,
p. 18 -- 20.
. I will do this writer the honor to say, that he has here stated their
sentiments with as much fairness and precision as any that I ever saw upon that
side of the question. And the difference betwixt his ideas and mine about this
matter is chiefly upon the following points. 1. He supposes that Adam was to
work his way to life, after he was created; but I believe that the image of
God, in which he was created, was his life. 2. I know that faith in God was as
necessary then for the continuance of life, as it is now in Christ for the
recovery thereof; but grace, in the gospel sense of the word, means relief to
the guilty and miserable, in distinction from works, which innocent man was to
have lived by, if he had continued in that state. Debt means the reward that is
promised, which becomes due when the condition of it is performed; and that
reward may then be claimed by law, whatever difference there is in value
betwixt the work and the reward. The angels of light will ever acknowledge an
infinite difference between their works and the reward they receive therefore;
which at the same time is as distinct from free grace to sinners, as heaven is
from earth. It destroys the nature, both of grace and works, to confound them
together. Romans xi. 6. God never fails to pay all his debts; and sooner or later
he will make all to know his right to give grace and glory to whom he pleases,
while he justly inflicts endless punishment upon impenitent sinners. How solemn
and convincing is that demand, is it not lawful for me to do what I will with
mine own? Is thine eye evil because I am good! Matt. xx. 15. He is the fountain
of all good; and the root of all error is a conceit that good can be had in
some other way, better than in obedience to his revealed will. James i. 13 --
25. 3. This author supposes that perfect and persevering obedience, in every
point of duty required by the moral law, would have been too severe a trial for
life to innocent Adam; which in my view is so contrary to truth, that a turning
therefrom was his death. The forbidden tree was the test, to try whether or not
he would regard God's sovereignty over all, and his property in all the
creatures he had made; and by taking and eating of that fruit man rebelled
against HEAVEN, and seized upon the earth as his own. And when our Savior
came, the Jews, from the same principle, said, this is the heir, come let us
kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance. Matt. xxi. 38. Every wise ruler
will lay his plans so as to need as little alteration hereafter as may be, and
never to be defeated or disappointed in his designs, if he can help it; yet
those who firmly hold, and boldly assert, that JEHOVAH'S plan is absolutely
perfect in all these respects, so that nothing can be put to it, not any thing
taken from it, are often looked upon and treated as the worst of men; and that
because men are not willing to fear before HIM. Eccl. iii. 14. Our Savior was
so far from removing or abating this fear, that he greatly enforced it; and
when Peter would fondly have prevented his dying for us, he rejected the
attempt, with the same detestation as he would have shown to the devil himself;
and also assures us, that the only time for having our debts paid by him, is
before we are cast into prison. Matt. v. 17 -- 26, and xvi. 23. Nor can the
conceit of those, who deny the endless punishment of such as die in an
impenitent state, be true, till rebellion against HEAVEN shall become a finite
evil, so that finite doings and sufferings, either in this or another world,
can purge it away. Nor, indeed, till JEHOVAH shall become a servant to
perishing worms, so as to go and come at their bidding or call. Job xxi. 14,
15, Isa. xxvii. 11, and xliii. 24, Jer. ii. 27, Acts iv. 12, Dan. xii. 2.


The case of the Baptist accusers, before mentioned, is as follows. On Sept. 8,
1767, a number of our elders and brethren met at Warren, and agreed upon an
annual meeting, under the name of the Warren Association; the design whereof
they since published in these words, viz. "we are not insensible of the
attempts that have been made by ministers, in various ways, to assume a
classical power and jurisdiction over the churches; neither are we unaware of
the evil and pernicious effects of their obtaining such a power; which
therefore we desire we may always watch against. Yet, as it is certain that the
churches in the apostolic age did, by messengers and letters, hold a friendly
correspondence with each other, for mutual advice, help and comfort, and
sometimes by the meeting of many of them together for that purpose; and as we
are commanded to follow after the things that make for peace, and things
wherewith one may edify another, we have been convinced, that it is both
warrantable and expedient for our churches, that are so much scattered through
this land, and who have heretofore been so much unacquainted with each other,
thus, to associate together for prayer, preaching of the word, mutual advice
and endeavors to promote union and gospel order among them, and to guard
against the contrary; as well as to afford what assistance we can to flocks
that are destitute, weak or oppressed." This was published in Sept. 1771; and
this plan has been so fully observed, that no appeals of any personal case of
discipline in any church, nor complaints against any other community of
Christians, have ever been admitted by the Association; and it stands on record
in our church book, that the doing of any such thing would break the conditions
that we joined them upon. They have been so far from it, that when a breach of
communion once happened betwixt two churches in the Association, which affected
others, and an attempt from thence was made to bring the case before this body,
it was positively refused; and the contending parties were prevailed with, to
agree in calling a few judicious men, to hear and labor with them upon it; and
such a blessing was granted upon these means, as entirely to remove the
difficulty. Yet one Baptist teacher has discovered some dislike to our
Association for ten years past, which might partly be caused by information,
that by this means was spread, of his presuming to break bread to a minor part
of a Baptist church, whom the majority had censured; this information being an
impediment in the way of his preaching elsewhere. His mind has also been
somewhat entangled with Sandeman's notion, of exalting the atonement in such a
manner as to pay little or no regard to a divine work within us, of conviction
by the law, and relief by the gospel. And, in preaching at Chelmsford last
spring, he delivered such questions about the law, as greatly burdened the
church who heard it; though one or two members were pleased therewith, they
having privately propagated such questions there for some years. When said
teacher came there again in the fall, the church refused to admit him to preach
therein again, till he should give them satisfaction. Upon this two brethren
got five or six sisters to join with them in openly withdrawing from the
church, and setting up a separate meeting near by, to hear that teacher,
without stating the principles they differed upon. A council was soon after
called by the church, whereof I was scribe; and when we had gone through with
hearing other cases, the church was desirous of laying this also before us.
Said teacher and brethren were present; and though they were not active in
calling the council, and were unwilling to submit any cause thereto, as such,
yet they consented to discourse with us upon these affairs. This was done for
about two hours; and then we said in our result, "it appears plainly, that they
hold, that God the Father has given the government of the world into the hands
of his Son, in such a manner, that none of the human race are now under the
curse of the law that was given to Adam; and that Christ's ministers are so far
from being called to preach that law, and to tell any men that they are under
the curse of it, that they questioned with earnestness, whether so to preach is
not to preach a lie! Which opinion we fully believe to be contrary to the holy
scriptures of truth, and of a very dangerous and pernicious tendency to the
souls of men; and therefore we earnestly call upon these brethren to retract
it, and warn all against it." Great relief was hereby given to the church, and
two valuable men were baptized, and added thereto the next Lord's day. I gave
no copies of our result to any but the churches immediately concerned; yet
those two brethren, who signed this publication against us, say, "every
Christian man's character is too sacred to be tossed about at the pleasure of
every one. -- For a select number from several churches to undertake to judge
such cases, may well alarm us to look about us, and see where our privileges
are going; for we think it is not hard to see what such assuming councils are
aiming at. This council have excommunicated two brethren -- this solemn warning
is like hanging them in gibbets. -- But may indulgent heaven interpose for us,
seeing vain is the help of man Remarks, p. 4, 11, 12.
."

How far their passions have carried them beyond the truth, is left to
consideration. They had assumed the power to make a schism in that church, and
to write an account of it, by said teacher, to the pastor of another church,
whom they hoped to have drawn to their party, before we met there in council;
and we did no more to them than I have related, let them call it by what name
they will. They own that they asked the question we have mentioned, and also
the following, viz. "if any of the human race are under the law, in the same
sense, and upon the same conditions, as it was delivered to Adam, what will
ever bring them from under it, seeing Christ dies no more?" And they now say,
"we hold, that mankind are not without law to God, but under law to Christ: Now
the law of Christ, which mankind are now under, is for substance the same which
was given to Adam, namely, to love God and our neighbor; but it is not given
to men, nor are men holden under it upon the same terms and conditions as it
was given to Adam. Ibid. p. 7, 9.
."

In my view, this is so far from rightly dividing the word of truth, that it is
really a confounding of law and grace together. They have taken words which are
peculiar to the regenerate, 1 Cor. ix. 21, and have applied them to all the
human race, which, alas! is too common through the world! Our Savior plainly
applies the moral law to mankind in general, and says, This do, and thou shall
live. Matt. xxii. 40, compared with Luke x. 28. And no one can be actually and
personally in the new covenant, so as to be under law to Christ, till the holy
spirit puts that law into his mind, and writes it in his heart. Jer. xxxi. 33,
Heb. viii. 10. And says Dr. Owen thereon, let this way stand, and the way of
man's wisdom and self-righteousness perish for ever Owen on the 130th Psalm, p.
247.
. Every soul is wedded to the law of do and live, and is bound thereby as much
as any wife is to her husband, till by the work of the spirit in the soul she
is made dead to that law, and it to her; and it is adultery to pretend to be
married to the living Savior in any other way. Romans vii. 1 -- 12. Many years
after the death of Christ, the inspired apostle said, as many as are of the
works of the law, ARE under the curse; from which the only way of deliverance
was, and is, by receiving the promise of the spirit through faith. Gal. iii. 10
-- 14. Till then the elect are shut up under the law, and are slaves to sin and
guilty fears, even as others. Gal. iii. 23 and 4. 1 Ephesians. ii. 3. This was as
really the case before the death of Christ, as since; only then it was taught
more obscurely, now more plainly. The bloody token of circumcision, was a type
of his being cut off for us, and also of our being cut off from any confidence
in the flesh; which great change is now openly to be declared by being buried
with him in baptism. Romans ii. 29, and vi. 1 -- 4 Phil. iii. 3. Col. ii. 11, 12.
Upon which scriptures Mr. Edwards says, that baptism, by which the primitive
converts were admitted into the church, was used as an exhibition and token of
their being visibly regenerated, dead to sin, and alive to God. -- The
saintship, godliness and holiness, of which, according to scripture, professing
Christians and visible saints do make a profession, and have a visibility, is
not any religion and virtue that is the result of common grace, or moral
sincerity (as it is called) but SAVING GRACE On a right to sacraments, p. 20 --
23.
. But for his embracing and holding this point, in opposition to the conceit of
the Lord's supper being a converting ordinance, other ministers separated him
from his dear flock in Northampton, in June, 1750. Just fourteen months after I
was buried in baptism, in which way I am greatly confirmed since.

The mercy-seat was just as long and broad as the ark, in which the moral law
was kept whole, and into the side of which the ceremonial law was put. Exodus
xxv. 16 -- 22. Deuteronomy. xxxi. 26. Which was an eminent type of Jesus Christ, in
whom mercy and truth have met together. Psalm. xl. 6 -- 8, and lxxxv. 10, 11.
Heb. x. 1 -- 10. Here is our only place to meet and commune with God, which
instead of abating, greatly increases our obligation to keep all his
commandments; only before, the duty was required in order to obtain the
blessing; but here the blessing is given, to enable us to perform the duty. The
oldness of the letter makes every defect a bar against coming; the newness of
the spirit makes the greatness of our evils and distempers a reason why we
should come without delay. Psalm. xxv. 11 -- 14. The ark was to be carried upon
the priest's shoulders, according to God's special direction. Numb. ix. 17 --
23. And when two priests refused to be content with the support that his
influence procured, and presumed to take what they pleased from the people by
force, the ark was so far from being any defense to them, that they were both
slain in one day, and the ark was taken by the Philistines. But it proved so
terrible, both to them and to their idols, that they put it into a new cart,
and left it to the divine influence to carry it back to Israel again. 1 Samuel
ii. 16, and vi. 7 -- 12. Yet David paid so little regard to the right way, that
he set men to drive the care as they judged best, till an awful stroke from
heaven, and divine teaching upon it, brought him into the due order. 1 Chronicles.
xiii. 7 -- 10, and xv. 13. And may the many strokes we have had teach us as
much! Gospel order is not to eat any man's bread for naught. 2 Thessalonians. iii. 5 --
10. Which rule is of equal authority upon rulers, ministers and people. And the
officer who invades the rights of any, and the people or person that refuses to
receive the gospel, or to treat those well that preach it, according to their
ability and opportunity, are daily exposed to punishments, infinitely worse
than man can inflict; and so are they who give countenance to men that pervert
the gospel. Luke x. 3 -- 12. 1 Cor. ix. 1 -- 14. Gal. i. 8, 9, and vi. 6, 7. 2
John x. 11. Therefore men can have no more RIGHT to judge for others in these
affairs, than they have POWER to answer for them at the bar of God.

The gospel knows of no priests in the Christian church, but Jesus Christ, and
the souls which are built by faith upon him, by hearing his sayings and doing
them. This is the church which is the salt of the earth, the light of the
world, and the pillar and ground of the truth. Matt. v. 13, 14, and vii. 24 --
27. 1 Timothy iii. 15. 1 Pet. ii. 5. Officers therein are never called priests, in
distinction from other saints. And a great historian says, baptism was
administered, in the first century, without the public assemblies, in places
appointed and prepared for the purpose, and was performed by immersion of the
whole body in the baptismal font. And of church government he says, the people
were undoubtedly the first in authority; for the apostles showed by their
example, that nothing of moment was to be carried on and determined, without
the consent of the assembly. Acts i. 15, vi. 3, xv. 4, xxi. 22. -- A bishop,
during the first and second century, was a person who had the care of one
Christian assembly, which at that time was, generally speaking, small enough to
be contained in a private house. In this assembly he acted not so much with the
authority of a master, as with the zeal and diligence of a faithful servant
Mosheim's eccl. hist. vol. 1. p. 70, 76, 96, Dublin edition.
But he informs us, that in the second century certain teachers affirmed, that
Christ had established a double rule of sanctity and virtue, for different
orders of Christians. Of these rules the one was ordinary, the other
extraordinary; the one of a lower dignity, the other more sublime. And soon
after some adopted, from the heathen philosophers, a maxim, that it was not
only lawful, but even praiseworthy, to deceive, and even to use the expedient
of a lie, in order to advance the cause of truth and piety. In the mean time,
about the middle of the second century, a notion was industriously propagated,
that Christian ministers succeeded to the character, rights and privileges of
the Jewish priesthood; upon which bishops considered themselves as invested
with a rank and character similar to those of the Jewish high priest, while the
presbyters represented the priests, and the deacons the levites. The errors to
which it gave rise were many, and one of its immediate consequences was the
establishing a greater difference between the Christian pastors and their
flocks, than the genius of the gospel seems to admit Ibid. p. 139, 150, 155 --
See Col. ii. 8 -- 23.
. It is as evident that Abraham, as he was father of the members of the Jewish
church, was a type of Christ, as that Aaron, the head of the priesthood, was
so. Ephesians. ii. 19 -- 22. Romans iv. 11, 12. Therefore in the beginning of the third
century a controversy appeared about bringing infants to baptism. Tertullian,
who first mentions it, opposed it; but soon after Origin said, what is the
reason, that whereas the baptism of the church is given for the forgiveness of
sins, infants also are, by the usage of the church, baptized, when, if there
were nothing in infants that wanted forgiveness and mercy, the grace of baptism
would be needless to them? -- It is for that reason, because by the sacrament
of baptism, the pollution of our birth is taken away, that infants are baptized
Clark against Gill, p. 105, 111.
. And Cyprian said, it is manifest where, and by whom, the remission of sins,
which is CONFERRED IN BAPTISM, is administered. -- They who are presented by
the rulers of the church, OBTAIN BY our prayers, and imposition of hands, the
HOLY GHOST. These things were said in the third century, and in the fourth,
Constantine the Great appeared to prosess the Christian religion, and acted as
head of the church for 24 years, without paying so much regard to the authority
of Christ as ever to be baptized, till a few days before his death. Yet under
his influence it was adopted as a maxim, that errors in religion, when
maintained and adhered to after proper admonition, were punishable with civil
penalties and corporal tortures Mosheim, vol. 1. p. 236, 263, 287, 314.
Thus nature and grace, law and gospel, church and state, were confounded
together, which is the very essence of mystery Babylon; who has made
merchandise of slaves and souls of men, and by whose sorceries all nations have
been deceived. Rev. xviii. 13, 23.

Her cruelties were such in all parts of Europe, as to move our pious fathers
to fly therefrom into this American wilderness. Those who began the settlement
here, in 1620, came crusting wholly upon DIVINE PROVIDENCE New England
Chronology, p. 3, 60. In the election sermon, Oct. 25, 1780, before the first
General Court of our new constitution, it is said, "upon our present
independence, sweet and valuable as the blessing is, we may read the
inscription, I am sound of them that sought me not. Be it to our praise or
blame, we cannot deny, that when we were not searching for it, it happily found
us." This is strictly true; and infinite wisdom planted the root of it, when he
first planted the country with a noble vine; whose noble sentiments were, "that
the merits of saints may as well be mingled with the merits of Christ for the
saving of the church, as the laws of men with his laws, for the ruling and
guiding of it." Saying to their oppressors, "since tithes and offerings were
appurtenances unto the priesthood, and as the priesthood, both of Melchisedec
and Levi, are abolished in Christ, as the shadow in the substance; and as the
Lord has ordained, that they who preach the gospel, shall live of the gospel;
we willingly leave unto you both your priestly order and maintenance,
contenting ourselves with the people's voluntary contribution, whether it be
less or more, as a blessing of God upon our labors, the fruit of our ministry,
and declaration of their love and duty." Nor could others bring Plymouth rulers
into compulsive measures in such affairs, till they had buried Governor
Bradsord, and had crowded two of their seven assistants out of office; and
hanging of Quakers at Boston followed immediately upon it. Baptist history, p.
30, 32, 310 -- 321, 329.
, without any royal grant from England to depend upon. But on March 4, 1629,
the Massachusetts Company received an ample grant of a vast tract of land in
America, from the head of the church of England, who took their power from the
head of the church of Rome, who received his from the old dragon. Rev. xiii. 2.
The company that received said grant of lands called the church of England "our
dear mother," when they came from Europe, but contended, even unto blood,
against having her worship introduced into America; for which she at last
revoked that grant, and gave another, wherein she reserved an arbitrary power,
to set over us what governors she pleased, and to demand as much of our
property as she pleased for their support; and contentions about this point
have now forced us to declare ourselves independent of her Baptist history, p.
54, 59, 519. Appendix, p. 4.
. In 1701 a large society was constituted in England, who have expended vast
sums to propagate her worship in this land; and in a sermon before that
society, on Feb. 20, 1767, it was said of the first adventurers here, "what
reproach could be cast, heavier than they deserved? who, with their native
soil, abandoned their native manners and religion; and ever long were found in
many parts living without remembrance or knowledge of God, without any divine
worship, in dissolute wickedness, and the most brutal profligacy of manners.
Instead of civilizing and converting barbarous infidels, as they undertook to
do, they became themselves infidels and barbarians. And is it not some
aggravation of their shame, that this their neglect of religion was contrary to
the pretenses and conditions, under which they obtained royal grants and public
authority? -- The want of bishops in our colonies, besides other disadvantages
attending it, appears, in particular, to be the fundamental cause of the want
of native ministers. -- If these things are so, we may entertain hopes, that
this benefit will flow to the church from our present most gracious Sovereign.
-- This point obtained, the American church will soon go out of its infant
state; be able to stand upon its own legs; and, without foreign help, support
and spread itself. Then the business of this society will have been brought to
the happy issue intended Bishop of Landaff's sermon before said society, p. 6,
7, 22, 24, 25.
." Thus the saying of our Lord is verified; if thine eye be evil, thy whole
body is full of darkness. If, therefore, the light that is in thee be darkness,
how great is that darkness! This is the cafe of all who do not sincerely love
their brethren as themselves, but hate them in their hearts, though they
outwardly pretend the contrary. 1 John, ii. 3 -- 11. And it is a most glaring
fact, that all men who have been fond of supporting their worship by force,
have never been willing to change places with dissenters therefrom. And when
the Most High metes the same measures to them again, they loudly complain of
the injustice and tyranny of those measures.

The year after Boston was planted, a law was made there, to exclude all from a
vote in government but communicants in congregational churches. In the year
1636 they appointed a committee, of five rulers and three ministers, to make a
draught of laws, agreeable to the word of God, to be the fundamentals of this
Commonwealth; and in the mean time ordered their executive courts, to hear and
determine all causes, according to the laws now established, and where there is
no law, then as near the laws of God as they can. Two years after they made the
first law, to support religious teachers and ordinances by assessment and
distress, that ever was enacted in New England. It was to enable freemen to
compel those who were not freemen to contribute proportionably with themselves,
for the upholding church ordinances, whereof he does or may receive benefit.
Harvard-College was founded that year; and one of their first class of
graduates gave it as his mind, that he who should deny such an exertion of
power, is rather to be taught by cudgel than argument, as a denier of first
principles. The first Baptist church in America was constituted at Providence
the year after said law was made Baptist history, p. 49, 79, 98 -- 105.
. And that cause has been supported by cudgel, and ours by argument, ever
since. And the latter is so much the strongest, that the aged minister who
ventures to subscribe his name to accusations against our churches, says, alas
the consequence of the prevalence of this sect! they hinder, and are like to
hinder, the settling and supporting learned, pious and orthodox ministers Rev.
xviii. 10, 16. They put learning before piety.
. And the writer of the ninth and tenth learned accusations against me by name,
closes the last of them with saying, I must petition to conceal my real name,
till I am become such a salamander in the moral world, that I can live no
longer out of the fire. -- Is not this a surprising event! that "illiterate,
bold itinerating preachers," should prevail so far as to vanquish all the
learned teachers and lawyers in New England, where religion, according to their
account, has long been established by law, in the best manner of any part of
the world? That their skill and courage should now fail them so much, that one
who ventures to own his name and place of abode, yet should be afraid to name
any person or community of the accused; and he who is so bold as to name one of
them, yet petitions to have his own name concealed, lest he should be burnt up
by them! Will not some people be apt to think, that these illiterate, bold
itinerating preachers, are successors of some who lived above seventeen hundred
years ago, against whom like complaints were made? John vii. 47 -- 51, Psalm
ii. 1 -- 4, Acts iv. 5 -- 22, and v. 17 -- 40. -- By these accounts it appears,
that one great difficulty which then labored among the learned, was a want of
agreement among themselves about those teachers; some of them thinking it was
not lawful to condemn a man, before they had heard him, and knew what he did.
Another was, that the accusers were conscious that much good was done by the
accused, so that it was a very difficult thing to convince the common people
that they were bad men. A third thing was, that what these itinerant preachers
said and did, laid great bands upon themselves; and when they enquired of their
HEAD, by what authority he did it, and how he came by that authority, he
quickly brought those learned men into such a dilemma upon that point, as they
knew not how to get out of, but by pleading their own ignorance, Matt. xxi. 23
-- 27. This last writer against us is so much mistaken in thinking to keep out
of the fire, by concealing his name, that both of his publications prove him to
be now in it; and that compassion is called for, to pull him and his
confederates out of the fire, if possible, hating the garment spotted by the
flesh; in which condition are all those who have men's persons in admiration,
because of advantage. 1 Cor. iii. 11 -- 15. Jude xvi. 22, 23. And that this is
his character, is evident; for, speaking of acting upon sinister views in
religious matters, he says, in such instances, I know that conscience would
bite like a serpent, and sting like an adder. And, as it is likely there are
some such characters among every denomination, for my part I wish the law might
be altered to the form Mr. Buckus has exhibited, or that the Warren Association
would propose a form, agreeable to their minds and the third article in our
Bill of Rights, which we cannot consent to have altered, or infringed upon,
without violating our consciences; for we have consciences, as well as the
Baptists, and hold these rights most sacredly. The form of mine, here referred
to, was only to inform strangers in a distant town of a plain fact, viz. that
such a man, by name, is a baptized member of the first Baptist church in
Middleborough. This is all that was certified by the pastor of the church,
without any other name to it, or its being directed to any place or person,
which is as different from any certificate ever required by law in this
government, as Joseph's wearing his garment in his master's house was from
adultery. Yet the two last publications against me are built entirely upon a
supposition of its being a legal certificate; and upon this supposition it is
represented in the first of them, that either a new revelation or necessity had
moved me to dispense with my sacred promises and conscience; and the writer
says, I hope his laudable example will be punctually imitated by all others of
the same profession. And he still pleads for this, in his last publication, as
the only way laft for the securing their rights, claimed in the third article,
which they hold conscientiously and sacredly." And he says, "if the practice of
giving certificates be really such an intolerable burden, and unpardonable
sin, why was it for so long a time punctually complied with!

In reply to him, I ask, why the spirit of truth does not guide us into all
truth at once? John xvi. 12, 13. When grace and truth could be promoted by
circumcision, Paul complied with it. Acts xvi. 3. But when it came to be
contended for, in a way which obstructed that great and good end, he refused to
give place by subjection, even for an hour, that the truth of the gospel might
remain with the churches; and he had no mercy to show to dissimulation, no not
in Peter himself. Gal. ii. 4 -- 14. And the word of truth shows, that the
victory of the church, over that evil in him who pretends to be Peter's
successor, and his followers, will be gradual, viz. over the beast, and over
his image, and over his mark, and over the number of his name, which is the
number of a MAN. Be it in units, tens or hundreds, it is no more than man set
up in God's place. 2 Thessalonians. ii. 3, 4, Rev. xiii. 18, and xv. 2. And that the
power now contended for is of that nature, is most evident. For in the Boston
Evening-Post of May 17, 1773, mention was made of their law to tax all members
of the church of England in each town, with others, which the church minister,
if they had any, was to draw out of the town-treasury; and then it was said,
had the same prudent precaution been taken with respect to Anabaptists, when
they were exempted from being taxed toward the maintenance of the ministers of
the churches by law established, those avaricious and dissolute persons, who
get under water to wash away their ministers rates, without any expectation or
desire of washing away their sins, would have little or no temptation to
declare themselves Anabaptists. This, with other means, brought the Warren
Association, in the fall after, to publish these five reasons, why we could not
in conscience obey their certificate laws any longer. 1. Because so to do would
imply an acknowledgment, that civil rulers have a right to set one religious
sect up above another, which they have not. 2. Because they are not our
representatives in religious matters, therefore so to tax us, is to tax us
where we are not represented. 3. Because this practice emboldens the uppermost
sect to assume God's prerogative, and to judge the secrets of others hearts. 4.
Because the church is presented as a chaste virgin to Christ, and to place her
love and trust upon any others for temporal support, is playing the harlot
(Hos. ii. 5) and so is the way to destroy all religion. 5. Because this
practice tends to envy, hypocrisy, confusion, and every evil work, and so to
the ruin of human society Appeal to the public, 1773, p. 43 -- 49.
.


No answer has ever been returned to these reasons, better than railing,
imprisonment, and spoiling of our goods. If said third article be compared with
the amendments which the town of Boston voted to have made therein, all may see
that it is the very scheme which was published in 1773, as I have related it.
Neither have we any reason to think that the country would have adopted it, if
Boston, with her deceitful arts, had not taken the public lead therein. Her
chief teachers and lawyers have acted the part in this matter, which we have
described in Matt. xxiii. 3, 4. The winter after the first taxing law for
ministers was made, after their second charter was received, an addition
thereto was passed, wherein it was said, that nothing herein contained is
intended, or shall be construed to extend, to abridge the inhabitants of Boston
of their accustomed way and practice, as to the choice and maintenance of their
ministers. And this partiality has been established here by law for
eighty-eight years; and our attempts to remove it has been the only cause of
the outcry which that party have made against us for eight years past. And to
their partiality in human laws, a noted minister of theirs has now added as
great an instance of partiality in the laws of God. In his plan of grace,
promises and precepts, privileges and duties, are inseparably connected
together; and to expect one without the other, is to tempt him, instead of
trusting in him. Deuteronomy. vi. 16, 17. Matt. iv. 6, 7. And I fully concur, that the
following words are very applicable to the present state of this country. Jer.
xxx. 20, 21. Their congregation shall be established before me, and I will
punish all that oppress them. And their nobles shall be of themselves, and
their governor shall proceed from the midst of them, and I will cause him to
draw near, and he shall approach unto me; for who is this that engaged his
heart to approach unto me? says the LORD. Yet this text was taken, with the
omission of all the words here put in italics, and a very learned and polite
election sermon was delivered from the other part of it, on Oct. 25, 1780, at
the commencement of the constitution, and inauguration of the new government,
by SAMUEL COOPER, D. D. He is minister of a church in Boston, that is the first
we know of in this government, who in their first constitution expressed a
dislike at our father's strictness, in requiring a credible profession of
saving says, of all persons that they received to communion at the Lord's
table It was constituted in 1699.
. It may be of service to compare this with the address to the people of the
compilers of our new constitution, to move them to receive it, p. 17; say they,
"your delegates did not conceive themselves to be vested with power to set up
one denomination of Christians above another; for RELIGION must at all times be
a matter between God and individuals;" which is given as the reason why they
refused to exclude out of our future legislature such Roman Catholics as shall
"disclaim the principles which are subversive of a free government." Yet all
the power contended for in their third article is put into the hands of
communities, who have the exclusive right in its exercise. Therefore they knew
that RELIGION was not the good they aimed at therein.

The first founder of the town and colony of Providence Plantations had a plain
sight of the deceitfulness of such claims, and contended earnestly for
impartial liberty for the consciences of Papists with others, as to matters of
worship, so far as might be consistent with the safety of government, and the
rights of individuals; and that none but spiritual weapons should be employed
against mere errors in judgment of any kind. But the fathers of the
Massachusetts called this liberty "dangerous principles of separation Baptist
history, p. 156, 165 -- 171, 297, 298. His argument then was, that civil rulers
can have no right to any more or other power than is fairly given them by the
people; and that the people, as such, had no religious power to convey to
ruters; all which is now allowed to be truth, though many are trying hard to
establish a power and practice, entirely of a contrary nature. We deny Mr.
Chandler's charges against our churches, as to covenant breaking; and if any
person or community has done so, we stand ready to do what we can to rectify
it, when it is properly pointed out. Government in church, as state, is founded
in compact or covenant, implied or expressed; and they are equally hinding upon
officers and privates, to act toward each other according to the nature of the
compact, as far as their ability and opportunity will admit of. And if any one,
in a public or a private station, could gain the whole world, by making
shipwreck of says and a good conscience, he would be an infinite loser by the
bargain. Therefore let no man ever again attempt to deceive others, or give his
vote for any who evidently do so, as he would escape such a shipwreck himself,
and also the guilt of endangering the community be belongs to thereby.
;" and vented all their skill and rage, in trying to divide, and conquer his
little colony; and all the disorders, which by these and other means were
caused therein, have been a prevailing argument for tyranny in the
Massachusetts; and their tyranny has been a strong argument for the continuance
of those disorders in the other State ever since; and how far these two parties
have now been confederates in trying to crush our attempts to remove that
tyranny, and those disorders, I know not.

Some would have us look to Britain for help against these oppressors; but we
have no idea of any such thing. For their king, in a speech to his new
parliament, Nov. 2, 1780, exclaims aloud against others "boundless ambition;"
and urges for such preparations and exertions, as, says he, "shall convince our
enemies, that we will not submit to receive law from any powers whatsoever."
And yet before this speech arrived among us, a declaration was received from
his commissioners at New York, which would fain persuade us, that the British
parliament have received law from America, so as to give up more to us than we
asked for before the war; and thereupon they earnestly invite us to return
under their protection, while in the same declaration they exhort those whom
they call the loyal, "to persevere in their integrity, for the preservation of
their religion and liberties." Compare this with the bishop of Landast's
sermon, and who can put any trust in such men? Such men as a century ago
accused Dr. Owen and his friends of favoring POPERY, because they refused to
join in fellowship with the church of England, whose claims of arbitrary power
soon after brought the nation to the brink of ruin. In answer to that
accusation, Dr. Owen observed, that all the reformation from popery which any
had attained to, was built entirely upon these three principles. 1. That the
holy scriptures are our only rule in religious matters. 2. That each rational
man has an equal right to judge of their meaning for himself. 3. That all
church power, and office power therein, is derived from Christ, by his word and
spirit, to each particular church. That the succession of ministerial power is
secured, by his continuing, according to his promise, to call souls effectually
by his grace, and to furnish men with spiritual gists, fit for such offices as
he has instituted, and making it the duty of the church to call them thereto
and set them apart therein. And says he, "those who plead for a successive
ministry without respect to these things, without resolving both the authority
and office of it unto them, do but erect a dead image, or embrace a dead
carcass, instead of the living and life-giving institutions of Christ Original
of evangelical churches, 1681, p. 165, 291 -- 297.
."


This was emphatically the case with New England, when God was pleased
remarkably to pour out his spirit, and gloriously to revive religion therein,
forty years ago. This Mr. Edwards, in his book of five parts, very plainly
proved. But in answer thereto, the next year, Dr. Chauncy labored hard to
prove, that the itinerant preaching, which was the chief means of that work,
was a thing of very bad and dangerous tendency, and that the first leader
therein was guilty of very rash and uncharitable judging, for expressing his
fears, that many, nay most of the teachers in the land, did not experimentally
know Jesus Christ; therefore he raked this country, and even ransacked the
church of Rome, for filthy stories to cast upon the instruments and subjects of
that work. And to prove that the ministers of New England had not then lost
their character, he produced Dr. Cotton Mather's testimony in their favor, who
said, "no man becomes a minister in our churches, till he first be a
communicant; and no man becomes a communicant, until he has been severely
examined about his regeneration, as well as conversation." But when was it so?
This testimony was published in 1696. But twelve years after, it was openly
preached up, that the Lord's supper was a converting ordinance; which doctrine
had spread through the country before this revival began. And to guard against
the increase of the Baptists in Boston in 1772, Dr. Chauncy said to the world,
"the divinely appointed way, in which persons become members of the visible
church of Christ, is utterly inconsistent with the supposition, that, in order
to their being, so, they must be the subjects of saving faith, or judged to be
so." According to which opinion, the fathers of New England were the
uncharitable men, for severely examining into that matter, as much as the
Newlights were for reviving that practice, or the Baptists for persevering
therein; and it was an imposition upon mankind to bring that testimony, to
uphold a cause that was and is contrary thereto.

TRUTH and MERCY shine with equal luster, in the glorious kingdom of the
Redeemer; and to his works of this nature he appeals, as his greatest witnesses
against the powers of darkness. John v. 36, 37. Their united influence convey
the golden oil into the church, to make her the light of the world. Zech. iv. 2
-- 14. These witnesses have long prophesied in sackcloth; till of late it seems
as if they had scarce any entrance into any administrations of civil government
in the world, but rather to have fallen in the streets, so that he that
departs from evil makes himself a prey. Isai. lix. 14, 15. But when the
spirit of life from God shall enter into them, the kingdoms of this world will
soon become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of his anointed; and the ark of his
testament will be seen again. Rev. xi. 3 -- 19. Then the spirit that is upon
him, and the words of his mouth, shall not depart from his seed for ever. Isai.
lix. 19 -- 21. The magistrate's strate's sword is to punish none but such as
work ill to their neighbors. Romans xiii. 1 -- 10. And when the influence above
described shall extend so far as to restrain those who would hurt and destroy,
the sword will be entirely laid aside. Isai. ii. 2 -- 5, and iv. 5, 6, and xi.
9, 10. Amen; even so, come Lord Jesus.

ISAAC BACKUS.
Middleborough, April 20, 1781.
APPENDIX.
SINCE the foregoing pages were printed, I have seen a letter from a Baptist
minister in Pennsylvania, who has lately been drawn into the opinion of the
final restoration of all creatures to happiness; wherein it is laid down, as a
rule to interpret scripture by, that "whatever is to be known of God is
manifest within." And his sentiments respecting the gospel he delivers in these
words, viz. "God in his written word declares himself as the everlasting
essential love: He that loves not, knows not God; for God is love. If God be
love, emphatically so, abstractedly so, he can be nothing else; hence it
necessarily follows, whatever he inflicts upon his creatures must have its rise
and spring in love and in wisdom, however severe and terrible it may appear to
the short-sighted creature. If in love, it must finally, center in their
happiness."

This shows the weight of the apostle's saying, I am jealous over you with a
godly jealousy; for I have espoused you to one bushand, that I may present you
as a chaste virgin to Christ. But I fear, lest by any means, as the serpent
beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be corrupted from the
SIMPLICITY that is in Christ. 2 Cor. xi. 2, 3. The tempter's argument with Eve
was, that it could not be consistent with truth and goodness to take God's
saying in its literal sense. And to set up an interpreter within man, which
shall construe the written word in a sense, that must finally center in the
happiness of all creatures, is making a regard to them the ultimate end of
God's dispensations; which is evidently a changing the truth of God into a lie.
Romans i. 25. See what is before said thereon, p. 4, 5, 15, 23. Christianity is
built upon these three points. 1. That God is self-moved in all his actions,
and that no higher reason can be given for his showing mercy to any, than
because so it seemed good in his sight. Matt. xi. 26. Romans ix. 8 -- 23, and xi.
33 -- 36. 2. That sin is an infinite evil, and can only be removed by the
merits of God the Son, and by the renewing power of God the Holy Spirit. 3.
That this salvation must take place upon the soul in time, or not at all, p.
15. But mystery Babylon was built by calling in heathen philosophy, to construe
things in the opposite way, p. 22, 23. And let it be covered ever so artfully,
I am bold in it, that to suppose that God's choice is determined by what he
sees in the creature, and not in himself; and to hold sin to be but a finite
evil, and that creature-sufferings can remove it, is antichristianism. And the
fruits of it always show the propriety of that remark; he that loves not his
brother whom he has seen, how can be love God whom he has not seen? 1 John,
iv. 20. And a temper contrary to equity has ever been discovered in all sorts
of men, who have been unwilling to let the written laws of Christ be their own
interpreters; but have set up any thing within man above them. One candlestick
was an emblem of the church which sprang from the twelve patriarchs; and two
were so, of the church that was constituted by the ministry of the twelve
apostles, from among both Jews and Gentiles. Zech. iv. 2 -- 14. Ephesians. ii. 18 --
20. Rev. xi. 4. This church which is built upon, and governed by, the writings
of the apostles and prophets, I believe is intended by the twenty-four elders,
and its ministers by the four beasts or living creatures, who unite in high
praises to God for the displays of redeeming grace to them, and of righteous
judgments toward the impenitent. Ezekiel. i. 19 -- 21, Rev. iv. 4 -- 11, and v.
9, and vii. 11 -- 14, and xi. 16, 17, and xix. 4. And the displays of TRUTH and
EQUITY which the Redeemer makes in all these works, I take to be the two
witnesses spoken of in Rev. xi. 3 -- 12. And when a full victory shall be
gained over the beast, the church will sing the song of Moses, lawgiver to the
Jewish church, and of the Lamb, who is lawgiver to the Christian church. Acts
iii. 22, 23. Rev. xv. 2, 3. And what follows, contains a demonstration of the
impossibility of uniting truth and equity with the exercise of a legislative
and executive power in civil States, as to the affairs of divine worship.


In the election-sermon last fall, it was said to our legislature, we may rely
that the present government will do all it fairly can, by authority and
example, to answer the end of its institution, that the members of this
Commonwealth may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all GODLINESS as well as
honesty. A government which is most certainly founded on the broadest basis of
liberty, and affords equal protection to all Cooper's election-sermon, p. 37,
38.
. Which is the very scripture that Dr. Mather made use of, with his father
Cotton's construction of it, in 1681, to justify the nailing up of the Baptist
meeting house in Boston: Only GODLINESS was not then set in capitals, and
honesty in small letters, as has now been done. Bitter experience soon after
convinced Dr. Mather, that what he had called godliness, in reality was robbery
Baptist history, p. 491 -- 493, 521.
. And perhaps the following facts may convince many, that the present
generation have been no less mistaken about that matter, than their fathers
were. In the fall of 1774, our churches were accused of an inimical design
toward their country, because of their sending me to Philadelphia; therefore
the true state of the case was laid before the Massachusetts Congress; from
whom we received this answer, viz.

IN PROVINCIAL CONGRESS, Cambridge, December 9, 1774.
ON reading the memorial of Rev. Isaac Backus, agent to the Baptist churches in
this government,

Resolved, That the establishment of civil and religious liberty, to each
denomination in the Province, is the sincere wish of this Congress: But being
by no means vested with powers of civil government, whereby they can redress
the grievances of any person whatever, they therefore recommend to the Baptist
churches, that when a General Assembly shall be convened in this Colony, they
lay the real grievances of said churches before the same; when and where their
petition will most certainly meet with all that attention, due to the memorial
of a denomination of Christians so well disposed to the public weal of their
country.

By order of the Congress, JOHN HANCOCK, President. A true extract from the
minutes, BENJAMIN LINCOLN, Sec'ry.


Accordingly we laid our case before the Assembly, which met at Watertown,
September 20, 1775, to whom we said, "we humbly represent that our real
grievances are, that we, as well as our fathers, have from time to time been
taxed on religious accounts where we are not represented, and when we have sued
for our rights, our causes have been tried by interested judges." Which we went
on plainly to prove; and toward the close said, "as we are persuaded that an
entire freedom from being taxed by civil rulers to religious worship, is not a
mere favor from any man or men in the world, but a right and property granted
us by God, who commands us to stand fast in it; we have not only the same
reason to refuse an acknowledgment of such a taxing power here, as America has
the taxing power of the British Parliament; but also, according to our present
light, we should wrong our consciences, in allowing that power to man, which we
believe belongs only to God." This memorial was read at three different times
in the Assembly, and then liberty was granted for one of our brethren who
belonged to it to bring in such a bill as he wanted to have passed in our
favor. He did so, and it was read once, and a time was set for a second
reading; but when that time came, other things were crowded in, and nothing
more was ever done upon it, as we know of. And when the third article, now in
question, came to be acted upon in the Convention, those old accusations, about
the design of my going to Philadelphia, were again brought up to prejudice the
Convention against all that the Baptist members could say for equal liberty.
Being well informed of this injustice soon after, I published a brief state of
the affair on Dec. 2, 1779, wherein I named our accusers, and challenged them
to a fair hearing thereon; but have been denied it to this day. And Lieut.
Elijah Ames, as hearty a friend to the American cause as any man in Bridgwater,
with his brother Joseph, two baptized members of our church, were imprisoned
for a ministerial tax, on the day that my challenge was printed in Boston; and
two other of my hearers were fined for refusing to assist the collector in that
iniquitous act. And on March 27, 1780, a cow was taken from Oliver Wetherbee,
for a tax to a minister he never had any connection with; being a baptized
member of our sister church in Harvard, before he removed into Lancaster, and
still walked in fellowship therewith. The cow was the property of one of his
brethren, who took lawful methods to recover her, and got her into his
possession; but a band of men came and violently wrested her from him, and
threatened to kill any Baptists that should attempt to take her again. But as
Worcester Court gave judgment that the owner should be paid for his cow,
Jonathan Kendell, the collector, aided by Capt. Haskal, who had before
threatened life, seized brother Wetherbee on June 26; and though there was no
appearance of any design to rescue him, yet he was conducted into Worcester
gaol by a drawn sword. John Hawks was also a baptized member of the same
church, before he removed into Lancaster, and had done near four years service
in this war; yet he, with Nathan Willard, one of that society, were seized on
April 11, for taxes to the same minister, and all three of them were confined
at Worcester till September. And the teachers and lawyers who oppose our claims
of liberty, discovered no more compassion to them, than the priest and levite
did to the man who fell among thieves. All civil officers, who received their
power in the name of the Kings of Britain, long since quitted the exercise of
it among us; but each of these brethren were imprisoned for the support of
ministers who received their parish power in that name; and is not this a being
partial in the law? Mal. ii. 9. Instead of equal protection, great numbers in
our State are now daily exposed to spoiling of goods or imprisonment, for the
support of teachers they never chose; one of whom is Mr. Eleazer Snow, of
Bridgwater, who was baptized in September, 1761, and has walked in fellowship
with our church ever since, being now within three months of fourscore years of
age; yet a (...) has lately been demanded of him, for a young teacher, from
whom he never heard a single sermon.

I am not insensible of the prejudices of many against hearing any thing from
me upon these matters; therefore I shall close at this time with a brief view
of the reasons of the present publication. Ministers have told us that we were
initiated into the covenant of grace in infancy; but forty years ago this
month, the holy spirit took me in hand, and effectually taught me, that I was
under the covenant of works, and in August following he brought me into the
covenant of grace, by giving my soul such a revelation of the glory and
excellency of the way of salvation by the Redeemer, as drew my heart gladly to
quit all confidence in the flesh, that I might win Christ, and be found in him.
Yet I was such a dull scholar in his school, that it took thirty-two years to
learn me this short lesson; one Lord, one faith, one baptism. It was ten years
before I came to see, that what men call baptism, which they have put before
faith, is a nullity; and it took four more to bring me to refrain from
communing with that nullity at the Lord's table. After which it cost the
farther discipline of eighteen years to learn me so much as to treat all laws
about worship as nullities, which come not from the one Lord. And his authority
upon my conscience has constrained me, to improve what gifts and influence he
has been pleased to give me, in attempts to propagate this lesson among my
country men, it being the only way to obtain and keep the unity of the Spirit
in the bond of peace. Ephesians. iv. 1 -- 6, xv. 25. The covenant of circuncision
gave Israel a right to make slaves of such as were not in it; and the taking
away that name which God gave to it (Acts vii. 8) and adding a name to it which
he never gave, is the very way that the mother of harlots has taken to make
merchandise of slaves and souls of men. And the call from HEAVEN is, Come out
of her, my people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive
not of her plagues. For her sins have reached unto heaven, and God has
remembered her iniquities. Rev. xviii. 4, 5, 13, 20 -- 24. If this call be duly
regarded, we are well able to overcome every foe, and to go in and possess' all
the blessings promised in the gospel. And, as far as I know any thing of my own
heart, the only reason of this publication is to promote this great good, and
to clear my soul of blood guiltiness, whether others will hear, or whether they
will forbear.

May 18, 1781.

