OBSERVATIONS ON THE NATURE AND USE OF PAPER-CREDIT; AND THE PECULIAR
ADVANTAGES TO BE DERIVES FROM IT, IN NORTH AMERICA: FROM WHICH ARE INFERRED THE
MEANS OF ESTABLISHMENT AND SUPPORTING IT, INCLUDING PROPOSALS FOR FOUNDING A
NATIONAL BANK

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY R. AITKEN, AT POPE'S HEAD, THREE DOORS ABOVE
THE COFFEE HOUSE, IN MARKETS STREET.

M.DCC.LXXXI.

TO THE HONORABLE THE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA AND TO THE
HONORABLE THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF PENNSYLVANIA;

The following Tract is most respectfully inscribed, By their obedient, humble
Servant,

THE AUTHOR.

Philadelphia, May 24, 1781.

PREFACE
WHEN the Author of the following Tract first took up his pen on the subject,
he had no intention of going into it so fully: but having shown the outline of
his plan to a very judicious Friend, and receiver his approbation of it, he was
induced to consider the matter in a more extensive point of view.

Conscious that what he has proposed is dicatated by no other motive, than an
earnest desire to promote the public welfare; he is not deterred, by the fear
of incurring the impuitation of vanity, from offering his sentiments to the
world, on a subject of such importance: He conceives it to be the duty of every
citizen, to use his best endeavors to advance the prosperity of his country.

Many valuable institutions have been planned by private persons; and there can
be no reason why their opinions should be disregarded, if they sugest any
useful observations.

OBSERVATIONS, etc
IN the early ages of the world, when little communication subsisted between
different countries; when the wants of men were confines to their necessities,
and those necessities easI;y supplied with their own hands, by pasturage and
the chase, barter readily answered all the purposes of money; and this is still
the case amongst barbarous and uncivilized nations.

But when mankind became more polished, the conveniences of life, and at
length it is luxuries, were sought for; and these artificial wants the
inhabitants of various climes

Barter became now inconvenience, as the commodities, offered on each side for
exchange, did not often suit the wants of both the parties.

This occasioned the necessity of making use of some substances, "Money is an
universal medium, or common standard, by a comparison with which the value of
all merchandise may be ascertained; or it is a sign which represents the
respective values of all commodities."

1 Bl. Com. 276.
which, from their universal scarcity, and certain inherent qualities of
purity, possessed the greatest intrinsic value, to represent the real riches of
every country.

Hence gold and silver were fixed on, as an universal medium of commerce: and
because one of these metals is much more precious than the other, the
difference between their comparative values was ascertained, and that
difference made the standard proportion between the two.

The nature of trade is such, that, in it, money made of these substances is
not estimated at a higher rate than it is intrinsic value, which is founded in
the rate or value according to which it is used to pass; so that, in the course
of trade, money can have no higher value than a mass of the same metal and
quantity would have, if given in barter for any kind of goods: but yet, in
different places, on certain pressing occasions, the extrinsical value of money
may be raised higher, at the discretion of the supreme power.

The real riches "Silver and gold, which only represent more substantial
riches, are of a fluctuating nature. It is not easy, it seems even impossible,
to trace their various motions, or determine when they are in greatest plenty
upon the whole: The most substantial riches are more visible." --
Characteristics of the present political state of Great Britain.
of a country consist in it is trade, it is produce, and the labor of it is
inhabitants; gold and silver being no otherwise riches, than by representing
them; except as articles of merchandise: for if a fertile country, abounding
with all the necessaries "The most substantial riches consist in the abundance
of those things which are necessary for the support and comfort of life." --
Characteristics, etc.
of life and industrious inhabitants, should, at any one point of time, lose
all it is cash, it would be comparatively very little poorer; although totally
deprived of that which is generally thought to constitute wealth, and which
bears a very small proportion to the cattle, grain, and other commodities of
the country.

It may be laid down, therefore, as an incontrovertible position, that "We may
conclude with certainty, that the wealth of any country is increased, when the
number of the people has increased; when the fields and gardens are better
cultivated, and produce better kinds, and a greater quantity of fruits; when
the country breeds more numerous stores, and better kinds, of cattle, when the
houses are more magnifycent, and more richly furnished; when the people are
better cloather, and their tables are more elegant; when their ware-housed are
filled with a more valuable quantity of goods; when the prices of their lands,
and most other commodities, are raised; when their manufacturers are increased;
when their commerce is more widely extended; and there is greater industry,
than was known in former times. If all these symptoms, or such of them as are
most material, concur, the nation must certainly ne increasing in riches. In
such circumstances, the state of the coin is but of small moment. A Nation,
which, during any particular period, has lost a million of its silver and gold,
but improved its lands, and acquired valuable commodities to the extent of ten
millions, must be in a better condition at the end of that period, than it was
at the beginning of it." Characteristics, etc.
that country is the richest, which has the largest extent of improveable land,
contains the greatest number of;aborious inhabitants, and where the most
commodities are produced for foreign markets and their own consumption. Labor
and industry are the principal means of acquiring riches; and a fruitful soil
is an inexhaustible mine of wealth to those who will assiduously cultivate it.

Here the observation will occurm, that North America enjoys, in a very high
degree, those real riches, which, by an extensive and unfettered foreign trade,
will ever yield to her a proportionable quantity of gold and silver: And as the
means of procuring these will, from the nature and peculiar advantages of this
country, greatly and rapidly increase here, the actual acquisition of them will
increase in the same degree. The additional supplies of money, obtained from
time to time, and which represents the industry and labor by which it was
procured, will operate, in a acompound ratio, in promoting continued accessions
of it to the inhabitants: and thus industry and money would mutually produce
each other, to a "There may be too much money in a nation. /and there is
certainly too much, if it renders the great body of the people idle, and
enables them to purchase what they want from foreigners, without any labor or
industry of their own. This was the case in Spain, teo or three hundred years
ago; and did great harm to that country. But it will scarce be possible to
procure so much money by trade alone." Characteristics, etc.
certain limit.

But, as the prices of the commodities of any country, taken all together, must
be determined by the quantity of money in it; at the same time, (though
different circumstances may vary the prices of particular articles) if that
stock of commodities be increased by the industry of it is inhabitants, a larger
quantity of money will be requisite to represent the increased value of this
real wealth. The products of that industry of the people would, without doubt,
add to the riches of the country, by procuring, in exchange for them, such
commodities as might be wanted for their oen consumption But as the demand for
these might, at first, nearly equal, if not totally, the amount of their
exports, little or no gold and silver could be imported.

In order, therefore, that such extra quantities of commodities may be produced
for exportation, as to procure, in return, the necessary supplies, together
with the balance in gold or silver, the industry of the people must be
quickened.

To effect this, an increased quantity of money, of some kind, is necessary:
for, as the labor and industry of a people constitute an essentail part of the
real wealth of a country, the sign of that wealth ought to bear a certain
proportion to it.

But, as the acquisition of the money, properly so termed, required to
accelerate the industry of the people, so as to promote the introduction of
gold and silver into a country, must, necessarily, be subsequent to the means
of obtaining it, the absolute necessity of substituting something in the stead
"When a spirit of industry is any way excited in a nation, if by this industry,
both the commodities, and the number of the people shall be increased, before
they have much commerce with foreign nations to fetch them money; in such a
condition, either there must be a currency of paper credit, or the industrious
part of the people will be continually obliged to use barter, which will expose
them to many inconveniences." Characteristics, etc.

"When a spirit of industry is one raised, it may require a larger circulation
of specie to support it, than the gold or silver in the country can supply: in
this case there is an absolute necessity for paper credit." Characteristics,
etc.


of money, under these circumstances, is produced.

This substitute, to supply the place of money, is denominated "It'is the use
and effect of credit to represent money by paper." Rolt's Dict. Of trade and
commerce.

"Credit of some kind or other is necessary, wherever there is much trade.
There can be little trade, where every one buys for ready money. Credit is
absolutely necessary to an extensive commerce. Besides the credit given by
private dealers, one to another, and the advantages arising from such credit,
equal or greater advantages may be gained by a more regular and public credit,
given by banks under proper reregulations, and established by proper
authority." Characteristics, etc.


Paper-Credit: which, when the term is applied to the paper emitted by
government, represents the sums borrowed, for the public service, upon the
public faith; and for the redemption of which, by a certain time, an adequate
proportion of the riches to be acquired by the people, within that period, in
pledged. In fact, it denotes the sums borrowed from one part of the nation by
another; and becomes a national debt, for the security of which the Property
and industry of the subject are mortgaged.

A public debt is a benefit "A certain proportion of debt," says Sir William
Blackstone, "seems to be highly useful to a trading people; but what that
proportion is, it is not for me to determine." 1 Com. 328.
to a nation, provided it be confined within proper limits, as it increases the
cash of the country, by the introduction of a new kind of currency. Perhaps the
principle, that ascertains the extent of these limits, is, that no further sums
should be borrowed by a government, than they would be able, without
difficulty, to redeem, in a certain space of time: or, in other words, that no
larger a portion of the national wealth should be anticipated, than it might be
reasonably expected the people could have it in their power to replace, against
a certain day. It may, however, be safely affirmed that paper-credit, under
this restraction, must prove a great advantage to a country.

The paper bills of credit emitted by Congress, in pursuance of their
resolution of the 18th of March, 1780, stand upon that footing, precisely. They
are considered as the anticipated product of the taxes of six years, To their
amount, borrowed by the government, from the people, on interest: an equal
value of their property which they already possess, or many acquire in the
intermediate time by their industry, being pledged for their redemption. --
And, indeed, this is the true principle on which paper-credit should be
established.

In Great Britain, such immense sums have been borrowed "We may boast of large
fortunes, and quantities of money in the funds. But where does this money
exist? It exists only in name, in paper, in public faith, in parliamenttary
security: and that in undoubtedly sufficient for the creditors of the public to
rely on. But then what is the pledge, which the public faith has pawned for the
security of these debts? The land, the trade, and the personal industry of the
subject; from which the money must arise that supplies the several taxes. In
these therefore, and these only, the property of the public creditors does
really and intrinsically exist." 1 Bl. Com. 327.
for the public service, that it is with extreme difficulty they can now
discharge the interest annually accruing upon them, besides defraying the
expenses of government. The produce of the sinkingfund, which was solemnly
appropriated by the Parliament to the sole purpose of paying off the national
debt, proves inadequate to that end; and has been so far perverted from the
original design of it is institution, "That Not only large sums have been
granted out of it, but further sums were borrowed on the credit of it, and the
surplus was likewise made a collateral security to answer and supply all the
deficiencies of the taxes raised for the payment of the interest due on the
national debt."

Mr. Mortimer, (in his Book entitled, "Every Man his own Broker,") after
speaking of his perversion of the sinkingfund, says, "I hope what I have wrote
on this head will serve to gratify curiosity, the only point I had in view; for
the subject does not appear to me of much importance to the public in general,
whose principal concern is, that the payment of the interest of the money
borrowed of them is regular, and at the same time well secured.

It is certainly an object of great importance to them, that the payment of the
interest be well secured, as the principal rests on so precarious a foundation,
especially the unfunded debt: and, indeed, it is owing to their punctuality,
"All the unemployment money of Europe has been lent to this country, because
the interest, or annual annuity, agreed on, has always been punctually paid."
Mortimer.
in this respect, that their Paper-credit has hitherto maintainmed it is ground.

From what has been said it is evident, that paper-credit is essentially
necessary in North America, as well to answer the purposes of commerce as those
of government; and that no country is better furnished with the means of
supporting it. And it may be plainly inferred, that, if he necessary
precautions, respecting it, are used, it must circulate upon a par "If the
people have confidence in the government, the securities given by the public,
bearing a certain interest, may not only become a fund of paper money, which
may easily be transferred from hand to hand, but become so convenient for
merchants or others, that they may very reasonably rise above Par."
Characteristics, etc.
with specie. Disaffected and designing men will, without doubt, endeavor to
depreciate it; and, when already done, to prevent it is appreciation: but their
arts will prove ineffectual, if proper measures be taken to prevent and
counteract them. Before the present war, paper was emitted in several parts of
this continent, which, owing to the caution of the Legislatures, passed equal
to gold and silver, nothwithstanding the distant periods fixed for it is
redemption. As a necessary preliminary, therefore, to evry other measure, such
prudence And circumspection must be observed by our public councils, as may
tent to restore to the people that confidence in government, which has been
impaired less by it is own misconduct, than by the artifices of it is enemies.

Independently of the advantages to government, it is the interest of the
people to support the credit of a paper-currency: it is depreciation is a
grievous and unequal tax; affecting every man through whose hands the money
passes, but falling the heaviest upon the meritorious and those least able to
bear it. Indeed it is much to be lamented, that the people should have so
greatly deviated from their true interests, in this particular, as it has
occasioned much public and private mischief. But there is strange propensity in
mankind to consult their immediate convenience, although to the prejudice of
their ultimate good.

The depreciation of the paper-currency was, doubtless, first caused by an
erroneous policy in Congress; but the evil might have been remedied, long
before this time, had it not been for the cooperation of other causes, the
machinations of the disaffected, and a mistaken notion, adopted by a great part
of The well-affected, that depreciation served to promote their interests. This
gave rise to a spirit of speculation, by which every man endeavored to advance
his own fortune, at the expense of the community: and the odious and unmeaning
distinctions of "It is a most certain fact, though not sufficiently attended
to, that the landed gentleman is more deeply concerned in the national effects
of an advantageous or a disadvantageous commerce, than the merchant himself.
Those supposed distinctions, of landed interest and trading interest, in the
sense they are commonly used, are the most idle and silly." -- Tucker's Essay
on the advantages and disadvantages which respectively attend France and
Great Britain, with reagdr to trade.
mercantile and landed interests took place, by the country gentlemen having
imagined, that if they could shift their share of the public burdens off
theid\r own shoulders, upon those of the merchants, they would finally reliev
themselves.

Nothing could be more absurd than such policy: yet did this strange
infatuation prevent the early imposition of "Taxes in their own nature, if they
are properly and judicious laid on, are so far from causing commerce to
stagnate, that they quicken and enliven it. This is a doctrine little
understood by the landed interest, who of all persons ought to study in the
most, as it never can be their interest to act upon a contrary principle."
Tucker's Essay, etc.
taxes, Thereby creating a principal source of depreciation. The issuing of
paper-money, so far from rendering taxation useless, made it the more
necessary; and enabled the government to draw from the people "The money drawn
from the public by the taxes (exclusive of those which maintain the poor) is
near 14 millions per annum; a sum almost equal to the whole specie of the
kingdom; which, therefore, had we no paper-currency would be totally inadequate
to the wants of the kingdom." Price's Observations, etc.

"The clear produce of the taxes, exclusive of the charge of collecting, which
are raised yearly on the people of this country (Great Britain,) amount to
neat\r ten millions sterling." 1 Bl. Com. 332.


greater sums for the public service. Taxes are that proportion of every man's
property which he pays toward the support ofthat government, which protects
him in the enjoyment of the remainder: if, therefore, taxation be "The thing to
be wished and aim\ed at, in a land of liberty, is by no means the total
abolition of taxes, which would draw after it very pernicious consequences, and
the supposition of which is the very height OF POLITICAL ABsURDITY. But the
things to be aimed at are wisdom and moderation, not only in granting, but also
in raising, the necessary supplies; by contriving to do both in such a manner
as may be most conductive to the national welfare, and at the same time most
consstent with economy and the liberty of the subject." 1 Bl. Com. 307.
discontinued, or the sums raised by it be so small, as to be insufficient to
answer the end proposed, government cannot exist; and, consequently, the person
and property of the subject become insecure.

Having premised thus much, concerning the nature, use and advantage, of
papercredit, the next consideration is, what means are the most proper to be
used, for it is support. These are comprehended within this single principle --
That it be made clearly the interest of every individual to keep the paper
currency at a fixed and known value; and, of course, his loss to injure it.

For this purpose, the adoption of the following measures is proposed --

I. That no more paper-money be emitted by the Assembly of any state; and that
what remains in the treasury, of that struck by the present Assembly in their
last session, be not issued.

II. That all our paper-monies be reduced, as soon as possible to one kind,
viz. that emitted by Congress, in pursuance of the resolution of the 18th of
March, 1780.

III. That the interest due on that money be paid, without delay; and that
measures be taken to ensure the regular payment of the interest, to be become
due on it, every year, until it be all redeemed.

IV. That one-sixth of all taxes, assesses in specie-value, be payable in gold
or silver; except those of non-jurors, one-third of which to be payable in
specie.

V. That the land-office be opened for the sale of the vacant and
unappropriated lands belonging to this state, at a certain and reasonable price
per hundred acres, in the current paper-money or in gold ans silver: whereby a
very productive fund, to answer the purposes of the government, would be
created; the necessity of laying the heavier taxes, for carrying on the war,
lessened; and the people enabled to increase their estates, by the acquisition
of real property.

VI. That, out of the specie obtained by taxation, in the manner already
mentioned, the interest due and to become due, to the creditors of government,
be faithfully discharged.

VII. That the tender-laws be immediately repealed; experience having
demonstrated their bad tendency and inefficacy.

VIII. That a "When there are many industrious merchants or manufacturers, who
could usefully employ greater sums than they possess, or can have on credit
from private hands, they can never carry their trade to the utmost length, if
there is not a bank for furnishing them with this necessary credit."
Characteristics, etc.
national bank be founded, on the plan hereafter proposed.

The honorable redemption of the bills pf credit, (issued according to the act
of assembly of this state, of the 25th of March, 1780) which will be completed
in a few weeks, will evince the determination of government to redeem the
paper-currency, at it is full and original value: and had it been the interest
of every individual to maintain the credit of that money, while in circulation,
it would never have suffered any diminution of it is value; whereas many, even
of those who placed a proper confidence in it, affected to undervalue it, in
order to get into their possession the greater quantity; thereby promoting it is
depreciation. But the other money, established upon the principles here laid
down, will stand upon a very different footing: for it would be evident to
every man, especially the disaffected, that if it would depreciated, he must
inevitably be a loser; because his taxes would be proportionably increased, and
he must still pay his one-sixth (and, if a non-juror, one-third) of the nominal
sum thereof, in hard money.

As the reduction of the circulating medium, from time to time, by withdrawing
from it large sums in paper, would not perhaps be counterbalanced by a
proportionable influx of gold and silver to the country, in six years, to
supply that deficiency, and to answer the purposes of an increasing commerce,
let an annual state-lottery be instituted by Congress; the tickets thereof to
be sold for specie only, and the prizes paid in the same: -- let the products
of this lottery, which should amount to one hundred thousand pounds, each year,
be applied as a fund for erecting and establishing a "Banks settled by public
authority, under right regulations, continually increase the current species,
by issuing notes which circulate as money. By giving credit, they furnish men
of substance with the means of giving greater employment to the industrious,
and enable merchants to carry on a more extensive trade. The more notes the
banks can circulate in this way, the more will industry and trade be promoted.
Nor can there be any limit, while the borrowers from these banks can give good
security and the managers take care to issue no more notes, than by experience,
they have learned they can answer, according to the ordinary course of demand.
It is of no consequence, that there may be more paper money than silver and
old, and that the proportion betwixt them be not ascertained; provided the
foregoing regulations are duly observed." Characteristics, etc.
national bank, on the following principles, viz.

The moneys annually produced by the state-lottery, for six years successively,
to be vested in fifty gentlemen, most conspicuous for integrity, fortune,
ability, and attachment to this country; who should be chosen by Congress, and
incorporated under the name of the Governor and Company of the American Bank.

The stock of this bank to be limited to the value of one million of pounds; to
be computed at the rate of seven shillings and six pence for a Spanish dollar.

At the expiration of every year, the corporation to elect, by ballot, a
Governor and Directors for the succeeding year; who are to be sworn to the
faithful discharge of their trust: but that no man be capable of serving as a
director, more than three years out of five; except the directors first
appointed by Congress, who may be continued in office four years of the first
five, and be again eligible at the expiration of the fifth.

The directors, at the commencement of every years, to be severally bound to
Congress, as representing the United States, in a sum equal to one twenty-fifth
part of the capital which shall, at the conclusion of that year, belong to the
bank, as a security therefore for; so that each director will, in the sixth
year, stand bound in the penalty of forty thousand pounds: these obligations,
taken collectively, will amount to twice the capital-stock of the bank; for a
further security of which, the faith of the Confederated Republic should be
solemnly pledged by Congress.

The bank to issue "Whether in any one year half a million is brought into a
commercial country by trade, or issued out by banks, in notes, upon good
security, it will serve for the same purposes. Part of it will be laid out in
producing more of the same kinds of commodities which the country produced
before; another part in- making these kinds better; another in raising new
manufactures at home; another in procuring more foreign goods. The farmer will
raise more and better grain; the grazier breed more and better cattle; the
manufacturer make more and better cloth; the artizan make better work, and in a
greater quantity; and the merchant will extend his foreign trade."
Characteristics, etc.
notes, annually, to three times the amount of their yearly fund of one hundred
thousand pounds, and no more; -- such notes to be payable at the bank, in
specie, on demand.

One third part of the sum annually emitted in notes, the first four years, to
be appropriated by Congress, toward completing the capital of the bank, in the
manner hereafter directed: and the remaining two-thirds during that time, and
afterward the whole, to be lodged, in notes, in the public treasuries; subject
to the disposal of Congress only.

Every person placing gold or silver in the bank, for convenience or any other
purpose, to receive notes to the same amount, exchangeable for specie, on
demand.

The directors to employ the stock of the bank to the best advantage, by
discounting bills; by lending money on interest, redeemable in three months,
unless the bank think proper to prolong the term -- upon the security of
deposits, to twice the value of the sums lent, in commodities not of a quickly
perishable nature, (such as bullion, plate, hemp, flax-seed, tobacco, iron,
etc.) on the principle of the Lombard bank at Amsterdam; and by lending, on
landed security, in the manner hereafter mentioned.

A general council, consisting of a majority of the directors, to be held at
the bank, once a year, for arranging and transacting the business of the
department.

The company to be entitled to all the profits, during the first four years,
accruing from their stock, in consideration of their managing the concerns of
the bank.

A committee, composed of one member from each state, and styled Comptrollers
of the Bank, to be yearly chosen out of Congress by the several Assemblies, --
to examine, every six months, into the state of the bank, and to report the
same to Congress.

That Congress mortgage the produce of the duty of five per cent, ad valorem,
to be imposed by them on all merchandise imported into the United States, to
the public, until it shall amount to four millions of dollars, being
four-tenths of the national debt, exclusive of certificates: the several states
to provide means for sinking the remaining sum of six millions of dollars,
redeemable in six years from the date of their emission; Congress answering for
unavoidable deficiencies in any of the states.

According to the amount of these duties, which shall be paid every year into
the treasury -- and a sum equal to which, in the bills of credit aforesaid,
emitted by Congress, shall be at the same time destroyed -- Congress to pay
off, with bank-notes, a proportionable part of certificates; together with the
interest thereon, in notes or in bills of exchange: and that so much of those
duties be appropriated for this use, as may be requisite; provided that not
more than one hundred thousand pounds be paid in the year.

As the fund arising from the foregoing lottery, toward establishing the
bank-stock of one million, would amount only to six hundred thousand pounds,
the company to be authorized and enabled, by their charter, to lend money, on
"It is of no consequence," (in the arguments used against banks) "though landed
men mortgage part of their estates for hank notes; and may be said to coin
their lands and bring them into thr markct. On the contrary, the more the lands
of any country are locked up, the country must be less improved. And the more
easily lands can be transferred and exchanged in commerce; industry trade and
manufactures, will be more speedily and successfully promoted."
Characteristics, etc.
mortgages of real estates; provided that the sums so lent shall not, at any
one time, exceed four hundred thousand pounds.

As the notes issued by the bank would, at the expiration of the first six
years, exceed the capital by eight hundred thousand pounds, subscriptions to
that amount to be then opened at the bank; payable in notes or specie, within
the year, in four quarterly deposits, and redeemable with interest in eight
years, in as many successive equal payments. The fund for redeeming the moneys
so subscribed to be the produce of an annual state-lottery for that term
mortgaged by Congress to the subscribers, and applied to replace the yearly
disbursements made by the bank: this part of the bank-stock to be transferable,
in the manner hereafter mentioned, during the term of eight years -- the
interest accruing thereon being payable, within that period, by the bank, out
of the profits of it is capital, to the subscribers or their assignees; and
afterward to the government, for twenty years. This addition to the capital of
the bank would render it necessary that the securities given by the directors
should be proportionably increased; and that the faith of the United States
should be super-added, for the security of the whole.

The tickets and prizes of this lottery might be paid either in notes or
specie, at the option of the purchaser or the fortunate adventurer: the end for
which they were made payable, in the former lottery, in specie only, viz. --
the acquisition of a certain specie fund, and the bringing some gold and silver
into circulation, which might otherwise have lain dormant -- having been
sufficiently answered.

But as it would be most convenient for every person, lending money to
government, to be at liberty to reimburse himself, whenever he might have
occasion for the capital, transfer-books to be opened at the bank, once a week,
for transferring and accepting (or, in other words, for buying and selling)
stock.

All commodities deposited in bank to be forfeited, unless redeemed in three
weeks after the time of redemption; and (except bullion or plate) to be sold,
at public auction, for the benefit of the company.

As the general council of the bank would meet annually, and the comptrollers
every six months, to examine into the state of it is funds and the disposition
thereof, and to settle and adjust the accounts of the company, it would be
necessary to "The bank of Amsterdam is shut up twice a year, in January or
February, and in July or August, and continues shut eight, ten, or fifteen
days; during which time the books of account are adjusted. It is also shut up
during the feasts of Easter, Ascension, Christmas, and some other festival."
Rolt's Dict. of Trade and Com.
shut up the bank for eight or ten days, twice a year, besides holydays: and
that the general council, at their meeting, should make a dividend of the
profits of the bank, and appoint commissioners to superintend, direct and
manage the business of that department the following year.

Let a mint be established, under the direction of Congress, where all bullion
and plate deposited at the bank, that may become forfeited thereto, should be
coined, agreeable to the sterling standard; and after making the necessary
deduction, for defraying the expense of the coinage, (which should be fixed)
and for too great alloy, the residue to be paid into the bank.

The charges of all other bullion and plate, coined at the mint, to be borne by
the bank; so that every person bringing bullion or plate to be coined, shall
receive an equal weight in coin, deducting only for base alloy. For in
proportion as the circulating medium of specie is increased, will the demand
for it, at the bank, be lessened; and, consequently, the company will be
enabled to employ a greater part of their capital, for their joint emolument.
It is evident, that as much less than five per cent, as the bank pays for
coinage, so much will they be gainers thereby, exclusive of other advantages.

Here arises an observation worth our attention; which is, that melting down
the current specie of the country, for plate, is extremely injurious, by
diminishing the circulating medium. A certain quantity of gold and silver are
necessary for this purpose; but, when wrought into plate, they cease to be a
medium of commerce, and become a dead, unprofitable mass of wealth, in the
hands of the possessor. Hence, in GreatBritain, the melting down any current
silver money is an offense against the laws; and the species, coined in
England, are esteemed as contraband goods, and not to be exporttd. -- Foreign
coin being considered only as having flowed into the kingdom by a fortunate
tide of commerce, which, by it is ebb, might carry out the same, to restore the
balance of trade, (a kind of fluctuation not at all uncommon, in an extensive
traffic) it is not subject to the same regulations: for should an unfavourable
balance carry off the whole of it, their own coin remaining behind would,
probably, be adequate to the purposes of their domestic trade, and the support
of their paper-credit; -- whereas the greatest part of what is wrought up,
continues in the kingdom; and, though it does not increase the circulating
specie, adds wealth to the proprietors, and affords taxes to government.

It is not intended to examine into the policy of the duties upon plate, which
are payable in England: the object of them is, no doubt, the prohibition of it,
in some degree; so as to induce people to carry their gold and silver to the
mint. The plan here proposed is calculated to obviate, in a great measure, the
"The great quantities of plate that are said to be in France, in the Churches
and private houses, cannot be of any advantage in trade. What neither
circulates, nor is a fund of credit, can have no influence in commerce. The
French would carry on a much greater trade, if all this plate were circulating.
The British, too, could carry on a much greater trade, if every man possessed
of plate would either employ it in trade, or lend it to such as would: in this
respect the English and Dutch, who encourage services of China and other
earthen ware, instead of services of plate, act more in the true spirit of
trade than the Genoese." Characteristics, etc.
disadvantages arising from large quantities of plate; by enabling every
person, possessed of uncoined gold or silver, to make use of it, indirectly, as
a circulating medium.

It should be made a fundamental article in the constitution of the bank, that
it should not trade, nor suffer any person in trust for it to trade, with any
of the effects of the corporation, in the buying or selling any forts of
merchandise; except in the manner before mentioned, and in buying or selling
bullion, gold or silver.

The bank should likewise be prohibited from advancing any moneys to
government, for a longer term than one year; and on no other security than the
supplies to be raised within the year, previously mortgaged to the company.

It may not be improper here to observe, that, as the United States of America
form one grand, entire Republic, composed of a number of small ones,
confederated for their common safety and advantage, and distinct only for their
greater convenience, with respect to legislation and internal police, the
supreme sovereign authority of the whole ought, most undoubtedly, to be lodged
in Congress; and they should possess such powers and privileges, not
incompatible with the happiness of a free people, as usually appertain to
sovereignty, in order to enable them to conduct and direct the common concerns
of the United States, upon uniform principles, so as to afford equal advantages
to each, and give energy to the whole.

Upon this ground, the propriety of vesting in Congress the sole and exclusive
right of emitting paper bills of credit, and coining money, for the use of the
republic, they represent is evident: and unless this be done, it will be
extremely difficult, if not impossible, for any man or body of men, to regulate
and manage the finances of this country.

But if Congress has the right of emitting paper upon credit, that body should,
necessarily, have in their own hands the means of supporting that credit. They
ought, therefore, to have the privilege, as part of their prerogative, to
regulate the commerce of the United States, by the imposition of all duties
upon imports; to lay a general land tax, and to have the direction of the
post office.

The two first of these sources of revenue are common to all the states; and
are of such a nature, that, if the duties and taxes arising from them are laid
generally, ad valorem, they will be productive in the several states, in
proportion to their respective funds of wealth, and will operate in such a
manner as to preserve a just equilibrium, between the interests of all.

The post office department is, in a peculiar manner, connected with every
state, and extends through all.

It appears most proper, therefore, that the revenues accruing from this, and
from the two first mentioned objects of taxation, should be subject to the
appropriation of Congress: by which means, this important Assembly would not be
left with the mere shadow of sovereign authority, without the right of
controuling any state, of exacting obedience to their ordinances, and destitute
of the means of executing their resolves.

The authority of Congress, at present, is very inadequate to the performance
of their duties; and this indicates the necessity of their calling a
Continental Convention, for the express purpose of ascertaining, defining,
enlarging and limiting, the duties and powers of their constitution.

It has been the endeavor of the Writer, in forming the foregoing plan, to
make it coincide, as far as possible, with the measures already adopted by
Congress. The proposal for erecting a national bank is dictated by a conviction
of the necessity there is to establish some medium of paper-credit, that shall
be unconfined to any particular state. By the scheme here proposed, the bank is
to be under the patronage of the United States, and, by it is constitution, it
would certainly be the interest of government, as well as of individuals, to
protect and support it. On this account, all the revenues last mentioned, as
belonging to the Confederated Republic, should be payable into the bank: as the
exchequer or national treasury.

Violent prejudices have been conceived against banks, not only by the
ignorant, but by some ingenious and learned men. They will, however, appear
upon examination to be, for the most part, ill founded. The most material
objection, that has been raised against banks, is, that so great a run may be
made upon them, that they may not be able to answer their notes: but there is
little danger of this happening, if the proper cautions be used: -- besides,
that this will be less likely to be the case (...) America, than any where
else, from the vast extent of the country, and the great distances to which a
very considerable part of these notes will be dispersed.

The numerous and important advantages that would result to this country, from
an institution of this kind, must be obvious to every one. Exclusive of those
already taken notice of, the bank-notes, always commanding specie, would
circulate freely through all the United States: and merchants could make their
remittances, from one state to another, with great safety and convenience, by
such a medium. The government would derive similar benefits from so general a
currency; as these notes, from their extensive circulation, would be extremely
well calculated for paying armies, composed of troops from different states,
and stationary in none.

National banks have been established in many parts of Europe; and the
advantages accruing from them to "We see that nations have prospered by setting
up banks. This is true of Holland, of Genoa, and of other places; and it will
be found to be true both of England and of Scotland." Characteristics, etc.
trade seem, particularly, to have pointed out the necessity of them, in great
commercial countries.

England erected her bank in the reign of King William the Third, whilst
engaged in a most expensive war; and when it was not expedient to draw from the
people such annual sums, in taxes, as were requisite to defray the expenditures
of the year: -- it therefore became necessary, in order to enable them to
prosecute the war with vigor and effect, to anticipate the revenues of their
successors, by borrowing such sums as were wanted to answer the current
exigencies; only providing for the payment of the interest, and leaving
posterity to discharge the principal.

The bad policy of Britain has been in multiplying their paper, almost without
any limitation; thereby creating an amazing quantity of imaginary wealth,
unsupported by a necessary proportion of real; the nation having long since,
abandoned the hope of being ever able to pay off their debt.

To conclude -- From a thorough investigation of this subject, it will appear,
that similar causes to those, which, in the reign of William the Third,
occasioned the necessity of erecting the bank.of England, now exist in this
country. That bank, notwithstanding it is impaired foundation, has stood a long
time; and, hitherto, added strength to the kingdom: but the plan here
exhibited, for the establishment of an American Bank, is formed on such
principles, as must place it on a secure and permanent basis.

FINIS.

