Philadelphia, 12th Month 6th, 1781.
On the 26th ultimo a Committee of six Friends, by Appointment, waited on the
President of the Executive Council, and the Speaker of the General Assembly,
with Copies of the following Representation, to request the Favor of them to
lay the same before each of the public Bodies at which they respectively
presided, which they obligingly undertook, and it is now printed for the Use of
the Members of our own Society, and the Information of others who are
unacquainted with our religious Principles.

To the President and Executive Council, the General Assembly of Pennsylvania,
and others whom it may concern:
The following REPRESENTATION, on Behalf of the People called QUAKERS,

SHOWS,

THAT the outrages and violences committed on the property, and on diverse of
the persons, of the inhabitants of Philadelphia, of our religious society, by
companies of licentious people parading the streets, destroying the windows and
doors of our houses, breaking into and plundering some of them, on the evening
of the 24th of last month, increases the occasion of our present address to
you, who are in the exercise of the powers of Civil Government, which is in
itself honorable, and originally instituted for the support of public peace and
good order, and the preservation of the just rights of the people.

Although we believe that most of you are not unacquainted with our religious
principles in general, and the reasons of our dissent from other professed
Christians, in diverse matters relating to faith and practice, yet as such
riotous proceedings are shameful to the Christian name, and dishonorable to
government, and many of us have suffered great loss and damage, we apprehend it
our duty to bring into your view the grounds of our not complying with the vain
modes of rejoicing, in which many indulge themselves, as also for the
information of others, who through misapprehension or prejudice too freely
attribute our conduct to obstinacy and a party-spirit, and are thus prompted
wrongfully to judge and condemn us.

It therefore appears to us requisite to put you and them in mind, that at the
beginning of the Reformation, a few centuries past, the day of the Lord
gradually broke forth in diverse nations of Europe, raising up pious men to
declare against the gross superstitions and impositions, contrary to the nature
and spirit of christianity, which for many ages had prevailed, and enabling
them to stand faithful, many of them even unto death, according to the
discoveries of duty made known to them, in that revival of Gospel dawn on their
minds. And in process of time it pleased Almighty God further to cause his
glorious day of light to advance, and the sun of righteousness to shine in
great brightness, whereby not only the gross, but also the more specious, as
well (...) branches of corruption, were manifested to our worthy ancestors,
which divine principle of light and truth we also (...).

In (...) manifestation of gospel light they clearly saw, and many of us are
now also firmly convinced, among other important truths, that the lusts of
ambition, avarice, envy, and emulation, from whence wars, strife and contention
about earthly things, proceed, are the fruits of the depravity and corruption
of the human heart, which must be expelled and eradicated in the spiritual work
of Christian redemption; and they not only saw that they must cease from
outward hostilities, but that their conversation and conduct must be consistent
with the doctrine and precepts of the gospel. That as they could not join with
others in shedding the blood of their fellow-men, for whom Christ died, "and
who came to save men's lives, and not to destroy them;" neither could they
unite in rejoicing for the advantages gained by such bloodshed. As they could
not fight with the fighters, neither could they triumph with the conquerors;
and therefore they were not to be prevailed upon to make a show of conformity
in such rejoicings, by placing lights in any part of the fronts of their
houses, or other compliances of the like nature and tendency; well knowing the
levity and folly attending such things to be inconsistent with religious
gravity and sobriety, and with that godly fear and reverence, which ought at
all times to dwell on the minds of those who profess to be followers of the
Lord Jesus Christ.

It was likewise showed to them, in the same divine light, as well as by the
doctrine of the holy scriptures, that the sons of God were led by the spirit of
God, and that all voluntary humility and will worship must be laid aside by
them, and therefore they could not subject themselves in the worship of
Almighty God to the will and commands of men; and as they were redeemed from
insincerity, they could not dissemble by seeming to conform, when in heart and
spirit they did not; and therefore continued to open their shops, and follow
their lawful occupations, on days appointed by human authority for the
observation of public (...), feasts, and thanksgivings, as usual on other days.
This was their constant conscientious practice, that they might stand clear in
the discharge of their duty toward God, and with intent that others, through
their example, might be induced to reflect upon the vanity and impropriety of
those observances and tumults, and their incoherence with the inward life,
spirit and virtue, of true religion, and Christian sobriety.

And notwithstanding they were charged with being actuated by a spirit of
singularity, obstinacy, and a desire to be contrary to others, yet they
demonstrated that in whatsoever they could comply, agreeable to good
conscience, they were ready to do it. Thus they concurred with the propriety
and decency of other professed Christians, in appropriating the first day of
the week for the performance of public worship, believing it also to be their
duty to suspend their attention to their outward concerns on other days, and to
meet often together, according to the practice of the primitive Christians, for
the like pious purpose.

It is not from imitation, or for the support of ancient custom, but from a
conviction of judgment, that we are led into the same practice with our
ancestors; being firmly persuaded that the holy spirit will, in like manner,
lead and guide such who are faithful to its dictates, in their conduct and
conversation among men, and especially in matters of faith and worship; and
therefore we can neither really worship, nor put on any part of the appearance
thereof, merely in conformity to the injunctions of human authority; believing
it our duty rather to show our neighbors by our practice, that in this gospel
day the holy spirit has led us out of the formality of public fasts, which
though, in practice under the Jewish dispensation, it does not appear that they
are enjoined on Christians, either by precept or example, from the New
Testament; Christ himself in his spiritual appearance being the teacher of his
people, and when he leads them to fast, he directs that it be in private, Mat.
vi. 16, 17 and 18.
and that they appear not unto men to fast. This we believe to be our duty as a
people to bear constant and open testimony unto, and also to maintain it fully,
and not in part only, lest by falling short therein, we should deny Christ our
Lord before men, whom we ought to acknowledge before all, and who has said,
"whosoever shall deny me before men, him will I also deny before my Father
which is in heaven."

Our forefathers, under full conviction of the rectitude of their principles,
and uprightness of their intentions, of which they had given indubitable
proofs, through a long series of severe persecutions in their native land,
borne with much firmness and Christian patience, became at length entrusted
with, and entitled to, many valuable extensive rights and privileges; which
induced them, at their own expense, to encounter the dangers of the seas, and
many other hazards and difficulties, to settle and improve this country, at
that time a wilderness; having first, in concert with their much beloved
friend, the wife William Penn, formed such a constitution of government as gave
the most promising prospect of securing to themselves, and their posterity, the
free and full enjoyment of liberty of conscience, which they preferred to all
temporal considerations, and were constantly careful to preserve not only to
themselves, but to all persons of every other religious denomination, who dwelt
among them, and for a considerable number of years the administration of the
laws was chiefly committed to men of the same liberal principles; that by the
divine blessing on their pious concern for the present and future prosperity
and happiness of the people, piety and virtue were promoted and encouraged,
vice and irreligion were discountenanced, peace, harmony and concord prevailed,
and the enjoyment of religious and civil liberty was inviolably preserved. Thus
Pennsylvania became celebrated for the mildness and liberal temper of its
government, and great numbers of sober persons of tender consciences, of
different religious professions, found a quiet retreat from the oppression and
persecution to which they had been subjected in various parts of Europe.

It must therefore appear strange and extraordinary, in the view of candid
enquirers, that so evident a change and contrast have taken place, and that we,
many of whom are the descendants of the first settlers, professing the same
religious principles, and connected in interest, affection and duty, to the
real good and welfare of our country, who have never forfeited our birthright,
should now be vilified, persecuted, imprisoned, and excluded from our just
liberties and privileges, not only by laws which have been calculated to
oppress us, and the execution of them in some places committed to men of
avaricious, profligate principles, who have made a prey of the innocent and
industrious, to the great loss and damage of some, and the almost ruin of
others; but scurrilous publications, and other invidious means used by our
adversaries to calumniate and reproach us with opprobrious names, in order to
inflame the minds of the ignorant, and impose on the credulous, to our
prejudice; when, upon an impartial candid examination, we trust it will appear,
that in the course of the commotions which have unhappily prevailed, no just
cause of offense will be found against us in the general, but that we have
endeavored to maintain our peaceable religious principles, to preserve a good
conscience toward God, and to manifest our good will to all men.

We are not incited by party views, or vindictive motives, in this
representation, but to awaken your cool and dispassionate attention to our
multiplied sufferings and the abuses we have received; knowing that magistracy
is intended for a terror to evil doers, and an encouragement to the virtuous;
but where the necessary care and exertions are not used, for the prevention and
suppression of prophanity, tumults and outrage, and a virtuous part of the
community are oppressed and insulted, the true end of government is neglected,
and anarchy, confusion, contempt of authority, and insecurity to persons and
property, will succeed; and although public fasts may be proclaimed, and days
under the name of humiliation recommended and appointed, and confession of sin
and transgression verbally made, yet, unless there be a true and sincere
fasting from ambition, strife, ill will, animosities, infidelity, fraud,
luxury, revelling, drunkenness, oppression, and all manner of evil, it cannot
be a fast or acceptable day to the Lord; nor can we have a well grounded hope,
that the scourge with which the inhabitants have been visited will be removed,
and days of peace and tranquillity restored.

The dispensation of war, bloodshed and calamity, which has been permitted to
prevail on this continent, is very solemn and awful, demanding the most serious
and heartfelt attention of all ranks and denominations among the people,
individually to consider and examine how far we are each of us really and
sincerely engaged to bring forth fruits of true repentance, and amendment of
life, agreeable to the spirit and doctrine of the gospel. And although we have
been exposed to great abuse and unchristian treatment, we wish to be enabled,
through the assistance of divine grace, to cherish in ourselves, and inculcate
in others with whom we have an influence, that disposition of forgiveness of
injuries enjoined by the precepts and example of Christ, our holy Lawgiver; and
to manifest our desires and endeavors to promote the real good of our country,
and that we are

Your Friends.
Signed in and on behalf of a meeting of the Representatives of the said
People, held in Philadelphia, the 22d day of the 11th month, 1781, By JOHN
DRINKER, Clerk.

PROVIDENCE: Printed by JOHN CARTER.


