AN Historical Narrative, AND DECLARATION.

Showing the CAUSE and RISE of the Strict Congregational CHURCHES, IN THE STATE
OF CONNECTICUT; And their present VIEWS, respecting several interesting Matters
of a religious Nature.

ALSO, A Profession of their FAITH; And several HEADS of AGREEMENT, respecting
CHURCH DISCIPLINE, agreed upon by Number of STRICT CONGREGATIONAL CHURCHES,
convened by Delegation at KILLINGLY, September 19, 1781.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, An Address to the several Churches And a LETTER upon the
Subject of ORDINATION.

PUBLISHED BY ORDER OF SAID CHURCHES.

-- And the Children of Reuben, and the Children of God, called the Altar
(...), for it shall be a Witness between us, that the Lord is God. JOSHUA 22.
PROVIDENCE (Rhode Island) Printed by BENNET and WHEELER, 1781.

ADVERTISEMENT.
WHEREAS there were a Number of Churches, of our Denomination, in this State,
that did not attend our Meeting in September last; and so consequently have not
given their Approbation to the following Publication: It is therefore earnestly
recommended to them to peruse the same, and if they find any Thing amiss, or
erroneous therein, that they would attend our Meeting, at Plainfield, on the
Third Wednesday of September next, and offer their Objections.

But if they have no Objections to make, it is desired that they would attend
said Meeting, that so we may have an Opportunity mutually to strengthen and
confirm our Fellowship, one with another.

Killingly (Connecticut) December 4, 1781.
AN HISTORICAL NARRATIVE, etc. etc.
IT came to pass in the Year 1740-41 that the Work of God, called the GREAT
REFORMATION, took Place in New England, and some of the Southern Colonies (now
States) with surprising Power and Rapidity: Vast Numbers of People in a few
Months Time were awakened out of Security. Ignorance and Formality, as to
Matters of Religion, to seek spiritual Knowledge, and to obtain an Interest in
Christ. This Concern soon became general, and very pressing on the Minds of
Multitudes, and became the great Topic of Conversation and Enquiry.

THE Diversions and Vanities of People were in general laid aside, such as
Tavern-haunting, Gaming, Dancing, Horse-racing, Chambering and Wantonness, with
all foppish Parade of extravagant Dress, and gaudy, wanton Appearance, were
forsook; and People in general, in a plain, modest Habit, devoted themselves to
attend all public Meetings, where it was expected that those who were called
powerful Preachers would perform divine Service: So that going Five or Six
Miles on Foot to such Meetings was thought feasible. Private Meetings also, for
Prayer, singing Psalms, and Spiritual Songs, and for Exhortation, and
Conversation, were frequently attended by Crowds of People.

THE chief Instruments in leading on this Work, were Messrs. Whitefield, the
Tenants, Belamy, Pomroy, Wheelock, Edwards, Buill, Croswell, Jewit, Lord,
Davinport, Finly, etc.

THESE, with great Numbers more, went through all Parts of our Land, preaching
the glad Tidings of the Gospel; and where they were not received into Meeting
Houses, they preached in the Fields. They preached as Messengers sent from God,
that felt, and believed the Importance of their Message to our sinful,
perishing World.

SUBORDINATE Means were various, besides Reading the Bible, and other good
Books, which were diligently attended to; Exhortation by Ministers, and private
Brethren was much practiced. Solemn and earnest Prayers were going up publicly,
and privately: Elevated and devout singing of Psalms and Hymns, not only in
public, but in private Houses; and sometimes when Numbers were traveling on
the Road; the Conversation People had one with another, enquiring into each
others Knowledge, Experience and Christian Hope: Together with the Freedom and
Honesty, with which they communicated their Opinion, and Judgment, concerning
themselves, and those they conversed with, had a powerful Tendency to awaken,
convince, instruct, or comfort one another.

THE Cries and Lamentations which some, and not a few, were making, being
pricked in the Heart, surprised and awakened Beholders; and also the
Acclamations of Praise to God, which some that had received Comfort; their
Raptures of Joy and Expressions of the Love of God, and the exceeding Riches of
his Grace toward Sinners; their Hope in Him, and their earnest Longings, that
others should "taste and see how Good the Lord is;" was greatly alarming to
others. Only the sight of the Multitude flocking together to hear the Word
preached, etc. the solemn Countenance, the Tears, the Sighs, the earnest
Devotion of some, the grave and joyful Countenances of others, indicating their
Complacency, and Delight in the Worship, and Work of God; was enough to impress
on the Minds of Beholders some Idea of the Solemnity of the Judgment Day.

IN the Space of Two or Three Years, it was supposed, that Thirty or Forty
Thousand were converted in New England.

HOWEVER, the Work met with Opposition; and the Opposers were proportionably
Zealous, in their Opposition, to the Zeal with which its Friends endeavored to
promote and carry it on. -- The Controversy was managed by all Orders of Men;
every public Board, both Civil and Ecclesiastical, were racking their Invention
to find out Ways and Means to embarrass and hinder the Work's going on; at
least to check the Disorder, as they call it.

WHILST the major Part were devising, and using severe Measures, the minor
Part, being friendly to the Work, were using their Influence to pacify the
Opposition; and to obtain Liberty of Conscience, and the Right of private
Judgment, in Matters of Religion, but with little Success.

WITH Respect to the Work itself, and the Errors that attended it, both among
its Friends and Foes, we refer the Reader to President Edwards's Book, in
Vindication of the Work of God in those Times.

HAVING hinted what Manner of Times the Great Reformation produced: We now
proceed to point out the Constitution and Practice of the established Churches,
of the Colony (now State) of Connecticut, as they were in those Days.

THEIR Heads of Agreement, and Articles for the Administration of Church
Discipline, may be seen in their printed Platform, agreed upon by the Elders,
and Messengers of the Churches, met by Delegation, at ^aybrook, September 9,
1708: Which Platform was presented to the General Assembly of said State; and
by them approved and established by Law. And to make it a practicable System,
the General Assembly divided the whole Colony (now State) into ecclesiastical
Bodies, according to the Districts of the Towns, or Societies; and Enacted,
That such ecclesiastical Society, qualifying themselves according to Law, were
empowered to manage and control the Choice of Parish Ministers, and the
Supporting of them; and the Building of Meeting Houses, etc. without any
Provision for the Church's Liberty of Conscience, or Reformation in Divine
Service, but left them bound by penal Laws.

THE Churches were inseperably connected with the World, in this Constitution,
under a Prohibition of having any other Meeting, or Ministers in said
Societies, but such as were expressly allowed by Law. See old Law Book, Page
153 -- 154.

THE Churches in general had tamely submitted to this Constitution; and had
generally fallen into the Practice of admitting their Members, without
requiring a credible Profession of their Faith, whereby they might be looked
upon, in a Judgment of Charity, to be visible Saints. See the printed Letter of
the Association of Windham County, Page 23. "It is the Will of Christ, that all
who make an outward, credible Profession of Christianity, should be admitted
into the Church, though unconverted: -- That they may be under proper
Ordinances for their Conversion."
To which was added, a Custom of admitting Persons to own a Covenant, and
become half way Members (without any Profession of gracious Sincerity) that
they and their Children might be baptized.

IN this Situation the Churches in general carried on all Parts of external
Worship, Order, and Ordinances, according to Law, and Custom aforesaid: Whilst
at the same Time the Government of the Churches in all Matters of Discipline
(that were not by civil Law put into the Hands of the said Societies) were
managed by the consociated Ministers, in the Manner prescribed in the aforesaid
Saybrook Regulation, authorized by civil Law: -- So that the Churches of
Christ, as such, had no Place, Liberty, or Prerogative left. -- And if the
Churches had not been included in the Societies aforesaid, one would have
thought, that the Church of Christ had been considered as not of the World, but
left at Liberty to worship, and serve God, according to the Christian Law. --
This was the general State of the Churches when the Great Reformation began.

WHEN some Ministers began, not only to be very zealous in their Preaching; but
to travel from Place to Place, preaching the Word with Power, and Multitudes
flocking to hear them; which together with the Effects their Preaching had on
the People, soon alarmed the Attention of some, and the Envy of others; and
became an Object of great Speculation, and Improvement, as has been described.

IN those Times the General Assembly of this State, made Laws to restrict, and
restrain the Liberties used by Ministers, and People, in Matters of Religion.
-- To prevent Parish Ministers preaching out of their own Parishes, it was
Enacted, That if any Parish Minister should preach in another Parish, without
first obtaining Liberty of the Minister, and Two-Thirds of the Parish, he
should be liable to loose his Salary for Two Years.

To prevent Ministers from other States traveling and Preaching in this, it
was Enacted, That they should be taken up as Vagabonds, and transported out of
the State. In Consequence of this Act, Mr. Finly, afterward President of
Jersey College, was taken up near New Haven, and transported; but returned, and
was taken up a second Time, together with Mr. Davenport, and banished by Water
to New York.


To prevent any Man's preaching, however qualified, and called, if he was not
authorized according to the express Laws of the Constitution, he should be
liable to Fines, and Imprisonment. Old Law Book, Page 510, 511. In Consequence
of this Act, Numbers have been fined, and imprisoned, for preaching the Gospel;
and exhorting the People to the Duties of Christianity, viz. -- Messieurs
Elisha Pain, Solomon Pain, Thomas Marsh, John Palmer, Ebenezer Frothingham,
and others.


To prevent any Religious Meeting being held on the Lord's Day, but such as
were allowed, and established by Law; a Law that enabled the County Courts, to
grant Liberty for Religious Meetings to be held, etc. was repealed; and the
People subject to Penalties, if they did not attend the Parish Meetings. The
Law of the State expressly forbid any Meeting House to be built, or Meeting to
be held for Religious Worship, without Liberty first obtained of the General
Assembly, upon Penalty, etc.


THE Associations of the Counties, at least some of them, were making Resolves,
that no Discentions, or Seperations from the established Order, as described by
the Laws of the State, and the Associations, should be allowed or tolerated. In
this they acted consistent with their Constitution. See old Law Book, Page 29.
Be it Enacted, etc. That no Persons shall embody into Church State, without the
Consent of the Assembly and Approbation of neighboring Ministers.

THE Associations remonstrated against those, that emerged out of the
Labyrinth, of the declined, and adulterated State of Religion among us; and
were taking Measures to obtain Reformation, and to restore primitive Purity,
pleading Liberty of Conscience, and the Right of private Judgment, in Matters
of Religion.

THE reforming Ministers, and Churches, were treated as departing from the
Faith, and Order of the Gospel: As corrupting the Word, and perverting the
Truth, and turning the World up side down; and therefore rendered themselves
unfit for Communion, Liberty of Conscience, or Toleration.

THE Severity used, caused (...), and give up their Liberties. The (...), and
Mistakes of others, surprised and intimidated them, so that they precipitately
retracted, and went back too far.

Some OBSERVATIONS on the SEPARATION; and the SEPARATE, or STRICT
CONGREGATIONAL CHURCHES.
THE Constitution, and Practice of the Established Churches, being as has been
described; Numbers in various Parts of this State, did descent, and separate
themselves from the Communion of the said standing Churches, and gathered
themselves into Churches, to carry on the Worship of God, and Church
Discipline, according as they understood the Word of God: Acknowledging no
other but God alone, to have Right to prescribe Rules for Divine Worship; or
ordering the Discipline of his Church.

We according to our Judgment, looked upon the Ecclesiastical Constitution of
this State, and the Traditions thereof, to be a great Departure from the Order
of the Apostolic Churches, as well as from the Platform of our Fore Father's
in this Land. And although they were called, and importuned to take some Step
for Reformation, they refused, and justified themselves in their Constitution,
and Practice. Here we judged it necessary, and become our Duty to withdraw from
their Fellowship, and Communion; so far as they had departed from the Rule of
God's Word.

THE Church in Canterbury, that had been a Congregational-Church from its first
beginning, after a long and tedious Labor, in opposing the Society, with a
minor Part of the Church, from settling Mr. Cogswell among them; withdrew from
the Socities Meeting House, and set up the Worship of God in a private House.
This was some time in the Year 1744. And on the 9th of October, 1745, a new
Separate, or Strict Congregational Church, was gathered in Mansfield, in the
County of Windham, consisting of Members collected from several adjacent Towns.
The Manner, in which they formed themselves into a visible Church, was this;
they gave a verbal Relation to each other, of their Experience, of a Work of
Grace upon their Souls, to the Satisfaction of each other; a special Respect
being had to the Fruits of Grace, that discover themselves in the Lives and
Conversation of such as are truly godly, or gracious Persons: And also
subscribed to Articles of Faith, and Practice, and in Church Covenant, that had
been previously drawn up, and in their Opinion, agreeable to the Word of God.

AFTER the Church was thus gathered, and covenanted together, they proceeded to
the Choice of Mr. Thomas Marsh for their Pastor; who had sustained the Office
of a Deacon, for many Years, in the Church in the Second Society, in Windham:
And appointed his Ordination to be on June 6th, 1746. But Mr. Marsh was seized
by an Officer, the Day before he was to have been ordained, for Preaching the
Gospel some Time before, without License from the established Ministers of the
Constitution, and confined in Windham Gaol, where he was confined in Prison,
until the Sitting of the County Court in June following. The Church, therefore,
by the Advice of Mr. Marsh, chose, and ordained Mr. John Hovey, to be their
Pastor, or teaching Elder, in the Month of February, 1746; a Man of approved
Abilities among them. This was the first Ordination, among the Strict
Congregational Churches, -- and was performed in the following Manner, viz. The
Church chose Three Brethren, out of their own Number: Note, -- One of the
Three, Mr. Thomas Denison, had been licouced, and recommended by some of the
standing Ministers, as a man qualified to preach the Gospel: Had also been
ordained Pastor of a Baptist Church in Ashford, by the Rev. Dr. Thomas Green,
of Dorcester, and the Rev. Ebenezer Moulten, of Brimfield.
Men of approved Gifts, and Abilities, to personate the Church, as their
Presbytery, in ordaining Mr. Hovey to the pastoral Office over them.

THUS the Cause of our Separation, and the Manner how it first began, may be
seen. But before we pass on we would here take Notice of some Errors, and
Mistakes, that attended our first Separation.

OUR first withdraw from the established Churches, was much like Israel's
coming out of Egypt, a mixed Multitude came out also; and served to answer the
same Purpose, i. e. to be a Trouble and Vexation to us, and to bring a Reproach
and Scandal upon the Work of God. -- There was much rash and party Zeal that
appeared in many, which occasioned sharp and unchristian Contentions; whereby
the Cause of Truth and Meekness suffered greatly. We lament the Missteps in
Doctrine, and Practice, that marked our Proceedings in many Instances, while we
were aiming, (in our infant State) to know and walk in the right Way of the
Lord. Many that appeared forward in the Separation fell into notorious,
scandalous Sins: -- Others there were that ran into Errors and Extremes, in
Matters of Religion; holding to an absolute Knowledge of the Brethren, upon an
invisible Evidence, as they called it. -- Others there were that made Faith,
Conscience, and Good Feeling in Religion, their Rule of Duty, and did not pay
that Honor to the revealed Will of God, in his Word, as they ought to have
done. -- Some there were that held that Church Discipline might be proceeded in
without visible Evidence to prove Facts alleged. -- Some held that Ministers
ought to have no previous Study before Preaching; but that they ought to have
their Sermons immediately from God. -- Others there were that seemed to strike
at the Foundation of civil Government, to overthrow it entirely; and were for
destroying human Learning, and even human Reason itself, as useless in
Religion; and were for introducing unqualified Persons into the Ministry, upon
the Belief, that their Qualifications were in Heaven, and would be sent down
when they needed them.

WE have seen the Mischiefs that have taken Place among the Churches of our
Profession and Connections; where they have thought their Knowledge, and
Discernment of spiritual Things, was great, and infallible, being the Dictates
of the Spirit of God, by Impulses or Suggestions (whether by a Medium or not)
which is a Kind of Evidence, or Knowledge, too Spiritual and certain, to be
subject to moral Evidence, Reason, or Scripture. We are sensible that
Retractions of this Nature are not common, and the Path is attended with
Danger. -- Mankind are so apt, from one Extreme to hasten into another.
However, it is made our Duty to confess our Faults one to another. The
Scripture History of the Church of God sets us an Example: See the unreserved
Simplicity with which it relates the Errors, Corruptions, and Delusions, that
prevailed and took Place, both among the Friends and Foes of the Work and Cause
of God.
Mistakes and Delusions arising from this Source has drawn off great Numbers
from the Spirit and Principles of our Profession. -- Yet through the
distinguishing Goodness and Mercy of God to us, there is a Number, who have so
far escaped the Snares and Devices of the Gates of Hell, in those searching and
perilous Times, that we are agreed to declare our Understanding of the Times:
-- Our Agreement as to Articles of Faith: -- And our Judgment respecting Church
Discipline, as in the Sequel of this Book will appear.

An Account of some Events that have brought to pass great Overtures in the
Established CHURCHES.
AS to the Established Churches, such Events have taken Place as have reduced
the Establishment to little more than a Toleration as to Power of Action. --
The most rigorous Laws are become obsolete, or superseded by Laws granting
Liberty of Conscience: -- So that settling and maintaining Ministers in the Law
way, is in a great Measure out of Practice.

THE Preaching and Printing concerning the Nature of Christ's Church and
Kingdom; that it is not of this World, and that civil Magistracy has no
Jurisdiction over the Church of Christ as such; together with what has taken
Place, by Means of the National Disputes, about the natural and civil Rights
and Liberties of Mankind; has so convinced the Minds and Consciences of People
in general, that civil Establishments of Religion, and coercive Measures can be
no Advantage to the Building of Christ's Kingdom, but the contrary. -- The
Effects and Consequences of Penalties, and Force to compel to Uniformity, upon
the Plan of the established Constitution, abundently shows those Measures to be
utterly inconsistent with that Unity, and brotherly Love which is absolutely
Necessary to the Being of Christ's Church.

UPON Trial it has been found that where Ministers have been settled by the
Power of the established Constitution, in many Instances it has occasioned
warm Debates, Divisions, and Seperations unavoidably. -- And where the
Settlement, and Salary of Societies Ministers have been destrained by Law, it
has occasioned great and grevious Complaints of Injustice, of Cruelty, and
Oppression: And the Ministers have been reproached as Hirelings, and
unmerciful: And hence all Harmony and brotherly Love is no more. -- And where
People have been fined, and imprisoned, for not hearing, or attending upon the
Preaching of the Parish Minister, on the Sabbath; or attending a religious
Meeting in a Separate Assembly; or Ministers for Preaching the Gospel to
worshipping Assemblies, without Approbation, according to the established
Constitution, have been the Causes of such Grief, and Offense, and produced
such Animosities and Division, as never could be removed, if the Operation of
the established Constitution was continued.

THOSE Debates and Labors abovesaid, have plunged many Societies and Churches
into such Divisions and Confusion, with Regard to exercising the Power of the
Establishment, as rendered it utterly impracticable. The Body of the People
being convinced that it was inconsistent with Righteousness and Peace, civil or
religious; have refused to carry it into Execution; which has providentially
opened a way for Reformation: The Churches being disunited with the World, are
at Liberty to manage the Affairs of Christ's Kingdom, according to his Law. A
goodly Number of Churches have not only renounced and turned away from
following the Laws of the Constitution; but the Traditions of the Churches
also; The traditional Custom of admitting Church Members, without requiring a
credible Profassion of their Faith, is laid aside; and they practice according
to Mr. Edwards, and others, who maintain visible Saintship, necessary for
Communion; neither do they admit Persons to be only half way Members, nor
baptize any but visible Believers, and their Households.
and maintain and follow the Doctrines and Discipline of Christianity in some
good Measure, as held forth in the Word of God.

THUS we have given a brief historical Relation of Events, of a religious
Nature, that have taken place in the State of Connecticut, in particular, as
well as those that have been of a more general Nature, abroad in our Land. And
here we would take Occasion, to declare our Sentiment in (...) Things, wherein
we have been wrongfully represented, to our great Injury. And

FIRST. It has been generally received among People, that we have embraced
some new Opinions, both with Respect to Faith and Practice. But that the World
of Mankind may be undeceived in this Affair, we say, that notwithstanding,
there has been many Errors, among those that have been called Seperates, as
has been before related; yet as Churches, we have ever acknowledged
Westminster Confession of Faith; and Cambridge Platform of Church Discipline,
as to the Substance of them (some few Things excepted) to orthodox Systems of
Faith, and Practice, as in the (...) may appear. Yet after all, we hold no
Creeds, or Confessions of Faith, to be binding upon us, any farther than they
agree with the Word of God, contained in the Scriptures of the Old and New
Testaments.

SECOND. We have been represented, as holding to an absolute Knowledge of the
Brethren; and that we admit none into our Churches, but such as we know to be
real Saints. Therefore we say, notwithstanding there has been Persons of our
Profession, that have held to absolute Knowledge of the Brethren, as has been
related: Yet as Churches we are so far from pretending to know the good Estate
of one another's Souls absolutely, that we do not suppose it even Necessary, in
the Admission of Members to our Communion, that we must certainly know, that
they are truly godly, or gracious Persons. Yet it has ever been our Opinion,
that unconverted, or unregenerate Persons, have no Right to Membership in the
Church of Christ so as to be admitted to the special Ordinances of the Gospel.
That for a Person to feel in himself, a Right before God, to Membership in his
visible Church, it is necessary, that he be well satisfied in his own Mind,
that his Heart is disposed to Love, Fear, and serve God. That upon the best
Evidence, or Judgment he (...) of himself, he has been made a Partaker of this
Repentance toward God, and Faith toward our Lord Jesus Christ, that the Word
of God holds forth as Necessary to Salvation. That these Things are what he is
to make Profession, or Confession of, before the Church; as well as a general
Belief of the Gospel, and a Subjection to Jesus Christ.

NOW in order for a Church to receive a Person into Membership, it is
Necessary, that they be well satisfied of the Truth and Reality of what he
professes to have; and the most proper Means to be attended to, in Order to
obtain a Satisfaction, is to examine the Person, into his Knowledge of his lost
and undone Estate by Nature; and of the Way of Salvation through a Redeemer;
and of the Exercises of his Heart toward God: And also to consider and view
the Life, and Conversation of the Person in the World. In which Things, if the
Church be satisfied, they have good Right to extend their Charity to such an
One, as a real Disciple of Jesus Christ, without pretending to an absolute
Knowledge, of the good Estate of his Soul.

THIRD. It has been generally received, that we hold, that every Brother in
the Church, has a Right to preach, pray, and exhort publicly in the Church.
Now to set this Affair in a true Light, we say, that we believe it to be the
Duty of all professing Christians, to let their Light shine in the World, so
that their Life, and Conversation, might be one continued Preachment to others:
But that every Brother has a Right to set up to be a Public Teacher, or
Exhorter in the Church, we deny. It is our Opinion, that all those Brethren in
a Church, that have Gifts given them, that are for the Edification of the
Church, ought to be improved in the Church, in their proper Place; and to be
subject to the Government and Direction of the Church. And in order that a
Church may know the Gifts they have amongst them, it is necessary that there be
an open Door for the Proof, and Trial of those Gifts that they have; and when
the Church has made Proof and Trial of the Gifts, and Abilities of any one
Brother, and find them to be for the Edification of the Church; then the Church
ought to approve of them, by giving them their Fellowship, or Approbation to
improve their Gists among them, and to recommend them to the Acceptance of
others. -- And this we apprehend is a sufficient License, for any Man to
preach, as a Candidate for the Gospel Ministry. And as to our Opinion of the
Ordination of Church Officers, see our Heads of Agreement.

FOURTH. We have been traduced, as being a Sect of Professors, that say to all
other Denominations of Christian Professors, stand by yourselves, for we are
more Holy than you.

THEREFORE, to set this Matter in a true Light, we say, that in order for
Communion among Churches, as Churches of Christ, it is necessary, that the
Churches so communing, ought to make the Christian Profession; without which no
Body, or Society of People, can properly be said to be a visible Church of
Christ. That the Christian Profession principally consists, in a professed
Heart Subjection to Jesus Christ, as their rightful Lord and Sovereign, to be
ruled, and governed by his Law prescribed in his Word. Now we conclude, that a
Profession of Heart Subjection to Jesus Christ, and his Law, includes in it, a
Profession of being Friends to Jesus Christ; and a Profession of being Friends
to Jesus Christ, includes in it a Profession of being regenerated or born
again. Therefore all such as call themselves Churches of Christ, and do not
make the above Profession, cannot properly be said to be visible Churches of
Christ. Neither is it possible in the Nature of Things, to make a Person, a
visible Member of a visible Church of Christ, so long as he, or she, profess
themselves to be in a State of unregeneracy. Therefore, we suppose, that we
have no Scripture Warrant, to hold Communion in special Ordinances, with such
Churches, as profess that Faith, and Repentance, are not absolutely necessary
to qualify Persons for Membership in Christ's Church; and a Profession of the
same necessary, in order to their being admitted, as Members in his visible
Church.

BUT as their is a Number of Churches in this State, that we have before
mentioned, that are called Standing Churches, that are disintangled from the
Law established Constitution; and make the Christian Profession as above said,
and practice accordingly; with all such Churches we could freely hold
Communion, although they may differ from us in some Things respecting Church
Discipline, that are of a lesser Moment. And as there has been of late, a
Pamphlet, published by the Presbytery of Morris County, entitled "A View of a
Christian Church, and Church Government." We take this Method to declare our
Approbation of said Book, in all those Things that are essential to the Being
of a visible Church; though there are some Things in said Book, respecting
Church Government, that are of a subordinate Nature, that we are not so well
agreed in; yet we see no just Cause, why we could not freely hold Communion,
with Churches formed on such a Plan, as is therein described.

AND as to our Baptist Brethren, we are free to hold occasional Communion, with
such as are regular Churches, and make the Christian Profession as above said;
and acknowledge us to be Baptized Churches, and own the Morality of the Ten
Commands of the Decalogue.

Our MOTIVES for publishing the foregoing HISTORICAL NARRATIVE, And
DECLARATION, are as follow, viz.
THE Overtures, Alterations, and Reformations, that have taken Place in the
Churches, since the Great Reformation, and of our Separation, with respect to
Exertions to support, and maintain the Established Constitution, are such, that
the young and rising Generation, could form no just Idea of the Reasons we had,
for our dissenting from the Established Churches, without some such Means of
Knowledge; nor what Series of Events, has brought so many of the Ministers,
and Churches, from so wide a Breach, to be so united and agreed, both in
Doctrine and Practice, as they now appear to be. It may be justly said, it is
the Lord's Doings, and it is marvelous in our Eyes; how the Lord has wrought
to make Breaches in the strong Holds of Tradition, formed by Civil, or
Ecclesiastical Powers, joining to established Uniformity in Religion, and to
establish it by Power. And on the other Hand, how he has defeated the Wiles of
the Devil, who came forth as an Angel of Light, declaring for Liberty, and
Spirituality, casting out a Flood of Delusions, and damnable Heresies, by which
many have been defiled, and the Way of Truth, evil spoken of, and the honest
Inquirer at a loss to know what to think, or which Way to walk.

MANY of us yet alive, having been Eye Witnesses of these Things, have thought
it our Duty to declare them, for the Glory of God, for the Comfort and
Establishment of the Church; and for the Instruction, and Improvement of the
present and rising Generation.

WE offer in Vindication of our Conduct, in seperating from the Established
Churches, as follows, viz. The Grounds of our having Scruples of Conscience,
to continue in their Fellowship, and Communion, has been already declared, in
the Description given of the Constitution, and Practice of the Established
Churches in those Times.

FOR any One to withdraw, from the Communion of a Church he had covenanted
with, when there was no sufficient Grounds for Scruples of Conscience in
continuing: -- Or to separate abruptly, without using proper Means to have his
Scruples removed, or Causes of Grief redressed: -- Or from a contentious,
schismatical Spirit, would be sinful and disorderly Walking.

BUT when there are just Causes for Scruples; and due Pains have been taken to
remove them; and it cannot be obtained, withdrawing becomes prudent, and
necessary, for Two Reasons: -- First, By continuing he must give Fellowship to
an Act of Worship, which in his own View is contrary to the Will of God; and
thereby his Conscience be defiled: -- Second, It would be sinful Neglect of
serving God, in the Manner he in his own Conscience believes he ought to do.

FOR a more full Explication, and to show that our Separation was not a new and
unjustifiable Proceedure, we would refer the Reader to the Preface of Cambridge
Platform: -- The whole Spirit and Argument of which justifies our Conduct.
They, under a Fifth Particular cite a Passage from Dr. Ames in his 4th Book,
Conscience, Chap. 14, No. 16. -- "If any Man (says he) wronged with unjust
Vexation, or providing for his own Edification, or in Testimony against Sin,
depart from a Church where some Evils are tolerated, and join himself to
another more Pure, yet without condemning the Church he leaves; he is not
therefore to be held as a Schismatic, or as guilty of any other Sin." The
Preface explains him, and says, "When either through weariness of unjust
Vexation, or in Way of Provision for his own Edification, or in Testimony
against Sin, he joineth himself to another Congregation more reformed: Any one
of these he judges a lawful Cause of Departure, though all of them do not
concur together," etc.

As to our publishing Heads of Agreement, respecting the Prerogatives, and
Discipline of Christ's Church; we look upon it both Useful and Necessary, in
order to the Fellowship of Churches, that they may exercise Charity, and Acts
of Fellowship, one toward another, as Occasion may serve, with better
Judgment, Satisfaction and Comfort. It also may be useful to particular
Churches, for their greater Agreement in Understanding uniform and harmonious
Proceedings, with respect to Order, Ordinances, Worship, and Discipline in the
Church. Notwithstanding it can make nothing right, or binding, but what is made
so by the Word of God. Hence it can Amount to no more, and is only an
Expression of our Judgment of the Rule of God's Word.

OUR acknowledging the Confession of Faith, agreed upon by the Synod at Boston,
May 12, 1680, and the longer, and shorter Chatechisms, agreed upon by the
Assembly of Divines at Westminster; shows that we are of the same Faith of our
Protestant Brethren. And as Unity in the Faith of Jesus, is honorary to him; so
Unity in the Profession of it declares his Glory, and is a Means of Christian
Charity, Fellowship, and mutual Edification. We therefore cheerfully join with
our Brethren, in confessing our Faith in the Doctrines of Christ, agreeable to
the Systems above referred to.

HEADS OF AGREEMENT, Entered into by a Number of STRICT CONGREGATIONAL
CHURCHES, convened, by Delegation, at KILLINGLY, Sept. 19, 1781.
I. Of a Confession of Faith.

WE agree to the Confession of Faith, agreed upon by the Synod at Boston, May
12, 1680, and to the longer and shorter Catechisms, agreed upon by the Assembly
of Divines at Westminster, as orthodox Systems of the Doctrines of the
Christian Religion, as to the Substance of them. Ever holding the Word of God,
contained in the Scriptures of the Old and New Testaments, to be the only
perfect Rule of Faith and Practice.

II. OF the Church in general,

THAT the Word Church, is used to signify the whole Body of the Elect, or
Saints, both in Heaven, and Earth, who are united in Christ as their Head, and
by one Spirit baptized into one Body, that is the Body of Christ, Heb. 12, 22,
23.

III. OF the Catholic visible Church.

THERE is a Catholic visible Church, viz. The Company of those who profess the
Christian Faith, whether in Church Order or not; but there is no Political
Catholic Church, the State of the Members of the visible Church, since the
coming of Christ, being only Congregational.

IV. OF a particular Congregational Church.

A Congregational Church is a Part of the visible Church, consisting of a
Company of Saints, by Calling, making a credible Profession of their Faith, and
Repentance; united in one Body by an holy Covenant, for the Worship of God, and
an Obedience to him in all his Ordinances and Institutions; and for the mutual
Edification one of another, in the Fellowship of the Lord Jesus: As to its
Quantity it ought not to be of greater Number than may ordinarily meet together
conveniently in one Place, nor fewer than may conveniently carry on Church
Work. Any One that joins to such a Church, must be baptized, profess Religion,
satisfy the Church of the Credibility of their Profession; and covenant to walk
with the Church, in the Observance of all Gospel Ordinances.

V. OF the Power or Privilege of a Congregational Church.

THAT a Church regularly gathered, and covenanted together, have good Right,
full Power, and lawful Authority, delegated to them by Christ their rightful
King, and Law giver, to act and transact every Thing within themselves, that is
Necessary to their Well-being as a Church of Christ. -- That there is no
Jurisdiction, to which particular Churches are or ought to be subject, by Way
of authoritative Censure; nor any other Church Power, extrinsical to such
Churches, which they ought to depend on any other Sort of Men for the Exercise
of. This is exactly agreeable to the Opinion of our Forefathers in the First
Settlement of New England. See Hutchinson's History of the Massachusetts Bay.
Page 420.


VI. OF the Exercise of Church Power.

THE Church of Christ exercises her Power or Privilege. 1st. By admitting her
own Members. 2dly. By admonishing her Members in Case of Sin, and by
excommunicating them in Case they become incorrigible in their Wickedness.
3dly. By choosing and ordaining her own Officers (Need so requiring) and in
removing them from their Offices, in Case of Forseiture.

VII. OF Church Officers.

THAT there is two Offices appointed by Christ in his Church, viz. Bishops, and
Deacons. The Words Bishop, Elder, Pastor, or Teacher, we understand to be so
many Names for the same Office. In the Choice of Pastors, or Teachers, special
Respect ought to be had to their Qualifications, as described in the Word of
God, viz. Those Gifts and Virtues which the Scriptures requires in Men that
are to be elected into such Places. That Elders must be blameless, sober, apt
to Teach, and endued with such other Qualifications as are laid down, 1 Timothy
3.2. Tit. 1.6 -- 9. Deacons to be qualified as directed Acts 6.3.1 Tim. 3 8 --
11.

VIII. OF the Ordination of Church Officers.

ORDINATION is the putting a Person into the Place that he had a Right to
before, by Election. In the Ordination of Pastors, or Elders, we judge it
expedient that Imposition of Hands be performed by ordained Elders, if it can
be obtained: But if not, it may be done by some of the Brethren, appointed
thereunto by the Church. This was the Opinion of our Forefathers. See
Hutchinson's History, Page 433, and also their Practice, Page 425.
Deacons also ought to be put into Office by Prayer, and some public Testimony
given by the Church.

AFTER all the Debates that has been about the Right of Ordination, we can
freely join with the Opinion of the Presbytery of Morris County, viz. "When we
consider the Nature of Ordination, and the Right each Church has to choose
their own Officers, it will appear, that it is not essential by whom they are
introduced, after they are elected, and have accepted the Call of the Church."

IX. How Churches should proceed in Church Government.

THAT in Order to a Church's exercising that Power, or Privilege, that is
radically in them as a Church, it is Necessary in Churches not furnished with
proper Officers, that they appoint some proper Person to preside in Church
Meetings, as Moderator, to lead the Church in those Affairs that may lie before
them; but when a Church has supplied itself with proper Officers, such as
Pastor, or Deacon, or Deacons, it is the proper Work of a Pastor to lead in the
Church, in all Matters of Church Government: But if the Pastor be disabled
through Sickness or otherwise, from attending to his Duty in this Respect; or
wilfully refuse when desired by the Church, it appears most reasonable that it
is the Deacon's Duty to lead as Moderator in Matters of Church Government. But
that any Officer in the Church, or all its Officers, by Virtue of their Office,
have a Right to negative the Church in Matters of Church Government, we
entirely disapprove.

X. OF the Work and Duty of Pastors and Deacons.

FIRST, Of the Pastors Work and Duty. -- It appears that it is not only the
Pastors Work and Duty to preside in Matters of Church Government; but also to
feed the Flock with Knowledge and Understanding: This appears of great
Importance in the Discharge of their Duty, that they rightly divide the Word of
Truth, and give to every one a Portion in due Season. The Teaching and
Preaching the Word of God is an Ordinance of his own appointing; and is a
special Means in the Hand of the Spirit, for the Conviction and Conversion of
Sinners; and of building up the Saints, in their most holy Faith. Therefore,
the Apostle gives it in Charge to Timothy, 2 Epis. c. 4. v. 2. "Preach the
Word." Tit. 2.1. "But speak thou the Things, which become sound Doctrine."
Wherefore, it appears to us essential to the Well-being of a Church that they
be well provided with a sound, orthodox Ministry, among them. -- Pastors should
guide and conduct the Flock, in the Paths of Truth and Duty. -- Pastors should
watch for and over the Flock, Heb. 13.17. -- Pastors should warn the Flock of
Danger from the World, from Satan, and from the Corruptions of their own
Hearts. -- Pastors should administer the Seals unto the Flock, such as Baptism,
and the Lord's Supper. -- Pastors should pray for the Flock, and bless the
Flock in the Name of the Lord. -- Pastors should pity the Flock, and carry it
gently and meekly toward them. -- Pastors should keep up a good Opinion of,
and have an high Esteem of the Flock; and should suit their Discourses to the
several. Circumstances and Capacities of the Flock. -- In a Word, Pastors
should in all Things approve themselves the Ministers of God, 2 Cor 3.2.

SECOND, Of the Work and Duty of Deacons. -- The Work and Duty of Deacons in
the Church, appears most plain to us in the Scriptures, to be an Assistant to
the Ministry; and that it is not altogether confined to the Temporalities of
the Church, but may as Occasion and Necessity may require, be improved in
Spiritual Services in the Church, according to the several Gifts, and Abilities
bestowed upon them.

XI. SEVERAL Articles of Agreement, respecting the Conduct and Behavior of our
Church, one toward another.

1. WE agree that particular Churches ought not to walk so distinct, and
separate from each other, as not to have Care and Tenderness one toward the
other; but ought by mutual Advice and brotherly Intercourse, to strengthen and
encourage each others Hearts and Hands in the Ways of the Lord.

2. THAT none of our Churches shall be subordinate to one another; each being
endued with Equality of Power from Jesus Christ.

3. THAT known Members of particular Churches, that we have already declared we
are willing to hold Communion with, as well as those who are of our particular
Churches; may have occasional Communion in the Ordinances of the Gospel, unless
there be some just Objection.

4. THAT we will not admit any one to be a Member of our particular Churches,
that has joined himself to another; without Endeavors of mutual Satisfaction
of the Church concerned.

5. THAT we will be most willing and ready to give an Account of our Church
Proceedings to each other when desired; for preventing, or removing, any
Offenses that may arise among us. Likewise we shall be ready to give the right
Hand of Fellowship, and walk together, according to the Gospel Rules of
Communion of Churches; and also to assist each other, by our Advice and
Counsel, when desired, or called thereunto.

6. THAT in order to maintain Fellowship and Union among the Churches, and for
the Assistance of each other, in some difficult Cases, it is expedient that
Churches meet together by their Delegates, or otherways, to consult, and advise
with each other about such Things, as shall be for their general Good and
Benefit.

7. THAT when any of our Churches, shall in the Providence of God, be destitute
of Ordained Pastors among them, that those who are favored with Pastors, will
be most ready upon their Desire, to afford them Help, and Assistance, by giving
our Pastors Fellowship to administer the Word, and Sacrements to them
occasionally.

8. THAT it is agreeable to the Scriptures, that a Church may (Need so
requiring) have more than one Pastor ordained over them, at one and the same
Time.

9. THAT we will be known among ourselves, and others, by the Name of Strict
Congregational Churches.

10. THAT we will have a General Meeting of our several Churches, by
Delegation, annually on the Third Wednesday of September, for the Purpose
abovesaid; the First to be at Plainfield, September next.

XII. OF the Support of the Gospel Ministry.

IT is our Opinion, that the Support of the Gospel Ministry, is a Duty enjoined
upon those who are favored with the Gospel; that all who are taught in the
Word, ought (according to their several Abilities) to communicate to him that
teaches in all good Things; and can no more be dispensed with, than any other
Duty required in the Word of God: That this Duty ought to be discharged, by
those upon whom it lies, in the most just and equitable Way, according as God
has prospered them in the Things of this Life; and can never be discharged
acceptable to God, but by the free, voluntary Act of him that does it.
Therefore we wholly disapprove of all Use of Civil Law, in forcing Persons to
support the Gospel Ministry; nor do we think that the Exercise of Church
Censures upon its Members, will ever answer any good Purpose in this Affair,
except when Church Members, have laid themselves under a personal, voluntary
Obligation, in which Case, if they refuse to fulfill their Engagements (without
just Cause) they may be proceeded against, as in any other Breaches of Promise.
We apprehend that God has reserved the Punishment of t^^ Sin in his own Hand,
as in many other Cases, and he does it various Ways; sometimes by sending a
Curse upon People in their Persons, Families, or Estates; sometimes by
suffering the Gospel to become a Savor of Death to them; sometimes by leaving
them destitute of any Desire to hear the Gospel; sometimes by sending a Famine
of hearing the Word; and finally if dying in Impenitency, they must expect to
meet the great Author of the Gospel, with this solemn Charge, "I was an hungry,
and ye fed me not, naked and ye clothed me not," therefore "depart from me ye
Cursed," etc. Some Questions naturally arise. Quest. 1st. What if People are
able to support the Gospel Ministry, but are not disposed to do it, and so
neglect it? Ans. Their want of Disposition is their Sin, and their Neglect is
the Fruit and Evidence of their Sin. Quest. 2d. What shall a Minister do, that
is ordained over such a Church? Ans. After due Labor with them, shake off the
Dust off his Feet for a Testimony against them, and depart from them. Quest.
3d. What if a Church, and Society, be willing to support the Gospel Ministry,
but are poor, and unable to do it? Ans. It is accepted according to what a Man
has, and not according to what he has not, if there be first a willing Mind.
And it is one of the Excellencies of the Gospel, that the Poor have it preached
to them, while on the other Hand, the Rich will be sent empty away.

EVERY Church, ought to adopt such Modes of supporting the Gospel Ministry
among them, as appears most agreeable to the Word of God, and to their own
Circumstances.

A SERIOUS ADDRESS. WE, ELDERS, and MESSENGERS, of a Number of Strict
Congregational Churches, convened At KILLINGLY, September 19, 1781, take this
Method to address ourselves to the several Churches, we respectively belong
unto.
BELOVED BRETHREN, and FRIENDS,
YOU cannot be insensible, that Forty Years are expired, since the Great
Reformation took Place in our Land, and of the Difficulties we had to pa^^
through in our Infant State, from Civil, and Ecclesiastical Powers, uniting
their Strength, to crush the Reformation that was then going on; and the many
Embarrassments that attended us from Persons among ourselves; and of the
earnest Cries that were then going up to God for Deliverance, that we might
(...) God in Righteousness, and true Holiness all the (...) of our Lives. You
cannot be insensible, how the (...) has wrought for our Deliverance, by
letting in (...) into the Minds of our fellow Men, and inclining (...) Hearts
to favor our righteous Cause, or rather (...) righteous Cause of God, in our
sinful Hands; how (...) Lord has inclined the Hearts of our Rulers, to (...)
us Freedom in some good Measure, from those impressions that we were under, and
the Encouragement that we have still to Hope, that they will make Freedom more
complete, by granting to Church^^ our Denomination in their Infant State, or
(...) the Providence of God) they may be deprived of ordained Ministers among
them, the same Liberty (...) to organized Churches. And how the Lord has
inclined many of the established Ministers, and Churches, to adopt the same
Principles, and Practice in Reformation, that first influenced us.

WHEN we consider these Things, it seems we must be guilty of the greatest
Ingratitude to God, if we do not offer a Tribute of Praise to him, and live to
his Glory.

WE earnestly recommend to you, to make the Word of God your Rule, and to put
away every Thing from your Faith, and Practice, that wont bear the Test by that
Standard of Truth. We recommend to you to put away all rash, and party Zeal, in
Matters of Religion; and to be clothed with an humble, meek, and quiet Spirit,
which is in the Sight of God of great Price. To speak Evil of no Man, and
especially not to traduce any Sect of Protestant Professors, by the hard harsh
Names of Babylon, and Antichrist; knowing that others have as good a Right, to
think and act for themselves as we have. But let us endeavor in Meekness, to
instruct those that we think are out of the Way. We would put you in mind of
the Sin of speaking Evil of Civil Rulers, a Sin that is too much prevailing at
this Day we live in: It is a special Command of God, not to revile the Gods,
nor speak Evil of the Ruler of thy People. We ought to consider that they are
but Men, and the many Embarrassments that attend their Administration, in this
Day of Trouble, and Perplexity, and to pray for them according to the Direction
given in the Gospel.

WE recommend to you to cultivate Peace and Harmony among yourselves, and to
follow Peace with all Men, and Holiness, without which no Man can see the Lord.
And that you carefully guard against those damnable Errors, and Heresies, that
are spreading in our Land in this Day we live in; especially the Doctrine of
Universal Salvation, that is making such Progress in this Day.

WE recommend to you Carefulness in Church Discipline, according to the Word of
God, that all Miscarriages may be corrected: That all Practices that have the
least Tendency to weaken the Union, and Fellowship of Churches, one with
another be carefully avoided: That mutual Help, and Assistance, be afforded to
each other in a sisterly Way, so that we may be like a Fountain of Gardens, or
like Ezekiel's Chambers, Door against Door, denoting their Fellowship, and
Communion one with another.

WE would also recommend to your particular Consideration, and Attention, the
Duty that lies upon Parents, and Churches, toward baptized Children. It is
with the greatest Sorrow, and Pain, that we see so many of our baptized
Children, indulging themselves in the Sins of these Times; some in Taverns,
drinking with the Drunkards, others chanting to the Sound of the Viol, others
perhaps cursing and swearing, and blaspheming the God that made them; others
indulging themselves in the vain, foolish Customs, and Fashions of the World;
Zion's Children with their stretched forth Necks, and wanton gaudy Dress,
appearing more like Babel's Sons, and Daughters, than like the Children of the
Church of Christ, and little or no Pains taken by their Parents, or Church, to
restrain them. Beloved Brethren, you cannot be insensible of the Covenant
Obligations you are under, to train up your Children, in the Nurture, and
Admonition of the Lord, and how much there is depending upon the Discharge of
your Duty in this Respect, as it has Respect to the declarative Glory of God,
your own Peace and Comfort in this World; and the Welfare and Happiness of your
Children in the World to come. Therefore we pray God, to impress your Duty upon
you, and enable you to discharge the same faithfully.

FINALLY, Brethren, we would earnestly recommend to you practical Piety, and
Godliness, in all the Branches of it, as it respects your Duty to God, to
yourselves, and to Mankind in general; practical Godliness is the final, and
last Evidence you can give of your being the chaste Spouse, or true Church of
Christ: And we earnestly pray, that God would succeed you in reforming every
Thing that is amiss among you, and cleanse you from all Sin, and bring you to
possess that Rest, that remains for the People of God. Which may God hasten in
his own Time.

AMEN.
A LETTER from a Gentleman, on the Subject of ORDINATION.
SIR,
I Have been informed, that you are one of the Committee appointed by the
Strict Congregational Churches, to prepare a Draught for public Print,
designed to show in what Light they view themselves, and ought to be viewed by
others, with Respect to their religious Sentiments, and Practice.

PERHAPS there is no one Point, that you will have Occasion to declare any
Thing about, that must undergo such a critical Examination, and be so liable to
Censure, as that of the Ordination of Ministers. For it is very obvious, that
whenever the Christian Religion has been established by Civil Law, whether
Papist, or Protestant, it has been made an Engine of Cruelty, and Oppression;
and when Numbers have dissented, and separated from the Communion of the
Established Order, professing to be reformed, the Standing Order never fails to
object against the Ministers, improved by the Dissenters; and the Objection
chiefly relied upon to bear all down before it is, "that their Ordinations are
invalid, they were not ordained by Apostolic, or Presbyterian Authority; by
which all Ministerial Power, and Right for official Administrations are given,
and conveyed." Therefore, they act without Commission, and their
Administrations empty, and useless, presumptuous, and wicked. Thus the
established Clergy clamor at the Ordinations of the Dissenters, and no marvel,
for their own Honor, and Interest, under such Circumstances makes it necessary
for their own Support. And the dissenting Party have as constantly plead, that
the Church has Right to choose, and ordain her own Officers, esteeming
Scripture Qualifications, holy and spiritual Administrations, more essential
than any particular Mode of Ordination; which they esteem a Work of Order, not
of Office.

HOWEVER, it may be observed, that when the Dissenters Circumstances admit of
it, they invariably improve Ministers, in the Ordination of Ministers, as
others has done before, and so their Sentiments, and Practice, keep Pace with
their Circumstances: And when they have obtained a Civil Establishment, they
have become oppressive, and cruel; and so another Separation becomes necessary:
And when it has taken Place, the old Dispute about Ordination, is disputed
over again; each Party maintaining agreeable to their present Circumstances,
and thus the Dispute has gone round, and round again, as though it was the
great Axis, upon which all revealed Religion turned: Although the Bible no
where mentions such Ordination, as the Criterion by which Christ's Ministers
should be known, or necessary to make their Administration valid.

YET it is very evident, from the Bible, that Men designed for, and employed in
any public Branch of Ministry, in the Church, were for the most Part ordained,
sooner or later, somehow or other, by whole Congregations, or by particular
Officers, or sometimes by a Presbytery. For a more clear View of this Matter, I
will point you out a Number of Scripture Instances, Numb. 8.10, The whole
Congregation laid their Hands upon the Levites, in their Installment to the
Service of the Tabernacle. Numb. 11.25.26, The Seventy Elders were ordained, or
put into Office, by a solemn Assembly, when there was no laying on of Hands.
Numb. ^7.18.19, Moses laid his Hands upon Joshua, and gave him a Charge to
establish him in Office as his Successor. 1st. Chron. 9.22, David, and Samuel,
ordained a Number of Porters, and no Ceremony mentioned. Heb. 5.1, It is said,
every High Priest taken from among Men, is ordained for Men, in Things
pertaining to God. The High Priest's Ordination was performed, by the pouring
on, or anointing him with the Holy Oil, see Exodus 30.30.

NEW Testament Ordinations also, were variously performed. The Ordination of an
Apostle in Judah's room, Acts 1.22, and 26. was done by a solemn Lottery. The
Ordination of the Seven, Acts 6.6. was by Prayer, and the laying on of the
Apostle's Hands. Acts 13.3. The Ordination of Paul, and Barnabas, for a Tour of
Ministration among the Heathen, was by Fasting, Prayer, and the laying on of
Hands. Acts 14.23, It is said they ordained them Elders in every Church; the
Manner was (says Mr. Bragg) by lifting up the Hands, by which they were
publicly chosen: They also fasted, and prayed, and commended them to the Lord.
Tit. 1.5, Titus was left at Crete to ordain Elders; the Manner how is not
declared, but their Qualifications are expressed, which must refer to their
being chosen, which might be no small Part of their Ordination. Tim. 4.14,
Timothy was ordained by the laying on of the Hands of the Presbytery; the only
Instance of Ordination by their Hands mentioned in the Bible.

IN those Instances above quoted, it is evident, that there were diverse Modes,
and Forms, used by Men of diverse Characters and Stations in the Church; and
probably with Reference to the Diversity of Gifts, and Office-Work, they were
designed for.

UPON the Whole we may learn, it is certain, the Church in Order to its
Well-Being, must be furnished with able Officers; and they are promised, but
the Manner how they shall be ordained, or by whose Hands, is not assertained in
the Bible. Therefore, Christian Prudence ought to be used, and the Business
performed in the most rational, Christian Manner Circumstances will admit.

NOW, Sir, I will declare what, in my Judgment, is a scriptural, rational
Proceedure, in the Ordination of a Gospel Minister, with Reference to his
Connections and Work. The Ordination of a Church Officer, is putting him into,
or declaring him to be in Holy Orders, in and over one Church, for the Work of
the Ministry; and if it may be, in the Fellowship of other Churches, for
occasional Services. The Ordination, or Installment of Church Officers,
ordinarily implies a public recommending them to God, and the Word of his
Grace, for the Work they are designed for, in the Fellowship of the Church, or
Churches. Fasting and Prayer, the Word of God preached upon the Occasion, are
with great Propriety.

WE may lay on Hands in Ordination, but should mean no more, than a religious,
solemn Gesture, formerly used by good Men, in pronouncing their Benedictions,
and giving their Charges, and Advice, to their Children, as well as Ministers,
and others: And we should repeat, and lay before them the Rule of their Duty,
and the Charge to be faithful, as it stands in the New Testament, with a
Declaration of Fellowship, and Engagements of Assistance, in the great Work of
the Gospel Ministry.

ORDINATION implies, a religious declaring, and recognizing the Spiritual
Union, and Agreement, which had before taken Place, between the Pastor, and
Flock. Ordination in the ordinary Way, does not give ministerial Gifts, or
Grace; and therefore cannot be the Basis of that Union, which is essentially
necessary in that Relation. But where that Union has taken Place, if the
Fellowship, and Assistance of neighboring Churches, and Ministers, cannot be
obtained, it is the Church's Duty, by some chosen from amongst themselves to
perform such Religious Service as they are able, suitable to the Occasion; in
order, publicly to establish their Minister's Character among themselves; and
may properly be called a private Ordination. Yet upon the Plan of Catholic
Communion, and Fellowship among all the Churches of the Saints, their Ministers
ought to be established in the Fellowship of all the Churches in the Vicinity,
to administer occasionally amongst them.

THEREFORE with regard to Order, and a rational Foundation for ministerial
Usefulness among the Churches in general, they should be ordained in the
Presence, and by the Assistance and Fellowship of neighboring Churches and
Ministers. Nevertheless, if any one Church call and ordain a Minister duly
qualified and in a decent Manner without any Assistance of other Churches,
there is no Objection justly to be made against his having Office-Right to
administer in that Church. But he cannot from hence administer occasionally, as
an Officer, in Fellowship in any other Church; because the Jurisdiction of his
Ordination, was circumscribed to one Church only.

BUT notwithstanding such Deficiency in Ordination, whatever the Cause might
be, if other Churches and Ministers become acquainted with such Church and
Minister, and find them walking according to Truth of the Gospel; and willing
to have their Minister's Ordination completed, so as to establish his
Character in the Fellowship of all the Churches, it is their Duty to take Order
by common Consent, in convenient Time, to give Fellowship to his Ordination by
his own Church; and so establish his Character, as a Minister of Christ, in the
Fellowship of the Churches in general: And so the Work is finished, which might
have been as well done, and more conveniently all at once, if neighboring
Churches and Ministers had been present at his first Installment. The
Ordination of a Gospel Minister, in Fellowship of the Churches, implies the
joint Act of two distinct Jurisdictions: One is the Church, where he is
specially sixed, which is an entire Jurisdiction by itself: The other is the
catholic, occasional Communion and Fellowship of the Churches in general: Each
Jurisdiction managing the Parts of Ordination belonging to their Deparments,
will make a uniform System of Fellowship in the Profession and Practice of
Christianity, relative to the Ordination of Gospel Ministers, and the great
Dispute come to an End.

FINIS.

