MR. MATHER'S ELECTION SERMON, MAY 10th, 1781.

SERMON, PREACHED IN THE AUDIENCE OF THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF THE STATE OF
CONNECTICUT, IN HARTFORD, ON THE DAY OF THEIR ANNIVERSARY ELECTION, MAY 10,
1781.

BY MOSES MATHER, M. A. Pastor of the CHURCH in Middlesex.

NEW LONDON: Printed by TIMOTHY GREEN, Printer to the GOVERNOR and COMPANY,
M,DCC,LXXXI.

At a General Assembly of the Governor and Company of the State of Connecticut;
holden at Hartford, on the second Thursday of May, A. D. 1781.
ORDERED, That ABRAHAM DAVENPORT, Esquire. and Mr. CHARLES WEED, return the Thanks
of this Assembly to the Rev. Mr. MOSES MATHER, for his Sermon delivered before
the Assembly on the 10th Instant, and desire a Copy thereof that it may be
printed.

A true Copy of Record, Examined, by GEORGE WYLLYS, Sec ry.

AN ELECTION SERMON.
II CHRONICLES IX.8: Blessed be the Lord thy God which delighted in thee to set
the on his throne, to be king for the Lord thy God; because thy God loved
Israel, to establish them forever, therefore made be that king over them, to do
judgment and justice.
THESE words were spoken by the Queen of Sheba, of whom honorable mention is
made by our Savior, in that she came from a far country to hear the wisdom of
Solomon; who, when she had come and proved him with hard questions, declares,
that although the report she had heard of his wisdom and grandeur did far
exceed her belief; yet having heard his wisdom, and seen the grandeur and
magnificence of his kingdom and attendance, she finds reason to acknowledge
that the half was not told her. And upon a view and reflection on these things,
she, with wonder and admiration, breaks forth in the language recorded in my
text: Blessed be the Lord thy God which delighted in thee to set thee on his
throne, to be king for the Lord thy God; because thy God loved Israel, to
establish them forever, therefore made he thee king over them, to do judgment
and justice.

THESE expressions discover an excellent spirit of discernment, wisdom and
understanding in this royal female. Although a heathen, yet she acknowledges
the true God, and expresses her belief of his governing providence in the
affairs of this world, and in disposing of men to places of public trust, power
and authority; and with devout acknowledgments ascribes glory to him, saying
"Blessed be the Lord thy God," etc. --

THE dignified character of the civil ruler is here also exhibited in its
proper light. They sit upon God's throne, and are vested with their authority
for the Lord their God. All power is of God: the powers that be are ordained of
God. Their authority is derived from him, and is to be used for him: they are
his vicegerents, acting by delegated authority from him; for which cause they
are some times styled Gods. Thus she observes to Solomon, that he was seated
upon God's throne, Although there was a special propriety in representing the
kings of Israel as seated upon God's throne in that Israel was a Theocracy, yet
I can see to impropriety in applying this to civil rulers in general; which I
conceive is warranted by the apostle who has said, "the powers that be, are
obtained of God."
and was made king for the Lord his God.

WE may here also observe the accurate penetration and judgment of this
dignified female, in that she not only traceth civil government from its true
source, as it is derived from God; but also wisely observes the great ends and
purposes to be served by the exercise of that power which particular persons,
by the allotments of divine providence, are vested with; which is to do good by
the exercise of their authority to those over whom they govern. Men are vested
with civil power, not for their own sake; but for the benefit of those among
whom they are to exercise their authority. For thus she observes to Solomon,
"that it was because God loved Israel, to establish them forever, that he had
made him king over Israel, to do judgment and justice." Those two expressions,
"judgment and justice," are expressive of the whole exercise of civil
government. Civil rulers are to do judgment, that they may discountenance and
restrain all manner of sin and wickedness, by inflicting a proper punishment
upon offenders; and they are to do justice by an equitable decision of all
controversies which arise between a man and his neighbor.

THUS we have the remarks of a female upon the nature, ends and purposes of
civil government: and what pity is it that any who value themselves upon being
called men, should come behind her in the knowledge of these things; or if
vested with any branch of authority, should so fail in the exercise of it, as
to fall under the reproof of an old woman!

IT is not necessary to suppose this Gentile queen was directed by inspiration
when she uttered these words: it is sufficient to give a divine sanction to my
text, that it here stands recorded by an inspired penman for our instruction
and admonition; wherein we not only find the dignity and duty of civil rulers
pointed out; but also many motives briefly touched, to excite them to the
practice of it. Their duty is to do judgment and justice. They must do judgment
by punishing the vicious, therein rendering themselves a terror to evildoers.
As a man can have no right to hurt his neighbor; so neither to hurt himself:
whence it appears to belong to the civil magistrate to punish personal as well
as relative offenses. And they must also do justice, by making equitable
decisions between contending parties.

IT must be confessed that the power of legislation is not here so directly
spoken of; but yet, as doing judgment and justice is the great and important
service which civil rulers are to perform for the community, therefore when
they are acting in a legislative capacity, it must be their special care to
enact such laws, that the executive authority may be rendered blessings to a
people by the due exercises of judgment and justice upon all occasions. Indeed,
the kings of Israel seem to have been vested with little or nothing of that
power which is of the legislative kind. God himself had framed their laws by
the ministry of Moses, not only for their edification as a religious society,
or visible church; but also for their good government as a civil state. We have
there given us an excellent and truly divine model of civil government, worthy
to be imitated by all nations. There laws are but few; expressed in few, but
plain terms, easy to be understood. They are for the most part, general rules
of equity; and but few special statutes for particular cases. Some few
particular statutes in certain cases are given, which might serve as a pattern
for the instruction of executive authority, to direct them to the righteous
application of the more general rules of government in all particular cases
that might arise; which men of interity might easily apply, so as to execute
good judgment, and true equity among a people. When legislative powers essay to
frame particular statutes that may be a rule for the executive authority in
every case that shall arise, it is necessary that their statutes should be very
numerous; which not only makes it more difficult to find men sufficiently
acquainted with the law to put it in execution; but also, many times wicked,
designing and crafty men invent ways to shelter evil actions under the letter
of the law; or to screen themselves from justice, because the judges are
obliged to proceed according to the express terms of particular statutes.
Indeed, where civil justice is to be administered not by particular statutes,
but by the application of general rules of equity, much will depend upon the
wisdom and integrity of the judges; which would make it peculiarly necessary in
the appointment of executive authority to practice upon the advice of Jethro to
Moses, "To provide out of all the people able men such as fear God, men of
truth hating covetousness". Might we depend upon having men of this character
for the administration of justice, we might be safe in our persons and
properties without such a multiplicity of particular statutes. For a man of an
honest heart will, for the most part, readily see how to apply general rules of
righteousness to particular cases, so as to do judgment and justice, without
being confined to the express terms of particular statutes.

But whether the affairs of a people are to be administered by the application
of general rules of righteousness or particular statutes adapted to each
several case; yet it is of singular moment that civil rulers, in every
capacity, should consider themselves as being made rulers over a people for the
Lord their God. The apostle Paul agrees with our text and speaks of civil
rulers as ministers of God for good. Romans XIII 4. They are God's ministers, in
that they are to serve him, acting as it were in God's stead, in doing both
judgment and justice. It is a manifest inference from the divine perfections
that sin shall not go unpunished: and these perfections of the Deity ought to
be patterned after by all such as are styled God's on earth, all such as bear
rule among men; that it may be truly said, that they act as his servants,
vicegerents, or representatives, in doing judgment upon transgressors. Every
well regulated state will make laws to discountenance and restrain vice and
immorality of every kind. To be sure this is the case with this state. We have
reason to rejoice that our wise and good rulers have from time to time, made
good and wholesome laws to restrain the vicious, to put wickedness to shame,
and prevent the contagion of evil example from leading others astray. And it is
the peculiar province of those who are authorized to put the laws in execution,
to render themselves blessings, great and extensive blessings to the people in
doing judgment.

INDEED, such civil officers will meet with many trying cases, in their putting
the good and wholesome laws of the land into execution. If they are not men of
virtue and integrity, the fear of offending on the one hand, or the hope of
making friends on the other, to serve their own private interest, or ambitious
views, may prove powerful temptations to connive at breaches of law, or to warp
the law aside from its true intention, and frustrate the salutary purpose for
which it was made, either by executing so small a punishment as not to render
themselves terrors to evildoers; or allowing some room for criminals to make
their escape from punishment. Or if we allow the judges to be men of real
integrity and uprightness, yet the tender feelings of humanity, especially in
very criminal cases, may be great temptations to bear the sword in vain, not
approving themselves the ministers of God, the avengers to execute wrath upon
him that does evil. But if they are ministers of God, act by authority derived
from him, are to pattern after his perfections, and be finally accountable to
him for the manner in which they conduct in their office; they ought and must
execute the good and wholesome laws of the land in doing judgment and justice.
It is true, that although several persons may be found guilty of transgressing
the same statute, yet there may be great difference in the aggravating
circumstances of the transgressions of different persons; which has given rise
to that common proverb, "the severity of the law is cruelty," which may
sometimes have too great an influence upon the tender feelings of the judge,
inclining him to relax the punishment, to the detriment of the public, whose
peace and prosperity often requires the faithful execution of judgment upon the
transgressors. But such is our happy civil constitution, that our legislative
authority always have a power to relax the penalty to particular persons, where
the circumstances of the case, and the public good requires it; so that the
executive authority may, with safety and righteousness, proceed in the
execution of the law, leaving all such relaxations of the punishment as any
particular case may require, to the proper board.

THE civil peace and prosperity of a community require in the first place, that
good and wholesome laws should be enacted, for the distribution of judgment and
justice; but if the laws, when made, exist only on paper and ink, what benefit
can a people derive from them! The divine law is quick and powerful, and
sharper than any two edged sword; and surely, his ministers ought to make the
laws which they execute, bear some resemblance to his, in these respects; which
if done, the benefits to society cannot easily be reckoned up: But if those
whose office it is to put the laws in execution, instead of giving vigor and
efficacy to them, do suffer them to languish and die in their hands; it is not
easy to count the evils which must necessarily follow from it.

SUCH officers cloud and darken their own reputation. It is truly an honor put
upon a man, to be vested with any branch of civil authority; thereby an
opportunity is put into his hands to do the more good in the world, to render
himself a more extensive blessing, and merit the honorable esteem and regard of
mankind. But yet, if a man does not honor his office, his office will never
honor him. The higher a man is raised in civil rank, the more contemptible will
he be in the eye of mankind, if his conduct is not suitable to his station, so
as to answer in some good measure, the just expectation of mankind from him,
the solemn ties of the oath of God under which he is laid, and the important
purposes for which he was dignified. Men may pity, but must despise those who
thus betray the trust which the public have reposed in them.

NOR does the mischief flop here; but the law itself becomes despised and
contemned, when men find they may transgress without fear of punishment. And
while some few laws are thus suffered to be trodden under fear, it emboldens
wicked and designing men to disregard all law, to despise government, and
trample upon the authority; it opens a wide door to anarchy, confusion and
every evil work. And in this case, tho'e become the greatest sufferers, who are
most worthy, and most deserving of protection. Men of honestly and uprightness,
who make conscience of their ways, are hereby laid open to insult and
oppression; while the wicked are suffered to prosper in their wickedness. For
if the foundations be destroyed, what can the righteous do.

AT some periods there is a much greater tendency to anarchy and licentiousness
among a people, than at others; and never was there greater danger of these
evils, in this land, since the first settlement of it, than now. While these
American states were dependent on the British crown, such were the measures of
administration, adopted by the British ministry, and by the King himself, that
it became necessary for us, in the defense of our just rights and privileges,
to rise up in opposition to their proceedings. And although many of those
measures taken in the land, were very justifiable, in that case; yet some of
them were not without their bad tendency and effects upon some people's minds.
The less judicious part of mankind, who are not so discerning in the proper and
necessary measures of civil government, have perhaps, been emboldened to find
fault with, and oppose all government. And it is very obvious that one course
to be taken, to prevent or remedy evils of this kind, is not to relax the laws;
but to carry the reins of government with a steady hand; and that all the good
and wholesome laws of the land should be diligently and carefully executed in
doing judgment and justice among the people. Greater strictness and severity in
the execution of the laws, seems necessary in the present times, to prevent the
dangerous and growing evils with which we are threatened.

IT is the anxious apprehension of many, that at present, we have more reason
to fear misery and distress arising from that spirit of licentiousness, and
that tendency to anarchy and confusion, which seems to be working in the land,
than we have from our open enemies. Therefore it concerns every one to guard
against, and do what in us lies, to prevent such evils. But it especially
concerns civil rulers, whose more immediate care it is to maintain peace and
good order, to exert their authority in support of the law, which can be done
only by their diligence and faithfulness in doing judgment and justice among
the people; protecting, supporting and encouraging the virtuous; and frowning
upon and punishing the vicious. The virtue of patriotism, at such a day as this
especially, ought to meet with all countenance and respect; and on the other
hand, the opposite vice of treachery calls aloud for the pursuit of vengeance.
Our noble patriotic army, which under God, is our chief bulwark, and the
support of every thing dear and valuable to us, ought by no means to be
neglected; but should receive all possible support and encouragement. So
likewise all such friends to the state, which act in lesser circles, ought to
meet with support and encouragement; while such as are inimical to our freedom
and protection expose themselves to our just indignation. Such as are inimical
and treacherous, have acted very different parts in the present day. Some have
acted an open part, and have gone and joined the enemy; while others have
chosen still to continue at home among us; who have been much more hurtful to
us, and helpful to the enemy, than those who have gone off, and openly joined
them. They, many of them, maintain a secret correspondence with the enemy, give
them intelligence, carry on a clandestine trade with them; they lie as a dead
weight, throwing every clog and hindrance in the way of all our movements and
efforts for our own defense; to them it is principally owing, that our paper
currency has suffered such a great and rapid depreciation; and our land so
exhausted of provisions to feed the enemy, as greatly to distress and
discourage our own army. Every argument therefore, which will justify us in our
opposition to Great Britain, strongly plead for our most vigorous efforts to
detect, and make examples of such secret enemies as endeavor to conceal
themselves among us. It cannot therefore surely, be supposed, that a civil
officer, of whatever rank, whose duty it is to execute the law, should show
more lenity toward a tory, than to a friend of his country; or be, by any
means, backward, or intimidated from doing judgment and justice in that case,
yea, or in any other, wherein the peace and good order of the state are
interested. Nor are there any weighty and powerful motives wanting, to quicken
every one to diligence in the duties of his station. Our text suggests several
considerations of great weight, to influence those who are clothed with
authority, to exert themselves in their own stations, to preserve and promote
the peace, good order, and prosperity of the people. As

I. THE hand of God is acknowledged, in putting men into their several ranks
and offices, in a civil state. Thus faith the Queen to Solomon, "Blessed be the
Lord thy God, which delights in thee, to set thee on his throne." It is the
Lord's doing, and his hand is to be acknowledged in it. "For promotion comes
not from the east, nor from the west; but God is the judge; he puts down
one, and sets up another." Whatever methods are used in choosing men, and
investing them with authority, yet all is under the control of the wise and
all-governing providence of God. For "the lot is cast into the lap, but the
whole disposing thereof is of the Lord." When therefore men are called into
places of public trust and improvement, they are to remember, that the finger
of God is in it. Which consideration, if duly attended to, plainly shows a
special obligation hence arising, to quit themselves with diligence and
faithfulness, in their public trust. Nor are they to look upon the call of God
in his providence, which has seated them in places of public improvement, as
imposing a burden, but as conferring a blessing, for which, according to the
example of the queen in our text, God's name is to be blessed. For there is not
only an honor thereby put upon a person, but also an advantage for more
extensive good and usefulness in our day and generation.

II. CIVIL rulers are likewise to consider that their power is the power of
God. Our text represents them as seated on God's throne; and put into office
for the Lord their God. And the apostle Paul tells us, "There is no power but
of God; the powers that be, are ordained of God." Romans xiii. 1. God himself is
the supreme Governor of the world. But it is his pleasure not to perform the
whole of government immediately himself, but to improve his servants, as his
instruments, in the exercise of some instances of it. Thus the apostle speaks
of the angels of light, as ministering spirits, sent forth to minister unto them
which shall be heirs or salvation. Heb. 1.14. That noble order of beings esteem
it an honor to be employed in public services, even for the good of mankind
who are so far below them. And they are faithful, zealous and very active in
it. For we are told that "he makes his angels spirits, and his ministers a
flame of fire." And shall not men, when thus honored and authorized of God,
feel themselves animated to diligence and faithfulness? They are rulers under
God, and are to act in God's stead in doing judgment and justice in their
several ranks and stations. Hence it is that they are styled Gods. Psalm LXXXII
6. "I have said, ye are Gods, and all of you are children of the most high." If
then, civil rulers are put into office that they might exercise this branch of
divine authority, and make use of God's power in doing judgment and justice
among their fellow creatures; it surely ought to animate and influence them to
diligence and faithfulness in it. And is it not a kind of sacrilege to pervert
this divine prerogative to bad purposes? Or even not to improve it to the good
ends for which it was conferred upon them?

III. ARE civil rulers God's ministers? Are they not then, accountable to him
for their conduct in that station? Although they are Gods, they shall die like
men. Death is the great leveller of mankind, which swallows up all distinctions
which have taken place in this life, puts both rulers and ruled upon an equal
footing in the grave, that they may stand in an equal rank in the day of
judgment. The great men of the earth will be treated with no more ceremony and
respect in that day, by their judge, than the meanest beggar on the dunghill;
but every one must give an account of himself to God, for his improvement of
the talents he has received. God's servants here in this life, receive their
talents some more, some less; some receive ten, others one; and according to
their receipts, must their account be. All the solemn scenes therefore, of the
day of judgment, and all the rewards and punishments of an incomprehensible
eternity, stand before every one, before rulers as well as ruled, as so many
motives to diligence and faithfulness in the duties of their station.

IV. GOOD and faithful rulers are represented as expressions of the love of God
to a people. It was because God loved Israel to establish them forever, that he
sat such a wise king over them to do judgment and justice. Good rulers are a
great blessing, and the administration of judgment and justice will be of
unspeakable advantage to a people. And when a people are favored with such,
they are to look upon it a token for good, an expression of divine love, and a
reason to excite them to bless the Lord. The Queen of Sheba, in our text,
though not interested in the prosperity of Israel, blessed God under a view of
it. To be a blessing in the world, a blessing in our place, day and generation
is a very desirable thing. Therefore when Abraham was sent abroad in the world,
that he might be supported and encouraged to duty under all trials and
difficulties, God promised to make him a blessing. Genesis XII.2. Those who are
vested with civil authority are thereby put into a capacity to render
themselves blessings, great and extensive blessings in the world: but then they
are so, only in case of their due and faithful discharge of their public trust.
And shall not this be attended to as an effectual argument, and prevailing
motive to stir up such to diligence and faithfulness? Can any one bear the
thought of being held up to view, and placed in a conspicuous station in civil
life, that he may appear as an instance of God's anger against a people, rather
than as an expression of his love? And be indeed a curse rather than a
blessing? No, I would hope better things, though I thus speak.

V. IT is farther implied in our text, that such civil rulers as will do
judgment and justice, are peculiarly necessary to the establishment of a state.
It was because God loved Israel, to establish them forever, that he gave them
such a wise ruler as Solomon was.

THE stability, strength and firmness of a state very much depend upon the
skilfulness and faithfulness of its rulers. While good government is
maintained, the State will flourish, and make a respectable figure in the
world; but when civil rulers neglect their duty, slacken the reigns of
government, and are not careful to maintain righteousness and equity; the State
becomes fickly and will soon fall into decay. History will furnish us with many
examples of states that have flourished in the world, while regularity, order
and good government were maintained in them; but have afterward fallen into
disgrace, and crumbled into nothing, through the corruption and perversion of
government.

THESE American states are now in their infancy, and but just rising up, and
making their appearance in the world; much still remains to be done for their
establishment. To this end the war must be vigorously prosecuted; the army be
kept up, be suitably provided for, encouraged and rewarded; and our enemies
counteracted in all their plots and schemes. We have a very powerful enemy to
oppose, aided and assisted by treacherous and secret enemies among ourselves;
for whose detection and suppression the vigor of law and utmost vigilence and
activity of our rulers, seem peculiarly necessary and important. Good
government also must be kept up among ourselves; which is the most effectual
method to obtain respect, credit and influence abroad. A well established state
will be a terror to a foreign enemy, and be always ready to make a defense
against every attack. There can be no better security against the approach of
an enemy, than to be in a wellprepared state for a defense. And one principal
thing in which preparedness for making a defense consists, is to be in a state
of peace, regularity and good order among ourselves; which never can be the
case, without the due exercise of civil government, in the faithful
administration of judgment and justice among a people. Whether we regard the
internal strength, peace and prosperity of the state, or its external honor,
respect and influence; civil government must be maintained, good and wholesome
laws must be enacted, and life and vigor given them by such as are authorized
and betrusted with the care of putting the laws in execution. The safety of the
whole state, and the good, the safety and interest of each individual of which
the state is composed, loudly call for these things at the hand of civil rulers.

VI. ARE civil rulers God's ministers? Then surely, they may hope for his
blessing on them, and presence with them, in the discharge of the duties of
their station. Difficulties are to be expected, and trying discouragements must
be encountered and overcome; wherein we need to attend to every animating
consideration; among which, this surely must be of great weight, that "God is
with us." Civil rulers are clothed with authority by God, they are seated on
his throne, and employed in his service; and may therefore hope for his
blessing to crown their faithful endeavors in the duties of their station. The
encouraging hopes of civil rulers in this case are not only warranted from
their being God's servants, but they are also much supported by experience, and
the manifest tokens of the divine presence, in supporting the cause of truth
and righteousness; and especially in the things which tend to the establishment
of this, as well as of the other independent states of America. Time will not
allow me to enumerate particular instances; but the overruling hand of divine
providence has been often so conspicuous in the events of the present war, as
to extort a confession, even from infidelity itself, that it is God that
fights for us; which tokens of the divine presence ought to have a very
animating and quickening influence upon every rank and order in the civil state
to exert themselves for the establishment, peace and prosperity of the state.

VII. CIVIL rulers have powerful motives to diligence and faithfulness in the
duties of their station, from the prospect of a divine reward. Are civil rulers
God's servants? Then to him they must look for their reward. No wonder, if in
this life, they meet with unkind returns from an ungrateful world; but their
labor is with the Lord, and their reward with their God. If they are truly
faithful, yet a little while, and they shall receive that blessed euge, Well
done, good and faithful servant; enter thou into the joy of thy Lord.

APPLICATION
I. THE way for a people to be blessed with good rulers, is to secure an
interest in the love of God. It was because God loved Israel, that he set a
wise king over them. All our blessings come from God, the father of lights,
from whom descends every good and perfect gift. When a people corrupt
themselves, abuse their privileges, and yield themselves to their own lusts, to
be led away by an evil heart of unbelief, in departing from the living God;
they forfeit his favors, provoke his anger, and pull down his judgments upon
themselves. God will then curse their blessings, take away his abused favors,
remove from them the hedge of his providence, and open the door for a variety
of calamities to make inroads upon them. Nothing therefore can be of greater
concern to us, both with respect to our temporal and eternal interests, than to
secure the favor and love of God. For we have the testimony of the apostle,
that "Godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promise of the life
which now is, and of that which is to come." And the wise king of Israel,
spoken to in our text, also tells us, "That righteousness exalts a nation: but
sin is a reproach to any people." God once gave Israel a king in his anger, and
took him away in his wrath. If therefore civil rulers do not prove blessings to
a people; although such rulers may be highly criminal in not answering the good
purposes of their appointment, yet the people ought first to look at home, and
remember that it is some God provoking wickedness among themselves, that is the
reason why divine providence has not smiled upon them, and given them the
blessing of good rulers.

II. WHEN a people are blessed with good rulers, the hand of God is to be
acknowledged in it, with praise and gratitude. Even this gentile queen in our
text, blessed God on account of his love to Israel, in setting a wise king over
them to do judgment and justice. Good rulers are a great blessing to a people,
while they, with diligence and faithfulness, attend to the duties of their
station, administering judgment and justice, in the execution of the good and
wholesome laws of the land. The benefits thence arising are very great and
desirable; which ought to be acknowledged as coming from the same divine
Benefactor, who is the bountiful given of all our enjoyments. To him therefore,
a tribute of praise and thanksgiving is due from a people thus smiled upon of
heaven. This is a favor which carries its bonds of duty along with it; and the
people are to express their gratitude for it, not in words only, but in
actions; by leading peaceable and quiet lives in all godliness and honestly,
under this good and faithful administration of civil government. It belongs to
the people to give countenance to, and to support and encourage civil rulers in
their administration of government. This will render the ruler's duty the more
easy to him, and the more efficacious and beneficial to others. Yea, this is
what people are obliged to do, for conscience toward God; and is one way in
which they are to express their praise and thanksgiving to their divine
Benefactor for the blessings of good government.

THE public occasion of this day, calls upon me, in a particular manner, to
address the important thoughts contained in my text, to the General Assembly of
this State now convened. And first to his Excellency our Governor:

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR EXCELLENCY:

OBEDIENCE to your Excellency's commands having called me into this desk, upon
this public occasion; give me leave, sir, to congratulate you for the singular
honor God has put upon you, in your early introduction into the chief seat of
authority in Connecticut, when it was a colony to the British crown; continuing
you in that seat through the revolution, to this day; and improving you as a
very important instrument in his hand, for the establishment of this free
State. Although your vigorous efforts, and spirited endeavors in the defense
of our liberties and privileges, and for the effectual establishment of this
State, are such as merit the esteem and thanks of the public; yet all such
among us as wish success to the British arms, look on them with an evil eye;
and will therefore, by all means in their power, seek your removal. But
promotion comes not from the east, nor from the west, nor from the south: God
is the judge, he puts down one, and sets up another. So long as God has
any further services for you to perform, in this public station, your
excellency shall sit secure, in this chief seat of government, and as we trust,
will use your authority for the Lord your God, and for the good of the State
over which you preside.

LET me also address myself to his honor, the DEPUTY GOVERNOR, to the
honorable members of COUNCIL, and the respectable REPRESENTATIVES of the
people, in General Court assembled.

MAY IT PLEASE YOUR HONORS, AND WORTHY GENTLEMEN,

IT is my duty to remind you, as directed in my text, that you are by the
providence of God, seated upon his throne, and put into office for the Lord
your God. And we encourage ourselves to hope that it is because he has loved
this State, to establish it forever, that he has called you to your several
public stations, to do judgment and justice. That you may be the happy
instruments of so great a blessing, and an expression of the love of God to
this people, it is not only necessary that good and wholesome laws should be
enacted, but also enforced by the executive authority of the State: life and
spirit, vigor and efficacy must be given them among the people, by proper
officers, who will exert themselves, in carrying the law into execution. Such
officers are not only to serve the people at large, but they are more
immediately the servants of this General Assembly. You have the appointment of
them; and therefore reason dictates, that to you they should be accountable for
their conduct in their stations. -- If there are any who betray their trust,
neglect the duties of their station, or act an unworthy part, surely the people
may justly expect some remedy, from the Assembly. The first and most effectual
method to establish this State, is to establish the influence of law and rule
in the minds of the people; which can only be done by giving life and spirit to
the law, by diligence and faithfulness in the execution of it. To hold the
reins of government with a slack hand, especially in such a day as this, when
people are so apt to break over all rule and order, will open a door to many
evils which afterward cannot easily be removed. When men are called up to
public view, and ranked in the several stations of civil government, for
maintaining order and regularity among a people, an opportunity is given them
to become extensively useful; but whether they shall be esteemed as an
expression of God's love to a people, or of his anger; whether they shall be a
blessing, or a curse, must be made appear by their conduct in their station.

THE people of Connecticut, when they were a government, and now since they
have been an independent State, have had reason to bless God that he has placed
such upon his throne of civil power, and made them rulers for the Lord their
God, as have been happy instruments of our civil establishment, by their
wisdom, diligence and faithfulness in doing judgment and justice. And we hope
and pray still to continue under the divine smiles in this respect; and that it
will appear that God loves this people still, and has it in view to establish
us more and more, by giving us such to fill the several stations in the
government, as will approve themselves rich blessings by diligence and
faithfulness in their several departments.

As a considerable number of Ministers of the Gospel are present in this
Assembly, I shall now take the liberty to address may discourse to my brethren,
in the sacred character.

Reverend Sirs,

MANIFEST it is, that it comes within our province, to use our endeavors to
promote the administration of judgment and justice among the people of our
charge. Indeed, to win souls to a saving union with Jesus Christ, must be the
chief and great scope of our labor: but then, it concerns us so to acquit
ourselves in the ministry which we have received of the Lord, that we may be
able to say, "We have not shunned to declare the whole council of God." All the
doctrines of the gospel are to be laid open, that the people may be found in
the faith; and the scope and tendency of these truths, for the purpose of holy
living, must be urged upon their consciences. To preach morality, is as really
preaching Christ, is when we preach articles of faith. -- And as it becomes a
good steward of the manifold grace of God, to deal out to every one, a portion
in due season; so there are certain times when we have special calls in divine
providence, to warn against particular sins; and more especially to urge the
practice of some particular duties; which calls of divine providence may be
easily known by all such as duly observe the signs of the times, and the common
practice of the people. The great prevalence of iniquity in the present day, is
obvious to all men, which is a loud call to us, to cry aloud, and spare not, to
lift up our voice like a trumpet, to show our people their transgressions, and
the house of Israel, their sins. And although it belongs to civil officers to
execute judgment on transgressors; yet, it also belongs to us to warn the
wicked, that they may turn from their wicked ways. It belongs to us, not only
to bear testimony against vicious practices; but also, to encourage our rulers
in their vigorous endeavors to suppress all vice and immorality; and to
enforce upon the people due subjection to order and good government; which
plainly appears from that special charge of the apostle Paul to Titus, in Tit.
iii.8. "This is a faithful saying, and these things I will that thou affirm
constantly, that they which have believed in God, might be careful to maintain
good works: these things are good and profitable unto men."

LET me finally direct my discourse to the people at large.

You see in the text, that civil rulers are seated on God's throne; they are
vested with authority for the Lord their God; and the design of God therein, is
to show his love to a people by their exercise of this authority, in doing
judgment and justice. -- It belongs therefore to every one, not only to be in
subjection to government themselves, but also to support and encourage civil
rulers in the discharge of their office. For shall we acknowledge that the
administration of judgment and justice is the great blessing which God means to
confer upon a people by the ministry of civil rulers, and yet not be careful
ourselves to abstain from those vices, and to practice those virtues in which
the great and good purposes of civil government are answered? Nor is it enough
that we confine our own conduct within the rule of duty; but it belongs to
every one to discourage and discountenance all vice and immorality in others,
by being ready to bear testimony against them that do evil; and giving
countenance to good and faithful rulers in the discharge of their trust, in the
execution of the law.

To conclude. That we may be blessed with good rulers, it is the duty of every
one, to shun those land defiling and God provoking abominations which pull down
divine judgments upon a people; and earnestly seek to God, that he would show
his love toward us, in placing such upon his throne among us, as shall
faithfully do judgment and justice: To enforce this, I shall conclude with that
apostolic injunction, 1 Timothy ii.1, 2. "I exhort therefore, that first of all,
supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks be made for all
men; for kings and for all that are in authority; that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable life in all godliness and honesty."

AMEN.

