THE NEW METHOD OF INOCULATING FOR THE SMALL POX; DELIVERED IN A LECTURE IN THE
UNIVERSITY OF PHILADELPHIA, FEB. 20th, 1781.

BY BENJAMIN RUSH, M. D.

PHILADELPHIA, Printed by CHARLES CIST, in MARKET-STREET.

M.DCC.LXXXI.

TO THE STUDENTS OF MEDICINE IN THE MEDICAL SCHOOL OF PHILADELPHIA THE
FOLLOWING LECTURE IS INSCRIBED;
AS A TESTIMONY OF THE CONSTANT AND PUNCTUAL ATTENDANCE, WITH WHICH THEY WERE
PLEASED TO HONOR THE LECTURES UPON THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC. DELIVERED (AT THEIR
REQUEST) IN THE WINTER OF 1780 -- 1.

BY THEIR FRIEND AND HUMBLE SERVANT THE AUTHOR.

GENTLEMEN,
IT must afford no small pleasure to a benevolent mind in the midst of a war,
which daily makes so much havoc with the human species, to reflect, that the
smallpox which once proved equally fatal to thousands, has been checked in its
career, and in a great degree subdued by the practice of INOCULATION.

It is foreign to my purpose to deliver to you the history of this art, and to
mark the various steps that have attended its progress to its present state of
improvement. We have yet to lament the want of uniformity and of equal success
in the practice of it among physicians. A great number of pamphlets have been
written upon the subject without exhausting it. There is still ample room left
for the man of genius to exercise his talents for observation and reasoning on
it. The facts I mean to lay before you are so inconsiderable, compared with
what still remain to be known upon this subject, that I have to request, when
your knowledge in it is completed, that you would bury my name in silence; and
forget that ever I ventured to lay a single stone in this part of the fabric of
science.

In treating upon this subject, I shall I. Consider the proper subjects and
seasons for Inoculation. II. I shall describe the method of communicating the
disorder. III. I shall consider the method of preparing the body for the
smallpox. IV. I shall mention the treatment proper during the eruptive fever,
and V. Point out a few cautions that are necessary after the disease is over.


I. Formerly there were great difficulties in the choice of the subjects for
Inoculation. But experience teaches us that it may be practiced in every stage
of life, and in almost every condition of the human body. -- In infancy the
periods before and after dentition are to be prefered. -- But we seldom see any
great inconveniences from submiting to the general necessity of inoculating
children between the ages of three months and two years. -- Indeed we often see
children cut three or four teeth during the preparation and eruptive fever
without the least addition being made to any of the troublesome symptoms which
accompany the smallpox. There is one inconvenience attending the choice of the
first months of infancy for inoculating, and that is the matter often fails of
producing the disorder in such young subjects. I have frequently failed in two
or three attempts to communicate the disorder to children under four months old
with the same matter that has succeeded in a dozen other patients inoculated at
the same time. -- When the Inoculation succeeds in such tender subjects, they
generally have less fever, and fewer pustules than are common in any future
period of life.

Although a physician would prefer a patient in good health to any other as a
subject for Inoculation, yet cases often occur in which it is necessary to
communicate the smallpox while the body is affected with some other disorder.
I can with pleasure inform you, that the smallpox is rendered so perfectly
safe by Inoculation, that there are few chronic diseases which should be
considered as obstacles in the way of it. I have inoculated patients laboring
under a tertian fever, obstructed viscera, the hooping cough, the
hypochondriasis, the asthma, the itch and other cutaneous disorders, and even
pregnant women with the same, and in some instances, with greater success than
persons in perfect health. Doct. Cullen informs us that he has seen Inoculation
succeed in scrophulous patients. A physician in Jamaica informed me that he had
inoculated Negroes with success in the worst stage of the Yaws. -- To these
facts I must add one more extraordinary than any that has been yet mentioned.
-- Doct. Brown, my late colleague in the care of the military hospitals,
informed me, that he had seen Inoculation succeed in patients who were seized,
after the infection was communicated, with the hospital fever. -- The
preparation of the body should be accommodated to the disease which affects it.
Some physicians have thought the smallpox received in this way, was a remedy
for other diseases, but my experience has not confirmed this opinion. On the
contrary I am disposed to think that no other change is produced by Inoculation
than by the regimen and medicines that are used to prepare the body for the
smallpox. Nor does the smallpox during its continuance afford any security
against the attacks of other diseases. I have seen the most alarming
complication of the smallpox and measles in the same person.

The seasons commonly prefered for Inoculation in this country are the spring
and fall. It may be practiced with equal safety in the winter, a due regard
being had to the temperature of the air in the preparation of the body.

The principal objection to inoculating in the summer months in this climate,
arises from the frequency of bilious disorders at that season, to which the
preparation necessary for the smallpox probably disposes the body. This
caution applies more directly to children who at a certain age are more subject
than grown people to a disorder in their bowels in warm weather.

II. The methods of communicating the smallpox by Inoculation, have been
different in different countries and in the different aeras of its progress
toward its present stage of improvement. The scab, dossel of lint, and the
thread impregnated with variolous matter and bound up in a gash in the arm,
have been laid aside.

We are indebted to Mr. Sutton for the mode of communicating it by a slight
puncture with the point of a lancet or needle dipped in fresh matter. As it is
difficult sometimes to procure matter in a fresh state, I have been led to use
it with equal success by preserving it on lint in a box, and moistning it with
cold water just before I used it. Matter may be kept in this way for a month
without loosing its infectious quality, provided it is not exposed to heat or
moisture. The former destroys its power of infecting as certainly as the salt
of tartar destroys the acidity of vinegar. Moisture by remaining long upon the
matter, probably destroys its virulence by subjecting it to fermentation. The
longer matter has been kept in a general way, the longer the distance will be
between the time of communicating the disorder and the eruptive fever. It will
be proper always to yield to the prejudices of our patients in favor of matter
taken from persons who have but few pustules. But I am persuaded from repeated
observations, that the disease is no ways influenced by this circumstance. I am
satisfied likewise that there is no difference between the effects of the
matter whether it be taken in its watery or purulent state. The puncture should
not be larger than is sufficient to draw one drop of blood. -- No plaster nor
bandage should be applied over it. It should be made in the left arm of all
subjects. The objections to inoculating in the leg are too obvious to be
mentioned. I have heard of the disease being communicated by rubbing the dry
skin with the matter. My own observations upon this subject give me reason to
suspect the facts that are contained in books relative to this mode of
infecting the body. I have bound large pieces of lint dipped in fresh matter for
24 hours upon the arm without producing the disorder. A practitioner of physic
in New Jersey informed me that he once gave a considerable quantity of fresh
variolous matter in a dose of physic without infecting his patient. I suspect
the matter that produces the disease is of the same nature with certain
poisons, which require to be brought in contact with a wound or sore in the
body before they produce their effects. I deliver this opinion with diffidence.
The subject stands in need of more experiments and investigation.

III. I come now to consider the best method of preparing the body for the
smallpox -- This must be done 1st by DIET, and 2dly by MEDICINE. -- The DIET
should consist chiefly of vegetables. I have never seen any inconvenience from
the free use of milk as a part of the preparative diet. In some habits where a
morbid acid prevails in the stomach, we may indulge our patients in a little
weak flesh broth two or three times a week with safety. -- Tea, coffee, and
even weak chocolate with biscuit or dry toast may be used as usual by persons
accustomed to that kind of aliment. Wine and spirits of all kinds should be
withheld from our patients during the preparation. -- The more acescent their
drinks are, the better. It is unnecessary that this change in the diet should
take place 'till a day or two before the time of communicating the disorder.
The system accommodates to a vegetable and low diet in the course of three
weeks or a month, so as to defeat in some measure the advantages we expected
from it. -- The good effects of it appear to depend in a great degree upon the
suddenness with which we oblige our patients to conform to it. For this reason
when we are called upon to inoculate persons who have lived more than three or
four weeks upon a low diet, we should always direct them to live a few days
upon animal food before we communicate the disorder to them. By these means we
may produce all the good effects of the sudden change in the diet I have
already mentioned. 2. The MEDICINES most commonly used to prepare the body for
the smallpox are Antimony and Mercury. The latter has had the preference and
has been given in large quantities under a notion of its being a specific
antidote to the variolous matter. Many objections might be made to this
opinion, I shall mention only three.

1. We often see the disorder in a high degree after the system is fully
impregnated with mercury.

2. We often see the same salutary effects of mercury when given before the
disorder is communicated to the body, that we perceive when it is given after
Inoculation in which case we are sure the mercury cannot enter into mixture
with the variolous matter so as to destroy it.

3. If mercury acted specifically in destroying the variolous matter, it would
render every other part of the preparation unnecessary, but this we know is not
the case, for the neglect or improper use of the vegetable diet or cool regimen
is often attended with an extraordinary number, or virulence of the smallpox
even in those cases where mercury is given in the largest quantity.

The way in which mercury prepares the body for the smallpox seems to be by
promoting the several excretions, particularly that by perspiration, which by
diminishing the quantity of the fluids and weakening the tone of the solids,
renders the system less liable to a plentiful eruption of the smallpox. But I
object to the use of this medicine for the following reasons.

1. It effectually deprives us of all the benefits of the cool regimen, for
mercury we know always disposes the system to take cold.

2. It subjects patients after Inoculation to troublesome and, in some cases,
dangerous glandular swellings. This will readily be admitted by all who know
the tendency mercury has to stimulate the glandular parts of the body.

3. All the good effects of* mercury may be procured by PURGES which do not
subject the body to either of the above mentioned inconveniences.

The PURGES may be suited to the constitutions, and in some cases even to the
inclinations of our patients. I have seen jalap -- rhubarb -- senna -- manna --
aloes -- soluble tartar -- Glauber and Epsom salts -- the butternut pill -- all
given with equal success. The quantity should be sufficient to procure three or
four stools every day. A little magnesia should always be mixed with rhubarb
and jalap in preparing children. It will be sufficient for the mothers and
nurses of infants to conform strictly to the vegetable diet. I have never seen
any advantages from giving them even a single dose of physic.

It is hardly necessary to observe that the quality -- dose -- and number of
purges are to be determined by the age -- sex -- and habits of our patients. A
constitution infeebled with a previous disease forbids the use of purges, and
requires medicines of a restorative kind. Patients afflicted with cutaneous
disorders bear larger and more frequent doses of physic than are indicated in
more healthy subjects.

In adult subjects of a plethoric habit, bloodletting is very useful on the
third or fourth day after Inoculation. We are not to suppose, that every fat
person labors under a plethora. A moderate degree of fat is so far from
rendering the disease more violent, especially in children, that I think I have
generally found such subjects have the smallpox more favorably than others.

Moderate exercise in the open air should be used during the preparation. But
hard labor and every thing that promotes sweat or fatigue as also the extremes
of heat and cold, should be avoided.

IV. We come now to consider the treatment of the body during the eruptive
fever. On the eighth day after Inoculation our patients are generally seized
with the common symptoms of fever. Sometimes this fever appears on the sixth
and seventh day after Inoculation. But when it is irregular it is often delayed
'till the ninth and tenth days. I have seen many instances of it on the
fourteenth, a few on the fifteenth and sixteenth, and one case in which it did
not come on 'till the eighteenth day after the infection was communicated to
the body. -- The place where the puncture was made with the lancet or needle
generally serves as an harbinger of the approaching fever. A slight
inflammation appears about it and a pock rises up in the center. But this
remark is liable to some objections. I have seen four instances in which the
fever came on at the expected time, and the disorder went through all its stages
with the greatest regularity, and yet there was no sign of an inflammation or
pock near the spot where the puncture was made; even the puncture itself became
invisible. -- On the other hand we sometimes see an inflammation and pock on
the arm appear on the eighth and ninth days without any fever accompanying
them. Some physicians pretend that this inflammation and solitary pock are
sufficient to constitute the disease, but repeated experience has taught me to
be very cautious in relying upon these equivocal marks. It is true, I have
sometimes seen patients secured against the smallpox both in the natural way
and by Inoculation where these marks have appeared; but I have as often seen
such patients seized afterward with the smallpox in the natural way to the
great distress of families and mortification of physicians. -- Upon this
account I make it a constant practice to advise a second or third Inoculation
where a fever and eruption have been wanting. -- As the absence of these
symptoms is probably occasioned by the weakness or age of the variolous matter,
or the too high state of preparation of the body, we should always guard
against both. by making the puncture the second time with fresh matter -- by
subjecting our patients to a less abstemious diet, and by giving fewer doses of
physic. I have heard it remarked that if a slight redness, and a small pimple
appeared on the arm on the third day after Inoculation, it was a sign the
matter had infected the whole constitution. I acknowledge I have often seen a
greater degree of redness on the third than on the second day after
Inoculation, but I have not been able to establish a diagnostic mark from it,
for I have seen the disease produced on the usual days where the redness has
appeared on the second day -- and in some cases where it has not appeared until
the eruptive fever.

I am led here unwillingly to discuss the old question, Is it possible to have
the smallpox in the natural way after Inoculation? -- In many of the cases
supposed to be the smallpox from Inoculation, it is probable the matter has
been taken from the chicken-pox which resembles the smallpox in many of its
peculiarities, but in none more than that of leaving pits or marks on the skin.
But there are certainly cases where there are the most irrefragable proofs of
the infection implanted by Inoculation being of a variolous nature, where the
disorder has been afterward taken in the natural way. In these cases I would
suppose the variolous matter produced only a topical or cuticular disorder. We
see something analogous to this in nurses who attend patients in the smallpox.
But further -- this topical or cuticular infection may be produced by art in
persons who have had the smallpox in the natural way. Some years ago I made a
puncture on my left hand with a lancet moistened with variolous matter. On the
eighth day an inflammation appeared on the place accompanied with an
efflorescence in the neighborhood of it which extended about two inches in
every direction from the spot where the puncture was made. On the 11th day I
was surprised to find two pocks (if I may venture to call them such) the one on
the outside of my fourth finger on my left hand, and the other on my forehead.
They remained there for several days but without filling with matter, and then
dropped off rather in the form of a soft wart than of a common scab. -- Doct.
Way of Wilmington repeated the same experiment upon himself, but with an issue
to his curiosity more extraordinary than that I have just now related. On the
eighth day after he had made a puncture on his hand, a pock appeared on the
spot, which in the usual time filled with matter, from which he inoculated
several children, who sicken'd at the usual time, and went through all the common
stages and symptoms of the smallpox -- It would seem from these facts that it
is necessary the smallpox should produce some impression upon the whole system
in order to render it ever afterward incapable of receiving an impression of a
similar nature. A fever and an eruption therefore seem necessary for this
purpose. As the inflammation of the arm on the eighth day is a sign of the
topical and cuticular infection, so an eruption (though ever so small) seems to
be the only certain sign of the infection of the whole system. The eruption is
the more decisive in its report in proportion as it comes out and goes off in
the usual manner of the smallpox in the natural way. In those cases where
patients have been secured against a second attack of the disorder, where there
have been no obvious fever or visible eruption, I think I have observed an
unusual inflammation, and a copious and long continued discharge of matter from
the arm. Perhaps this may serve as an outlet of the matter, which in other
cases produces the fever and eruption. I am the more disposed to embrace this
opinion from the testimony which several authors have left us of the effects of
ulcers in securing the body from the infection of the plague. The effects of
issues are still more to our purpose. We observe a plentiful discharge of
matter from them every time the body is exposed to cold, and the febrile
effects of it upon the system are there by frequently obviated. -- How far a
ratio exists between the degrees of inflammation and the discharge of matter
from the arm, and the degrees of fever and eruption, must be determined by
future and very accurate observations. If it should appear that there are the
least inflammation and smallest discharge where there have been the highest
fever and most copious eruption, and on the contrary, if it should appear that
there are the greatest inflammation and discharge where there have been the
least fever and smallest eruption, I must beg leave to add without attempting
in this place to explain the reasons of it, that the remark, if generally true,
is liable to some exceptions. But the subject is involved in darkness; I shall
be satisfied if I have brought you within sight of the promised land. Your own
ingenuity like another Jewish leader must conduct you thither.

The indications in the treatment of the body during the eruptive fever are 1st
To regulate the degree of fever. 2d To mitigate troublesome and alarming
symptoms.


The fever which produces the eruption is generally of the inflammatory kind.
It sometimes therefore comes on with the symptoms of great heat, preceded with
chilliness, determination to the head and breast, and a full hard pulse. The
remedies proper in this case are

A. Bloodletting. The quantity to be drawn must be regulated by the violence of
the symptoms, -- the constitution -- habits, and even country of the patient,
and by the season of the year. -- I have never found more than one bleeding to
the quantity of 12 or 14 ounces necessary in any stage or degree of the
eruptive fever of the smallpox by Inoculation.

B. Cool air is of the utmost consequence in the eruptive fever. The use of
this remedy in fevers marks an era not only in the management of the small pox
but in medicine. The degrees of cold should always be increased in proportion
to the violence of the fever. -- Stove-rooms, so common in this country, should
be carefully avoided. The more we oblige our patients to set up and walk in the
open air the better. Even in those cases where they languish most for the bed,
they should be encouraged rather to lay upon, than under the bed clothes. --
Children should be stripped of flannel petticoats that come in contact with their
skins, and even clouts should be laid aside if possible without great
inconvenience, and at any rate they should be often removed. -- Great and
obvious as the advantages of cold air are in the eruptive fever, it has
sometimes been used to an excess that has done mischief. -- There are few cases
where a degree of cold below 40 of Farenheit's thermometer is necessary in this
stage of the smallpox. When it has been used below this, or where patients
have been exposed to a damp atmosphere some degrees above it, I have heard of
inflammations of an alarming nature being produced in the throat and breast.

C. The bowels, more especially of children, should be kept open with gentle
laxatives. And

D. Cool subacid drinks should be drank plentifully until the eruption is
completed.

Sometimes the smallpox comes on with a fever the reverse of that which we
have described. The heat is inconsiderable, the pulse is weak, and scarcely
quicker than ordinary, and the patient complains of but slight pains in the
back and head. Here the treatment should be widely different from that which
has been mentioned when the fever is of the inflammatory kind. Bleeding in this
case is hurtful, and even cool air must be admitted with caution. The business
of the physician in this case is to excite a gentle action in the sanguiferous
system, in order to produce the degree of fever necessary to the eruption of
the pock. -- For this purpose he may recommend the use of warm drinks, and even
of a warm bed with advantage. -- If the eruption delays beyond the third day
with all the circumstances of debility that have been mentioned, I have
frequently ordered my patients to eat a few ounces of animal food and to drink
a glass or two of wine with the most desirable success. The effects of this
indulgence are most obvious where the weakness of the fever and the delay of
the eruption in children have made it necessary to allow it to mothers and
nurses. --

The smallpox by Inoculation so seldom comes on with the symptoms of a putrid
fever, that little need be said of the treatment proper in such cases. I shall
only observe, that the cold regimen in the highest degree promises more success
in these cases than in any others. -- I have repeatedly been told, that when
the smallpox appears confluent among the Africans, it is a common practice for
mothers to rub their children all over with pepper, and plunge them immediately
afterward into a spring of cold water. -- This, they say, destroys a great
part of the pock, and disposes the remainder to a kindly suppuration. From the
success that has attended the use of the cold bath in putrid fevers in some
parts In a dissertation entitled " Epidemia vernae quae Wratislaviam, Anno 1737
afflixit," published in the appendix to the Acta Not. Curios. Vol. X. it
appears, that washing the body all over with cold water in putrid fevers,
attended with great debility, was attended with success at Breslaw in Silesia.
The practice has since been adopted we are told by several of the neighboring
countries. CULLEN'S FIRST LINES OF THE PRACTICE OF PHYSIC.
of Europe mentioned in a former lecture, I am disposed to believe in the
efficacy of the African remedy.

The fever generally lasts three days, and the eruption continues for a similar
length of time, counting the last day of the fever as the first day of the
eruption. But this remark is liable to many exceptions. We sometimes observe
the eruption to begin on the first, and often on the second day of the fever,
and we sometimes meet with cases in which a second eruption comes on after the
fever has abated for several days, and the first eruption considerably advanced
in its progress toward a complete suppuration. -- This is often occasioned by
the application of excessive cold, or heat to the body, or by a sudden and
premature use of stimulating drinks, or animal food.

I come now to treat of the best method of mitigating troublesome and alarming
symptoms.

The only alarming symptom is convulsions to which children are subject during
the time of dentition. These have been less frequent, since the liberal and
judicious use of cool air in the eruptive fever than formerly. They are often
relieved by putting the feet in warm water. But a more effectual and speedy
method of curing them is to expose our patients suddenly to the open air. The
colder the air the quicker relief it affords in these cases. To prevent the
return of the fits, as well as to allay any disagreeable and troublesome
startings, a few drops of Laudanum should be given. They generally yield in a
little while to this excellent remedy.

The next symptom which demands the aid of our art is the inflammation and sore
on the arm. Poultices of all kinds should be laid aside, as tending to increase
the inflammation and sore. -- Instead of these, the part affected should be
washed three or four times a day with cold water. Where the inflammation on the
arm has been so considerable, as not to yield immediately to the application of
cold water, I have used the vegeto-mineral water with advantage. --
This application is not only agreeable to our patients, but soon checks the
progress of the inflammation, and disposes the sore to heal about the time the
eruption is completed. The eyes should likewise be washed frequently with cold
water to secure them from pustules and inflammation. -- With respect to those
alarming or troublesome symptoms which occur in those case where the pocks are
numerous, or confluent, they happen so seldom in Inoculation that they do not
come properly under our notice in this place. They are moreover fully discussed
by Docts. Boerhave, Huxham, Hillary and other practical writers. --

V. I come now in the last place to deliver a few directions that are necessary
after the eruption and suppuration are over.

It is well known that eruptions of an obstinate nature sometimes follow the
smallpox. These I believe, are often occasioned by a too sudden and speedy use
of animal food. To guard against these disagreeable consequences of
Inoculation, it is of the utmost importance to enjoin a cautious and gradual
return to the free use of an animal diet, and at the same time it will be
necessary to give our patients a dose or two of purging physic.

Thus Gentlemen have I delivered to you a short history of the new method of
inoculating for the smallpox. I am aware that prejudices are entertained
against some parts of it by physicians of the most ancient name and character
among us. I have witnessed the effects of the old and new methods of preparing
the body, upon many thousand patients, and I am satisfied not only from my own
observations, but from the experience of Gentlemen upon whose judgments I rely
more than upon my own, that the new method is by far the safest and most
successful. -- Added to this, I can assure my pupils, that I have never known a
single instance of a patient prepared and treated in the manner I have
described, that ever had an abscess after the smallpox, or even such an
inflammation or sore upon the arm as required the application of a poultice. --

FINIS.

