THE CONSTITUTIONS OF THE SEVERAL INDEPENDENT STATES OF AMERICA; THE
Declaration of Independence; THE ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION BETWEEN THE SAID
STATES; THE TREATIES between HIS MOST CHRISTIAN MAJESTY and the UNITED STATES
of AMERICA.

Published by order of Congress.

PHILLADEPHIA: PRINTED BY FRANCIS BAILEY, IN MARKET-STREET. M.DCCLXXXI.

IN CONGRESS, DECEMBER 29, 1780.
RESOLVED,
THAT a Committee of three be appointed to collect and cause to be published,
two hundred correct copies of the Declaration of Independence, the Articles of
Confederation and Perpetual Union, the Alliances between these United States
and his Most Christian Majesty, with the Constitutions or Forms of Government
of the several States, to be bound together in boards.

The members chosen, Mr. Be, Mr. Witherspoon, and Mr. Wolcott.

Extract from the Minutes, CHARLES THOMSON, Secretary.

A COLLECTION OF THE CONSTITUTIONS OF THE THIRTEEN UNITED STATES, etc.
NEW HAMPSHIRE. In CONGRESS, at EXETER, Jan. 5, 1776.
WE, the members of the congress of the colony of New Hampshire, chosen and
appointed by the free suffrages of the people of said colony, and authorized
and empowered by them, to meet together, and use such means, and pursue such
measures, as we shall judge best for the public good; and in particular to
establish some form of government, provided that measure should be recommended
by the Continental Congress; and a recommendation to that purpose having been
transmitted to us, from the said Congress; have taken into our serious
consideration the unhappy circumstances into which this colony is involved, by
means of many grievous and oppressive acts of the British Parliament, depriving
us of our native and constitutional rights and privileges; to enforce obedience
to which acts, a powerful fleet and army have been sent into this country, by
the ministry of Great Britain, who have exercised a wanton and cruel abuse of
their power, in destroying the lives and properties of the colonists, in many
places, with fire and sword, taking the ships and lading from many of the
honest and industrious inhabitants of this colony, employed in commerce,
agreeable to the laws and customs a long time used here:

The sudden and abrupt departure of his excellency John Wentworth, esquire. our
late governor, and several of the council, leaving us destitute of legislation;
and no executive courts being open to punish criminal offenders, whereby the
lives and properties of the honest people of this colony, are liable to the
machinations and evil designs of wicked men:

Therefore, for the preservation of peace and good order, and for the security
of the lives and properties of the inhabitants of this colony, we conceive
ourselves reduced to the necessity of establishing a Form of Government, to
continue during the present unhappy and unnatural contest with Great Britain;
protesting and declaring, that we never sought to throw off our dependence upon
Great Britain, but felt ourselves happy under her protection, while we could
enjoy our constitutional rights and privileges -- and that we shall rejoice, if
such a reconciliation between us and our parent state can be effected, as shall
be approved by the Continental Congress, in whose prudence and wisdom we
confide.

Accordingly, pursuant to the trust: reposed in us, we do Resolve, that this
congress assume the name, power, and authority of a Home of Representatives or
Assembly, for the colony of New Hampshire: and that said house, then proceed to
choose twelve persons, being reputable freeholders, and inhabitants within this
colony, in the following manner, viz. five in the county of Rockingham, two in
the county of Strafford, two in the county of Hillsborough, two in the county
of Cheshire, and one in the county of Grafton, to be a distinct and separate
branch of the legislature, by the name of a council for this colony, to
continue as such until the third Wednesday in December next; any seven of whom
to be a quorum, to do business.

That such council appoint their President; and in his absence, that the senior
counselor preside.

That a Secretary be appointed by both branches, who may be a counselor, or
otherwise, as they shall choose.

That no act, or resolve be valid, and put into execution, unless agreed to and
passed by both branches of the legislature.

That all public officers for the said colony, and each county, for the current
year, be appointed by the council and assembly, except the several clerks of
the executive courts, who shall be appointed by the Justices of the respective
courts.

That all bills, resolves, or votes for raising, levying and collecting money,
originate in the house of representatives.

That at any sessions of the council and assembly, neither branch shall adjourn
for any longer time than from Saturday till the next Monday, without consent of
the other.

And it is further Resolved, That if the present unhappy dispute with
Great Britain, should continue longer than the present year, and the
Continental Congress give no instructions or directions to the contrary, the
council be chosen by the people of each respective county, in such manner as
the council and house of representatives shall order.

That general and field officers of the militia, on any vacancy, be appointed
by the two houses, and all inferior officers be chosen by the respective
companies.

That all officers of the army be appointed by the two houses, except they
should direct otherwise in case of any emergency.

That all civil officers for the colony, and for each county be appointed, and
the time of their continuance in office be dete^mined, by the two houses,
except clerks, and county tr^^surers, and recorders of deeds.

That a treasurer, and a recorder of deeds, for each county be annually chosen,
by the people of each county respectively; the votes for such officers to be
returned to the respective courts of general sessions of the peace, in the
county, there to be ascertained, as the council and assembly shall hereafter
direct.

That precepts, in the name of the council and assembly, signed by the
president of the council, and speaker of the house of ^epresentatives, shall
issue annually, at or before the first day of November for the choice of a
council, and house of representatives, (...) be returned by the third Wednesday
in December then next ensuing, in such manner as the council and assembly shall
hereafter prescribe.

In the HOUSE of REPRESENTATIVES, September 19, 1776.
Voted and Resolved,
THAT as any new towns or settlements in this state, shall increase in their
number of inhabitants from year to year, or from time to time, precepts shall
issue for their sending delegates to council and assembly, so as to be fully
represented, according to their numbers, proportionable with other parts of the
state.

Sent up for Concurrence, P. WHITE, Speaker. In COUNCIL, Eodem Die. Read and
Concurred. E. THOMPSON, Secretary.
Copy examined,

per E. THOMSON, Secretary.



MASSACHUSETTS. A CONSTITUTION, or FRAME of GOVERNMENT, agreed upon by the
Delegates of the People of the State of Massachusetts Bay, in CONVENTION, begun
and held at Cambridge, on the First of September, 1779, and continued by
Adjournments, to the Second of March, 1780.
PREAMBLE.
THE end of the institution, maintenance and administration of government, is
to secure the existence of the body-politic, to protect it, and to furnish the
individuals who compose it, with the power of enjoying, in safety and
tranquillity, their natural right, and the blessings of life: And whenever
these great objects are not obtained, the people have a right to alter the
government, and to take measures necessary for their safety, prosperity and
happiness.

The body-politic is formed by a voluntary association of individuals: It is a
social compact, by which the whole people covenants with each citizen, and each
citizen with the whole people, that all shall be governed by certain laws for
the common good. It is the duty of the people, therefore, in framing a
constitution of government, to provide for an equitable mode of making laws, as
well as for an impartial interpretation, and a faithful execution of them; that
every man may, at all times, find his security in them.

We, therefore, the people of Massachusetts, acknowledging, with grateful
hearts, the goodness of the Great Legislator of the Universe, in affording us,
in the course of his providence, an opportunity, deliberately, and peaceably,
without fraud, violence, or surprise, of entering into an original, explicit,
and solemn compact with each other; and of forming a new constitution of civil
government, for ourselves and posterity; and devoutly imploring his direction
in so interesting a design, DO agree upon, ordain, and establish, the following
Declaration of Rights, and Frame of Government, as the CONSTITUTION of the
COMMONWEALTH of MASSACHUSETTS.

PART I. A DECLARATION of RIGHTS, of the Inhabitants of the Commonwealth of
Massachusetts.
Art. I. ALL men are born free and equal, and have certain natural, essential,
and unalienable rights; among which may be reckoned the right of enjoying and
defending their lives and liberties; that of acquiring, possessing, and
protecting property; in fine, that of seeking and obtaining their safety and
happiness.

II. It is the right as well as the duty of all men in society, publicly, and
at stated seasons, to worship the Supreme Being, thd great Creator and
Preserver of the Universe. And no subject shall be hurt, molested, or
restrained in his person, liberty, or estate, for worshipping God in the manner
and season most agreeable to the dictates of his own conscience; or for his
religious profession or sentiments; provided he does not disturb the public
peace, or obstruct others in their religious worship.

III. As the happiness of a people, and the good order and preservation of
civil government, essentially depend upon piety, religion, and morality; and as
these cannot be generally diffused through a community, but by the institution
of the public worship of God, and of public instructions in piety, religion and
morality: Therefore, to promote their happiness, and to secure the good order
and preservation of their government, the people of this commonwealth have a
right to invest their legislature with power to authorize and require, and the
legislature shall, from time to time, authorize and require the several towns,
parishes, precincts, and other bodies-politic, or religious societies, to make
suitable provision, at their own expense, for the institution of the public
worship of God, and for the support and maintenance of public protestant
teachers of piety, religion, and morality, in all cases where such provision
shall not be made voluntarily.

And the people of this commonwealth, have also a right to, and do, invest
their legislature with authority to enjoin, upon all the subjects, an
attendance upon the instructions of the public teachers as aforesaid, at stated
times and seasons, if there be any on whose instructions they can
conscientiously and conveniently attend.

Provided notwithstanding, that the several towns, parishes, precincts, and
other bodies-politic, or religious societies, shall, at all times, have the
exclusive right of electing their public teachers, and of contracting with them
for their support and maintenance.

And all moneys paid by the subject to the support of public worship, and of
the public teachers aforesaid, shall, if he require it, be uniformly applied to
the support of the public teacher or teachers of his own religious sect or
denomination, provided there be any on whose instructions he attends; otherwise
it may be paid toward the support of the teacher or teachers of the parish or
precinct in which the said moneys are raised.

And every denomination of Christians demeaning themselves peaceably, and as
good subjects of the commonwealth, shall be equally under the protection of the
law: And no subordination of any one sect or denomination to another, shall
ever be established by law.

IV. The people of this commonwealth have the sole and exclusive right of
governing themselves as a free, sovereign, and independent state; and do, and
forever hereafter shall, exercise and enjoy every power, jurisdiction, and
right, which is not, or may not hereafter, be by them expressly delegat^^ to the
United States of America, in Congress assembled.

V. All power residing originally in the people, and being derived from them,
the several magistrates and officers of government, vested with authority,
whether legislative, executive, or judicial, are their substitutes and agents,
and are at all times accountable to them.

VI. No man, or corporation, or association of men, have any other title to
obtain advantages, or particular and exclusive privileges, distinct from those
of the community, than what arises from the consideration of services rendered
to the public; and this title being in nature neither hereditary nor
transmissible to children, or descendents, or relations by blood, the idea of a
man born a magistrate, lawgiver, or judge, is absurd and unnatural.

VII. Government is instituted for the common good; for the protection, safety,
prosperity, and happiness of the people; and not for the profit, honor, or
private interest of any one man, family, or class of men: Therefore, the people
alone have an incontestible, unalienable, and indefeasible right, to institute
government; and to reform, alter, or totally change the same, when their
protection, safety, prosperity, and happiness require it.

VIII. In order to prevent those, who are vested with authority from becoming
oppressors, the people have a right, at such periods, and in such manner as
they shall establish by their frame of government, to cause their public
officers to return to private life; and to fill up vacant places, by certain
and regular elections and appointments.

IX. All elections ought to be free, and all the inhabitants of this
commonwealth, having such qualifications as they shall establish by their frame
of government, have an equal right to elect officers, and to be elected for
public employments.

X. Each individual of the society has a right to be protected by it, in the
enjoyment of his life, liberty, and property, according to standing laws. He is
obliged, consequently, to contribute his share to the expense of this
protection; to give his personal service, or an equivalent, when necessary: But
no part of the property of any individual, can, with justice, be taken from
him, or applied to public uses, without his own consent, or that of the
representative body of the people: In fine, the people of this commonwealth are
not controulable by any other laws, than those to which their constitutional
representative body have given their consent. And whenever the public exigences
require, that the property of any individual should be appropriated to public
uses, he shall receive a reasonable compensation therefore.

XI. Every subject of the commonwealth ought to find a certain remedy, by
having recourse to the laws for all injuries or wrongs which he may receive in
his person, property or character. He ought to obtain right and justice freely,
and without being obliged to purchase it; completely, and without any denial;
promptly, and without delay; conformably to the laws.

XII. No subject shall be held to answer for any crime or offense, until the
same is fully and plainly, substantially and formally, described to him; or be
compelled to accuse, or furnish evidence against himself. And every subject
shall have a right to produce all proofs that may be favorable to him; to meet
the witnesses against him face to face, and to be fully heard in his defense by
himself, or his council, at his election. And no subject shall be arrested,
imprisoned, despoiled, or deprived of his property, immunities, or privileges,
put out of the protection of the law, exiled, or deprived of his life, liberty,
or estate, but by the judgment of his peers, or the law of the land.

And the legislature shall not make any law, that shall subject any person to a
capital or infamous punishment, excepting for the government of the army and
navy, without trial by jury.

XIII. In criminal prosecutions, the verification of facts in the vicinity
where they happen, is one of the greatest securities of the life, liberty, and
property of the citizen.

XIV. Every subject has a right to be secure from all unreasonable searches,
and seizures, of his person, his houses, his papers, and all his possessions.
All warrants, therefore, are contrary to this right, if the cause or foundation
of them be not previously supported by oath or affirmation; and if the order in
a warrant to a civil officer, to make search in all suspected places, or to
arrest one or more suspected persons, or to seize their property, be not
accompanied with a special designation of the persons or objects of search,
arrest, or seizure; and no warrant ought to be issued, but in cases and with
the formalities prescribed by the laws.

XV. In all controversies concerning property, and in all suits between two or
more persons, except in cases in which it has heretofore been otherways used
and practiced, the parties have a right to a trial by a jury; and this method
of procedure shall be held sacred, unless, in causes arising on the high seas,
and such as relate to mariners wages, the legislature shall hereafter find it
necessary to alter it.

XVI. The liberty of the press is essential to the security of freedom in a
state; it ought not, therefore, to be restrained in this commonwealth.

XVII. The people have a right to keep and to bear arms for the common defense.
And as in time of peace armies are dangerous to liberty, they ought not to be
maintained without the consent of the legislature, and the military power shall
always be held in exact subordination to the civil authority, and be governed
by it.

XVIII. A frequent recurrence to the fundamental principles of the
constitution, and a constant adherence to those of piety, justice, moderation,
temperance, industry, and frugality, are absolutely necessary, to preserve the
advantages of liberty, and to maintain a free government. The people ought,
consequently, to have a particular attention to all those principles, in the
choice of their officers and representatives: And they have a right to require
of their lawgivers and magistrates, an exact and constant observance of them,
in the formation and execution of all laws necessary for the good
administration of the commonwealth.

XIX. The people have a right, in an orderly and peaceable manner, to assemble
to consult upon the common good; give instructions to their representatives;
and to request of the legislative body, by the way of addresses, petitions, or
remonstrances, redress of the wrongs done them, and of the grievances they
suffer.

XX. The power of suspending the laws, or the execution of the laws, ought
never to be exercised but by the legislature, or by authority derived from it,
to be exercised in such particular cases only as the legislature shall expressly
provide for.

XXI. The freedom of deliberation, speech, and debate, in either house of the
legislature, is so essential to the rights of the people, that it cannot be the
foundation of any accusation or prosecution, action, or complaint, in any other
court or place whatsoever.

XXII. The legislature ought frequently to assemble for the redress of
grievances, for correcting, strengthening, and confirming the laws, and for
making new laws, as the common good may require.

XXIII. No subsidy, charge, tax, impost, or duties, ought to be established,
fixed, laid, or levied, under any pretext whatsoever, without the consent of
the people, or their representatives in the legislature.

XXIV. Laws made to punish for actions done before the existence of such laws,
and which have not been declared crimes by preceding laws, are unjust,
oppressive, and inconsistent with the fundamental principles of a free
government.

XXV. No subject ought, in any case, or in any time, to be declared guilty of
treason or felony by the legislature.

XXVI. No magistrate or court of law shall demand excessive bail or sureties,
impose excessive fines, or inflict cruel or unusual punishments.

XXVII. In time of peace, no soldier ought to be quartered in any house without
the consent of the owner; and in time of war, such quarters ought not to be
made, but by the civil magistrate, in a manner ordained by the legislature.

XXVIII. No person can in any case be subjected to law-martial, or to any
penalties or pains, by virtue of that law, except those employed in the army or
navy, and except the militia in actual service, but by authority of the
legislature.

XXIX. It is essential to the preservation of the rights of every individual,
his life, liberty, property, and character, that there be an impartial
interpretation of the laws, and administration of justice. It is the right of
every citizen to be tried by judges as free, impartial, and independent, as the
lot of humanity will admit. It is, therefore, not only the best policy, but for
the security of the rights of the people, and of every citizen, that the judges
of the supreme judicial court should hold their offices as long as they behave
themselves well; and that they should have honorable salaries, ascertained and
established by standing laws.

XXX. In the government of this Commonwealth, the legislative department shall
never exercise the executive and judicial powers, or either of them: The
executive shall never exercise the legislative and judicial powers, or either
of them: The judicial shall never exercise the legislative and executive
powers, or either of them: to the end, it may be a government of laws, and not
of men.

PART II. The FRAME of GOVERNMENT.
THE people inhabiting the territory formerly called the Province of
Massachusetts Bay, do hereby solemnly and mutually agree with each other, to
form themselves into a free, sovereign, and independent body-politic or state,
by the name of, The COMMONWEALTH of MASSACHUSETTS.

CHAPTER I. The LEGISLATIVE POWER.
SECTION 1. The GENERAL COURT.
Art. I. THE department of legislation shall be formed by two branches, a
Senate, and House of Representatives; each of which shall have a negative on
the other.

The legislative body shall assemble every year on the last Wednesday in May,
and at such other times as they shall judge necessary; and shall dissolve and
be dissolved on the day next preceding the said last Wednesday in May; and
shall be styled, The General Court of Massachusetts.

II. No bill or resolve of the senate or house of representatives shall become
a law, and have force as such, until it shall have been laid before the
governor for his revisal: And if he, upon such revision, approve thereof, he
shall signify his approbation by signing the same. But it he have any objection
to the passing of such bill or resolve, he shall return the same, together with
his objections thereto, in writing, to the senate or house of representatives,
in which soever the same shall have originated; who shall enter the objections
sent down by the governor, at large, on their records, and proceed to
reconsider the said bill or resolve: But if after such reconsideration, two
thirds of the said senate or house of representatives, shall, notwithstanding
the said objections, agree to pass the same, it shall, together with the
objections, be sent to the other branch of the legislature, where it shall also
be reconsidered, and if approved by two thirds of the members present, it shall
have the force of a law: But in all such cases, the votes of both houses shall
be determined by yeas and nays; and the names of the persons voting for, or
against, the said bill or resolve, shall be entered upon the public records of
the commonwealth.

And in order to prevent unnecessary delays, if any bill or resolve shall not
be returned by the governor within five days after it shall have been
presented, the same shall have the force of a law.

III. The general court shall forever have full power and authority to erect
and constitute judicatories and courts of record, or other courts, to be held
in the name of the commonwealth, for the hearing, trying, and determining of
all manner of crimes, offenses, pleas, processes, plaints, actions, matters,
causes and things, whatsoever, arising or happening within the commonwealth, or
between or concerning persons inhabiting, or residing, or brought within the
same; whether the same be criminal or civil, or whether the said crimes be
capital or not capital, and whether the said pleas be real, personal, or mixed;
and for the awarding and making out of execution thereupon: To which courts and
judicatories are hereby given and granted full power and authority, from time
to time, to administer oaths or affirmations, for the better discovery of truth
in any matter in controversy or depending before them.

IV. And further, full power and authority are hereby given and granted to the
said general court, from time to time, to make, ordain, and establish, all
manner of wholesome and reasonable orders, laws, statutes, and ordinances,
directions and instructions, either with penalties or without; so as the same
be not repugnant or contrary to this constitution, as they shall judge to be
for the good and welfare of this commonwealth, and for the government and
ordering thereof and of the subjects of the same, and for the necessary support
and defense of the government thereof* and to name and settle annually, or
provide by fixed laws, for the naming and settling all civil officers within
the said commonwealth; the election and constitution of whom are not hereafter
in this form of government otherwise provided for; and to set forth the several
duties, powers and limits, of the several civil and military officers of this
commonwealth and the forms of such oaths or affirmations as shall be
respectively administered unto them for the execution of their several offices
and places, so as the same be not repugnant or contrary to this constitution;
and to impose and levy proportional and reasonable assessments, rates and
taxes, upon all the inhabitants of, and persons resident, and estates lying,
within the said commonwealth; and also to impose, and levy, reasonable duties
and excises, upon any produce, goods, wares, merchandises, and commodities
whatsoever, brought into, produced, manufactured, or being within the same; to
be issued and disposed of by warrant, under the hand of the governor of this
commonwealth for the time being, with the advice and consent of the council,
for the public service, in the necessary defense and support of the government
of the said commonwealth, and and the protection and preservation of the
subjects thereof, according to such acts as are or shall be in force within the
same.

And while the public charges of government, or any part thereof, shall be
assessed on polls and estates, in the manner that has hitherto been practiced;
in order that such assessments may be made with equality, there shall be a
valuation of estates within the commonwealth taken anew once in every ten years
at the least, and as much oftener as the general court shall order.

CHAP. I. SECT. II. SENATE.
Art. I. THERE shall be annually elected by the freeholders and other
inhabitants of this commonwealth, qualified as in this constitution is
provided, forty persons to be counselors and senators for the year ensuing
their election; to be choby the inhabitants of the districts, into which the
commonwealth may from time to time be divided by the general court for that
purpose. And the general court, in assigning the numbers to be elected by the
respective districts, shall govern themselves by the proportion of the public
taxes paid by the said districts; and timely make known to the inhabitants of
the commonwealth, the limits of each district, and the number of counselors
and senators to be chosen therein; provided that the number of such district
shall be never less than thirteen; and that no district be so large as to
entitle the same to choose more than six senators.

And the several counties in this commonwealth shall, until the general court
shall determine it necessary to alter the said district, be districts for
choice of counselors and senators (except that the counties of Dukes-county
and Nantucket shall form one district for that purpose) and shall elect the
following number for counselors and senators, viz.

Suffolk Six Essex Six Middlesex Five Hampshire Four Plymouth Three Barnstable
One Bristol Three York Two Dukes-county and Nantucket One Worcerster Five
Cumberland One Lincoln One Berkshire Two

II. The senate shall be the first bran^h of the legislature; and the senators
shall be chosen in the following manner, viz. There shall be a meeting on the
first Monday in April annually, forever, of the inhabitants of each town in the
several counties of this commonwealth; to be called by the select men, and
warned in due course of law, at least seven days before the first Monday in
April, for the purpose of electing persons to be senators and counselors: And
at such meetings every male inhabitant of twenty-one years of age and upwards,
having a freehold estate within the commonwealth, of the annual income of three
pounds, or any estate of the value of sixty pounds, shall have a right to give
in his vote for the senators for the district of which he is an inhabitant. And
to remove all doubts concerning the meaning of the word "inhabitant," in this
constitution, every person shall be considered as an inhabitant, for the
purpose of electing and being elected into any office or place within this
state, in that town, district or plantation, where he dwells, or has his
home.

The selectmen of the several towns shall preside at such meetings impartially;
and shall receive the votes of all the inhabitants of such towns present and
qualified to vote for senators, and shall sort and count them in open town
meeting, and in presence of the town clerk, who shall make a fair record, in
presence of the selectmen, and in open townmeeing, of the name of every person
voted for, and of the number of votes against his name; and a fair copy of this
record shall be attested by the selectmen and the town clerk, and shall be
sealed up, directed to the secretary of the commonwealth for the time being,
with a superscription, expressing the purports of the contents thereof, and
delivered by the town clerk of such towns, to the sheriff of the county in
which such town lies, thirty days at least before the last Wednesday in May
annually; or it shall be delivered into the secretary's office seventeen days
at least before the said last Wednesday in May; and the sheriff of each county
shall deliver all such certificates by him received into the Secretary's office
seventeen days before the said last Wednesday in May.

And the inhabitants of plantations unincorporated, qualified as this
constitution provides, who are or shall be empowered and required to assess
taxes upon themselves toward the support of government, shall have the same
privilege of voting for coun^ellors and senators in the plantations where they
reside, as town inhabitants have in their respective towns; and the plantation
meetings for that purpose shall be held annually on the same first Monday in
April, at such place in the plantations respectively, as the assessor thereof
shall direct; which assessors shall have like authority for notifying the
electors, collecting and returning the votes, as the selectmen and town-clerks
have in their several towns, by this constitution. And all other persons living
in places unincorporated (qualified as aforesaid) who shall be assessed to the
support of government by the assessors of an adjacent town, shall have the
privilege of giving in their votes for counselors and senators, in the town
where they shall be assessed, and be notified of the place of meeting by the
selectmen of the town where they shall be assessed, for that purpose
accordingly.

III. And that there may be a due convention of senators on the last Wednesday
in May annually, the governor, and five of the council, for the time being,
shall, as soon as may be, examine the returned copies of such records; and
fourteen days before the said day he shall issue his summons to such persons as
shall appear to be chosen by the majority of voters, to attend on that day, and
take their seats accordingly; provided nevertheless, that for the first year
the said returned copies shall be examined by the president and five of the
council of the former constitution of government; and the said president shall
in like manner, issue his summons to the persons so elected, that they may take
their seats as aforesaid.

IV. The senate shall be the final judge of the elections, returns and
qualifications of their own members, as pointed out in the constitution; and
shall, on the said last Wednesday in May annually, determine and declare who
are elected by each district, to be senators by a majority of votes: And in
case there shall not appear to be the full number of senators returned, elected
by a majority of votes for any district, the deficiency shall be supplied in
the following manner, viz. The members of the house of representatives, and
such senators as shall be declared elected, shall take the names of such
persons as shall be found to have the highest number of votes in such district,
and not elected, amounting to twice the number of senators wanting, if there be
so many voted for; and out of these, shall elect by ballot a number of senators
sufficient to fill up the vacancies in such district; and in this manner all
such vacancies shall be filled in every district of the commonwealth; and in
like manner all vacancies in the senate, arising by death, removal out of the
state, or otherwise, shall be supplied as soon as may be, after such vacancies
shall happen.

V. Provided nevertheless, that no person shall be capable of being elected as
a senator, who is not seized in his own right of a freehold within this
commonwealth, of the value of three hundred pounds at least, or possessed of
personal estate to the value of six hundred pounds at least, or of both to to
the amount of the same sum, and who has not been an inhabitant of this
commonwealth for the space of five years immediately preceding his election,
and at the time of his election, he shall be an inhabitant in the district for
which he shall be chosen.

VI. The senate shall have power to adjourn themselves, provided such
adjournments do not exceed two days at a time.

VII. The senate shall choose its own president, appoint its own officers, and
and determine its own rules of proceedings.

VIII. The senate shall be a court with full authority to hear and determine
all impeachments made by the house of representatives, against any officer or
officers of the commonwealth, for misconduct and mal-administration in their
offices. But previous to the trial of every impeachment, the members of the
senate shall respectively be sworn, truly and impartially to try and determine
the charge in question, according to evidence. Their judgment, however shall
not extend further than to removal from office, and disqualification to hold or
enjoy any place of honor, trust or profit, under this commonwealth: But the
party so convicted, shall be, nevertheless, liable to indictment, trial,
judgment, and punishment, according to the laws of the land.

IX. Not less than sixteen members of the senate, shall constitute a quorum for
doing business.

CHAP. I. SECT. III. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
Art. I. THERE shall be in the legislature of this commonwealth, a
representation of the people, annually elected, and founded upon the principle
of equality.

II. And in order to provide for a representation of the citizens of this
commonwealth, founded on the principle of equality, every corporate town,
containing one hundred and fifty rateable polls, may elect one representative:
Every corporate town, containing three hundred and seventy-five rateable polls,
may elect two representatives: Every corporate town, containing six hundred
rateable polls, may elect three representatives; and proceeding in that manner,
making two hundred and twenty-five rateable polls the mean increasing number
for every additional representative.

Provided nevertheless, that each town now incorporated, not having one hundred
and fifty rateable polls, may elect one representative: But no place shall
hereafter be incorporated with the privilege of electing a representative,
unless there are within the same, one hundred and fifty rateable polls.

And the house of representatives shall have power from time to time, to impose
fines upon such towns as shall neglect to choose and return members to the
same, agreeably to this constitution.

The expenses of traveling to the general assembly, and returning home, once
in every session and no more, shall be paid by the government, out of the
public treasury, to every member who shall attend as seasonably as he can, in
the judgment of the house, and does not depart without leave.

III. Every member of the house of representatives shall be chosen by written
votes; and for one year at least next preceding his election, shall have been
an inhabitant of, and have been seized in his own right of a freehold of the
value of one hundred pounds within the town he shall be chosen to represent, or
any rateable estate to the value of two hundred pounds; and he shall cease to
represent the said town, immediately on his ceasing to be qualified as
aforesaid.

IV. Every male person, being twenty one years of age, and resident in any
particular town in this commonwealth, for the space of one year next preceding,
having a freehold estate within the same town, of the annual income of three
pounds, or any estate of the value of sixty pounds, shall have a right to vote
in the choice of a representative, or representatives for the said town.

V. The members of the house of representatives shall be chosen annually in the
month of May, ten days at least before the last Wednesday of that month.

VI. The house of representatives shall be the grand inquest of this
commonwealth; and all impeachments made by them, shall be heard and tried by
the senate.

VII. All money-bills shall originate in the house of representatives; but the
senate may propose or concur with amendments, as on other bills.

VIII. The house of representatives shall have power to adjourn themselves;
provided such adjournment shall not exceed two days at a time.

IX. Not less than sixty members of the house of representatives, shall
constitute a quorum for doing business.

X. The house of representatives shall be the judge of the returns, elections,
and qualifications of its own members, as pointed out in the constitution;
shall choose their own speaker; appoint their own officers, and settle the rules
and orders of proceeding in their own house: They shall have authority to
punish by imprisonment, every person, not a member, who shall be guilty of
disrespect to the house, by any disorderly or contemptuous behavior in its
pre^ence; or who, in the town where the general court is sitting, and during
the time of its sitting, shall threaten harm to the body or estate of any of
its members, for any thing said or done in the house; or who shall assault any
of them therefore; or who shall assault, or arrest any witness, or other person,
ordered to attend the house, in his way in going, or returning; or who shall
rescue any person arrested by the order of the house.

And no member of the house of representatives shall be arrested, or held to
bail on mean process, during his going unto, returning from, or his attending
the general assembly.

XI. The senate shall have the same powers in the like cases; and the governor
and council shall have the same authority to punish in like cases. Provided,
that no imprisonment on the warrant or order of the governor, council, senate,
or house of representatives, for either of the above described offenses, be for
a term exceeding thirty days.

And the senate and house of representatives may try, and determine, all cases
where their rights and privileges are concerned, and which, by the
constitution, they have authority to try and determine, by committees of their
own members, or in such other way as they may respectively think best.

CHAPTER II. EXECUTIVE POWER.
SECTION I. GOVERNOR.
Art. I. THERE shall be a supreme executive magistrate, who shall be styled,
The Governor of the commonwealth of Massachusetts; and whose title shall be,
His Excellency.

II. The governor shall be chosen annually: And no person shall be eligible to
this office, unless at the time of his election, he shall have been an
inhabitant of this commonwealth, for seven years next proceeding; and unless he
shall, at the same time, be seized in his own right, of a freehold within the
commonwealth, of the value of one thousand pounds; and unless he shall declare
himself to be of the Christian religion.

III. Those persons who shall be qualified to vote for senators and
representatives within the several towns of this commonwealth, shall, at a
meeting to be called for that purpose, on the first Monday of April annually,
give in their votes for a governor, to the selectmen, who shall preside at such
meetings; and the town clerk, in the presence and with the assistance of the
selectmen, shall, in open town-meeting, sort and count the votes, and form a
list of the persons voted for, with the number of votes for each person against
his name; and shall make a fair record of the same in the town books, and a
public declaration thereof in the said meeting; and shall, in the presence of
the inhabitants, seal up copies of the said list, attested by him and the
selectmen, and transmit the same to the sheriff of the county, thirty days at
least before the last Wednesday in May; and the sheriff shall transmit the same
to the secretary's office, seventeen days at least before the said last
Wednesday in May; or the selectmen may cause returns of the same to be made to
the office of the secretary of the commonwealth, seventeen days at least before
the said day; and the secretary shall lay the same before the senate, and the
house of representatives, on the last Wednesday in May, to be by them examined:
And in case of an election by a majority of all the votes returned, the choice
shall be by them declared and published: But if no person shall have a majority
of votes, the house of representatives shall, by ballot, elect two out of four
persons, who had the highest number of votes, if so many shall have been voted
for; but, if otherwise, out of the number voted for; and make return to the
senate of the two persons so elected; on which the senate shall proceed, by
ballot, to elect one, who shall be declared governor.

IV. The governor shall have authority, from time to time, at his discretion,
to assemble and call together the counselors of this commonwealth for the time
being; and the governor, with the said counselors, or five of them at least,
shall, and may, from time to time, hold and keep a council, for the ordering
and directing the affairs of the commonwealth, agreeably to the constitution,
and the laws of the land.

V. The governor, with advice of council, shall have full power and authority,
during the session of the general court, to adjourn or prorogue the same, to
any time the two houses shall desire; and to dissolve the same, on the day next
preceding the last Wednesday in May; and, in the recess of the said court, to
prorogue the same, from time to time, not exceeding ninety days in any one
recess; and to call it together sooner than the time to which it may be
adjourned or prorogued, if the welfare of the commonwealth shall require the
same: And in case of any infectious distemper prevailing in the place where the
said court is next at any time to convene, or any other cause happening,
whereby danger may arise to the health or lives of the members from their
attendance, he may direct the session to be held at some other the most
convenient place within the state.

And the governor shall dissolve the said general court on the day next
preceding the last Wednesday in May.

VI. In cases of disagreement between the two houses, with regard to the
necessity, expediency, or time of adjournment, or prorogation, the governor,
with advice of the council, shall have a right to adjourn or prorogue the
general court, not exceeding ninety days, as he shall determine the public good
shall require.

VII. The governor of this commonwealth, for the time being, shall be the
commander in chief of the army and navy, and of all the military forces of the
state, by sea and land; and shall have full power by himself, or by any
commander, or other officer or officers, from time to time, to train, instruct,
exercise and govern the militia and navy, and for the special defense and
safety of the commonwealth, to assemble in martial array, and put in warlike
posture, the inhabitants thereof, and to lead and conduct them, and with them
to encounter, repel, resist, expel, and pursue, by force of arms, as well by
sea as by land, within or without the limits of this commonwealth, and also to
kill, slay, and destroy, if necessary, and conquer, by all fitting ways,
enterprises, and means whatsoever, all and every such person and persons, as
shall, at any time hereafter, in a hostile manner, attempt or enterprise the
destruction, invasion, detriment, or annoyance of this commonwealth; and to use
and exercise, over the army and navy, and over the militia in actual service,
the law-martial, in time of war or invasion, and also in time of rebellion,
declared by the legislature to exist, as occasion shall necessarily require;
and to take and surprise by all ways and means whatsoever, all and every such
person or persons, with their ships, arms, ammunition, and other goods, as
shall, in a hostile manner, invade, or attempt the invading, conquering, or
annoying this commonwealth; and that the governor be entrusted with all these
and other powers, incident to the offices of captain general and commander in
chief, and admiral, to be exercised agreeably to the rules and regulations of
the constitution, and the laws of the land, and not otherwise.

Provided, that the said governor shall not, at any time hereafter, by virtue
of any power by this constitution granted, or hereafter to be granted to him by
the legislature, transport any of the inhabitants of this commonwealth, or
oblige them to march out of the limits of the same, without their free and
voluntary consent, or the consent of the general court; except so far as may be
necessary to march or transport them by land or water for the defense of such
part of the state, to which they cannot otherwise conveniently have access.

VIII. The power of pardoning offenses, except such as persons may be convicted
of before the senate by an impeachment of the house, shall be in the governor,
by and with the advice of council: But no charter of pardon, granted by the
governor, with advice of the council, before conviction, shall avail the party
pleading the same, notwithstanding any general or particular expressions
contained therein, descriptive of the offense or offenses intended to be
pardoned.

IX. All judicial officers, the attorney general, the solicitor-general, all
sheriffs, coroners, and registers of probate, shall be nominated and appointed
by the governor, by and with the advice and consent of the council; and every
such nomination shall be made by the governor, and made at least seven days
prior to such appointment.

X. The captains and subalterns of the militia, shall be elected by the written
votes of the train band and alarm list of their respective companies, of
twenty-one years of age and upwards: The field officers of regiments shall be
elected by the written votes of the captains and subalterns of their respective
regiments: The brigadiers shall be elected in like manner, by the field
officers of their respective brigades: And such officers, so elected, shall be
commissioned by the governor, who shall determine their rank.

The legislature shall, by standing laws, direct the time and manner of
convening the electors, and of collecting votes, and of certifying to the
governor the officers elected.

The major-generals shall be appointed by the senate and house of
representatives, each having a negative upon the other; and be commissioned by
the governor.

And if the electors of brigadiers, field officers, captains of subalterns,
shall neglect or refuse to make such elections, after being duly notified,
according to the laws for the time being, then the governor, with advice of
council, shall appoint suitable persons to fill such offices.

And no officer, duly commissioned to command in the militia, shall be removed
from his office, but by the address of both houses to the governor, or by fair
trial in court martial, pursuant to the laws of the commonwealth for the time
being.

The commanding officers of regiments shall appoint their adjutants and
quartermasters; the brigadiers their brigade majors; and the major generals
their aids; and the governor shall appoint the adjutant general.

The governor, with advice of council, shall appoint all officers of the
continental army, whom by the confederation of the United States it is provided
that this commonwealth, shall appoint, as also all officers of forts and
garrisons.

The divisions of the militia into brigades, regiments and companies, made in
pursuance of the militia laws now in force, shall be considered as the proper
divisions of the militia of this commonwealth, until the same shall be altered
in pursuance of some future law.

XI. No moneys shall be issued out of the treasury of this commonwealth, and
disposed of (except such sums as may be appropriated for the redemption of
bills of credit or treasurers notes, or for the payment of interests arising
thereon) but by warrant under the hand of the governor for the time being, with
the advice and consent of the council, for the necessary defense and support of
the commonwealth; and for the protection and preservation of the inhabitants
thereof, agreably to the acts and resolves of the general court.

XII. All public boards, the commissary-general, all superintending officers of
public magazines and stores, belonging to this commonwealth, and all commanding
officers of sorts and garrisons within the same, shall once in every three
months, officially, and without requisition, and at other times, when required
by the governor, deliver to him an account of all goods, stores, provisions,
ammunition, cannon with their appendages, and small arms with their
accoutrements, and of all other public property whatever under their care
respectively; distinguishing the quantity, number, quality and kind of each, as
particularly as may be; together with the condition of such sorts and
garrisons: And the said commanding officer shall exhibit to the governor, when
required by him, true and exact plans of such forts, and of the land and sea,
or harbor or harbors adjacent.

And the said boards, and all public officers, shall communicate to the
governor, as soon as may be after receiving the same, all letters, dispatches,
and intelligence of a public nature, which shall be directed to them
respectively.

XIII. As the public good requires that the governor should not be under the
undue influence of any of the members of the general-court, by a dependence on
them for his support -- that he should in all cases, act with freedom for the
benefit of the public -- that he should not have his attention necessarily
diverted from that object to his private concerns -- and that he should
maintain the dignity of the commonwealth in the character of its chief
magistrate -- it is necessary that he should have an honorable stated salary,
of a fixed and permanent value, amply sufficient for those purposes, and
established by standing laws: And it shall be among the first acts of the
general court, after the commencement of this constitution, to establish such
salary by law accordingly.

Permanent and honorable salaries shall also be established by law for the
justices of the supreme judicial court.

And if it shall be found that any of the salaries aforesaid, so established,
are insufficient, they shall, from time to time, be enlar^^d as the
general-court shall judge proper.

CHAP. II. SECT. II. LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR.
Art. I. THERE shall be annually elected a Lieutenant Governor of the
commonwealth of Massachusetts, whose title shall be, His Honor; and who shall
be qualified, in point of religion, property, and residence in the
commonwealth, in the same manner with the governor: And the day and manner of
his election, and the qualifications of the electors shall be the same as are
required in the election of a governor. The return of the votes for this
officer, and the declaration of his election, shall be in the same manner: And
if no one person shall be found to have a majority of all the the votes
returned, the vacancy shall be filled by the senate and and house of
representatives, in the same manner as the governor is to be elected, in case
no one person shall have a majority of the votes of the people to be governor.

II. The governor, and in his absence the lieutenant governor, shall be
president of the council, but shall have no vote in council: And the lieutenant
governor shall always be a member of the council, except when the chair of the
governor shall be vacant.

III. Whenever the chair of the governor shall be vacant, by reason of his
death, or absence from the commonwealth, or otherwise, the lieutenant governor,
for the time being, shall, during such vacancy, perform all the duties
incumbent upon the governor, and shall have and exercise all the powers and
authorities which by this constitution the governor is vested with, when
personally present.

CHAP. II. SECT. III. COUNCIL, and the Manner of settling Elections by the
Legislature.
Art. I. THERE shall be a council for advising the governor in the executive
part of government, to consist of nine persons besides the lieutenant governor,
whom the governor for the time being, shall have full power and authority, from
time to time, at his discretion, to assemble and call together. And the
governor, with the said counselors, or five of them at least, shall and may
from time to time, hold and keep a council, for the ordering and directing the
affairs of the commonwealth, according to the laws of the land.

II. Nine counselors shall be annually chosen from among the persons returned
for counselors and senators, on the last Wednesday in May, by the joint ballot
of the senators and representatives assembled in one room: And in case there
shall not be found upon the first choice, the whole number of nine persons who
will accept a seat in the council, the deficiency shall be made up by the
electors aforesaid from among the people at large; and the number of senators
left shall constitute the senate for the year. The seats of the persons thus
elected from the senate, and accepting the trust, shall be vacated in the
senate.

III. The counselors, in the civil arrangements of the commonwealth, shall
have rank next after the lieutenant governor.

IV. Not more than two counselors shall be chosen out of any one district of
this commonwealth.

V. The resolutions and advice of the council shall be recorded in a register,
and signed by the members present; and this record may be called for at any
time by either house of the legislature; and any member of the council many
insert his opinion contrary to the resolution of the majority.

VI. Whenever the office of the governor and lieutenant governor shall be
vacant, by reason of death, absence, or otherwise, then the council, or the
major part of them, shall, during such vacancy, have full power and authority,
to do, and execute, all and every such acts, matters and things, as the
governor or the lieutenant governor might or could, by virtue of this
constitution, do or execute, if they or either of them, were personally present.

VII. And whereas the elections appointed to be made by this constitution, on
the last Wednesday in May annually, by the two houses of the legislature, may
not be completed on that day, the said elections may be adjourned from day to
day until the same shall be completed. And the order of elections shall be as
follows: The vacancies in the senate, if any, shall first be filled up; the
governor and lieutenant governor shall then be elected, provided there should
be no choice of them by the people: And afterward the two Houses shall proceed
to the election of the council.

CHAP. II. SECT. IV. Secretary, Treasurer, Commissary, etc.
Art. I. THE secretary, treasurer and receiver general, and the commissary
general, notaries-public, and naval officers, shall be chosen annually, by
joint ballot of the senators and representatives in one room. And that the
citizens of this commonwealth may be assured, from time to time, that the
moneys remaining; in the public treasury, upon the settlement and liquidation
of the public accounts, are their property, no man shall be elegible as
treasurer and receiver general more than five years successively.

II. The records of the commonwealth shall be kept in the office of the
secretary, who may appoint his deputies, for whose conduct he shall be
accountable, and he shall attend the governor and council, the senate and house
of representatives, in person, or by his deputies, as they shall respectively
require.

CHAPTER III. JUDICIARY POWER.
Art. I. THE tenure, that all commission officers shall by law have in their
offices shall be expressed in their respective commissions, all judicial
officers, duly appointed, commissioned and sworn, shall hold their offices
during good behavior, excepting such concerning whom there is different
provision made in this constitution: provided nevertheless, the governor, with
consent of the council, may remove them upon the address of both houses of the
legislature.

II. Each branch of the legislature, as well as the governor and council shall
have authority to require the opinions of the justices of the supreme judicial
court, upon important questions of law, and upon solemn occasions.

III. In order that the people may not suffer from the long continuance in
place of any justice of the peace, who shall fail of discharging the important
duties of his office with ability or fidelity, all commissions of justices of
the peace shall expire and become void, in the term of seven years from their
respective dates; and upon the expiration of any commission, the same may, if
necessary, be renewed, or another person appointed, as shall most conduce to
the well being of the commonwealth.

IV. The judges of probate of wills, and for granting letters of
administration, shall hold their courts at such place or places, on fixed days,
as the convenience of the people shall require. And the legislature shall, from
time to time, hereafter appoint such times and places; until which
appointments, the said courts shall be holden at the times and places which the
respective judges shall direct.

V. All causes of marriage, divorce and alimony, and all appeals from the
judges of probate shall be heard and determined by the governor and council,
until the legislature shall, by law make other provision.

CHAPTER IV. DELEGATES to CONGRESS.
THE delegates of this commonwealth to the Congress of the United States,
shall, sometime in the month of June annaully, be elected by the joint ballot
of the senate and house of representatives, assembled together in one room; to
serve in Congress for one year, to commence on the first Monday in November
then next ensuing. They shall have commissions under the hand of the governor,
and and the great seal of the commonwealth; but may be recalled at any time
within the year, and others chosen and commissioned, in the same manner, in
their stead.

CHAPTER V. The University at Cambridge, and Encouragement of Literature, etc.
SECTION I. The UNIVERSITY.
Art. I. WHEREAS our wise and pious ancestors, so early as the year one
thousand six hundred and thirty six, laid the foundation of Harvard college, in
which university many persons of great eminence have, by the blessing of God,
been initiated in those arts and sciences, which qualified them for public
employments, both in church and state: And whereas the encouragement of arts
and sciences, and all good literature, tends to the honor of God, the
advantage of the Christian religion, and the great benefit of this and the
other United States of America -- It is declared, that the President and
Fellows of Harvard College, in their corporate capacity, and their successors
in that capacity, their officers and servants, shall have hold, use, exercise
and enjoy all the powers, authorities, rights, liberties, privileges,
immunities and and franchises, which they now have or are entitled to have,
hold, use, exercise and enjoy: And the same are hereby ratified and confirmed
unto them, the said president and fellows of Harvard college, and to their
successors, and to their officers and servants, respectively, forever.

II. And whereas there have been at sundry times, by diverse persons, gifts,
grants, devises of houses, lands, tenements, goods, chattles, legacies and
conveyances, heretofore made, either to Harvard-college, in Cambridge, in
New England, or to the president and fellows of Harvard college, or to the said
college, by some other description, under several charters successively: It is
declared, that all the said gifts, grants, devises, legacies, and conveyances,
are hereby for ever confirmed unto the president and fellows of Harvard
college, and to their successors in the capacity aforesaid, according to the
true intent and meaning of the donor or donors, grantor or grantors, devisor or
devisors.

III. And whereas, by an act of the general court of the colony of
Massachusetts Bay, passed in the year one thousand six hundred and forty-two,
the governor and deputy governor, for the time being, and all the magistrates
of that jurisdiction, were, with the president, and a number of the clergy in
the said act described, constituted the overseers of Harvard-college: And it
being necessary, in this new constitution of government, to ascertain who shall
be deemed successors to the said governor, deputy governor, and magistrates: It
is declared, that the governor, lieutenant governor, council, and senate of
this commonwealth, are, and shall be deemed their successors; who, with the
president of Harvard-college, for the the time being, together with the
ministers of the congregational churches in the towns of Cambridge, Watertown,
Charlestown, Boston, Roxbury, and Dorchester, mentioned in the said act, shall
be, and hereby are, vested with all the powers and authority belonging, or in
any way appertaining, to the overseers of Harvard-college; provided, that
nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the legislature of this
commonwealth, from making such alterations in the government of the said
university, as shall be conducive to its advantage, and the interest of the
republic of letters, in as full a manner as might have been done by the
legislature of the late province of the Massachusetts Bay.

CHAP. V. SECT. II. The Encouragement of Literature.
WISDOM and knowledge, as well as virtue, diffused generally among the body of
the people, being necessary for the preservation of their rights and liberties;
and as these depend on spreading the opportunities and advantages of education,
in the various parts of the country, and among the different orders of the
people, it shall be the duty of the legislatures and magistrates, in all future
periods of this commonwealth, to cherish the interests of literature and the
sciences, and all seminaries of them; especially the university at Cambridge,
public schools, and and grammar schools in the towns; to encourage private
societies and public institutions, rewards and immunities, for the promotion of
agriculture, arts, sciences, commerce, trades, manufactures, and a natural
history of the country; to countenance and inculcate the principles of humanity
and general benevolence, public and private charity, industry and frugality,
honesty and punctuality in their dealings; sincerity, good humor, and all
social affections, and generous sentiments among the people.

CHAPTER VI. Oaths and Subscriptions; Incompatibility of and Exclusion from
Offices; Pecuniary Qualifications; Commissions; Writs; Confirmation of Laws;
Habeas Corpus; The Enacting Style; Continuance of Officers; Provision for a
future Revisal of the Constitution, etc.
Art. I. Any person chosen governor, or lieutenant governor, counselor,
senator, or representative, and accepting the trust, shall, before he proceed
to execute the duties of his place or office, make and subscribe the following
declaration, viz. --

"I, A. B. do declare, that I believe the christian religion, and have a firm
persuasion of its truth; and that I am seized and possessed, in my own right,
of the property required by the constitution as one qualification for the
office or place to which I am elected."

And the governor, lieutenant governor and counselors shall make and subscribe
the said declaration, in the presence of the two houses of assembly; and the
senators and representatives first elected under this constitution, before the
president and five of the council of the former constitution, and forever
afterward before the governor and council for the time being.

And every person chosen to either of the places or offices aforesaid, as also
any person appointed or commissioned to any judicial, executive, military, or
other office under the government, shall, before he enters on the discharge of
the business of his place or office, take and subscribe the following
declaration, and oaths or affirmations, viz. --

"I, A. B. do truly and sincerely acknowledge, profess, testify and declare,
that the commonwealth of Massachusetts is, and of right ought to be, a free,
sovereign and independent state; and I do swear, that I will bear true faith
and allegiance to the said commonwealth, and that I will defend the same
against traitorous conspiracies and all hostile attempts whatsoever: And that I
do renounce and abjure all allegiance, subjection and obedience to the king,
queen, or government of Great Britain, (as the case may be) and every other
foreign power whatsoever: And that no foreign prince, person, prelate, state or
potentate, has, or ought to have, any jurisdiction, superiority, pre-eminence,
authority dispensing or other power, in any matter, civil, ecclesiastical or
spiritual, within this commonwealth; except the authority and power which is or
may be vested by their constituents in the Congress of the United States: And I
do further testify and declare, that no man or body of men has or can have any
right to absolve or discharge me from the obligation of this oath, declaration
or affirmation; and that I do make this acknowledgement, profession, testimony,
declaration, denial, renounciation and abjuration, heartily and truly,
according to the common meaning and acceptance of the foregoing words, without
any equivocation, mental evasion, or secret reservation whatsoever. So help me
God."

"I, A. B. do solemnly swear and affirm, that I will faithfully and impartially
discharge and perform all the duties incumbent on me as (...) according to the
best of my abilities and understanding, agreeably to the rules and regulations
of the constitution, and the laws of this commonwealth. So help me God."

Provided always, that when any person chosen or appointed as aforesaid, shall
be of the denomination of the people called Quakers, and shall decline taking
the said oaths, he shall make his affirmation in the foregoing form, and
subscribe the same, omitting the words, "^ do swear" "and abjure," "oath or,"
"and abjuration," in the first oath; and in the second oath, the words, " swear
and;" and in each of them the words, " So help me God;" subjoining instead
thereof, " This I do under the pains and penalties of perjury."

And the said oaths or affirmations shall be taken and subscribed by the
governor, lieutenant governor, and counselors, before the president of the
senate, in the presence of the two houses of assembly; and by the senators and
representatives first elected under this constitution, before the president and
five of the council of the former constitution; and for ever afterward before
the governor and council for the time being: And by the residue of the officers
aforesaid, before such persons and in such manner as from time to time shall be
prescribed by the legislature.

II. No governor, lieutenant governor, or judge of the supreme judicial court,
shall hold any other office or place, under the authority of this commonwealth,
except such as by this constitution they are admitted to hold, saving that the
judges of the said court may hold the offices of justices of the peace through
the state; nor shall they hold any other place or office, or receive any
pension or salary from any other state or government, or power whatever.

No person shall be capable of holding or exercising at the same time, more
than one of the following offices within this state, viz. judge of probate,
sheriff, register of probate, or register of deeds, and never more than any two
offices which are to be held by appointment of the governor, or the governor
and council, or the senate, or the house of representatives, or by the election
of the people of the state at large, or of the people of any county, military
offices, and the office of justice of the peace excepted, shall be held by one
person.

No person holding the office of judge of the supreme judicial court,
secretary, attorney general, solicitor general, treasurer or receiver-general,
judge of probate, commissary-general; president, professor, or instructor of
Harvard college; sheriff, clerk of the house of representatives, register of
probate, register of deeds, clerk of the supreme judicial court, clerk of the
inferior court of common pleas, or officer of the customs, including in this
description naval officers, shall at the same time have a seat in the senate or
house of representatives; but their being chosen or appointed to, and accepting
the same, shall operate as a resignation of their seat in the senate or house
of representatives, and the place so vacated shall be filled up.

And the same rule shall take place in case any judge of the said supreme
judicial court, or judge of probate, shall accept a seat in council; or any
counselor shall accept of either of those offices or places.

And no person shall ever be admitted to hold a seat in the legislature, or any
office of trust or importance under the government of this commonwealth, who
shall, in the due course of law, have been convicted of bribery or corruption,
in obtaining an election or appointment.

III. In all cases where sums of money are mentioned in this constitution, the
value thereof shall be computed in silver, at six shillings and eight-pence per
ounce: And it shall be in the power of the legislature from time to time to
increase such qualifications, as to property, of the persons to be elected into
offices, as the circumstances of the commonwealth shall require.

IV. All commissions shall be in the name of the commonwealth of Massachusetts,
signed by the governor and attested by the secretary or his deputy, and have
the great seal of the commonwealth affixed thereto.

V. All writs issuing out of the clerk's office in any of the courts of law,
shall be in the name of the commonwealth of Massachusetts: They shall be under
the seal of the court from whence they issue: They shall bear test of the first
justice of the court to which they shall be returnable, who is not a party, and
be signed by the clerk of such court.

VI. All the laws which have heretofore been adopted, used and approved in the
province, colony, or state of Massachusetts Bay, and usually practiced on in
the courts of law, shall still remain and be in full force, until altered or
repealed by the legislature; such parts only excepted, as are repugnant to the
rights and liberties contained in this constitution.

VII. The privilege and benefit of the writ of habeas-corpus shall be enjoyed
in this commonwealth, in the most free, easy, cheap, expeditious and ample
manner; and shall not be suspended by the legislature, except upon the most
urgent and pressing occasions, and for a limited time, not exceeding twelve
months.

VIII. The enacting style, in making and passing all acts, statutes and laws,
shall, be "Be it enacted by the senate and house of representatives in general
court assembled, and by the authority of the same."

IX. To the end there may be no failure of justice, or danger arise to the
commonwealth, from a change of the form of government, -- all officers, civil
and military, holding commissions under the government and people of
Massachusetts Bay in New England, and all other officers of the said government
and people, at the time this constitution shall take effect, shall have, hold,
use, exercise, and enjoy, all the powers and authority to them granted or
committed, until other persons shall be appointed in their stead: And all
courts of law shall proceed in the execution of the business of their
respective departments; and all the executive and legislative officers, bodies
and powers, shall continue in full force, in the enjoyment and exercise of all
their trusts, employments and authority; until, the general court, and the
supreme and executive officers under this constitution, are designated and
invested with their respective trusts, powers and authority.

X. In order the more effectually to adhere to the principles of the
constitution, and to correct those violations which by any means may be made
therein, as well as to form such alterations as from experience shall be found
necessary, the general court, which shall be in the year of our Lord one
thousand seven hundred and ninety-five, shall issue precepts to the selectmen
of the several towns, and to the assessors of the unincorporated plantations,
directing them to convene the qualified voters of their respective towns and
plantations, for the purpose of collecting their sentiments on the necessity or
expediency of revising the constitution, in order to amendments.

And if it shall appear by the returns made, that two thirds of the qualified
voters throughout the state, who shall assemble and vote in consequence of the
said precepts, are in favor of such revision or amendment, the general court
shall issue precepts, or direct them to be issued from the secretary's office,
to the several towns to elect delegates to meet in convention, for the purpose
aforesaid.

The said delegates to be chosen in the same manner and proportion as their
representatives in the second branch of the legislature, are by this
Constitution to be chosen.

XI. This form of government shall be enrolled on parchment, and deposited in
the secretary's office, and be a part of the laws of the land; and printed
copies thereof shall be prefixed to the book containing the laws of this
commonwealth, in all future editions of the said laws.

JAMES BOWDOIN, PRESIDENT. Attest. SAMUEL BARRET, Secretary.

RHODE ISLAND. RHODE ISLAND CHARTER, granted by King Charles II. in the
Fourteenth Year of his Reign. Quintadecima pars Patentium Anno Regni Regis
Caroli Secundi Quintodecimo.
CHARLES the Second, by the grace of God, etc. To all to whom these presents
shall come, greeting. Whereas we have been informed by the petition of our
trusty and well beloved subjects, John Clarke, on the behalf of Benjamin
Arnold, William Brenton, William Codington, Nicholas Easton, William Boulston,
John Porter, John Smith, Samuel Gorton, John Weeks, Roger Williams, Thomas
Olney, Gregory Dexter, John Cogeshall, Joseph Clarke, Randall Houlden, John
Green, John Room, Samuel Wildbore, William Field, James Barker, Richard Tew,
Thomas Harris, and William Dyre, and the rest of the purchasers, and free
inhabitants of our island called Rhode Island, and the rest of the colony of
Providence Plantations, in the Narragenset Bay in New England in America, That
they, pursuing with peace and loyal minds, their sober, serious, and religious
intentions, of godly edifying themselves, and one another, in the holy
Christian faith and worship as they were persuaded, together with the gaining
over and conversion of the poor ignorant indian natives, in those parts of
America, to the sincere profession and obedience of the same faith and worship,
did not only by the consent and good encouragement of our royal progenitors,
transport themselves out of this kingdom of England into America; but also
since their arrival there, after their first settlement amongst other our
subjects in those parts, for the avoiding of discord, and those many evils
which were likely to ensue upon those our subjects, not being able to bear in
those remote parts, their different apprehensions in religious concernments;
and in pursuance of the aforesaid ends, did once again leave their desirable
stations and habitations, and with excessive labor and travel, hazard and
charge, did transplant themselves into the midst of the indian natives, who, as
we are informed, are the most potent princes and people of all that country;
where, by the good providence of God, (from whom the plantations have taken
their name) upon their labor and industry, they have not only been preserved
to admiration, but have increased and prospered, and are seized and possessed,
by purchase and consent of the said natives, to their full content, of such
lands, islands, rivers, harbors, and roads, as are very convenient both for
plantations, and also for building of ships, supply of pipe-s;taves, and other
merchandise, and which ly very commodious in many respects for commerce, and to
accomodate our southern plantations, and may much advance the trade of this our
realm, and greatly enlarge the territories thereof; they having, by near
neighborhood to, and friendly society with, the great body of the Narraganset
indians, given them encouragement, of their own accord, to subject themselves,
their people and lands, unto us; whereby, as is hoped, there may, in time, by
the blessing of God upon their endeavors, be laid a sure foundation of
happiness to all America. And whereas, in their humble address, they have
freely declared, That it is much on their hearts (if they be permitted) to hold
forth a lively experiment, that a most flourishing civil state may stand, and
best be maintained, and that among our English subjects, with a full liberty in
religious concernments, and that true piety, rightly grounded upon gospel
principles, will give the best and greatest security to sovereignty, and will
lay in the hearts of men the strongest obligations to true loyalty: Now, know
ye, That we being willing to encourage the hopeful undertaking of our said
loyal and loving subjects, and to secure them in the free exercise and
enjoyment of all their civil and religious rights appertaining to them, as our
loving subjects; and to preserve unto them that liberty in the true Christian
faith, and worship of God, which they have sought with so much travel, and with
peaceable minds and loyal subjection to our royal progenitors, and ourselves to
enjoy; and because some of the people and inhabitants of the same colony
cannot, in their private opinion, conform to the public exercise of religion,
according to the liturgy, form, and ceremonies of the church of England, or
take or subscribe the oaths and articles made and established in that behalf;
and for that the same, by reason of the remote distances of those places, will,
as we hope, be no breach of the unity and uniformity established in this
nation, have therefore thought fit, and do hereby publish, great, ordain, and
declare, that our royal will and pleasure is, That no person within the said
colony, at any time hereafter, shall be any-wife molested, punished,
disquieted, or called in question, for any differences in opinion in matters of
religion, who do not actually disturb the civil peace of our said colony; but
that all and every person and persons may, from time to time, and at all times
hereafter, freely and fully have and enjoy his and their own judgments and
consciences, in matters of religious concernments, throughout the tract of land
hereafter mentioned, they behaving themselves peaceably and quietly, and not
using this liberty to licentiousness and profaneness, nor to the civil injury
or outward disturbance of others, any law, statute or clause therein contained,
or to be contained, usage, or custom of this realm, to the contrary hereof, in
any wise notwithstanding. And that they may be in the better capacity to defend
themselves in their just rights and liberties, against all the enemies of the
Christian faith, and others, in all respects, we have further thought fit, and
at the humble petition of the persons aforesaid, are graciously pleased to
declare, That they shall have and enjoy the benefit of our late act of
indemnity, and free pardon, as the rest of our subjects in other our dominions
and territories have; and to create and make them a body politic or corporate,
with the powers or privileges hereinafter mentioned: And accordingly, our will
and pleasure is, and of our especial grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion,
we have ordained, constituted and declared, and by these presents for us, our
heirs and successors, do ordain, constitute, and declare, That they the said
William Brenton, William Codington, Nicholas Easton, Benedict Arnold, William
Boulston, John Porter, Samuel Gorton, John Smith, John Weeks, Roger Williams,
Thomas Olney, Gregory Dexter, John Cogeshall, Joseph Clarke, Randall Houlden,
John Green, John Room, William Dyre, Samuel Wildbore, Richard Tew, William
Field, Thomas Harris, James Barker, (...) Rainsborrow, (...) Williams, and John
Nickson, and all such others as are now, or hereafter shall be admitted, free
of the company and society of our colony of Providence Plantations, in the
Narraganset Bay, in New England, shall be, from time to time, and for ever
hereafter, a body corporate and politic, in fact and name, by the name of the
Governor and Company of the English Colony of Rhode Island, and Providence
Plantations, in New England, in America; and that by the same name, they and
their successors shall and may have perpetual succession, and shall and may be
persons able and capable in the law to sue and be sued, to plead and be
impleaded, to answer and to be answered unto, to defend and to be defended, in
all and singular suits, causes, quarrels, matters, actions, and things, of what
kind or nature soever; and also to have, take, possess, acquire, and purchase
lands, tenements, or hereditaments, or any goods or chattels, and the same to
lease, grant, demise, alien, bargain, sell, and dispose of, at their own will
and pleasure, as other our liege people of this our realm of England, or any
corporation or body politic within the same, may lawfully do; and further, That
they the said governor and company, and their successors, shall and may, for
ever hereafter, have a common seal, to serve and use for all matters, causes,
things, and affairs whatsoever, of them and their successors, and the same seal
to alter, change, break, and make new from time to time* at their will and
pleasure, as they shall think fit. And further, we will and ordain, and by
these presents, for us, our heirs and successors, do declare and appoint, That
for the better ordering and managing of the affairs and business of the said
company and their successors, there shall be one governor, one deputy governor,
and ten assistants, to be from time to time constituted, elected, and chosen,
out of the freemen of the said company, for the time being, in such manner and
form as is hereafter in these presents expressed; which said officers shall
apply themselves to take care for the best disposing and ordering of the
general business and affairs of and concerning the lands and hereditaments
herein aftermentioned to be granted, and the plantation thereof, and the
government of the people there. And for the better execution of our royal
pleasure herein, we do for us, our heirs and successors, assign, name,
constitute and appoint, the aforesaid Benedict Arnold to be the first and
present governor of the said company, and the said William Brenton to be the
deputy governor, and the s^i^ William Boulston, John Porter, Roger Williams,
Thomas Olney, John Smith, John Green, John Cogeshal^ James Barker, William
Field, and Joseph Clarke, to ^^^^^ten present assistants of the said company,
to continue in the said several offices respectively, until the first We^nesday
which shall be in the month of May now next coming. And further, we will, and
by these presents, for us, our heirs and successors, do ordain and grant, That
the governor of the said company, for the time being, or in his absence, by
occasion of sickness, or otherwise, by his leave or permission, the
deputy governor, for the time being, shall and may, from time to time, upon all
occasions, give order for the assembling of the said company, and calling them
together, to consult and advise of the business and affairs of the said
company; and that for ever hereafter, twice in every year, that is to say, on
every first Wednesday in the month of May, and on every last Wednesday in
October, or oftener, in case it shall be requisite, the assistants, and such of
the freemen of the said company, not exceeding six persons for Newport, four
persons for each of the respective towns of Providence, Portsmouth, and
Warwick, and two persons for each other place, town or city, who shall be from
time to time thereunto elected or deputed by the major part of the freemen of
the respective towns or places, for which they shall be so elected or deputed,
shall have a general meeting or assembly, then and there to consult, advise and
determine, in and about the affairs and business of the said company and
plantations. And further, we do of our especial grace, certain knowledge, and
mere motion, give and grant unto the said governor and company of the English
colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations, in New England in America,
and their successors, That the governor, or in his absence, or by his
permission, the deputy governor, of the said company for the time being, the
assistants, and such of the freemen of the said company, as shall be so
aforesaid elected or deputed, or so many of them as shall be present at such
meeting or assembly, as aforesaid, shall be called the General Assembly; and
that they, or the greatest part of them then present, whereof the governor, or
deputy governor, and six of the assistants at least, to be seven, shall have,
and have hereby given and granted unto them, full power and authority, from
time to time, and at all times hereafter, to appoint, alter, and change such
days, times and places of meeting, and general assembly, as they shall think
fit, and to choose, nominate, and appoint such and so many persons as they shall
think fit, and shall be willing to accept the same, to be free of the said
company and body politic, and them into the same to admit, and to elect, and
constitute such offices and officers, and to grant such needful commissions as
they shall think fit and requisite, for ordering, managing, and dispatching of
the affairs of the said governor and company, and their successors; and, from
time to time, to make, ordain, constitute, or repeal, such laws, statutes,
orders and ordinances, forms and ceremonies of government and magistracy, as to
them shall seem meet, for the good and welfare of the said company, and for the
government and ordering of the lands and hereditaments herein after mentioned
to be granted, and of the people that do, or at any time hereafter shall
inhabit, or be within the same; so as such laws, ordinances, and constitutions,
so made, be not contrary and repugnant unto, but as near as may be, agreeable
to the laws of this our realm of England, considering the nature and
constitution of the place and people there; and also, to appoint, order, and
direct, erect and settle such places and courts of jurisdiction, for h^aring
and determining of all actions, cases, matters and things, happening within the
said colony and plantation, and which shall be in dispute, and depending there
as they shall think fit; and also to distinguish and set forth the several
names and titles, duties, powers and limits, of each court office and officer,
superior and inferior; and also, to contrive and appoint such forms of oaths
and attestations, not repugnant, but as near as may be agreeable, as aforesaid,
to the laws and statutes of this our realm, as are convenient and requisite,
with respect to the due administration of justice, and due execution and
discharge of all offices and places of trust, by the persons, that shall be
therein concerned; and also to regulate and order the way and manner of all
elections to offices and places of trust, and to prescribe, limit and
distinguish the number and bounds of all places, towns and cities, within the
limits and bounds herein after mentioned, and not herein particularly named,
who have or shall have the power of electing and sending of freemen to the said
general assembly; and also to order, direct and authorize, the imposing of
lawful and reasonable fines, mulcts, imprisonments, and executing other
punishments, pecuniary and corporal, upon offenders and delinquents, according
to the course of other corporations, within this our kingdom of England; and
again, to alter, revoke, annul or pardon, under their common seal, or
otherwise, such fines, mulcts, imprisonments, sentences, judgments and
condemnations, as shall be thought fit; and to direct, rule, order and dispose
of all other matters and things, and particularly that which relates to the
making of purchases of the native indians, as to them shall seem meet; whereby
our said people and inhabitants in the said plantations, may be so religiously,
peaceably, and civilly governed, as that by their good life, and orderly
conversation, they may win and invite the native indians of the country, to the
knowledge and obedience of the only true God and Savior of mankind; willing,
commanding and requiring, and by these presents, for us, our heirs and
successors, ordaining and appointing, that all such laws, statutes, orders and
ordinances, instructions, impositions and directions, as shall be so made by
the governor deputy, assistants and freemen, or such number of them as
aforesaid, and published in writing under their common seal, shall be carefully
and duly observed, kept, performed, and put in execution, according to the true
intent and meaning of the same. And these our letters patents, or the duplicate
or exemplification thereof, shall be to all and every such officers, superior
or inferior, from time to time, for the putting of the same orders, laws,
statutes, ordinances, instructions and directions, in due execution against us,
our heirs and successors, a sufficient warrant and discharge. And further, our
will and pleasure is, and we do hereby for us, our heirs and successors,
establish and ordain, That yearly, once in the year for ever hereafter, namely,
the aforesaid Wednesday in May, and at the town of Newport, or elsewhere if
urgent occasion do require, the governor, deputy governor, and assistants of
the said company, and other officers of the said company, or such of them as
the general assembly shall think fit, shall be in the said general court or
assembly, to be held from that day or time, newly chosen for the year ensuing,
by the greater part of the said company for the time being, as shall be then
and there present. And if it shall happen, that the present governor, deputy
governor, and assistants, by these presents appointed, or any such as shall
hereafter be newly chosen into their rooms, or any of them, or any other the
officers of the said company, shall die, or be removed from his or their
several offices or places, before the said general day of election, (whom we do
hereby declare for any misdemeanor or default, to be removable by the governor,
assistants and company, or such greater part of them, in any of the said public
courts to be assembled, as aforesaid) that then, and in every such case, it
shall and may be lawful to and for the said governor, deputy governor,
assistants, and company aforesaid, or such greater part of them so to
^^s^mbled, as is aforesaid, in any of their assemblies, to proceed to a new
election of one or more of their company, in the room or place, rooms or
places, of such officer or officers so dying or removed, according to their
directions. And immediately upon and after such election or elections made of
such governor, deputy governor, assistant or assistants, or any other officer
of the said company, in manner and form aforesaid, the authority, office and
power before given to the former governor, deputy governor, and other officer
and officers so removed, in whose stead and place new shall be chosen, shall,
as to him and them, and every of them respectively, cease and determine.
Provided always, and our will and pleasure is, That as well such as are by
those presents appointed to be the present governor, deputy governor, and
assistants of the said company, as those which shall succeed them, and all
other officers to be appointed and chosen as aforesaid, shall, before the
undertaking the execution of the said offices and places respectively, give
their solemn engagement by oath or otherwise, for the due and faithful
performance of their duties, in their several offices and places, before such
person or persons as are by these presents hereafter appointed to take and
receive the same; (that is to say) the said Benedict Arnold, who is herein
before nominated and appointed the present governor of the said company, shall
give the aforesaid engagement before William Brenton, or any two of the said
assistants of the said company, unto whom we do, by these presents, give full
power and authority to require and receive the same; and the said William
Brenton, who is hereby before nominated and appointed the present deputy
governor of the said company, shall give the aforesaid engagement before the
said Benedict Arnold, or any two of the assistants of the said company, unto
whom we do, by these presents, give full power and authority to require and
receive the same; and the said William Boulston, John Porter, Roger Williams,
Thomas Olney, John Smith, John Green, John Coggeshall, James Barker, William
Field, and Joseph Clarke, who are herein before nominated and appointed the
present assistants of the company, shall give the said engagement to their
offices and places respectively belonging, before the said Benedict Arnold and
William Brenton, or one of them, to whom respectively we do hereby give full
power and authority to require, administer or receive the same. And further,
our will and pleasure is, that all and every other future governor, or deputy
governor, to be elected and chosen by virtue of these presents, shall give the
said engagement before two or more of the said assistants of the said company
for the time being, unto whom we do, by these presents, give full power and
authority to require, administer or receive the same; and the said assistants,
and every of them, and all and every other officer or officers, to be hereafter
elected and chosen by virtue of these presents, from time to time, shall give
the like engagements to their offices and places respectively belonging, before
the governor, or deputy governor, for the time being; unto which said governor,
or deputy governor, we do by these presents give full power and authority to
require, administer or receive the same accordingly. And we do likewise, for
us, our heirs and successors, give and grant unto the said governor and
company, and their successors, by these presents, that for the more peaceable
and orderly government of the said plantations, it shall and may be lawful for
the governor, deputy governor, assistants, and all other officers and ministers
of the said company, in the administration of justice, and exercise of
government, in the said plantations, to use, exercise, and put in execution,
such methods, rules, orders, and directions, not being contrary and repugnant
to the laws and statutes of this our realm, as have been heretofore given,
used, and accustomed in such cases respectively, to be put in practice, until
at the next, or some other general assembly, especial provision shall be made
in the cases aforesaid. And we do further, for us, our heirs and successors,
give and grant unto the said governor and company, and their successors, by
these presents, that it shall and may be lawful to and for the said governor,
or in his absence the deputy governor, and major part of the said assistants
for the time being, at any time, when the said general assembly is not sitting,
to nominate, appoint and constitute such and so many commanders, governors, and
military officers, as to them shall seem requisite, for the leading,
conducting, and training up the inhabitants of the said plantations in martial
affairs, and for the defense and safeguard of the said plantations; and that it
shall and may be lawful to and for all and every such commander, governor, and
military officer, that shall be so as aforesaid, or by the governor, or in his
absence the deputy governor, and six of the assistants, and major part of the
freemen of the said company, present at any general assemblies, nominated,
appointed and constituted, according to the tenor of his and their respective
commissions and directions, to assemble, exercise in arms, marshal, array, and
put in warlike posture, the inhabitants of the said colony, for their especial
defense and safety; and to lead and conduct the said inhabitants, and to
encounter, repulse, and resist by force of arms, as well by sea as by land, to
kill, slay and destroy, by all fitting ways, enterprises, and means whatsoever,
all and every such person or persons, as shall at any time hereafter attempt of
enterprise the destruction, invasion, detriment or annoyance of the said
inhabitants or plantations; and to use and exercise the law martial, in such
cases only as occasion shall necessarily require, and to take and surprise, by
all ways and means whatsoever, all and every such person and persons, with
their ship or ships, armor, ammunition, or other goods of such persons as
shall in hostile manner invade or attempt the defeating of the said plantation,
or the hurt of the said company and inhabitants; and upon just causes to invade
and destroy the natives, indians, or other enemies of the said colony.
Nevertheless, our will and pleasure is, and we do hereby declare, to the rest
of our colonies in New England, that it shall not be lawful for this our said
colony of Rhode Island and Providence Plantations In America, in New England,
to invade the natives inhabiting within the bounds and limits of their said
colonies, without the knowledge and consent of the said other colonies. And it
is hereby declared, that it shall not be lawful to or for the rest of the
colonies to invade or molest the native indians, or any other inhabitants,
inhabiting within ^he bounds or limits hereafter mentioned, (they having
subjected themselves unto us, and being by us taken into our special
protection) without the knowledge and consent of the governor and company of
our colony of Rhode Island and Providence plantation. Also our will and
pleasure is, and we do hereby declare unto all Christian kings, princes and
states, that if any person, which shall hereafter be of the said company or
plantation, or any other by appointment of the said governor and company, for
the time being, shall at any time or times hereafter, rob or spoil, by sea or
land, or do any hurt, or unlawful hostility, to any of the subjects of us, our
heirs and successors, or to any of the subjects of any prince or state, being
then in league with us, our heirs and successors; upon complaint of such injury
done to any such prince or state, or their subjects, we, our heirs and
successors, will make open proclamation, within any parts of our realm of
England, fit for that purpose, that the person or persons committing any such
robbery or spoil, shall, within the time limited by such proclamation, make
full restitution or satisfaction of all such injuries done or committed, so as
the said prince, or others so complaining, may be fully satisfied and
contented; and if the said person or persons, who shall commit any such robbery
or spoil, shall not make satisfaction accordingly, within such time so to be
limited, that then we, our heirs and successors, will put such person or
persons out of our allegiance and protection; and that then it shall and may be
lawful and free for all princes or others, to prosecute with hostility such
offenders, and every of them, their and every of their procurers, aiders,
abettors and counselors, in that behalf. Provided also, and our express will
and pleasure is, and we do by these presents, for us, our heirs and successors,
ordain and appoint, that these presents shall not in any manner hinder any of
our loving subjects whatsoever, from using and exercising the trade of fishing
upon the coast of New England, in America, but that they, and every or any of
them, shall have full and free power and liberty to continue and use the trade
of fishing upon the said coast, in any of the seas thereunto adjoining, or any
arms of the sea, or salt water, rivers and creeks, where they have been
accustomed to fish, and to build and set upon the waste land belonging to the
said colony and plantations, such wharfs, stages, and workhouses as shall be
necessary for the salting, drying and keeping of their fish, to be taken or
gotton upon that coast. And further, for the encouragement of the inhabitants
of our said colony of Providence plantation, to set upon the business of taking
whales, it shall be lawful for them, or any of them, having struck a whale,
dubertus, or other great fish, it or them to pursue unto that coast, and into
any bay, river, cove, creek or shore, belonging thereto, and it or them, upon
the said coast, or in the said bay, river, cove, creek, or shore, belonging
thereto, to kill and order for the best advantage, without molestation, they
making no wilful waste or spoil; any thing in these presents contained, or any
other matter or thing to the contrary notwithstanding. And further also, we are
graciously pleased, and do hereby declare, that if any of the inhabitants of
our said colony do set upon the planting of vineyards, (the soil and climate
both seeming naturally to concur to the production of wines) or be industrious
in the discovery of fishing-banks, in or about the said colony, we will, from
time to time, give and allow all due and fitting encouragement therein, as to
others in cases of like nature. And further, of our more ample grace, certain
knowledge, and mere motion, we have given and granted, and by these presents,
for us, our heirs and successors, do give and grant, unto the said governor and
company of the English colony of Rhode Island and Providence plantation in the
Narraganset bay in New England, in America, and to every inhabitant there, and
to every person and persons trading thither, and to every such person or
persons, as are or shall be free of the said colony, full power and authority
from time to time, and at all times hereafter, to take, ship, transport, and
carry away, out of any of our realms and dominions, for and toward the
plantation and defense of the said colony, such and so many of our loving
subjects and strangers, as shall or will willingly accompany them in and to
their said colony and plantation, except such person or persons as are or shall
be therein restrained by us, our heirs and ^^^^essors, or any law or statute of
this realm; and also to ship and transport all and all manner of goods,
chattles, merchandise, and other things whatsoever, that are or shall be useful
or necessary for the said plantations, and defense thereof, and usually
transported, and not prohibited by any law or statute of this our realm;
yielding and paying unto us, our heirs and successors, such the duties, customs
and subsidies, as are or ought to be paid or payable for the same. And further,
our will and pleasure is, and we do, for us, our heirs and successors, ordain,
declare, and grant, unto the said governor and company, and their successors,
that all and every the subjects of us, our heirs and successors, which are
already planted and settled within our said colony of Providence plantations,
or which shall hereafter go to inhabit within the said colony, and all and
every of their children which have been born there, or which shall happen
hereafter to be born there, or on the sea going thither or returning from
thence, shall have and enjoy all liberties and immunities of free and natural
subjects, within any the dominions of us, our heirs and successors, to all
intents constructions and purposes whatsoever, as if they and every of them
were born within the realm of England. And further know ye, that we, of our
more abundant grace, certain knowledge, and mere motion, have given granted,
and confirmed, and by these presents, for us, our heirs and successors, do
give, grant and confirm, unto the said governor and company, and their
successors, all that part of our dominions, in New England, in America,
containing the Nahantick and Nanhygansett alias Narraganset bay, and countries
and parts adjacent, bounded on the west, or westerly, to the middle or channel
of a river there, commonly called and known by the name of Pawcatuck alias
Pawcawtuck river, and so along the said river, as the greater or middle stream
thereof reaches or lies up into the north country, northward unto the head
thereof, and from thence by a strait line drawn due north, until it meet with
the south line of the Massachusetts colony, and on the north or northerly, by
the aforesaid south or southerly line of the Massachusetts colony or
plantation, and extending toward the east or eastwardly three English miles,
to the east and north-east of the most eastern and north eastern parts of the
aforesaid Narraganset bay, as the said bay lies or extends itself from the
ocean on the south or southwardly, unto the mouth of the river which runs
toward the town of Providence, and from thence along the eastwardly side or
bank of the said river (higher called by the name of Seacunck river) up to the
falls called Patucket falls, being the most westardly line of Plymouth colony;
and so from the said falls, in a strait line due north, until it meet with the
aforesaid line of the Massachusetts colony, and bounded on the south by the
ocean, and in particular the lands belonging to the town of Providence,
Patuxit, Warwick, Misquammacock, alias Pawcatuck, and the rest upon the main
land, in the tract aforesaid, together with Rhode Island, Blocke-Island, and
all the rest of the islands and banks in the Narraganset bay, and bordering
upon the coast of the tract aforesaid, (Fisher's island only excepted) together
with all firm lands, soils, grounds, havens, ports, rivers, waters, fishings,
mines royal, and all other mines, minerals, precious stones, quarries, woods,
wood-grounds, rocks, slates, and all and singular other commodities,
jurisdictions, royalties, privileges, franchises, pre-eminences and
hereditaments whatsoever, within the said tract, bounds, lands, and islands
aforesaid, to them or any of them belonging, or in any-wise appertaining. To
have and to hold the same, unto the said governor and company, and their
suceessors for ever, upon trust, for the use and benefit of themselves, and
their associates, freemen of the said colony, their heirs and assig^^. To be
holden of us, our heirs and successors, as of the manor of East-Greenwich in
our county of Kent, in free and common soccage, and not in capite, nor by
knight's service. Yielding and paying therefore to us, our heirs and
successors, only the fifth part of all the ore of gold and silver, which from
time to time, and at all times hereafter, shall be there gotten, had or
obtained, in lieu and satisfaction of all services, duties, fines, forfeitures,
made or to be made claims or demands whatsoever, to be to us, our heirs or
successors, therefore or thereabout rendered, made or paid; any grant or
clause, in a late grant to the governor and company of Connecticut colony in
America, to the contrary thereof in any wise notwithstanding; the aforesaid
Pawcatuck river having been yielded after much debate, for the fixed and
certain bounds between these our said colonies, by the agents thereof who have
also agreed, that the said Pawcatuck river shall also be called alias
Narrogancett or Narrogansett river, and to prevent future disputes that
otherwise might arise thereby, for ever hereafter shall be construed, deemed
and taken to be the Narrogancett river, in our late grant to Connecticut
colony, mentioned as the easterly bounds of that colony. And further, our will
and pleasure is, that in all matters (...) public controversies, which may fall
out between our ^^^^y of Providence plantation, to make their appeal therein to
us, our heirs and successors, for redress in such cases, within this our realm
of England; and that it shall be lawful to and for the inhabitants of the said
colony of ^rovidence plantations, without let or molestation, to pass and
repass with freedom into and through the rest of the English colonies, upon
their lawful and civil occasions, and to converse, and hold commerce, and trade
with such of the inhabitants of our other English colonies, as shall be willing
to admit them thereunto, they behaving themselves peaceably among them; any
act, clause, or sentence, in any of the said colonies provided, or that shall
be provided, to the contrary in any wise notwithstanding. And lastly, we do for
us, our heirs and successors, ordain and grant unto the said governor and
company, and their successors, by these presents, that these our letters
patents, shall be firm, good, ^^^ctual, and available, in all things in the
law, to all intents, constructions and purposes whatsoever, according to our
true intent and meaning herein before declared and shall be construed, reputed
and adjudged in all cases, most favorably on the behalf, and for the best
benefit and behoof of the said governor and company, and their successors,
although express mention, etc. In witness, etc. witness, etc.

Per Ipsum Regem.

[Since the commencement of hostilities by Great Britain, the state of
Rhode Island and Providence plantations has not assumed a form of government
different from that contained in the foregoing charter. For in that, the king
ceded to the governor and company, all powers, legislative, executive, and
judicial, reserving to himself, as an acknowledgement of his sovereignty, a
render of the fifth part of the gold and silver ore that should be found within
the territory. The governor, chief magistrates, and legislators are chosen by
the freemen as usual, and all judicial and executive officers are annually
elected by the governor and company, or upper and lower house of assembly. All
processes original and judicial, formerly issued in the king's name, but they
now issue in the name of the governor and company. The oaths of allegiance and
of office are made conformable to the principles of the revolution. The
governor, in his legislative capacity, cannot give a negative to any act of the
two houses; but, in common with the other magistrates, has one voice only.

The state is divided into five counties, in each of which there is a court of
common pleas and general sessions of the peace, held twice every year, for the
trial of all causes not capital, that arise within their limits; from which an
appeal lies, to the superior court of judicature, court of assize and general
jail delivery, whose jurisdiction extends over the whole state, and who also
sit twice a year in each county. The constitution admits not of religious
establishments, any farther than depends upon the voluntary choice of
individuals. All men professing one Supreme Being, are equally protected by the
laws, and no particular sect can claim preeminence: From hence it is, that
benevolence, hospitality, and undissembled honesty remarkably characterise the
people.]

CONNECTICUT. ACCOUNT of the CONSTITUTION of CONNECTICUT.
CONNECTICUT is divided into six counties, and each county is divided into a
number of towns. Each town has a right to send two representatives to the
general court or assembly. The general court consists of two branches called
the upper and lower house. The upper house is composed of the governor,
deputy governor, and twelve assistants or counselors; and the lower house of
the representatives of the several towns. This court has the sole power to make
and repeal laws, grant levies, dispose of lands belonging to the state, to
particular towns and persons: to erect and style judicatories and officers, as
they shall see necessary for the good government of the people; and also to
call to account any court, magistrate, or other officer, for any misdemeanor or
mal-administration, and for just cause may fine, displace, or remove them, or
deal otherwise, as the nature of the case shall require; and deal or act in any
other matter that concerns the good of the state, except the election of
governor, deputy governor, assistants, treasurer, and secretary, which shall be
done by the freemen at the yearly court of election, unless there be any
vacancy by reason of death or otherwise, after the election, which may be
filled up by the general court. This court has power also, for reasons
satisfactory to them, to grant suspension, release, and jail delivery upon
reprieve, in capital and criminal cases. The general court has two stated
sessions annually, on the second Thursdays of May and October.

The governor, or in his absence the deputy governor, may call the assembly, on
special emergencies, to meet at any other time. The governor, deputy governor,
assistants, and secretary, are annually elected on the second Thursday in May.
The representatives are newly chosen for each stated session. The judges and
justices are annually appointed by the general court; the same persons are
commonly re-appointed from time to time during their capacity to serve, unless
guilty of misbehaviour. The sheriffs are appointed by the governor and council,
without limitation of time, but may be superseded by the authority that
appoints them. The governor for the time being is captain general of the
militia; the deputy governor, lieutenant general; the other general officers,
and the held officers are appointed by the general court, and commissioned by
the governor. The captains and subalterns are chosen by the vote of the company
and householders li^^ng within the limits of the company; the person so chosen
must be approved by the general court, and commissioned by the governor, before
they have power to execute their offices. All the military officers hold their
offices during the pleasure of the assembly, nor can they resign their
commissions without leave of the captain general, under penalty of doing duty
in the ranks as private soldiers.

The mode of electing the governor, deputy governor, assistants, treasurer, and
secretary is, that the freemen in the several towns meet on the Monday next
after the first Tuesday in April annually (being the day appointed by law for
that purpose, and choosing representatives) and give in their votes for the
persons they choose for said offices respectively, with their names written on
a piece of paper, which votes are received and sealed up by a constable in the
freemen's meeting; the votes for each of said offices in a different paper,
writing on the outside the name of the town, and the office for which the votes
are given in, which are sent by the representativss to the general court, to be
held on the second Thursday of May next ensuing; at which time, after the house
of representatives have chosen a speaker and clerk, a committee is chosen of
members of both houses, to sort and count the votes, and declare the names of
the persons chosen to said offices. Any freemen qualified to vote for
representatives, etc. may be elected to any office in the government. In
choosing assistants twenty persons are nominated by the votes of the freemen,
given in at their meeting for choosing representatives in September annually,
and sealed up and sent to the general court in October then next, which are
counted by a committee of both houses, and the twenty persons who have the
greatest number of votes stand in nomination, out of which number twelve are to
be chosen assistants by the freemen, the next April, in manner before described.

The qualifications requisite to entitle a person to vote in election of the
officers of government are, maturity in years, quiet and peaceable behavior, a
civil conversation, and forty shillings freehold, or forty pounds personal
estate; if the selectmen of the town certify a person qualified in those
respects, he is admitted a freemen, on his taking an oath of fidelity to the
state.

The names of all that are thus admitted, are enrolled in the town-clerk's
office, and continue freemen during life, unless disfranchised by a sentence of
the superior court on conviction of a misdemeanour.

The governor or in his absence the deputy governor in the upper house, and the
speaker in the lower house of assembly, have a casting voice when the members
of the respective houses, including the governor and speaker, are equally
divided in opinion on any question.

There is in this state a superior court, consisting of one chief judge and
four other judges, which have authority in all criminal cases, extending to
life, limb, and banishment, and to hear and determine all civil actions brought
by appeal from the county courts, or on writs of error. This court also has
authority in all matters of divorce. There are two stated sessions of the
superior court in each county annually.

There are also county courts held in the several counties, consisting of one
judge and four justices of the quorum, who have jurisdiction in all criminal
cases, arising within their respective counties, where the punishment does not
extend to life, limb, or banishment. The county courts also have original
jurisdiction in all civil actions wherein the demand exceeds forty shillings.

The superior and county courts try matters of fact by a jury, according to the
course of the common law.

Justices of the peace have authority to hear and determine civil actions where
the demand does not exceed forty shillings. They also have authority in some
cases of a criminal nature, punishable by fine not exceeding forty shillings,
or whipping not exceeding ten stripes, or sitting in the stocks.

This state is also divided into a number of probate districts, less than
counties; in each of which is appointed a judge for the probate of wills,
granting administration on intestate estates, appointing guardians for minors,
ordering distribution of intestate estates, etc. An appeal lies from any decree
of this court to the superior court.

The superior, county, and probate courts appoint their respective clerks.

The general court has till very lately been the only court of chancery in this
state. But by a late law, the county courts determine matters of equity from
five pounds to two hundred pounds value; the superior court from two hundred to
eight hundred pounds value; and the general assembly all cases exceeding the
last mentioned sum.

All attorneys at law are admitted and sworn by the county courts; there is no
attorney general, but there used to be one king's attorney in each county, but
since the king has abdicated the government, they are now attorneys to the
governor and company.

NEW YORK. The CONSTITUTION of the State of New York. Established by the
CONVENTION, authorized and empowered for that Purpose, April 20. 1777.
1. THIS convention, in the name and by the authority of the good people of
this state, does ordain, determine, and declare, that no authority shall, on
any pretense whatever, be exercised over the people or members of this state,
but such as shall be derived from and granted by them.

2. This convention does further, in the name and by the authority of the good
people of this state, ordain determine, and declare, that the supreme
legislative power, within this state, shall be vested in two separate and
distinct bodies of men; the one to be called, The Assembly of the State of
New York; the other to be called, The Senate of the State of New York; who
together shall form the legislature, and meet once at least in every year for
the dispatch of business.

3. And whereas, laws inconsistent with the spirit of this constitution, or
with the public good, may be hastily and unadvisedly passed; be it ordained
that the governor for the time being, the chancellor, and the judges of the
supreme court, or any two of them, together with the governor, shall be, and
hereby are, constituted a council to revise all bills about to be passed into
laws by the legislature, and for that purpose shall assemble themselves, from
time to time, when the legislature shall be convened; for which nevertheless,
they shall not receive any salary or consideration, under any pretense
whatever. And that all bills, which have passed the senate and assembly, shall,
before they become laws, be presented to the said council for their revisal and
consideration; and if upon such revision and consideration, it should appear
improper to the said council, or a majority of them, that the said bill should
become a law of this state, that they return the same, together with their
objections thereto in writing, to the senate or house of assembly, in
whichsoever the same shall have originated, who shall enter the objections sent
down by the council, at large, in their minutes, and proceed to reconsider the
said bill. But if after such reconsideration, two thirds of the said senate or
house of assembly, shall, notwithstanding the said objections, agree to pass
the same, it shall, together with the objections, be sent to the other branch
of the legislature, where it shall also be re-considered, and if approved by
two thirds of the members present shall be a law.

And in order to prevent any unnecessary delays, be it further ordained, that
if any bill shall not be returned by the council within ten days after it shall
have been presented, the same shall be a law, unless the legislature shall, by
their adjournment, render a return of the said bill within ten days
impracticable; in which case the bill shall be returned on the first day of the
meeting of the legislature, after the expiration of the said ten days.

4. That the assembly shall consist of at least seventy members, to be annually
chosen in the several counties in in the proportions following, viz.

For the city and county of New York, nine. The city and county of Albany, ten.
The county of Duchess, seven. The county of Westchester, six. The county of
Ulster, six. The county of Suffolk, five. The county of Queens, four. The
county of Orange, four. The county of Kings, two. The county of Richmond, two.
The county of Tryon, six. The county of Charlotte, four. The county of
Cumberland, three. The county of Gloucester, two.
5. That as soon after the expiration of seven years, subsequent to the
termination of the present war as may be, a census of the electors and
inhabitants in this state be taken, under the direction of the legislature. And
if on such census, it shall appear, that the number of representatives in
assembly from the said counties, is not justly proportioned to the number of
electors in the said counties respectively, that the legislature do adjust and
apportion the same by that rule. And further, that once in every seven years,
after the taking of the said first census, a just account of the electors
resident in each county shall be taken; and if it shall thereupon appear, that
the number of electors in any county, shall have increased or diminished one or
more seventieth parts of the whole number of electors, which on the said first
census shall be found in this state, the number of representatives for such
county shall be increased or diminished accordingly, that is to say, one
representative for every seventieth part as aforesaid.

6. And whereas, an opinion has long prevailed among diverse of the good people
of this state, that voting at elections by ballot, would tend more to preserve
the liberty and equal freedom of the people than voting viva voce. To the end
therefore, that a fair experiment be made, which of those two methods of voting
is to be preferred:

Be it ordained, that as soon as may be, after the termination of the present
war, between the United States of America and Great Britain, an act, or acts be
passed by the legislature of this state, for causing all elections thereafter
to be held in this state, for senators and representatives in assembly, to be
by ballot, and directing the manner in which the same shall be conducted. And
whereas, it is possible, that after all the care of the legislature, in framing
the said act or acts, certain inconveniences and mischiefs, unforeseen at this
day, may be found to attend the said mode of electing by ballot:

It is further ordained, that if after a full and fair experiment shall be made
of voting by ballot aforesaid, the same shall be found less conducive to the
safety or interest of the state, than the method of voting viva voce, it shall
be lawful and constitutional for the legislature to abolish the same; provided
two thirds of the members present in each house, respectively shall concur
therein: And further, that, during the continuance of the present war, and
until the legislature of this state shall provide for the election of senators
and representatives in assembly by ballot, the said elections shall be made
viva voce.

7. That every male inhabitant of full age, who shall have personally resided
within one of the counties of this state, for six months immediately preceding
the day of elecon, shall, at such election, be entitled to vote for
representatives of the said county in assembly; if, during the time aforesaid
he shall have been a freeholder, possessing a freehold of the value of twenty
pounds, within the said county, or have rented a tenement therein of the yearly
value of forty shillings, and been rated and actually paid taxes to this state:
Provided always, that every person who now is a freemen of the city of Albany,
or who was made a freeman of the city of New York, on or before the fourteenth
day of October, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-five, and shall be actually and usually resident in the said cities
respectively, shall be entitled to vote for representatives in assembly within
his said place of residence.

8. That every elector, before he is admitted to vote, shall, if required by
the returning officer or either of the inspectors, take an oath, or if of the
people called Quakers, an affirmation, of allegiance to the state.

9. That the assembly thus constituted shall choose their own speaker, be
judges of their own members, and enjoy the same privileges and proceed in doing
business, in like manner as the assemblies of the colony of New York of right
formerly did; and that a majority of the said members shall, from time to time,
constitute a house to proceed upon business.

10. And this convention does further, in the name and by the authority of the
good people of this state, ordain, determine and declare, that the senate of
the state of New York shall consist of twenty-four freeholders, to be chosen
out of the body of the freeholders, and that they be chosen by the freeholders
of this state, possessed of freeholds of the value of one hundred pounds, over
and above all debts charged thereon.

11. That the members of the senate be elected for four years, and immediately
after the first election, they be divided by lot into four classes, six in each
class, and numbered one, two, three and four; that the seats of the members of
the first class shall be vacated at the expiration of the first year, the
second class the second year, and so on continually; to the end that the fourth
part of the senate, as nearly as possible, may be annually chosen.

12. That the election of senators shall be after this manner; that so much of
this state as is now parcelled into counties, be divided into four great
districts; the southern district to comprehend the city and county of New York,
Suffolk, Westchester, Kings, Queens, and Richmond counties, the middle district
to comprehend the counties of Duchess, Ulster and Orange; the western
district, the city and county of Albany, and Tryon county; and the eastern
district, the counties of Charlotte, Cumberland, and Gloucester. That the
senators shall be elected by the freeholders of the said districts, qualified
as aforesaid, in the proportions following, to wit, in the southern district
nine, in the middle district six, in the western district six, and in the
eastern district three. And be it ordained, that a census shall be taken as
soon as may be, after the expiration of seven years from the termination of the
present war, under the direction of the legislature: And if on such census it
shall appear, that the number of senators is not justly proportioned to the
several districts, that the legislature adjust the proportion as near as may
be, to the number of freeholders qualified as aforesaid, in each district. That
when the number of electors, within any of the said districts, shall have
increased one twenty-fourth part of the whole number of electors, which, by the
said census, shall be found to be in this state, an additional senator shall be
chosen by the electors of such district. That a majority of the number of
senators to be chosen as aforesaid, shall be necessary to constitute a senate
sufficient to proceed upon business, and that the senate shall, in like manner
with the assembly, be the judges of its own members. And be it ordained, that
it shall be in the power of the future legislatures of this state, for the
convenience and advantage of the good people thereof, to divide the same into
such further and other counties and districts, as shall to them appear
necessary.

13. And this convention does further, in the name and by the authority of the
good people of this state, ordain, determine and declare, that no member of
this state shall be disfranchised, or deprived of any of the rights or
privileges secured to the subjects of this state, by this constitution, unless
by the law of the land, or the judgment of his peers.

14. That neither the assembly nor the senate shall have power to adjourn
themselves for any longer time than two days, without the mutual consent of
both.

15. That whenever the assembly and senate disagree, a conference shall be held
in the presence of both, and be managed by committees to be by them
respectively chosen by ballot. That the doors both of the senate and assembly,
shall at all times be kept open to all persons, except when the welfare of the
state shall require their debates to be kept secret. And the journals of all
their proceedings shall be kept in the manner heretofore accustomed by the
general assembly of the colony of New York, and except such parts as they
shall, as aforesaid, respectively determine not to make public, be from day to
day (if the business of the legislature will permit) published.

16. It is nevertheless provided, that the number of senators shall never
exceed one hundred, nor the number of assembly three hundred; but that whenever
the number of senators shall amount to one hundred, or of the assembly to three
hundred, then and in such case, the legislature shall from time to time
thereafter, by laws for that purpose, apportion and distribute the said one
hundred senators, and three hundred representatives, among the great districts
and counties of this state, in proportion to the number of their respective
electors; so that the representation of the good people of this state, both in
the senate and assembly, shall for ever remain proportionate and adequate.

17. And this convention does further, in the name and by the authority of the
good people of this state, ordain, determine, and declare, that the supreme
executive power and authority of this state shall be vested in a governor; and
that statedly once in every three years, and as often as the seat of government
shall become vacant, a wise and discreet freeholder of this state shall be by
ballot elected governor, by the freeholders of this state, qualified as before
described to elect senators; which elections shall be always held at the times
and places of choosing representatives in assembly for each respective county;
and that the person who has the greatest number of votes within the said
state, shall be governor thereof.

18. That the governor shall continue in office three years, and shall, by
virtue of his office, be general and commander in chief of all the militia, and
admiral of the navy of this state; that he shall have power to convene the
assembly and senate on extraordinary occasions, to prorogue them from time to
time, provided such prorogations shall not exceed sixty days in the space of
any one year; and at his discretion to grant reprieves and pardons to persons
convicted of crimes, other than treason or murder, in which he may suspend the
execution of the sentence, until it shall be reported to the legislature at
their subsequent meeting; and they shall either pardon, or direct the execution
of the criminal, or grant a farther reprieve.

19. That it shall be the duty of the governor to inform the legislature, at
every sessions, of the condition of the state, so far as may respect his
department; to recommend such matters to their consideration as shall appear to
him to concern its good government, welfare and prosperity; to correspond with
the continental congress, and other states; to transact all necessary business
with the officers of government, civil and military; to take care that the laws
are faithfully executed to the best of his ability; and to expedite all such
measures as may be resolved upon by the legislature.

20. That a lieutenant governor shall, at every election of a governor, and as
often as the lieutenant governor shall die, resign, or be removed from office,
be elected in the same manner with the governor, to continue in office until
the next election of a governor; and such lieutenant governor shall, by virtue
of his office, be president of the senate, and, upon an equal division, have a
casting voice in their decisions, but not vote on any other occasion.

And in case of the impeachment of the governor, or his removal from office,
death, resignation, or absence from the state, the lieutenant governor shall
exercise all the power and authority appertaining to the office of governor,
until another be chosen, or the governor absent or impeached, shall return or
be acquitted. Provided, that where the governor shall, with the consent of the
legislature, be out of the state, in time of war, at the head of a military
force thereof, he shall still continue in his command of all the military force
of the state, both by sea and land.

21. That whenever the government shall be administered by the
lieutenant governor, or he shall be unable to attend as president of the
senate, the senators shall have power to elect one of their own members to the
office of president of the senate, which he shall exercise pro hac vice. And
if, during such vacancy of the office or governor, the lieutenant governor
shall be impeached, displaced, resign, die, or be absent from the state, the
president of the senate shall in like manner as the lieutenant governor,
administer the government, until others shall be elected by the suffrage of the
people, at the succeeding election.

22. And this convention does further, in the name and by the authority of the
good people of this state, ordain, determine and declare, that the treasurer of
this state shall be appointed by act of the legislature, to originate with the
assembly: Provided, that he shall not be elected out of either branch of the
legislature.

23. That all officers, other than those, who by this constitution are directed
to be otherwise appointed, shall be appointed in the manner following, to wit,
The assembly shall once in every year, openly nominate and appoint one of the
senators from each great district, which senators shall form a council for the
appointment of the said officers, of which the governor for the time being, or
the lieutenant governor, or the president of the senate, when they shall
respectively administer the government, shall be president, and have a casting
voice, but no other vote, and with the advice and consent of the said council,
shall appoint all the said officers; and that a majority of the said council be
a quorum. And further, the said senators shall not be eligible to the said
council for two years successively.

24. That all military officers be appointed during pleasure; that all
commissioned officers civil and military, be commissioned by the governor; and
that the chancellor, the judges of the supreme court, and first judge of the
county court in every county, hold their offices during good behavior, or
until they shall have respectively attained the age of sixty years.

25. That the chancellor and judges of the supreme court, shall not at the same
time hold any other office, excepting that of delegate to the general congress,
upon special occasions; and that the first judges of the county courts in the
several counties, shall not at the same time hold any other office, excepting
that of senator, or delegate to the general congress: But if the chancellor or
either of the said judges be elected or appointed to any other office,
excepting as is before excepted, it shall be at his option in which to serve.

26. That sheriffs and coroners be annually appointed; and that no person shall
be capable of holding either of the said offices more than four years
successively, nor the sheriff of holding any other office at the same time.

27. And be it further ordained, that the register and clerks in chancery be
appointed by the chancellor; the clerks the supreme court by the judges of the
said court; the clerk of the court of probates by the judge of the said court;
and the register and marshall of the court of admiralty by the judge of the
admiralty. The said marshal, registers and clerks to continue in office during
the pleasure of those by whom they are to be appointed as aforesaid.

And that all attorneys, solicitors and counselors at law, hereafter to be
appointed, be appointed by the court, and licensed by the first judge of the
court in which they shall respectively plead or practice; and be regulated by
the rules and orders of the said courts.

28. And be it further ordained, that where by this convention the duration of
any office shall not be ascertained, such office shall be construed to be held
during the pleasure of the council of appointment: Provided that new
commissions shall be issued to judges of the county courts (other than to the
first judge) and to justices of the peace, once at the least in every three
years.

29. That town clerks, supervisors, assessors, constables, and collectors, and
all other officers heretofore eligible by the people, shall always continue to
be so eligible, in the manner directed by the present or future acts of
legislature.

That loan officers, county treasurers, and clerks of the supervisors, continue
to be appointed in the manner directed by the present or future acts of the
legislature.

30. That delegates to represent this state in the general congress of the
United States of America, be annually appointed as follows, to wit, The senate
and assembly shall each openly nominate as many persons as shall be equal to
the whole number of delegates to be appointed; after which nomination they
shall meet together, and those persons named in both lists shall be delegates;
and out of those persons whose names are not in both lists, one half shall be
chosen by the joint ballot of the senators and members of assembly, so met
together as aforesaid.

31. That the style of all laws shall be as follows, to wit, "Be it enacted by
the people of the state of New York, represented in senate and assembly." And
that all writs and other proceedings shall run in the name of the people of the
state of New York, and be tested in the name of the chancellor or chief judge
of the court from whence they shall issue.

32. And this convention does further, in the name and by the authority of the
good people of this state, ordain, determine, and declare, that a court shall
be instituted, for the trial of impeachments, and the correction of errors,
under the regulations which shall be established by the legislature; and to
consist of the president of the senate, for the time being and the senators,
chancellor, and judges of the supreme court, or the major part of them; except,
that when an impeachment shall be prosecuted against the chancellor, or either
of the judges of the supreme court, the person so impeached shall be suspended
from exercising his office until his acquittal: And in like manner, when an
appeal from a decree in equity shall be heard, the chancellor shall inform the
court of the reasons of his decree, but shall not have a voice in the final
sentence. And if the cause to be determined shall be brought up by writ of
error on a question of law, on a judgment in the supreme court, the judges of
that court shall assign the reasons of such their judgment, but shall not have
a voice for its affirmance or reversal.

33. That the power of impeaching all officers of the state, for mal and
corrupt conduct in their respective offices, be vested in the representatives
of the people in assembly; but that it shall always be necessary that two third
parts of the members present shall consent to and agree in such impeachment.
That previous to the trial of every impeachment, the members of the said court
shall respectively be sworn, truly and impartially to try and determine the
charge in question, according to evidence; and that no judgment of the said
court shall be valid, unless it be assented to by two third parts of the
members then present; nor shall it extend farther than to removal from office,
and disqualification to hold and enjoy any place of honor, trust or profit,
under this state. But the party so convicted, shall be, nevertheless, liable
and subject to indictment, trial, judgment and punishment, according to the
laws of the land.

34. And it is further ordained, that in every trial on impeachment or
indictment for crimes or misdemeanors, the party impeached or indicted shall be
allowed counsel, as in civil actions.

35. And this convention does further, in the name and by the authority of the
good people of this state, ordain, determine, and declare, that such parts of
the common law of England, and of the statute law of England and Great Britain,
and of the acts of the legislature of the colony of New York, as together did
form the law of the said colony on the 19th day of April, in the year of our
Lord one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five, shall be and continue the law
of this state; subject to such alterations and provisions, as the legislature
of this state shall, from time to time make concerning the same. That such of
the said acts as are temporary, shall expire at the times limited for their
duration respectively. That all such parts of the said common law, and all such
of the said statutes, and acts aforesaid, or parts thereof, as may be construed
to establish or maintain any partiticular denomination of christians or their
ministers, or concern the allegiance heretofore yielded to, and the supremacy,
sovereignty, government, or prerogatives, claimed or exercised by the king of
Great Britain and his predecessors, over the colony of New York and its
inhabitants, or are repugnant to this constitution, be, and they hereby are,
abrogated and rejected. And this convention does further ordain, that the
resolves or resolutions of the congresses of the colony of New York, and of the
convention of the state of New York, now in force, and not repugnant to the
government established by this constitution, shall be considered as making part
of the laws of this state; subject, nevertheless, to such alterations and
provisions, as the legislature of this state may, from time to time, make
concerning the same.

36. And be it further ordained, that all grants of land within this state,
made by the king of Great Britain, or persons acting under his authority, after
the fourteenth day of October, one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five,
shall be null and void: But that nothing in this constitution contained, shall
be construed to affect any grants of land, within this state, made by the
authority of the said king or his predecessors, or to annul any charters to
bodies politic, by him or them or any of them, made prior to that day. And that
none of the said charters shall be adjudged to be void, by reason of any
non-user or mis-user of any of their respective rights or privileges, between
the nineteenth day of April, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred
and seventy-five, and the publication of this constitution. And further, that
all such of the officers described in the said charters respectively, as by the
terms of the said charters, were to be appointed by the governor of the colony
of New York, with or without the advice and consent of the council of the said
king, in the said colony, shall henceforth be appointed by the council
established by this constitution, for the appointment of officers in this
state, until otherwise directed by the legislature.

37. And whereas it is of great importance to the safety of this state, that
peace and amity with the indians within the same, be at all times supported and
maintained. And whereas, the frauds too often practiced toward the said
indians, in contracts made for their lands, have in diverse instances been
productive of dangerous discontents and animosities; Be it ordained, that no
purchases or contracts for the sale of lands made since the fourteenth day of
October, in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and seventy-five,
or which may hereafter be made with or of the said indians, within the limits
of this state, shall be binding on the said indians, or deemed valid, unless
made under the authority, and with the consent of the legislature of this state.

38. And whereas we are required by the benevolent principles of rational
liberty, not only to expel civil tyranny, but also to guard against that
spiritual oppression and intolerance, wherewith the bigotry and ambition of
weak and wicked priests and princes, have scourged mankind: This convention
does further, in the name and by the authority of the good people of this
state, ordain, determine and declare, that the free exercise and enjoyment of
religious profession and worship, without discrimination or preference, shall
forever hereafter be allowed within this state, to all mankind. Provided that
the liberty of conscience hereby granted, shall not be so construed, as to
excuse acts of licentiousness, or justify practices inconsistent with the peace
or safety of this state.

39. And whereas the ministers of the gospel, are by their profession dedicated
to the service of God and the cure of souls, and ought not to be diverted from
the great duties of their function; therefore no minister of the gospel, or
priest of any denomination whatsoever, shall at any time hereafter, under any
pretense or description whatever, be eligible to, or capable of holding any
civil or military office or place, within this state.

40. And whereas it is of the utmost importance to the safety of every state,
that it should always be in a condition of defense; and it is the duty of every
man, who enjoys the protection of society, to be prepared and willing to defend
it; this convention, therefore, in the name and by the authority of the good
people of this state, does ordain, determine and declare, that the militia of
this state, at all times hereafter, as well in peace as in war, shall be armed
and disciplined, and in readiness for service. That all such of the inhabitants
of this state, being of the people called Quakers, from scruples of conscience,
may be averse to the bearing of arms, be therefrom excused by the legislature;
and do pay to the state, such sums of money in lieu of their personal service,
as the same may, in the judgment of the legislature, be worth: And that a
proper magazine of warlike stores, proportionate to the number of inhabitants,
be, forever hereafter, at the expense of this state, and by acts of the
legislature, established, maintained, and continued in every county in this
state.

41. And this convention does further ordain, determine and declare, in the
name and by the authority of the good people of this state, that trial by jury,
in all cases in which it has heretofore been used in the colony of New York,
shall be established, and remain inviolate forever. And that no acts of
attainder shall be passed by the legislature of this state for crimes, other
than those committed before the termination of the present war; and that such
acts shall not work a corruption of blood. And further, that the legislature of
this state shall, at no time hereafter, institute any new court or courts, but
such as shall proceed according to the course of the common law.

42. And this convention does further, in the name and by the authority of the
good people or this state, ordain, determine and declare, that it shall be in
the discretion of the legislature to naturalize all such persons, and in such
manner as they shall think proper; provided all such of the persons, so to be
by them naturalized, as being born in parts beyond sea, and out of the United
States of America, shall come to settle in, and become subjects of this state,
shall take an oath of allegiance to this state, and abjure and renounce all
allegience and subjection to all and every foreign king, prince, potentate and
state, in all matters ecclesiastical as well as civil.

By order, LEONARD GANSEVOORT, Pres. pro tem.

NEW JERSEY. CONSTITUTION of NEW JERSEY.
WHEREAS all the constitutional authority ever possessed by the kings of
Great Britain over these colonies, or their other dominions was, by compact
derived from the people, and held of them for the common interest of the whole
society, allegiance and protection are, in the nature of things, reciprocal
ties, each equally depending upon the other, and liable to be dissolved by the
other's being refused or withdrawn. And whereas George the third, king of
Great Britain, has refused protection to the good people of these colonies;
and, by assenting to sundry acts of the British parliament, attempted to
subject them to the absolute dominion of that body; and has also made war upon
them in the most cruel and unnatural manner, for no other cause than asserting
their just rights, all civil authority under him is necessarily at an end, and
a dissolution of government in each colony has consequently taken place.

And whereas in the present deplorable situation of these colonies, exposed to
the fury of a cruel and relentless enemy, some form of government is absolutely
necessary, not only for the preservation of good order, but also the more
effectually to unite the people, and enable them to exert their whole force in
their own necessary defense; and as the honorable the continental congress,
the supreme council of the American colonies, has advised such of the colonies
as have not yet gone into the measure, to adopt for themselves respectively,
such government as shall best conduce to their own happiness and safety, and
the well-being of America in general: We, the representatives of the colony of
New Jersey, having been elected by all the counties in the freest manner, and
in congress assembled, have, after mature deliberations, agreed upon a set of
charter rights, and the form of a constitution, in manner following, viz.

1 That the government of this province shall be vested in a governor,
legislative council, and general assembly.

2. That the legislative council and general assembly shall be chosen, for the
first time, on the second Tuesday in August next; the members whereof shall be
the same in number and qualifications as is herein after mentioned; and shall
be and remain vested with all the powers and authority to be held by any future
legislative council and assembly of this colony, until the second Tuesday in
October, which shall be in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-seven.

3. That on the second Tuesday in October yearly, and every year for ever (with
the privilege of adjourning from day to day, as occasion may require) the
counties shall severally choose one person to be a member of the legislative
council of this colony, who shall be and have been for one whole year next
before the election, an inhabitant and freeholder in the county in which he is
chosen, and worth at least one thousand pounds, proclamation money, of real and
personal estate within the same county: that, at the same time, each county
shall also choose three members of assembly; provided, that no person shall be
entitled to a seat in the said assembly, unless he be and have been for one
whole year next before the election, an inhabitant of the county he is to
represent, and worth five hundred pounds proclamation money in real and
personal estate, in the same county: that on the second Tuesday next after the
day of election, the council and assembly shall separately meet; and that the
consent of both houses shall be necessary to every law; provided, that seven
shall be a quorum of the council for doing business, and that no law shall
pass, unless there be a majority of all the representatives of each body
personally present, and agreeing thereto. Provided always, that if a majority
of the representatives of this province, in council and general assembly
convened, shall, at any time or times hereafter, judge it equitable and proper
to add to or diminish the number or proportion of the members of assembly for
any county or counties in this colony, then, and in such case, the same may, on
the principles of more equal representation, be lawfully done, any thing in
this charter to the contrary notwithstanding, so that the whole number of
representatives in assembly shall not at any time be less than thirty nine.

4. That all inhabitants of this colony of full age, who are worth fifty
pounds, proclamation money, clear estate in the same, and have resided within
the county in which they claim a vote, for twelve months immediately preceding
the election, shall be entitled to vote for representatives in council and
assembly; and also for all other public officers that shall be elected by the
people of the county at large.

5. That the assembly, when met, shall have power to choose a speaker, and
other their officers; to be judges of the qualifications and elections of their
own members; sit upon their own adjournments; prepare bills to be passed into
laws; and to empower their speaker to convene them, whenever any extraordinary
occurrence shall render it necessary.

6. That the council shall also have power to prepare bills to pass into laws,
and have other like powers as the assembly, and in all respects to be a free
and independent branch of the legislature of this colony; save only, that they
shall not prepare or alter any money bill, which shall be the privilege of the
assembly, that the council shall, from time to time, be convened by the
governor or vice president, but must be convened at all times when the assembly
sits; for which purpose the speaker of the house of assembly shall always
immediately after an adjournment give notice to the governor or vice president,
of the time and place to which the house is adjourned.

7. That the council and assembly jointly, at the^r first meeting after each
annual election, shall, by a majority of votes, elect some fit person within
the colony to be governor for one year, who shall be constant president of the
council, and have a casting vote in their proceedings; and that the council
themselves shall choose a vice president, who shall act as such in the absence
of the governor.

8. That the governor, or in his absence, the vice president of the council,
shall have the supreme executive power, be chancellor of the colony, and act as
captain general and commander in chief of all the militia and other military
force in this colony; and that any three or more of the council shall, at all
times, be a privy council to consult them; and that the governor be ordinary or
surrogate-general.

9. That the governor and council, (seven whereof shall be a quorum) be the
court of appeals in the last resort in all clauses of law, as heretofore; and
that they possess the power of granting pardons to criminals after
condemnation, in all cases of treason, felony, or other offenses.

10. That captains, and all other inferior officers of the militia, shall be
chosen by the companies in the respective counties; but field and general
officers by the council and assembly.

11. That the council and assembly shall have power to make the great seal of
this colony, which shall be kept by the governor, or, in his absence, by the
vice president of the council, to be used by them, as occasion may require; and
it shall be called, The great seal of the colony of New Jersey.

12. That the judges of the supreme court shall continue in office for seven
years; the judges of the inferior court of common pleas in the several
counties, justices of the peace, clerks of the supreme court, clerks of the
inferior court of common pleas and quarter sessions, the attorney general, and
provincial secretary, shall continue in office for five years, and the
provincial treasurer shall continue in office for one year; and that they shall
be severally appointed by the council and assembly in manner aforesaid, and
commissioned by the governor, or in his absence the vice president of the
council. Provided always, that the said officers severally, shall be capable of
being re-appointed at the end of the terms severally before limited; and that
any of the said officers shall be liable to be dismissed, when adjudged guilty
of misbehaviour, by the council on an impeachment of the assembly.

13. That the inhabitants of each county, qualified to vote as aforesaid,
shall, at the time and place of electing their representatives, annually elect
one sheriff, and one or more coroners; and that they may re-elect the same
person to such offices until he shall have served three years, but no longer;
after which three years must elapse before the same person is capable of being
elected again. When the election is certified to the governor or
vice president, under the hands of six freeholders of the county for which they
were elected, they shall be immediately commissioned to serve in their
respective offices.

14. That the townships, at their annual town meetings for electing other
officers, shall choose constables for the districts respectively; and also three
or more judicious freeholders of good character, to hear and finally determine
all appeals relative to unjust assessments in cases of public taxation; which
commissioners of appeal shall, for that purpose, sit at some suitable time or
times to be by them appointed, and made known to the people by advertisements.

15. That the laws of the colony shall begin in the following style, viz. Be it
enacted by the council and general assembly of this colony, and it is hereby
enacted by authority of the same: that all commissions granted by the governor
or vice president, shall run thus -- The colony of New Jersey to A. B, etc.
greeting: and that all writs shall likewise run in the name of the colony: and
that all indictments shall conclude in the following manner, viz. Against the
peace of this colony, the government and dignity of the same.

16. That all criminals shall be admitted to the same privileges of witnesses
and counsel, as their prosecutors are or shall be entitled to.

17. That the estates of such persons as shall destroy their own lives shall
not, for that offense, be forfeited; but shall descend in the same manner as
they would have done, had such persons died in the natural way; nor shall any
article which may occasion accidentally the death of any one, be henceforth
deemed a deodand, or in any wise forfeited on account of such misfortune.

18. That no person shall ever within this colony be deprived of the
inestimable privilege of worshipping Almighty God in a manner agreeable to the
dictates of his own conscience; nor under any pretense whatever be compelled to
attend any place of worship, contrary to his own faith and judgment; nor shall
any person within this colony ever be obliged to pay tithes, taxes, or any
other rates, for the purpose of building or repairing any other church or
churches, place or places of worship, or for the maintenance of any minister or
ministry, contrary to what he believes to be right, or has deliberately or
voluntarily engaged himself to perform.

19. That there shall be no establishment of any one religious sect in this
province in preference to another; and that no protestant inhabitants of this
colony shall be denied the enjoyment of any civil right, merely on account of
his religious principles; but that all persons, professing a belief in the
faith of any protestant sect, who shall demean themselves peaceably under the
government as hereby established, shall be capable of being elected into any
office of profit or trust, or being a member of either branch of the
legislature, and shall fully and freely enjoy every privilege and immunity
enjoyed by others their fellow subjects.

20. That the legislative department of this government may, as much as
possible, be preserved from all suspicion of corruption, none of the judges of
the supreme or other courts, sheriffs, or any other person or persons possessed
of any post of profit under the government, other than justices of the peace,
shall be entitled to a seat in the assembly; but that on his being elected and
taking his seat, his office or post shall be considered as vacant.

21. That all the laws of this province, contained in the edition lately
published by Mr. Allinson, shall be and remain in full force, until altered by
the legislature of this colony (such only excepted as are incompatible with
this charter) and shall be, according as heretofore, regarded in all respects,
by all civil officers, and others, the good people of this province.

22. That the common law of England, as well as so much of the statute law as
have been heretofore practiced in this colony, shall still remain in force,
until they shall be altered by a future law of the legislature; such parts only
excepted as are repugnant to the rights and privileges contained in this
charter; and that the inestimable right of trial by jury shall remain
confirmed, as a part of the law of this colony, without repeal for ever.

23. That every person who shall be elected as aforesaid, to be a member of the
legislative council or house of assembly, shall, previous to his taking his
seat in council or assembly, take the following oath or affirmation, viz.

"I, A B. do solemnly declare, that, as a member of the legislative council (or
assembly, as the case may be) of the colony of New Jersey, I will not assent to
any law, vote, or proceeding, which shall appear to me injurious to the public
welfare of said colony, nor that shall annul or repeal that part of the third
section in the charter in this colony, which establishes that the elections of
members of the legislative council and assembly shall be annual, nor that part
of the twenty second section in said charter, respecting the trial by jury, nor
that shall annul, repeal, or alter any part or parts of the eighteenth or
nineteenth sections of the same."

And any person or persons, who shall be elected as aforesaid, is hereby
empowered to administer to the said members, the said oath or affirmation.

Provided always, and it is the true intent and meaning of this congress, that
if a reconciliation between Great Britain and these colonies should take place,
and the latter be taken again under the protection and government of the crown
of Britain, this charter shall be null and void, otherwise to remain firm and
inviolable.

In PROVINCIAL CONGRESS, New Jersey, Burlington, July 2, 1776. By order of
Congress, SAMUEL TUCKER, PRESIDENT. Extract from the Minutes, WILLIAM PATERSON,
Secretary.

PENNSYLVANIA. The CONSTITUTION of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, as
established by the GENERAL CONVENTION, elected for that Purpose, and held at
Philadelphia, July 15, 1776, and continued by Adjournments to Sept. 28, 1776.
WHEREAS all government ought to be instituted and supported for the security
and protection of the community as such, and to enable the individuals who
compose it to enjoy their natural rights, and the other blessings which the
author of existence has bestowed upon man; and whenever these great ends of
government are not obtained, the people have a right, by common consent to
change it, and take such measures as to them may appear necessary to promote
their safety and happiness. And whereas the inhabitants of this commonwealth
have, in consideration of protection only, heretofore acknowledged allegiance
to the king of Great Britain, and the said king has not only withdrawn that
protection, but commenced, and still continues to carry on, with unabated
vengeance, a most cruel and unjust war against them, employing therein, not
only the troops of Great Britain, but foreign mercenaries, savages, and slaves,
for the avowed purpose of reducing them to a total and abject submission, to
the despotic domination of the British parliament, with many other acts of
tyranny, (more fully set forth in the declaration of congress) whereby all
allegiance and fealty to the said king and his successors, are dissolved and at
an end, and all power and authority derived from him ceased in these colonies.
And whereas it is absolutely necessary for the welfare and safety of the
inhabitants of said colonies, that they be henceforth free and independent
states, and that just, permanent, and proper forms of government exist in every
part of them, derived from and founded on the authority of the people only,
agreeable to the directions of the honorable American congress. We, the
representatives of the freemen of Pennsylvania, in general convention met, for
the express purpose of framing such a government, confessing the goodness of
the great Governor of the universe (who alone knows to what degree of earthly
happiness mankind may attain, by perfecting the arts of government) in
permitting the people of this state, by common consent, and without violence,
deliberately to form for themselves such just rules as they shall think best,
for governing their future society; and being fully convinced, that it is our
indispensible duty to establish such original principles of government, as will
best promote the general happiness of the people of this state, and their
posterity, and provide for future improvements, without partiality for, or
prejudice against any particular class, sect, or denomination of men whatever,
do, by virtue of the authority vested in us by our constituents, ordain,
declare, and establish, the following Declaration of Rights, and Frame of
Government, to be the CONSTITUTION of this commonwealth, and to remain in force
therein for ever, unaltered, except in such articles as shall hereafter on
experience be found to require improvement, and which shall by the same
authority of the people, fairly delegated as this frame of government directs,
be amended or improved for the more effectual obtaining and securing the great
end and design of all government, herein before mentioned.

CHAPTER I. A DECLARATION of the RIGHTS of the Inhabitants of the State of
Pennsylvania.
1. THAT all men are born equally free and independent, and have certain
natural, inherent, and unalienable rights, amongst which are, the enjoying and
defending life and liberty, acquiring, possessing, and protecting property, and
pursuing and obtaining happiness and safety.

2. That all men have a natural and unalienable right to worship Almighty God
according to the dictates of their own consciences and understanding: And that
no man ought, or of right can be compelled to attend any religious worship, or
erect or support any place of worship, or maintain any ministry, contrary to,
or against, his own free will and consent: Nor can any man, who acknowledges
the being of a God, be justly deprived or abridged of any civil right as a
citizen, on account of his religious sentiments, or peculiar mode of religious
worship: And that no authority can or ought to be vested in, or assumed by any
power whatever, that shall in any case interfere with, or in any manner
control, the right of conscience in the free exercise of religious worship.

3. That the people of this state have the sole, exclusive, and inherent right
of governing and regulating the internal police of the same.

4. That all power being originally inherent in, and consequently derived from,
the people; therefore all officers of government, whether legislative or
executive, are their trustees and servants, and at all times accountable to
them.

5. That government is, or ought to be, instituted for the common benefit,
protection, and security of the people, nation, or community; and not for the
particular emolument or advantage of any single man, family, or set of men, who
are a part only of that community: And that the community has an undubitable,
inalienable, and indefeasible right to reform, alter, or abolish government in
such manner, as shall be by that community judged most conducive to the public
weal.

6. That those who are employed in the legislative and executive business of
the state may be restrained from oppression, the people have a right, at such
periods as they may think proper, to reduce their public officers to a private
station, and supply the vacancies by certain and regular elections.

7. That all elections ought to be free; and that all free men having a
sufficient evident common interest with, and attachment to the community, have
a right to elect officers, or be elected into office.

8. That every member of society has a right to be protected in the enjoyment
of life, liberty, and property, and therefore is bound to contribute his
proportion toward the expense of that protection, and yield his personal
service, when necessary, or an equivalent thereto: But no part of a man's
property can be justly taken from him, or applied to public uses, without his
own consent, or that of his legal representatives: Nor can any man who is
conscientiously scrupulous of bearing arms, be justly compelled thereto, if he
will pay such equivalent: Nor are the people bound by any laws, but such as
they have in like manner assented to, for their common good.

9. That in all prosecutions for criminal offenses, a man has a right to be
heard by himself and his council, to demand the cause and nature of his
accusation, to be confronted with the witnesses, to call for evidence in his
favor, and a speedy public trial, by an impartial jury of the country, without
the unanimous consent of which jury he cannot be found guilty: Nor can he be
compelled to give evidence against himself: Nor can any man be justly deprived
of his liberty except by the laws of the land, or the judgment of his peers.

10. That the people have a right to hold themselves their houses, papers, and
possessions free from search or seizure; and therefore warrants without oaths
or affirmations first made, affording a sufficient foundation for them, and
whereby any officer or messenger may be commanded or required to search
suspected places, or to seize any person or persons, his or their property, not
particularly described, are contrary to that right and ought not to be granted.

11. That in controversies respecting property, and in suits between man and
man, the parties have a right to trial by jury, which ought to be held sacred.

12. That the people have a right to freedom of speech, and of writing, and
publishing their sentiments; therefore the freedom of the press ought not to be
restrained.

13. That the people have a right to bear arms for the defense of themselves
and the state; and as standing armies in the time of peace, are dangerous to
liberty, they ought not to be kept up: And that the military should be kept
under strict subordination to, and governed by, the civil power.

14. That a frequent recurrence to fundamental principles, and a firm adherence
to justice, moderation, temperance industry, and frugality, are absolutely
necessary to preserve the blessings of liberty, and keep a government free: The
people ought therefore to pay particular attention to these points in the
choice of officers and representatives, and have a right to exact a due and
constant regard to them, from their legislators and magistrates, in the making
and executing such laws as are necessary for the good government of the state.

15. That all men have a natural inherent right to emigrate from one state to
another that will receive them, or to form a new state in vacant countries, or
in such countries as they can purchase, whenever they think that thereby they
may promote their own happiness.

16. That the people have a right to assemble together, to consult for their
common good, to instruct their representatives, and to apply to the legislature
for redress of grievances, by address, petition, or remonstrance.

CHAPTER II. PLAN or FRAME of GOVERNMENT.
Sect. 1. THE commonwealth or state of Pensylvania shall be governed hereafter
by an assembly of the representatives of the freemen of the same, and a
president and council, in manner and form following --

Sect. 2. The supreme legislative power shall be vested in a house of
representatives of the freemen of the commonwealth or state of Pennsylvania.

Sect. 3. The supreme executive power shall be vested in a president and
council.

Sect. 4. Courts of justice shall be established in the city of Philadelphia,
and in every county of this state.

Sect. 5. The freemen of this commonwealth and their sons shall be trained and
armed for its defense, under such regulations, restrictions, and exceptions as
the general assembly shall by law direct, preserving always to the people the
right of choosing their colonel, and all commissioned officers under that rank,
in such manner and as often as by the said laws shall be directed.

Sect. 6. Every freeman of the full age of twenty-one years, having resided in
this state for the space of one whole year next before the day of election for
representatives, and paid public taxes during that time, shall enjoy the right
of an elector: Provided always, that sons of freeholders of the age of
twenty-one years shall be entitled to vote, although they have not paid taxes.

Sect. 7. The house of representatives of the freemen of this commonwealth,
shall consist of persons most noted for wisdom and virtue, to be chosen by the
freemen of every city and county of this commonwealth respectively. And no
person shall be elected unless he has resided in the city or county for which
he shall be chosen, two years immediately before the said election; nor shall
any member, while he continues such, hold any other office, except in the
militia.

Sect. 8. No person shall be capable of being elected a member to serve in the
house of representatives of the freemen of this commonwealth more than four
years in seven.

^^^t. 9. The members of the house of representatives (...) be chosen annually
by ballot, by the freemen of the ^^mmonwealth, on the second Tuesday in October
forever, (except this present year) and shall meet on the fourth Monday of the
same month, and shall be styled, The General Assembly of Representatives of the
Freemen of Pennsylvania, and shall have power to choose their speaker, the
treasurer of the state, and their other officers; sit on their own
adjournments; prepare bills and enact them into laws; judge of the elections
and qualifications of their own members; they may expel a member, but not a
second time for the same cause; they may administer oaths or affirmations on
examination of witnesses; redress grievances; impeach state criminals; grant
charters of incorporation; constitute towns, boroughs, cities and counties: And
shall have all other powers necessary for the legislature of a free state or
commonwealth: But they shall have no power to add to, after, abolish, or
infringe any part of this constitution.

Sect. 10. A quorum of the house of representatives shall consist of two thirds
of the whole number of members elected; and having met and chosen their
speaker, shall each of them before they proceed to business, take and
subscribe, as well the oath or affirmation of fidelity and allegiance herein
after directed, as the following oath or affirmation, viz.

"I do swear (or affirm) that as a member of this assembly, I will not propose
or assent to any bill, vote, or resolution, which shall appear to me injurious
to the people; nor do or consent to any act or thing whatever, that shall have
a tendency to lessen or abridge their rights and privileges, as declared in the
constitution of this state; but will in all things conduct myself as a faithful
honest representative and guardian of the people, according to the best of my
judgment and abilities."

And each member before he takes his seat, shall make and subscribe the
following declaration, viz.

"I do believe in one God, the creator and governor of the universe, the
rewarder of the good and the punisher of the wicked. And I do aknowledge the
scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be given by divine inspiration."

And no further or other religious test shall ever hereafter be required of any
civil officer or magistrate in this state.

Sect. 11. Delegates to represent this state in congress shall be chosen by
ballot by the future general assembly at their first meeting, and annually for
ever afterward, as long as such representation shall be necessary. Any
delegate may be superseded at any time, by the general assembly appointing
another in his stead. No man shall sit in congress longer than two years
successively, nor be capable of reelection for three years afterward: And no
person who holds any office in the gift of the congress, shall hereafter be
elected to represent this commonwealth in congress.

Sect. 12. If any city or cities, county or counties shall neglect or refuse to
elect and send representatives to the general assembly, two thirds of the
members from the cities or counties that do elect and send representatives,
provided they may be a majority of the cities and counties of the whole state,
when met shall have all the powers of the general assembly, as fully and amply
as if the whole were present.

Sect. 13. The doors of the house in which the representatives of the freemen
of this state shall sit in general assembly, shall be and remain open for the
admission of all persons who behave decently, except only when the welfare of
this state may require the doors to be shut.

Sect. 14. The votes and proceedings of the general assembly shall be printed
weekly during their sitting, with the yeas and nays on any question, vote, or
resolution, where any two members require it, except when the vote is taken by
ballot; and when the yeas and nays are so taken, every member shall have a
right to insert the reasons of his vote upon the minutes, if he desire it.

Sect. 15. To the end that laws before they are enacted may be more maturely
considered, and the inconvenience of hasty determinations as much as possible
prevented, all bills of public nature shall be printed for the consideration of
the people, before they are read in general assembly the last time for debate
and amendment; and except on occasions of sudden necessity shall not be passed
into laws until the next session of assembly; and for the more perfect
satisfaction of the public, the reasons and motives for making such laws shall
be fully and clearly expressed in the preambles.

Sect. 16. The style of the laws of this commonwealth shall be, "Be it enacted,
and it is hereby enacted by the representatives of the freemen of the
commonwealth of Pennsylvania, in general assembly met, and by the authority of
the same." And the general assembly shall affix their seal to every bill, as
soon as it is enacted into a law, which seal shall be kept by the assembly, and
shall be called, The seal of the laws of Pennsylvania, and shall not be used
for any other purpose.

Sect. 17. The city of Philadelphia, and each county in this commonwealth
respectively, shall on the first Tuesday of November in this present year, and
on the second Tuesday in October annually, for the two next succeeding years,
to wit, the year one thousand seven hundred and seventy seven, and the year one
thousand seven hundred and seventy eight, choose six persons to represent them
in general assembly. But as representation in proportion to the number of
taxable inhabitants, is the only principle which can at all times secure
liberty, and make the voice of a majority of the people the law of the land;
therefore the general assembly shall cause complete lists of the taxable
inhabitants in the city and each county in the commonwealth respectively, to be
taken, and returned to them, on or before the last meeting of the assembly,
elected in the year one thousand seven hundred and seventy eight, who shall
appoint a representation to each, in proportion to the number of taxables in
such returns; which representation shall continue for the next seven years
afterward, at the end of which, a new return of the taxable inhabitants shall
be made, and a representation agreeable thereto appointed by the said assembly,
and so on septennially for ever. The wages of the representatives in general
assembly, and all other state charges shall be paid out of the state treasury.

Sect. 18. In order that the freemen of this commonwealth may enjoy the benefit
of election as equally as may be, until the representation shall commence, as
directed in the foregoing section, each county at its own choice may be divided
into districts, hold elections therein, and elect their representatives in the
county, and their other elective officers, as shall be hereafter regulated by
the general assembly of this state. And no inhabitant of this state shall have
more than one annual vote, at the general election for representatives in
assembly.

Sect. 19. For the present the supreme executive council of this state shall
consist of twelve persons, chosen in the following manner: The freemen of the
city of Philadelphia, and of the counties of Philadelphia, Chester, and Bucks,
respectively, shall choose by ballot one person for the city, and one for each
county aforesaid, to serve for three years and no longer, at the time and place
for electing representatives in general assembly. The freemen of the counties
of Lancaster, York, Cumberland, and Berks, shall, in like manner, elect one
person for each county respectively, to serve as counselors for two years, and
no longer. And the counties of Northampton, Bedford, Northumberland and
Westmoreland, respectively, shall, in like manner elect one person for each
county, to serve as counselors for one year, and no longer. And at the
expiration of the time for which each counselor was chosen to serve, the
freemen of the city of Philadelphia, and of the several counties in this state,
respectively, shall elect one person to serve as counselor for three years and
no longer; an^ ^o on every third year for ever. By this mode of election and
continual rotation, more men will be trained to public business, there will in
every subsequent year be found in the council, a number of persons acquainted
with the proceedings of the foregoing years, whereby the business will be more
consistently c^nduct^,d and moreover the danger of establishing an inconvenient
aristrocacy will be effectually prevented. All vacancies in the council that
may happen by death, resignation, or otherwise, shall be ^ill^d ^t the nex^
g^neral election for representatives in general assembly, unless a particular
election for that purpose shall be sooner appointed by the president and
council. No member of the general assembly, or delegate in congress, shall be
chosen a member of the council. The president and vice president shall be
chosen annually, by the joint ballot of the general assembly and council, of
the members of the council. Any person having served as a counselor for three
successive years, shall be incapable of holding that office for four years
afterward. Every member of the council shall be a justice of the peace for the
whole commonwealth, by virtue of his office.

In case new additional counties shall hereafter be erected in this state, such
county or counties shall elect a counselor, and such county or counties shall
be annexed to the next neighboring counties, and shall take rotation with such
counties.

The council shall meet annually, at the same time and place with the general
assembly.

The treasurer of the state, trustees of the loan-office, naval officers,
collectors of customs or excise, judge of the admiralty attornies-general,
sheriffs and prothonotaries, shall not be capable of a seat in the general
assembly, executive council, or continental congress.

Sect. 20. The president, and in his absence the vice president with the
council, five of whom shall be a quorum, shall have power to appoint and
commissionate judges, naval officers, judge of the admiralty, attorney general,
and all other officers, civil and military, except such as are chosen by the
general assembly, or the people, agreeable to this frame of government, and the
laws that may be made hereafter; and shall supply every vacancy, in any office,
occasioned by death, resignation, removal, or disqualification, until the
office can be filled in the time and manner directed by law or this
constitution. They are to correspond with other states, and transact business
with the officers of government, civil and military; and to prepare such
business as may appear to them necessary, to lay before the general assembly.
They shall sit as judges to hear and determine on impeachments, taking to their
assistance, for advice only, the justices of the supreme court. And shall have
power to grant pardons, and remit fines, in all cases whatsoever, except in
cases of impeachment; and in cases of treason and murder, shall have power to
grant reprieves, but not to pardon, until the end of the next sessions of
assembly; but there shall be no remission or mitigation of punishments on
impeachments, except by act of the legislature; they are also to take care that
the laws be faithfully executed; they are to expedite the execution of such
measures as may be resolved upon by the general assembly; and they may draw
upon the treasury for such sums as shall be appropriated by the house: they may
also lay embargoes, or prohibit the exportation of any commodity, for any time,
not exceeding thirty days, in the recess of the house only: They may grant such
licenses as shall be directed by law; and shall have power to call together the
general assembly when necessary, before the day to which they shall stand
adjourned. The president shall be commander in chief of the forces of the
state, but shall not command in person, except advised thereto by the council,
and then only so long as they shall approve thereof. The president and council
shall have a secretary, and keep fair books of their proceedings, wherein any
counselor may enter his dissent, with his reasons in support of it.

Sect. 21. All commissions shall be in the name, and by the authority of the
freemen of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania, sealed with the state seal, signed
by the president or vice president, and attested by the secretary; which seal
shall be kept by the council.

Sect. 22. Every officer of state, whether judicial, or executive, shall be
liable to be impeached by the general assembly, either when in office, or after
his resignation, or removal for mal-administration: All impeachments shall be
before the president or vice president and council, who shall hear and
determine the same.

Sect. 23. The judges of the supreme court of judicature shall have fixed
salaries, be commissioned for seven years only, though capable of
re-appointment at the end of that term, but removeable for misbehaviour at any
time by the general assembly; they shall not be allowed to sit as members in
the continental congress, executive council, or general assembly, nor to hold
any other office civil or military, nor to take or receive fees or perquisites
of any kind.

Sect. 24. The supreme court, and the several courts of common pleas of this
commonwealth, shall, besides the powers usually exercised by such courts, have
the powers of a court of chancery, so far as relates to the perpetuating
testimony, obtaining evidence from places not within this state, and the care
of the persons and estates of those who are non compotes mentis, and such other
powers as may be found necessary by future general assemblies, not inconsistent
with this constitution.

Sect. 25. Trials shall be by jury as heretofore: And it is recommended to the
legislature of this state to provide by law against every corruption or
partiality in the choice, return, or appointment of juries.

Sect. 26. Courts of sessions, common pleas, and orphans courts shall be held
quarterly in each city and county; and legislature shall have power to
establish all such other courts as they may judge for the good of the
inhabitants of the state. All courts shall be open, and justice shall be
impartially administered, without corruption or unnecessary delay: All their
officers shall be paid an adequate but moderate compensation for their
services: And if any officer shall take greater or other fees than the laws
allow him, either directly or indirectly, it shall ever after disqualify him
from holding any office in this state.

Sect. 27. All prosecutions shall commence in the name and by the authority of
the freemen of the commonwealth of Pennsylvania; and all indictments shall
conclude with these words, "Against the peace and dignity of the same." The
style of all process hereafter in this state shall be, The commonwealth of
Pennsylvania.

Sect. 28. The person of a debtor, where there is not a strong presumption of
fraud, shall not be continued in prison, after delivering up, bona fide, all
his estate real and personal, for the use of his creditors, in such manner as
shall be hereafter regulated by law. All prisoners shall be bailable by
sufficient sureties, unless for capital offenses, when the proof is evident, or
presumption great.

Sect. 29. Excessive bail shall not be exacted for bailable offenses: And all
fines shall be moderate.

Sect. 30. Justices of the peace shall be elected by the freeholders of each
city and county respectively, that is to say, two or more persons may be chosen
for each ward, township, or district, as the law shall hereafter direct: And
their names shall be returned to the president in council, who shall
commissionate one or more of them for each ward, township, or district so
returning, for seven years, removable for misconduct by the general assembly:
But if any city or county, ward, township, or district in this commonwealth,
shall hereafter incline to change the manner of appointing their justices of
the peace, as settled in this article, the general assembly may make laws to
regulate the same, agreeable to the desire of a majority of the freeholders of
the city or county, ward, township, or district so applying. No justice of the
peace shall sit in the general assembly, unless he first resign his commission,
nor shall he be allowed to take any fees, nor any salary or allowance, except
such as the future legislature may grant.

Sect. 31. Sheriffs and coroners shall be elected annually in each city and
county, by the freemen; that is to say, two persons for each office, one of
whom for each, is to be commissioned by the president in council. No person
shall continue in the office of sheriff more than three successive years, or be
capable of being again elected during four years, afterward. The election
shall be held at the same time and place appointed for the election of
representatives: And the commissioners and assessors, and other officers chosen
by the people, shall also be then and there elected, as has been usual
heretofore, until altered or otherwise regulated by the future legislature of
this state.

Sect. 32. All elections, whether by the people or in general assembly, shall
be by ballot, free and voluntary: And any elector, who shall receive any gift
or reward for his vote, in meat, drink, moneys, or otherwise, shall forfeit his
right to elect for that time, and suffer such other penalty as future laws
shall direct. And any person who shall directly or indirectly give, promise, or
bestow any such rewards to be elected, shall be thereby rendered incapable to
serve for the ensuing year.

Sect. 33. All fees, license money, fines, and forfeitures heretofore granted,
or paid to the governor, or his deputies for the support of government, shall
hereafter be paid into the public treasury, unless altered or abolished by the
future legislature.

Sect. 34. A register's office for the probate of wills, and granting letters
of administration, and an office for the recording of deeds, shall be kept in
each city and county: The officers to be appointed by the general assembly,
removeable at their pleasure, and to be commissioned by the president in
council.

Sect. 35. The printing presses shall be free to every person who undertakes to
examine the proceedings of the legislature, or any part of government.

Sect. 36. As every freeman to preserve his independence, (if without a
sufficient estate) ought to have some profession, calling, trade or farm,
whereby he may honestly subsist, there can be no necessity for, nor use in
establishing offices of profit; the usual effects of whichare dependence and
servility, unbecoming freemen, in the possessors and expectants; faction,
contention, corruption, and disorder among the people. But if any man is called
into public service, to the prejudice of his private affairs, he has a right to
a reasonable compensation: And whenever an office, through increase of fees, or
otherwise, becomes so profitable as to occasion many to apply for it, the
profits ought to be lessened by the legislature.

Sect. 37. The future legislature of this state, shall regulate entails in such
a manner as to prevent perpetuities.

Sect. 38. The penal laws as heretofore used, shall be reformed by the
legislature of this state, as soon as may be, and punishments made in some
cases less san^uinary, and in general more proportionate to the crimes.

Sect. 39. To deter more effectually from the commission of crimes, by
continued visible punishment of long duration, and to make sanguinary
punishments less necessary, houses ought to be provided for punishing by hard
labor, those who shall be convicted of crimes not capital; wherein the
criminals shall be employed for the benefit of the public, or for reparation of
injuries done to private persons: And all persons at proper times shall be
admitted to see the prisoners at their labor.

Sect. 40. Every officer, whether judicial, executive, or military, in
authority under this commonwealth, shall take the following oath or affirmation
of allegiance, and general oath of office, before he enter on the execution of
his office: The oath or affirmation of allegiance. "I do swear (or affirm) That
I will be true and faithful to the commonwealth of Pennsylvania: And that I
will not directly or indirectly do any act or thing prejudicial or injurious to
the constitution or government thereof, as established by the convention." The
oath or affirmation of office. "I (...) do swear (or affirm) That I will
faithfully execute the office of (...) for the (...) of (...) and will do equal
right and justice to all men to the best of my judgment and abilities,
according to law."

Sect. 41. No public tax, custom, or contribution shall be imposed upon, or
paid by the people of this state, except by a law for that purpose: And before
any law be made for raising it, the purpose for which any tax is to be raised
ought to appear clearly to the legislature to be of more service to the
community than the money would be, if not collected; which being well observed,
taxes can never be burdens.

Sect. 42. Every foreigner of good character, who comes to settle in this
state, having first taken an oath or affirmation of allegiance to the same, may
purchase, or by other just means acquire, hold, and transfer land or other real
estate; and after one year's residence shall be deemed a free denizen thereof,
and entitled to all the rights of a natural born subject of this state, except
that he shall not be capable of being elected a representative, until after two
years residence.

Sect. 43. The inhabitants of this state shall have liberty to fowl and hunt in
seasonable times on the lands they hold, and on all other lands therein, not
enclosed; and in like manner to fish in all boatable waters, and others, not
private property.

Sect. 44. A school or schools shall be established in each county by the
legislature, for the convenient instruction of youth, with such salaries to the
masters paid by the public, as may enable them to instruct youth at low prices:
And all useful learning shall be duly encouraged and promoted in one or more
universities.

Sect. 45. Laws for the encouragement of virtue, and prevention of vice and
immorality, shall be made and constantly kept in force, and provision shall be
made for their due execution: And all religious societies or bodies of men
heretofore united or incorporated for the advancement of religion and learning,
or for other pious and charitable purposes, shall be encouraged and protected
in the enjoyment of the privileges, immunities and estates which they were
accustomed to enjoy, or could of right have enjoyed, under the laws and former
constitution of this state.

Sect. 46. The declaration of rights is hereby declared to be a part of the
constitution of this commonwealth, and ought never to be violated on any
pretense whatever.

Sect. 47. In order that the freedom of this commonwealth may be preserved
inviolate for ever, there shall be chosen by ballot by the freemen in each city
and county respectively, on the second Tuesday in October, in the year one
thousand seven hundred and eighty three, and on the second Tuesday in October
in every seventh year thereafter, two persons in each city and county of this
state, to be called, The Council of Censors; who shall meet together on the
second Monday of November, next ensuing their election; the majority of whom
shall be a quorum in every case, except as to calling a convention, in which
two thirds of the whole number elected shall agree; and whose duty it shall be
to enquire whether the constitution has been preserved inviolate in every part?
And whether the legislative and executive branches of government have performed
their duty as guardians of the people, or assumed to themselves, or exercised
other or greater powers than they are entitled to by the constitution: They are
also to enquire whither the public taxes have been justly laid and collected in
all parts of this commonwealth, in what manner the public moneys have been
disposed of, and whether the laws have been duly executed. For these purposes
they shall have power to send for persons, papers, and records; they shall have
authority to pass public censures, to order impeachments, and to recommend to
the legislature the repealing such laws as appear to them to have been enacted
contrary to the principles of the constitution: These powers they shall
continue to have, for and during the space of one year from the day of their
election, and no longer: The said council of censors shall also have power to
call a convention, to meet within two years after their sitting, if there
appear to them an absolute necessity of amending any article of the
constitution which may be defective, explaining such as may be thought not
clearly expressed, and of adding such as are necessary for the preservation of
the rights and happiness of the people: But the articles to be amended, and the
amendments proposed, and such articles as are proposed to be added or
abolished, shall be promulgated at least six months before the day appointed
for the election of such convention, for the previous consideration of the
people, that they may have an opportunity of instructing their delegates on the
subject.

DELAWARE. A DECLARATION of RIGHTS and Fundamental Rules of the Delaware State,
formerly styled, The Government of the Counties of Newcastle, Kent, and Sussex,
upon Delaware.
1. THAT all government of right originates from the people, is founded in
compact only, and instituted solely for the good of the whole.

2. That all men have a natural and unalienable right to worship Almighty God
according to the dictates of their own consciences and understandings; and that
no man ought, or of right can be compelled to attend any religious worship, or
maintain any ministry, contrary to or against his own free will and consent,
and that no authority can or ought to be vested in, or assumed by any power
whatever, that shall in any case interfere with, or in any manner control the
right of conscience, in the free exercise of religious worship.

3. That all persons professing the christian religion, ought for ever to enjoy
equal rights and privileges in this state, unless under color of religion, any
man disturb the peace, the happiness, or safety of society.

4. That the people of this state have the sole, exclusive, and inherent right
of governing and regulating the internal police of the same.

5. That persons entrusted with the legislative and executive powers are the
trustees and servants of the public, and as such accountable for their conduct;
wherefore, whenever the ends of government are perverted, and public liberty
manifestly endangered by the legislative singly, or a treacherous combination
of both, the people may, and of right ought to establish a new, or reform the
old government.

6. That the right in the people to participate in the legislature, is the
foundation of liberty and of all free government, and for this end all
elections ought to be free and frequent, and every freeman having sufficient
evidence of a perma^^nt common interest with, and attachment to the community,
has a right of suffrage.

7. That no power of suspending laws, or the execution of laws, ought to be
exercised unless by the legislature.

8. That for redress of grievances, and for amending and strengthening of the
laws, the legislature ought to be frequently convened.

9. That every man has a right to petition the legislature for the redress of
grievances, in a peaceable and orderly manner.

10. That every member of society has a right to be protected in the enjoyment
of life, liberty, and property, and therefore is bound to contribute his
proportion toward the expense of that protection, and yield his personal
service when necessary, or an equivalent thereto; but no part of a man's
property can be justly taken from him, or applied to public uses without his
own consent, or that of his legal representatives: Nor can any man that is
conscientiously scrupulous of bearing arms in any case, be justly compelled
thereto, if he will pay such equivalent.

11. That retrospective laws, punishing offenses committed be^^^e the existence
of such laws, are oppressive and unjust, and ought not to be made.

12. That every freeman, for every injury done him in his goods, lands, or
person, by any other person, ought to have remedy by the course of the law of
the land, and ought to have justice and right for the injury done to him,
freely without sale, ^^^ly without any denial, and speedily without delay,
according to the law of the land.

13. That trial by jury of ^^cts where they arise, is one of the greatest
securities of the li^^s, liberties, and estates of the people.

14. That in all prosecutions for criminal offenses, every man has a right to
be informed of the accusation against him, to be allowed counsel, to be
confronted with the accusers or witnesses, to examine evidence on oath in his
favor, and to a speedy trial, by an impartial jury, without whose unanimous
consent he ought not to be found guilty.

15. That no man in the courts of common law ought to be compelled to give
evidence against himself.

16. That excessive bail ought not to be required, nor excessive fines imposed,
nor cruel or unusual punishments inflicted.

17. That all warrants without oath to search suspected places, or to seize any
person or his property, are grievous and oppressive; and all general warrants
to search suspected places, or to apprehend all persons suspected, without
naming or describing the place or any person in special, are illegal, and ought
not to be granted.

18. That a well regulated militia is the proper, natural, and safe defense of
a free government.

19. That standing armies are dangerous to liberty, and ought not to be raised
or kept up without the consent of the legislature.

20. That in all cases and at all times the military ought to be under strict
subordination to, and governed by the civil power.

21. That no soldier ought to be quartered in any house in time of peace,
without the consent of the owner; and in time of war in such manner only as the
legislature shall direct.

22. That the independency and uprightness of judges are essential to the
impartial administration of justice, and a great security to the rights and
liberties of the people.

23. That the liberty of the press ought to be inviolably preserved.

The CONSTITUTION, or System of Government, agreed to and resolved upon by the
Representatives in full CONVENTION of the Delaware State, formerly styled, The
Government of the Counties of Newcastle, Kent, and Sussex, upon Delaware; the
said Representatives being chosen by the Freemen of the said State for that
express Purpose.
1. THE government of the counties of Newcastle, Kent and Sussex, upon
Delaware, shall hereafter in all public and other writings be called, The
Delaware State.

2. The legislature shall be formed of two distinct branches: They shall meet
once or oftener in every year, and shall be called, The General Assembly of
Delaware.

3. One of the branches of the legislature shall b^ (...), The House of
Assembly, and shall consist of sever^^^ ^tatives to be chosen for each county
annually* (...) ^^^sons as are freeholders of the same.

4. The other branch shall be called, The (...), and consist of nine members;
three to be chosen for each county at the time of the first election of the
assembly, who shall be freeholders of the county for which they are chosen, and
be upwards of twenty-five years of age. At the end of one year after the
general election, the counselor who had the smallest number of votes in each
county shall be displaced, and the vacancies thereby occasioned supplied by the
freemen of each county choosing the same or another person at a new election in
manner aforesaid. At the end of two years after the first general election, the
counselor who stood second in number of votes in each county shall be
displaced, and the vacancies thereby occasioned supplied (...) a new election
in manner aforesaid. And at the end of ^^^ee years from the first general
election, the counselor who had the greatest number of votes in each county
shall be displaced, and the vacancies thereby occasioned supplied by a new
election in manner aforesaid. And this rotatio^ of a counselor being displaced
at the end of three years in each county, and his office supplied by a new
choice shall be continued afterward in due order annually forever, whereby,
after the first general election, a counselor will remain in trust for three
years from the time of his being elected, and a counselor will be displaced,
and the same or another chosen in each county at every election.

5. The right of suffrage in the election of members for both houses shall
remain as exercised by law at present; and each house shall choose its own
speaker, appoint its own offices, judge of the qualifications and elections of
its o^n numbers, settle its own rules of proceeding, and direct writs of
election for supplying intermediate vacancies. They may also severally expel
any of their own members for misbehaviour, but not a second time in the same
sessions for the same offense, if re-elected; and they shall have all other
powers necessary for the legislature of a free and independent state.

6. All money-bills for the support of government shall originate in the house
of assembly, and may be altered, amended or rejected by the legislative
council. All other bills and ordinances may take rise in the house of assembly
or legislative council, and may be altered, amended or rejected by either.

7. A president or chief magistrate shall be chosen by joint ballot of both
houses, to be taken in the house of assembly, and the box examined by the
speakers of each house in the presence of the other members, and in case the
numbers for the two highest in votes should be equal, then the speaker of the
council shall have an additional casting voice, and the appointment of the
person who has the majority of votes shall be entered at large on the minutes
and journals of each house, and a copy thereof on parchment, certified and
signed by the speakers respectively, and sealed with the great seal of the
state, which they are hereby authorized to affix, shall be delivered to the
person so chosen president, who shall continue in that office three years, and
until the sitting of the next general assembly and no longer, nor be eligible
until the expiration of three years after he shall have been out of that
office. An adequate but moderate salary shall be settled on him during his
continuance in office. He may draw for such sums of money as shall be
appropriated by the general assembly, and be accountable to them for the same;
he may, by and with the advice of the privy council, lay embargoes or prohibit
the exportation of any commodity for any time not exceeding thirty days, in the
recess of the general assembly; he shall have the power of granting pardons or
reprieves, except where the prosecution shall be carried on by the house of
assembly, or the law shall otherwise direct, in which cases no pardon or
reprieve shall be granted, but by a resolve of the house of assembly; and may
exercise all the other executive powers of government, limited and restrained
as by this constitution is mentioned, and according to the laws of the state.
And on his death, inability, or absence from the state, the speaker of the
legislative council for the time being shall be vice president, and in case of
his death, inability, or absence from the state, the speaker of the house of
assembly shall have the powers of a president, until a new nomination is made
by the general assembly.

8. A privy council consisting of four members shall be chosen by ballot, two
by the legislative council, and two by the house of assembly: Provided, that no
regular officer of the army or navy in the service and pay of the continent, or
of this, or of any other state shall be eligible. And a member of the
legislative council or of the house of assembly being chosen of the
privy council, and accepting thereof, shall thereby lose his seat. Three
members shall be a quorum, and their advice and proceedings shall be entered on
record, and signed by the members present, (to any part of which any member may
enter his dissent) to be laid before the general assembly, when called for by
them. Two members shall be removed by ballot, one by the legislative council,
and one by the house of assembly, at the end of two years, and those who remain
the next year after, who shall severally be ineligible for the three next
years. These vacancies, as well as those occasioned by death or incapacity,
shall be supplied by new elections in the same manner. And this rotation of a
privy-counsellor shall be continued afterward in due order annually forever.
The president may by summons convene the privy council at any time when the
public exigences may require, and at such place as he shall think most
convenient, when and where they are to attend accordingly.

9. The president, with the advice and consent of the privy council, may embody
the militia, and act as captain general and commander in chief of them, and the
other military force of this state, under the laws of the same.

10. Either house of the general assembly may adjourn themselves respectively.
The president shall not prorogue, adjourn, or dissolve the general assembly,
but he may, with the advice of the privy council, or on the application of a
majority of either house, call them before the time to which they shall stand
adjourned; and the two houses shall always sit at the same time and place, for
which purpose immediately after every adjournment, the speaker of the house of
assembly shall give notice to the speaker of the other house of the time to
which the house of assembly stands adjourned.

11. The delegates for Delaware to the congress of the united states of
America, shall be chosen annually, or superseded in the mean time, by joint
ballot of both houses in the general assembly.

12. The president and general assembly shall by joint ballot appoint three
justices of the supreme court for the state, one of whom shall be
chief justice, and a judge of admiralty, and also four justices of the courts
of common pleas and orphans courts for each county, one of whom in each court
shall be styled Chief Justice (and in case of division on the ballot, the
president shall have an additional casting voice) to be commissioned by the
president under the great seal, who shall continue in office during good
behavior; and during the time the justices of the said supreme court and
courts of common pleas remain in office, they shall hold none other except in
the militia; any one of the justices of either of said courts shall have power
in case of the non-coming of his brethren, to open and adjourn the court. An
adequate, fixed but moderate salary shall be settled on them during their
continuance in office. The president and privy council shall appoint the
secretary, the attorney general, registers for the probate of wills, and
granting letters of administration, registers in chancery, clerks of the courts
of common pleas and orphans courts, and clerks of the peace, who shall be
commissioned as aforesaid, and remain in office during five years, if they
behave themselves well; during which time the said registers in chancery and
clerks shall not be justices of either of the said courts of which they are
officers, but they shall have authority to sign all writs by them issued, and
take recognizances of bail. The justices of the peace shall be nominated by the
house of assembly, that is to say, They shall name twenty-four persons for each
county, of whom the president, with the approbation of the privy council, shall
appoint twelve, who shall be commissioned as aforesaid, and continue in office
during seven years, if they behave themselves well; and in case of vacancies,
or if the legislature shall think proper to increase the number, they shall be
nominated and appointed in like manner. The members of the legislative and
privy councils shall be justices of the peace for the whole state, during their
continuance in trust; and the justices of the courts of common pleas shall be
conservators of the peace in their respective counties,

13. The justices of the courts of common pleas and orphans courts shall have
the power of holding inferior courts of chancery as heretofore, unless the
legislature shall otherwise direct.

14. The clerks of the supreme court shall be appointed by the chief justice
thereof, and the recorders of deeds by the justices of the courts of common
pleas for each county severally, and commissioned by the president under the
great seal, and continue in office five years, if they behave themselves well.

15. The sheriffs and coroners of the respective counties shall be chosen
annually as heretofore; and any person having served three years as sheriff,
shall be ineligible for three years after; and the president and privy council
shall have the appointment of such of the two candidates returned for the said
offices of sheriff and coroner, as they shall think best qualified, in the same
manner that the governor heretofore enjoyed this power.

16. The general assembly by joint ballot shall appoint the generals and field
officers, and all other officers in the army or navy of this state. And the
president may appoint during pleasure, until otherwise directed by the
legislature, all necessary civil officers not herein before mentioned.

17. There shall be an appeal from the supreme court of Delaware in matters of
law and equity, to a court of seven persons, to consist of the president for
the time being, who shall preside therein, and six others, to be appointed,
three by the legislative council, and three by the house of assembly, who shall
continue in office during good behavior, and be commissioned by the president
under the great seal; which court shall be styled, The Court of Appeals, and
have all the authority and powers heretofore given by law in the last resort to
the king in council, under the old government. The secretary shall be the clerk
of this court, and vacancies therein occasioned by death or incapacity, shall
be supplied by new elections in manner aforesaid.

18. The justices of the supreme court and courts of common pleas, the members
of the privy council, the secretary, the trustees of the loan-office, and
clerks of the courts of common pleas, during their continuance in office, and
all persons concerned in any army or navy contracts, shall be ineligible to
either house of assembly; and any member of either house accepting of any other
of the offices herein before mentioned (excepting the office of a justice of
the peace) shall have his seat thereby vacated, and a new election shall be
ordered.

19, The legislative council and assembly shall have the power of making the
great seal of this state, which shall be kept by the president, or in his
absence by the vice president, to be used by them as occasion may require. It
shall be called, The Great Seal of the Delaware State, and shall be affixed to
all laws and commissions.

20. Commissions shall run in the name of The Delaware State, and bear test by
the president. Writs shall run in the same manner, and bear test in the name of
the chief justice, or justice first named in the commissions for the several
courts, and be sealed with the public seals of such courts. Indictments shall
conclude, Against the peace and dignity of the state.

21. In case of vacancy of the offices above directed to be filled by the
president and general assembly, the president and privy council, may appoint
others in their stead, until there shall be a new election.

22. Every person, who shall be chosen a member of either house, or appointed
to any office or place of trust, before taking his seat, or entering upon the
execution of his office, shall take the following oath, or affirmation if
conscientiously scrupulous of taking an oath, to wit.

"I, A. B. will bear true allegiance to the Delaware state, submit to its
constitution and laws, and do ^o act wittingly whereby the freedom thereof may
be prejudiced."

And also make and subscribe the following declaration, to wit.

"I, A. B. do profess says in God the Father, and in Jesus Christ, his only
Son, and the Holy Ghost, one God, blessed for evermore; and I do acknowledge
the holy scriptures of the Old and New Testament to be given by divine
inspiration."

And all officers shall also take an oath of office.

23. The president when he is out of office, and within eighteen months after,
and all others, offending against the state, either by mal-administration,
corruption, or other means, by which the safety of the commonwealth may be
endangered, within eighteen months after the offense committed, shall be
impeachable by the house of assembly before the legislative council: Such
impeachment to be prosecuted by the attorney general, or such other person or
persons as the house of assembly may appoint, according to the laws of the
land. If found guilty, he or they shall be either forever disabled to hold any
office under government, or removed from office pro tempore, or subjected to
such pains and penalties as the laws shall direct. And all officers shall be
removed on conviction of misbehaviour at common law, or on impeachment, or upon
the address of the general assembly.

24. All acts of assembly in force in this state on the fifteenth day of May
last (and not hereby altered, or contrary to the resolutions of congress, or of
the late house of assembly of this state, shall so continue until altered or
repealed by the legislature of this state, unless where they are temporary, in
which case they shall expire at the times respectively limited for their
duration.

25. The common law of England, as well as so much of the statute law as have
been heretofore adopted in practice in this state, shall remain in force,
unless they shall be altered by a future law of the legislature; such parts
only excepted as are repugnant to the rights and privileges contained in this
constitution and the declaration of rights, etc. agreed to by this convention.

26. No person hereafter imported into this state from Africa ought to be held
in slavery under any pretense whatever, and no negroe, indian, or mulatto
slave, ought to be brought into this state for sale from any part of the world.

27. The first election for the general assembly of this state shall be held on
the twenty-first day of October next, at the court houses in the several
counties, in the manner heretofore used in the election of the assembly, except
as to choice of inspectors and assessors, where assessors have not been chosen
on the sixteenth day of September instant, which shall be made on the morning
of the day of election, by the electors, inhabitants of the respective hundreds
in each county. At which time the sheriffs and coroners for the said counties
respectively are to be elected: And the present sheriffs of the counties of
Newcastle and Kent, may be re-chosen to that office, until the first day of
October in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and seventy-nine,
and the present sheriff for the county of Sussex may be re-chosen to that
office until the first day of October in the year of our Lord one thousand
seven hundred and seventy-eight, provided the freemen think proper to re-elect
them at every general election; and the present sheriffs and coroners
respectively shall continue to exercise their offices as heretofore, until the
sheriffs and coroners to be elected on the said twenty-first day of October
shall be commissioned and sworn into office. The members of the legislative
council and assembly shall meet for transacting the business of the state on
the twenty-eighth day of October next, and continue in office until the first
day of October which will be in the year one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-seven; on which day, and on the first day of October in each year
forever after, the legislative council, assembly, sheriffs and coroners, shall
be chosen by ballot in manner directed by the several laws of this state, for
regulating elections of members of assembly, and sheriffs and coroners; and the
general assembly shall meet on the twentieth day of the same month, for
transacting the business of the state; and if any of the said first and
twentieth days of October should be Sunday, then, and in such case, the
elections shall be held and the general assembly meet the next day following.

28. To prevent any violence or force being used at the said elections, no
persons shall come armed to any of them; and no muster of the militia shall be
made on that day, nor shall any battalion or company give in their votes
immediately succeeding each other, if any other voter who offers to vote
objects thereto; nor shall any battalion or company in the pay of the
continent, or of this or any other state, be suffered to remain at the time and
place of holding the said elections, nor within one mile of the said places
respectively, for twenty-four hours before the opening said elections, nor
within twenty-four hours after the same are closed, so as in any manner to
impede the freely and conveniently carrying on the said election: Provided
always, that every elector may in a peaceable and orderly manner give in his
vote on the said day of election.

29. There shall be no establishment of any one religious sect in this state in
preference to another; and no clergyman or preacher of the gospel of any
denomination shall be capable of holding any civil office in this state, or of
being a member of either of the branches of the legislature, while they
continue in the exercise of the pastoral function.

30. No article of the declaration of rights and fundamental rules of this
state, agreed to by this convention, nor the first, second, fifth, (except that
part thereof that relates to the right of suffrage) twenty-sixth and
twenty-ninth articles of this constitution, ought ever to be violated on any
pretense whatever. No other part of this constitution shall be altered, changed
or diminished, without the consent of five parts in seven of the assembly, and
seven members of the legislative council.

Friday, September 20, 1776.
MARYLAND. A DECLARATION of RIGHTS, and the CONSTITUTION and FORM of
GOVERNMENT, agreed to by the Delegates of Maryland, in free and full CONVENTION
assembled.
A DECLARATION of RIGHTS, etc.
THE parliament of Great Britain, by a declaratory act, having assumed a right
to make laws to bind the colonies in all cases whatsoever, and in pursuance of
such claim endeavored by force of arms to subjugate the united colonies to an
unconditional submission to their will and power, and having at length
constrained them to declare themselves independent states, and to assume
government under the authority of the people. Therefore, we, the delegates of
Maryland, in free and full convention assembled, taking into our most serious
consideration the best means of establishing a good constitution in this state,
for the sure foundation and more permanent security thereof, declare,

1. That all government of right originates from the people, is founded in
compact only, and instituted solely for the good of the whole.

2 That the people of this state ought to have the sole and exclusive right of
regulating the internal government and police thereof.

3. That the inhabitants of Maryland are entitled to the common law of England,
and the trial by jury, according to the course of that law, and to the benefit
of such of the English statutes, as existed at the time of their first
emigration, and which by experience have been found applicable to their local
and other circumstances, and of such others as have been since made in England,
or Great Britain, and have been introduced, used, and practiced, by the courts
of law or equity; and also to all acts of assembly in force on the first of
June seventeen hundred and seventy-four, except such as may have since expired,
or have been, or may be altered by acts of convention, or this declaration of
rights, subject nevertheless to the revision of, and amendment or repeal by,
the legislature of this state; and the inhabitants of Maryland are also
entitled to all property derived to them from or under the charter granted by
his majesty Charles I. to Caecilius Calvert, baron of Baltimore.

4. That all persons invested with the legislative or executive powers of
government are the trustees of the public, and as such accountable for their
conduct: wherefore, whenever the ends of government are perverted, and public
liberty manifestly endangered, and all other means of redress are ineffectual,
the people may, and of right ought, to reform the old or establish a new
government; the doctrine of non-resistance against arbitrary power and
oppression, is absurd, slavish, and destructive of the good and happiness of
mankind.

5. That the right in the people to participate in the legislature is the best
security of liberty, and the foundation of all free government; for this
purpose, elections ought to be free and frequent, and every man having property
in, a common interest with, and attachment to the community, ought to have a
right of suffrage.

6. That the legislative, executive, and judicial powers of government, ought
to be forever separate and distinct from each other.

7. That no power of suspending laws, or the execution of laws, unless by, or
derived from the legislature, ought to be exercised or allowed.

8. That freedom of speech and debates, or proceedings in the legislature,
ought not to be impeached in any other court or judicature.

9. That a place for the meeting of the legislature ought to be fixed, the most
convenient to the members thereof, and to the depository of public records, and
the legislature ought not to be convened or held at any other place, but from
evident necessity.

10. That for redress of grievances, and for amending, strengthening and
preserving the laws, the legislature ought to be frequently convened.

11. That every man has a right to petition the legislature for the redress of
grievances, in a peaceable and orderly manner.

12. That no aid, charge, tax, fee or fees, ought to be set, rated, or levied,
under any pretense, without consent of the legislature.

13. That the levying taxes by the poll is grievous and oppressive, and ought
to be abolished; that paupers ought not to be assessed for the support of
government, but every other person in the state ought to contribute his
proportion of public taxes for the support of government, according to his
actual worth in real or personal property within the state; yet fines, duties,
or taxes, may properly and justly be imposed or laid with a political view for
the good government and benefit of the community.

14. That sanguinary laws ought to be avoided, as far as is consistent with the
safety of the state; and no law to inflict cruel and unusual pains and
penalties ought to be made in any case, or at any time hereafter.

15. That retrospective laws, punishing facts committed before the existence of
such laws, and by them only declared criminal, are oppressive, unjust, and
incompatible with liberty, wherefore no ex post facto law ought to be made.

16. That no law to attaint particular persons of treason or felony ought to be
made in any case, or any time hereafter.

17. That every freeman, for any injury done him in his person or property,
ought to have remedy by the course of the law of the land, and ought to have
justice and right, freely without sale, fully without any denial, and speedily
without delay, according to the law of the land.

18. That the trial of facts where they arise, is one of the greatest
securities of the lives, liberties, and estates of the people.

19. That in all criminal prosecutions, every man has a right to be informed
of the accusation against him, to have a copy of the indictment or charge in
due time (if required) to prepare for his defense, to be allowed counsel, to be
confronted with the witnesses against him, to have process for his witnesses,
to examine the witnesses for and against him on oath, and to a speedy trial by
an impartial jury, without whose unanimous consent he ought not to be found
guilty.

20. That no man ought to be compelled to give evidence against himself in a
common court of law, or in any other court, but in such cases as have been
usually practiced in this state, or may hereafter be directed by the
legislature.

21. That no freeman ought to be taken or imprisoned, or disseised of his
freehold, liberties, or privileges, or outlawed, or exiled, or in any manner
destroyed, or deprived of his life, liberty, or property, but by the judgment
of his peers, or by the law of the land.

22. That excessive bail ought not to be required, nor excessive fines imposed,
nor cruel or unusual punishments inflicted by the courts of law.

23. That all warrants without oath or affirmation, to search suspected places,
or to seize any person or property, are grievous and oppressive; and all
general warrants to search suspected places, or to apprehend suspected persons,
without naming or describing the place, or the person in special, are illegal,
and ought not to be granted.

24. That there ought to be no forfeiture of any part of the estate of any
person for any crime, except murder, or treason against the state, and then
only on conviction and attainder.

25. That a well regulated militia is the proper and natural defense of a free
government.

26. That standing armies are dangerous to liberty, and ought not to be raised
or kept up without consent of the legislature.

27. That in all cases and at all times the military ought to be under strict
subordination to, and control of the civil power.

28. That no soldier ought to be quartered in any house in time of peace,
without the consent of the owner; and in time of war, in such manner only as
the legislature shall direct.

29. That no person, except regular soldiers, mariners, and marines in the
service of this state, or militia when in actual service, ought in any case to
be subject to, or punishable by, martial law.

30. That the independency and uprightness of judges are essential to the
impartial administration of justice, and a great security to the rights and
liberties of the people; wherefore the chancellor and judges ought to hold
commissions during good behavior, and the said chancellor and judges shall be
removed for misbehaviour, on conviction in a court of law, and may be removed
by the governor upon the address of the general assembly, provided that two
thirds of all the members of each house concur in such address. That salaries
liberal but not profuse ought to be secured to the chancellor and the judges
during the continuance of their commissions, in such manner and at such times
as the legislature shall hereafter direct, upon consideration of the
circumstances of this state: No chancellor or judge ought to hold any other
office, civil or military, or receive fees or perquisites of any kind.

31. That a long continuance in the first executive departments of power or
trust is dangerous to liberty, a rotation therefore in those departments is one
of the best securities of permanent freedom.

32. That no person ought to hold at the same time more than one office of
profit, nor ought any person in public trust to receive any present from any
foreign prince or state, or from the united states, or any of them, without the
approbation of this state.

33. That as it is the duty of every man to worship God in such manner as he
thinks most acceptable to him, all persons professing the christian religion
are equally entitled to protection in their religious liberty; wherefore no
person ought by any law to be molested in his person or estate, on account of
his religious persuasion or profession, or for his religious practice, unless
under color of religion, any man shall disturb the good order, peace, or
safety of the state, or shall infringe tbe laws of morality, or injure others
in their natural, civil, or religious rights; nor ought any person to be
compelled to frequent or maintain, or contribute, unless on contract, to
maintain any particular place of worship, or any particular ministry; yet the
legislature may in their discretion lay a general and equal tax for the support
of the christian religion; leaving to each individual the power of appointing
the payment over of the money collected from him, to the support of any
particular place of worship or minister, or for the benefit of the poor of his
own denomination, or the poor in general of any particular county; but the
churches, chapels, glebes, and all other property now belonging to the church
of England, ought to remain to the church of England for ever. And all acts of
assembly lately passed for collecting moneys for building or repairing
particular churches or chapels of ease, shall continue in force and be
executed, unless the legislature shall by act supercede or repeal the same; but
no county court shall assess any quantity of tobacco or sum of money hereafter,
on the application of any vestry-men or churchwardens; and every incumbent of
the church of England, who has remained in his parish, and performed his duty,
shall be entitled to receive the provision and support established by the act,
entitled, "An act for the support of the clergy of the church of England in
this province," till the November court of this present year, to be held for
the county in which his parish shall lie, or partly lie, or for such time as he
has remained in his parish and performed his duty.

34. That every gift, sale, or devise of lands to any minister, public teacher
or preacher of the gospel, as such, or to any religious sect, order, or
denomination, or to, or for the support, use, or benefit of, or in trust for,
any minister, public teacher, or preacher of the gospel, as such, or any
religious sect, order, or denomination; and every gift or sale of goods or
chattels to go in succession, or to take place after the death of the seller or
donor, or to or for such support, use or benefit; and also every devise of
goods or chattels to, or for the support, use, or benefit of any minister,
public teacher, or preacher of the gospel, as such, or any religious sect,
order, or denomination, without the leave of the legislature, shall be void;
except always any sale, gift, lease or devise of any quantity of land not
exceeding two acres, for a church, meeting, or other house of worship, and for
a burying ground, which shall be improved, enjoyed, or used only for such
purpose, or such sale, gift, lease, or devise, shall be void.

35. That no other test or qualification ought to be required on admission to
any office of trust or profit, than such oath of support and fidelity to this
state, and such oath of office as shall be directed by this convention, or the
legislature of this state, and a declaration of a belief in the christian
religion.

36. That the manner of administering an oath to any person, ought to be such
as those of the religious persuasion, profession, or denomination, of which
such person is one, generally esteem the most effectual confirmation by the
attestation of the Divine Being. And that the people called Quakers, those
called Dunkers, and those called Menonists, holding it unlawful to take an oath
on any occasion, ought to be allowed to make their solemn affirmation in the
manner that Quakers have been heretofore allowed to affirm, and to be of the
same avail as an oath in all such cases, as the affirmation of Quakers has
been allowed and accepted within this state, instead of an oath. And further,
on such affirmation, warrants to search for stolen goods, or for the
apprehension or commitment of offenders, ought to be granted, or security for
the peace awarded, and Quakers, Dunkers, or Menonists, ought also, on their
solemn affirmation as aforesaid, to be admitted as witnesses in all criminal
cases not capital.

37. That the city of Annapolis ought to have all its rights, privileges, and
benefits, agreeable to its charter, and the acts of assembly confirming and
regulating the same, subject nevertheless to such alterations as may be made by
this convention or any future legislature.

38. That the liberty of the press ought to be inviolably preserved.

39. That monopolies are odious, contrary to the spirit of a free government
and the principles of commerce, and ought not to be suffered.

40. That no title of nobility or hereditary honors ought to be granted in
this state.

41. That the subsisting resolves of this and the several conventions held for
this colony, ought to be in force as laws, unless altered by this convention or
the legislature of this state.

42. That this declaration of rights, or the form of government to be
established by this convention, or any part of either of them, ought not to be
altered, changed, or abolished by the legislature of this state, but in such
manner as this convention shall prescribe and direct.

This declaration of rights was assented to and passed in convention of the
delegates of the freemen of Maryland, begun and held at Annapolis the 14th day
of August, A. D. 1776.

By order of the convention, MAT. TILGHMAN, President.

The CONSTITUTION or FORM of GOVERNMENT, etc.
1. THAT the legislature consist of two distinct branches, a senate, and a
house of delegates, which shall be styled, The General Assembly of Maryland.

2. That the house of delegates shall be chosen in the following manner: All
freemen above twenty-one years of age, having a freehold of fifty acres of land
in the county in which they offer to vote, and residing therein; and all
freemen having property in this state above the value of thirty pounds current
money, and having resided in the county in which they offer to vote, one whole
year next preceding the election, shall have a right of suffrage in the
election of delegates for such county; and all freemen so qualified shall, on
the first Monday of October, seventeen hundred and seventy-seven, and on the
same day in every year thereafter, assemble in the counties in which they are
respectively qualified to vote, at the courthouse in the said counties, or at
such other place as the legislature shall direct, and when assembled they shall
proceed to elect, viva voce, four delegates for their respective counties, of
the most wise, sensible, and discreet of the people, residents in the county
where they are to be chosen one whole year next preceding the election, above
twenty-one years of age, and having in the state real or personal property
above the value of five hundred pounds current money, and upon the final
casting of the polls, the four persons who shall appear to have the greatest
number of legal votes, shall be declared and returned duly elected for their
respective counties.

3. That the sheriff of each county, or in case of sickness, his deputy
(summoning two justices of the county, who are required to attend for the
preservation of the peace) shall be the judges of the election, and may adjourn
from day to day, if necessary, till the same be finished, so that the whole
election shall be concluded in four days; and shall make his return thereof,
under his hand, to the chancellor of this state for the time being.

4. That all persons, qualified by the charter of the city of Annapolis to vote
for burgesses, shall on the same first Monday of October seventeen hundred and
seventy-seven, and on the same day in every year for ever thereafter, elect
viva voce, by a majority of votes, two delegates, qualified agreeable to the
said charter; that the mayor, recorder, and aldermen of the said city, or any
three of them, be judges of the election, appoint the place in the said city
for holding the same, and may adjourn from day to day as aforesaid, and shall
make return thereof as aforesaid; but the inhabitants of the said city shall
not be entitled to vote for delegates for Anne-Arundel county, unless they have
a freehold of fifty acres of land in the county, distinct from the city.

5. That all persons, inhabitants of Baltimore town, and having the same
qualifications as electors in the county, shall, on the same first Monday in
October, seventeen hundred and seventy-seven, and on the same day in every year
for ever thereafter, at such place in the said town as the judges shall
appoint, elect viva voce, by a majority of votes, two delegates, qualified as
aforesaid; but if the said inhabitants of the town shall so decrease, as that
the number of persons having a right of suffrage therein, shall have been for
the space of seven years successively less than one half the number of voters
in some one county in this state, such town thenceforward cease to send two
delegates or representatives to the house of delegates, until the said town
shall have one half of the number of voters in some one county in this state.

6. That the commissioners of the said town, or any three or more of them, for
the time being, shall be judges of the said election, and may adjourn as
aforesaid, and shall make return thereof as aforesaid; but the inhabitants of
the said town shall not be entitled to vote for, or be elected delegates for
Baltimore county; neither shall the ^nhabitants of Baltimore county, out of the
limits of Baltimore town, be entitled to vote for, or be elected delegates for
the said town.

7. That on refusal, death, disqualification, resignation, or removal out of
this state, of any delegate, or on his becoming governor, or member of the
council, a warrant of election shall issue by the speaker, for the election of
another in his place, of which ten days notice at least, excluding the day of
notice and the day of election, shall be given.

8. That not less than a majority of the delegates, with their speaker (to be
chosen by them by ballot) constitute an house for the transaction of any
business, other than that of adjourning.

9. That the house of delegates shall judge of the elections and qualifications
of delegates.

10. That the house of delegates may originate all money bills, propose bills
to the senate or receive those offered by that body, and assent, dissent, or
propose amendments; that they may inquire, on the oath of witnesses, into all
complaints, grievances, and offenses, as the grand inquest of this state, and
may commit any person for any crime to the public jail, there to remain till he
be discharged by due course of law; they may expel any member for a great
misdemeanor, but not a second time for the same cause; they may examine and
pass all accounts of the state, relating either to the collection or
expenditure of the revenue, or appoint auditors to state and adjust the same;
they may call for all public or official papers and records, and send for
persons, whom they may judge necessary, in the course of their inquiries,
concerning affairs relating to the public interest, and may direct all office
bonds (which shall be made payable to the state) to be sued for any breach of
duty.

11. That the senate may be at full and perfect liberty to exercise their
judgment in passing laws, and that they may not be compelled by the house of
delegates either to reject a money bill which the emergency of affairs may
require, or to assent to some other act of legislation, in their conscience and
judgment injurious to the public welfare; the house of delegates shall not on
any occasion, or under any pretense, annex to, or blend with a money bill, any
matter, clause, or thing, not immediately relating to, and necessary for the
imposing, assessing, levying, or applying the taxes or supplies, to be raised
for the support of government, or the current expenses of the state; and to
prevent altercation about such bills, it is declared, that no bill imposing
duties or customs for the mere regulation of commerce, or inflicting fines for
the reformation of morals, or to enforce the execution of the laws, by which an
incidental revenue may arise, shall be accounted a money bill; but every bill
assessing, levying or applying taxes or supplies for the support of government,
or the current expenses of the state, or apropriating money in the treasury,
shall be deemed a money bill.

12. That the house of delegates may punish, by imprisonment, any person who
shall be guilty of a contempt in their view, by any disorderly or riotous
behavior, or by threats to, or abuse of their members, or by any obstruction
to their proceedings; they may also punish, by imprisonment, any person who
shall be guilty of a breach of privilege, by arresting on civil process, or by
assaulting any of their members, during their sitting, or on their way to, or
return from the house of delegates, or by any assault of, or obstruction to
their officers, in the execution of any order or process, or by assaulting or
obstructing any witness, or any other person, attending on, or on their way to,
or from the house, or by rescuing any person committed by the house; and the
senate may exercise the same power, in similar cases.

13. That the treasurers (one for the western and another for the eastern
shore) and the commissioners of the loan office may be appointed by the house
of delegates during their pleasure, and in case of refusal, death,
resignations, disqualification, or removal, out of the state of any of the said
commissioners or treasurers, in the recess of the general assembly, the
governor, with the advice of the council, may appoint and commission a fit and
proper person to such vacant office, to hold the same until the meeting of the
next general assembly.

14. That the senate be chosen in the following manner: All persons, qualified
as aforesaid to vote for county delegates, shall, on the first day of
September, 1781, and on the same day in every fifth year for ever thereafter,
elect viva voce, by a majority of votes, two persons for their respective
counties, qualified as aforesaid to be elected county delegates, to be electors
of the senate; and the sheriff of each county, or in case of sickness, his
deputy (summoning two justices of the county, who are required to attend for
the preservation of the peace) shall hold and be judge of the said election,
and make return thereof as aforesaid. And all persons qualified as aforesaid,
to vote for delegates for the city of Annapolis and Baltimore town, shall on
the same first Monday of September 1781, and on the same day in every fifth
year for ever thereafter, elect viva voce, by a majority of votes, one person
for the said city and town respectively, qualified as aforesaid, to be elected
a delegate for the said city and town respectively; the said election to be
held in the same manner as the election of delegates for the said city and
town, the right to elect the said elector with respect to Baltimore town to
continue as long as the right to elect delegates for the said town.

15. That the said electors of the senate meet at the city of Annapolis, or
such other place as shall be appointed for convening the legislature, on the
third Monday in September 1781, and on the same day in every fifth year for
ever thereafter and they, or any twenty-four of them so met, shall proceed to
elect, by ballot, either out of their own body, or the people at large, fifteen
senators (nine of whom to be residents on the western, and six to be residents
on the eastern shore) men of the most wisdom, experience and virtue, above
twenty-five years of age, residents of the state above three whole years next
preceding the election, and having real and personal property above the value
of one thousand pounds current money.

16. That the senators shall be balloted for, at one and the same time, and out
of the gentlemen residents of the western shore, who shall be proposed as
senators, the nine who shall, on striking the ballots, appear to have the
greatest numbers in their favor, shall be accordingly declared and returned
duly elected; and out of the gentlemen, residents of the eastern shore, who
shall be proposed as senators, the six who shall, on striking the ballots,
appear to have the greatest number in their favor, shall be accordingly
declared and returned duly elected; and if two or more, on the same shore,
shall have an equal number of ballots in their favor, by which the choice
shall not be determined on the first ballot, then the electors shall again
ballot before they separate, in which they shall be confined to the persons who
on the first ballot shall have had an equal number; and they who shall have the
greatest number in their favor on the second ballot, shall be accordingly
declared and returned duly elected; and if the whole number should not thus be
made up, because of an equal number on the second ballot still being in favor
of two or more persons, then the election shall be determined by lot, between
those who have equal numbers; which proceedings of the electors shall be
certified under their hands, and returned to the chancellor for the time being.

17. That the electors of senators shall judge of the qualifications and
elections of members of their body, and on a contested election shall admit to
a seat, as an elector, such qualified person as shall appear to them to have
the greatest number of legal votes in his favor.

18. That the electors immediately on their meeting, and before they proceed to
the election of senators, take such oath of support and fidelity to this state,
as this convention or the legislature shall direct, and also an oath, "to
elect, without favor, affection, partiality, or prejudice, such persons for
senators as they, in their judgment and conscience, believe best qualified for
the office."

19. That in case of refusal, death, resignation, disqualification, or removal
out of this state, of any senator, or on his becoming governor, or a member of
the council, the senate shall immediately thereupon, or at their next meeting
thereafter, elect by ballot, in the same manner as the electors are above
directed to choose senators, another person in his place for the residue of the
said term of five years.

20. That not less than a majority of the senate, with their president (to be
chosen by them by ballot) shall constitute an house for the transacting any
business, other than that of adjourning.

21. That the senate shall judge of the elections and qualifications of
senators.

22. That the senate may originate any other, except money bills, to which
their assent or dissent only shall be given, and may receive any other bills
from the house of delegates, and assent, dissent, or propose amendments.

23. That the general assembly meet annually, on the first Monday of November,
and if necessary oftener.

24. That each house shall appoint its own officers, and settle its own rules
of proceeding.

25. That a person of wisdom, experience and virtue, shall be chosen governor,
on the second Monday of November, seventeen hundred and seventy seven and on
the second Monday in every year for ever thereafter, by the joint ballot of
both houses, to be taken in each house respectively, deposited in a conference
room; the boxes to be examined by a joint committee of both houses, and the
numbers severally reported, that the appointment may be entered; which mode of
taking the joint ballot of both houses shall be adopted in all cases. But if
two or more shall have an equal number of ballots in their favor, by which the
choice shall not be determined on the first ballot, then a second ballot shall
be taken, which shall be confined to the persons who on the first ballot shall
have had an equal number; and if the ballots should again be equal between two
or more persons, then the election of the governor shall be determined by lot,
between those who have equal numbers; and if the person chosen governor shall
die, resign, remove out of the state, or refuse to act (sitting the general
assembly) the senate and house of delegates shall immediately thereupon proceed
to a new choice in manner aforesaid.

26. That the senators and delegates, on the second Tues-of November, 1777, and
annually on the second Tuesday of November forever thereafter, elected by joint
ballot, in the same manner as senators are directed to be chosen, five of the
most sensible, discreet, and experienced men, above twenty-five years of age,
residents in the state above three years next preceding the election, and
having therein a freehold of lands and tenements, above the value of one
thousand pounds current money, to be the council to the governor, whose
proceedings shall be always entered on record, to any part whereof any member
may enter his dissent, and their advice if so required by the governor, or any
member of the council, shall be given in writing, and signed by the members
giving the same respectively; which proceedings of the council shall be laid
before the senate, or house of delegates, when called for by them, or either of
them. The council may appoint their own clerk, who shall take such oath of
support and fidelity to this state as this convention or the legislature shall
direct, and of secrecy, in such matters as he shall be directed by the board to
keep secret.

27. That the delegates to congress from this state shall be chosen annually,
or superseded in the mean time by the joint ballot of both houses of assembly,
and that there be a rotation in such manner that at least two of the number be
annually changed, and no person shall be capable of being a delegate to
congress for more than three in any term of six years; and no person who holds
any office of profit in the gift of congress shall be eligible to sit in
congress, but if appointed to any such office his seat shall be thereby
vacated: That no person, unless above twenty-one years of age, and a resident
in the state more than five years next preceding the election, and having real
and personal estate in this state above the value of one thousand pounds
current money, shall be eligible to sit in congress.

28. That the senators and delegates, immediately on their annual meeting, and
before they proceed to any business, and every person hereafter elected a
senator or delegate, before he acts as such, shall take an oath of support and
fidelity to this state as aforesaid; and before the election of a governor, or
members of the council, shall take an oath, "to elect without favor,
affection, partiality, or prejudice, such person as governor, or member of the
council, as they in their judgment and conscience believe best qualified for
the office."

29. That the senate and delegates may adjourn themselves respectively: but if
the two houses should not agree on the same time, but adjourn to different
days, then shall the governor appoint and notify one of those days or some day
between, and the assembly shall then meet and be held accordingly; and he
shall, if necessary, by advice of the council, call them before the time to
which they shall in any manner be adjourned, on giving not less than ten days
notice thereof, but the governor shall not adjourn the assembly otherwise than
as aforesaid, nor prorogue or dissolve it at any time.

30. That no person, unless above twenty-five years of age, a resident in this
state above five years next preceding the election; and having in the state
real and personal property above the value of five thousand pounds current
money, one thousand pounds whereof at least to be freehold estate, shall be
eligible as governor.

31. That the governor shall not continue in that office longer than three
years successively, nor be eligible as governor until the expiration of four
years after he shall have been out of that office.

32. That upon the death, resignation, or removal out of this state of the
governor, the first named of the council, for the time being, shall act as
governor, and qualify in the same manner, and shall immediately call a meeting
of the general assembly, giving not less than fourteen days notice of the
meeting, at which meeting a governor shall be appointed, in manner aforesaid,
for the residue of the year.

33. That the governor, by and with the advice and consent of the council, may
embody the militia, and when embodied shall alone have the direction thereof,
and shall also have the direction of all the regular land and sea forces under
the laws of this state, but he shall not command in person, unless advised
thereto by the council, and then only so long as they shall approve thereof,
and may alone exercise all other the executive powers of government, where the
concurrence of the council is not required, according to the laws of this
state, and grant reprieves or pardons for any crime, except in such cases where
the law shall otherwise direct, and may, during the recess of the general
assembly, lay embargoes to prevent the departure of any shipping, or the
exportation of any commodities, for any time not exceeding thirty days in any
one year, summoning the general assembly to meet within the time of the
continuance of such embargo, and may also order and compel any vessel to ride
quarantain, if such vessel, or the port from which she may have come, shall, on
strong grounds, be suspected to be infected with the plague; but the governor
shall not, under any pretense, exercise any power or prerogative by virtue of
any law, statute, or custom, of England or Great Britain.

34. That the members of the council, or any three or more of them, when
convened, shall constitute a board for the transacting of business; that the
governor for the time being shall preside in the council, and be entitled to a
vote on all questions in which the council shall be divided in opinion; and in
the absence of the governor the first named of the council shall preside, and
as such shall also vote in all cases where the other members disagree in their
opinion.

35. That in case of refusal, death, resignation, disqualification, or removal
out of the state, of any person chosen a member of the council, the members
thereof, immediately thereupon, or at their next meeting thereafter, shall
elect by ballot, another person qualified as aforesaid, in his place, for the
residue of the year.

36. That the council shall have power to make the great seal of this state,
which shall be kept by the chancellor for the time being, and affixed to all
laws, commissions, grants, and other public testimonials, as has been
heretofore practiced in this state.

37. That no senator, delegate of assembly, or member of the council, if he
shall qualify as such, shall hold or execute any office of profit, or receive
the profits of any office exercised by any other person, during the time for
which he shall be elected; nor shall any governor be capable of holding any
other office of profit in this state, while he acts as such, and no person
holding a place of profit, or receiving any part of the profits thereof, or
receiving the profits or any part of the profits arising on any agency for the
supply of clothing or provisions for the army or navy, or holding any office
under the united states, or any of them, or a minister or preacher of the
gospel of any denomination, or any person employed in the regular land service,
or marine, of this or the united states, shall have a seat in the general
assembly, or the council of this state.

38. That every governor, senator, delegate to congress, or assembly, and
member of the council, before he acts as such, shall take an oath, "That he
will not receive, directly or indirectly at any time, any part of the profits
of any office held by any other person during his acting in his office of
governor, senator, delegate to congress, or assembly, or member of the council,
or the profits, or any part of the profits, arising on any agency, for the
supply of clothing or provisions for the army or navy."

39. That if any senator, delegate to congress or assembly, or member of the
council, shall hold or execute any office of profit, or receive, directly or
indirectly, at any time, the profits, or any part of the profits, of any office
exercised by any other person, during his acting as senator, delegate to
congress or assembly, or member of the council, his seat, on conviction in a
court of law, by the oath of two credible witnesses, shall be void, and he
shall suffer the punishment for wilful and corrupt perjury, or be banished this
state for ever, or disqualified for ever from holding any office or place of
trust or profit, as the court may judge.

40. That the chancellor, all judges, the attorney general, clerks of the
general court, the clerks of the county courts, the registers of the land
office, and the registers of wills, shall hold their commissions during good
behavior, removable only for misbehaviour, on conviction in a court of law.

41. That there be a register of wills appointed for each county, who shall be
commissioned by the governor, on the joint recommendation of the senate and
house of delegates, and that upon the death, resignation, disqualification, or
removal out of the county, by any register of wills, in the recess of the
general assembly, the governor, with the advice of the council, may appoint and
commission a fit and proper person to such vacant office, to hold the same
until the meeting of the general assembly.

42. That sheriffs shall be elected in each county, by ballot, every third
year, that is to say, two persons for the office of sheriff for each county,
the one of whom having the majority of votes, or if both have an equal number,
either of them, at the discretion of the governor, to be commissioned by the
governor for the said office, and having served for three years, such person
shall be ineligible for the four years next succeeding, bond with security to
be taken every year as usual, and no sheriff shall be qualified to act before
the same is given. In case of death, refusal, resignation, disqualification, or
removal out of the county, before the expiration of the three years, the other
person, chosen as aforesaid, shall be commissioned by the governor to execute
the said office for the residue of the said three years, the said person giving
bond with security as aforesaid; and in case of his death, refusal,
resignation, disqualification, or removal out of the county, before the
expiration of the said three years, the governor, with the advice of the
council, may nominate and commission a fit and proper person to execute the
said office for the residue of the said three years, the said person giving
bond and security as aforesaid; the election shall be held at the same time and
place appointed for the election of delegates, and the justices there summoned
to attend for the preservation of the peace, shall be judges thereof, and of
the qualification of candidates, who shall appoint a clerk to take the ballots:
all freemen above the age of twenty-one years, having a freehold of fifty acres
of land, in the county in which they offer to ballot, and residing therein, and
all freemen above the age of twenty-one years, and having property in the state
above the value of thirty pounds current money, and having resided in the
county in which they offer to ballot, one whole year next preceding the
election, shall have a right of suffrage; no person to be eligible to the
office of sheriff for a county, but an inhabitant of the said county, above the
age of twenty-one years, and having real and personal property in the state
above the value of one thousand pounds current money: the justices aforesaid
shall examine the ballots, and the two candidates properly qualified, having in
each county the majority of legal ballots, shall be declared duly elected for
the office of sheriff for such county, and returned to the governor and
council, with a certificate of the number of ballots for each of them.

43. That every person who shall offer to vote for delegates, or for the
election of the senate, or for the sheriff, shall (if required by any three
persons qualified to vote) before he be admitted to poll, take such oath or
affirmation of support and fidelity to this state, as this convention or the
legislature shall direct.

44. That a justice of the peace may be eligible as a senator, delegate, or
member of the council, and may continue to act as a justice of the peace.

45. That no field officer of the militia be eligible as a senator, delegate,
or member of the council.

46. That all civil officers hereafter to be appointed for the several counties
of this state, shall have been residents of the county respectively for which
they shall be appointed, six months next before their appointment, and shall
continue residents of their county respectively, during their continuance in
office.

47. That the judges of the general court, and justices of the county courts
may appoint the clerks of their respective courts, and in case of refusal,
death, resignation, disqualification, or removal out of the state, or from
their respective shores, of the clerks of the general court or either of them,
in the vacation of the said court; and in case of the refusal, death,
resignation, disqualification, or removal out of the county of any the said
county clerks in the vacation of the county court of which he is clerk, the
governor with the advice of the council may appoint and commission a fit and
proper person to such vacant office respectively, to hold the same until the
meeting of the next general court, or county court, as the case may be.

48. That the governor for the time being, with the advice and consent of the
council, may appoint the chancellor, and all judges and justices, the
attorney general, naval officers, officers in the regular land and sea service,
officers of the militia, registers of the land office, surveyors, and all other
civil officers of government (assessors, constables and overseers of the roads
only excepted) and may also suspend or remove any civil officer who has not a
commission during good behavior, and may suspend any militia officer for one
month, and may also suspend or remove any regular officer in the land or sea
service; and the governor may remove or suspend any militia officer in
pursuance of the judgment of a court martial.

49. That all civil officers of the appointment of the governor and council,
who do not hold commissions during good behavior, shall be appointed annually
in the third week of November, but if any of them shall be re-appointed they
may continue to act without any new commission or qualification; and every
officer, though not re-appointed, shall continue to act until the person who
shall be appointed and commissioned in his stead shall be qualified.

50. That the governor, every member of the council, and every judge and
justice, before they act as such, shall respectively take an oath, "That he
will not, through favor, affection, or partiality, vote for any person to
office, and that he will vote for such person as in his judgment and conscience
he believes most fit and best qualified for the office, and that he has not
made, nor will make, any promise or engagement to give his vote or interest in
favor of any person."

51. That there be two registers of the land office, one upon the western, and
one upon the eastern shore; that short extracts of the grants and certificates
of the land on the western and eastern shores respectively be made in separate
books, at the public expense, and deposited in the offices of the said
registers in such manner as shall hereafter be provided by the general assembly.

52. That every chancellor, judge, register of wills, commissioner of the loan
office, attorney general, sheriff, treasurer, naval officer, register of the
land office, register of the chancery court, and every clerk of the common law
courts, surveyor, and auditor of the public accounts, before he acts as such,
shall take an oath "that he will not directly or indirectly receive any fee or
reward for doing his office of (...) but what is or shall be allowed by law,
nor will directly or indirectly receive the profits or any part of the profits
of any office held by any other person, and that he does not hold the same
office in trust or for the benefit of any other person."

53. That if any governor, chancellor, judge, register of wills, attorney
general, register of the land office, register of the chancery court, or any
clerk of the common law courts, treasurer, naval officer, sheriff, surveyor, or
auditor of public accounts, shall receive directly or indirectly at any time,
the profits or any part of the profits of any office held by any other person
during his acting in the office to which he is appointed; his election,
appointment, and commission, on conviction in a court of law, by oath of two
credible witnesses, shall be void, and he shall suffer the punishment for
wilful and corrupt perjury, or be banished this state forever, or disqualified
for ever, from holding any office or place of trust or profit, as the court may
adjudge.

54. That if any person shall give any bribe, present, or reward, or any
promise, or any security for the payment or delivery of any money, or any other
thing, to obtain or procure a vote, to be governor, senator, delegate to
congress, or assembly, member of the council, or judge, or to be appointed to
any of the said offices, or to any office of profit or trust, now created or
hereafter to be created in this state, the person giving, and the person
receiving the same, on conviction in a court of law, shall be forever
disqualified to hold any office of trust or profit in this state.

55. That every person appointed to any office of profit or trust shall, before
he enters on the execution thereof, take the following oath, to wit, "I, A. B.
do swear, That I do not hold myself bound in allegiance to the king of
Great Britain, and that I will be faithful, and bear true allegiance to the
state of Maryland," and shall also subscribe a declaration of his belief in the
christian religion.

56. That there be a court of appeals, composed of persons of integrity and
sound judgment in the law, whose judgment shall be final and conclusive in all
cases of appeal, from the general court, court of chancery, and court of
admiralty: That one person of integrity and sound judgment in the law, be
appointed chancellor: That three persons of integrity and sound judgment in the
law, be appointed judges of the court now called the provincial court; and that
the same court be hereafter called and known by the name of The General Court;
which court shall sit on the western and eastern shores for transacting and
determining the business of the respective shores, at such times and places as
the future legislature of this state shall direct and appoint.

57. That the style of all laws run thus, Be it enacted, by the general
assembly of Maryland: That all public commissions and grants runs thus, The
state of Maryland, etc. and shall be signed by the governor, and attested by
the chancellor with the seal of the state annexed, except military commissions,
which shall not be attested by the chancellor, or have the seal of the state
annexed: That all writs shall run in the same style, and be tested, s^aled, and
signed as usual: That all indictments shall conclude, Against the peace,
government, and dignity of the state.

58. That all penalties and forfeitures, heretofore going to the king or
proprietary, shall go the state, save only such as the general assembly may
abolish or otherwise provide for.

59. That this form of government, and the declaration of rights, and no part
thereof, shall be altered, changed, or abolished, unless a bill so to alter,
change, or abolish the same, shall pass the general assembly, and be published
at least three months before a new election, and shall be confirmed by the
general assembly after a new election of delegates, in the first session after
such new election; provided that nothing in this form of government which
relates to the eastern shore particularly, shall at any time hereafter be
altered unless for the alteration and confirmation thereof at least two thirds
of all the members of each branch of the general assembly shall concur.

60. That every bill passed by the general assembly, when engrossed, shall be
presented by the speaker of the house of delegates, in the senate, to the
governor for the time being, who shall sign the same, and thereto affix the
great seal, in the presence of the members of both houses: every law shall be
recorded in the general court office of the western shore, and in due time
printed, published, and certified under the great seal, to the several county
courts, in the same manner as has been heretofore used in this state.

This form of government was assented to, and passed in convention of the
delegates of the freemen of Maryland, begun and held at the city of Annapolis,
the 14th of August, A. D. 1776.

By order of the Convention, M. TILGHMAN, President.

VIRGINIA. The CONSTITUTION or FORM of GOVERNMENT, agreed to and resolved upon
by the Delegates and Representatives of the several Counties and Corporations
of Virginia; in a GENERAL CONVENTION held at Williamsburgh, on the 6th of May,
and continued by Adjournments to the 5th of July, 1776.
WE, the delegates and representatives of the good people of Virginia, do
declare the future form of government of Virginia to be as follows:

The legislative, executive, and judiciary department, shall be separate and
distinct, so that neither exercise the powers properly belonging to the other;
nor shall any person exercise the powers of more than one of them at the same
time, except that the justices of the county courts shall be eligible to either
house of assembly.

The legislative shall be formed of two distinct branches, who, together, shall
be a complete legislature. They shall meet once, or oftener, every year, and
shall be called, The General Assembly of Virginia. One of these shall be
called, The House of Delegates, and consist of two representatives to be chosen
for each county, and for the district of West-Augusta, annually, of such men as
actually reside in and are freeholders of the same, or duly qualified according
to law, and also of one delegate or representative to be chosen annually for
the city of Williamsburgh, and one for the borough of Norfolk, and a
representative for each of such other cities and buroughs as may hereafter be
allowed particular representation by the legislature; but when any city or
burough shall so decrease, as that the number of persons having right of
suffrage therein, shall have been for the space of seven years successively,
less than half the number of voters in some one county in Virginia, such city
or borough thenceforward shall cease to send a delegate or representative to
the assembly.

The other shall be called, The Senate, and consist of twenty-four members, of
whom thirteen shall constitute a house to proceed on business, for whose
election the different counties shall be divided into twenty-four districts,
and each county of the respective district, at the time of the election of its
delegates, shall vote for one senator, who is actually a resident and
freeholder within the district, or duly qualified according to law, and is
upwards of twenty-five years of age; and the sheriffs of each county, within
five days at farthest, after the last county election in the district, shall
meet at some convenient place and from the poll so taken in their respective
counties, return as a senator the man who shall have the greatest number of
votes in the whole district. To keep up this assembly by rotation, the
districts shall be equally divided into four classes, and numbered by lot. At
the end of one year after the general election, the six members elected by the
first division shall be displaced, and the vacancies thereby occasioned
supplied from such class or division. by new election in the manner aforesaid.
This rotation shall be applied to each division according to its number, and
continued in due order annually.

The right of suffrage in the election of members for both houses, shall remain
as exercised at present, and each house shall choose its own speaker, appoint
its own officers, settle its own rules of proceeding, and direct writs of
election for the supplying intermediate vacancies.

All laws shall originate in the house of delegates, to be approved of or
readied by the senate, or to be amended with consent of the house of delegates;
except money-bills, which in no instance shall be altered by the senate, but
wholly approved or rejected.

A governor, or chief magistrate shall be chosen annually, by joint ballot of
both houses, to be taken in each house respectively, deposited in the
conference room, the boxes examined jointly by a committee of each house, and
the numbers severally reported to them, that the appointments may be entered
(which shall be the mode of taking the joint ballot of both houses in all
cases) who shall not continue in that (office longer than three years
successively, nor be eligible until the expiration of four years after he shall
have been out of that office. An adequate, but moderate salary shall be settled
on him during his continuance in office; and he shall, with the advice of a
council of state, exercise the executive powers of government, according to the
laws of this commonwealth; and shall not, under any pretense, exercise any
power or prerogative by virtue of any law, statute, or custom of England: But
he shall, with the advice of the council of state, have the power of granting
reprieves or pardons, except where the prosecution shall have been carried on
by the house of delegates, or the law shall otherwise particularly direct; in
which cases no reprieve or pardon shall be granted, but by resolve of the house
of delegates.

Either house of the general assembly may adjourn themselves respectively. The
governor shall not prorogue or adjourn the assembly during their sitting, nor
dissolve them at any time; but he shall, if necessary, either by advice of the
council of state, or on application of a majority of the house of delegates,
call them before the time to which they shall stand prorogued or adjourned.

A privy council, or council of state, consisting of eight members shall be
chosen by joint ballot of both houses of assembly, either from their own
members or the people at large, to assist in the administration of government.
They shall annually choose, out of their own members, a president, who, in case
of death, inability, or absence of the governor from the government, shall act
as lieutenant governor. Four members shall be sufficient to act, and their
advice and proceedings shall be entered on record, and signed by the members
present, (to any part whereof any member may enter his dissent) to be laid
before the gener^l assembly, when called for by them. This council may appoint
their own clerk, who shall have a salary settled by law, and take an oath of
secrecy in such matters as he shall be directed by the board to conceal. A sum
of money appropriated to that purpose, shall be divided annually among the
members, in proportion to their attendance; and they shall be incapable, during
their continuance in office, of sitting in either house of assembly. Two
members shall be removed by joint ballot of both houses of assembly, at the end
of every three years, and be ineligible for the three next years. These
vacancies, as well as those occasioned by death or incapacity, shall be
supplied by new elections in the same manner.

The delegates for Virginia to the continental congress shall be chosen
annually, or superseded in the mean time by joint ballot of both houses of
assembly.

The present militia officers shall be continued, and vacancies supplied by
appointment of the governor, with the advice of the privy council, on
recommendations from the respective county courts; but the governor and council
shall have a power of suspending any officer, and ordering a court martial on
complaint of misbehaviour or inability, or to supply vacancies of officers
happening when in actual service.

The governor may embody the militia, with the advice of the privy council;
and, when embodied, shall alone have the direction of the militia under the
laws of the country.

The two houses of assembly shall, by joint ballot, appoint judges of the
supreme court of appeals, and general court, judges in chancery, judges of
admiralty, secretary, and the attorney general, to be commissioned by the
governor, and continue in office during good behavior. In case of death,
incapacity, or resignation, the governor, with the advice of the privy council,
shall appoint persons to succeed in office, to be approved or displaced by both
houses. These officers shall have fixed and adequate salaries, and, together
with all others holding lucrative offices, and all ministers of the gospel of
every denomination, be incapable of being elected members of either house of
assembly, or the privy council.

The governor, with the advice of the privy council, shall appoint justices of
the peace for the counties; and in c^se of vacancies, or a necessity of
increasing the number hereafter, such appointments to be made upon the
recommendation of the respective county courts. The present acting secretary in
Virginia, and clerks of all the county courts, shall continue in office. In
case of vacancies, either by death, incapacity, or resignation, a secretary
shall be appointed, as before directed, and the clerks by the respective
courts. The present and future clerks shall hold their offices during good
behavior, to be judged of and determined in the general court. The sheriffs
and coroners shall be nominated by the respective courts, approved by the
governor with the advice of the privy council, and commissioned by the
governor. The justices shall appoint constables; and all fees of the aforesaid
officers be regulated by law.

The governor, when he is out of office, and others offending against the
state, either by mal-administration, corruption, or other means, by which the
safety of the state may be endangered, shall he impeachable by the house of
delegates. Such impeachment to be prosecuted by the attorney general, or such
other person or persons as the house may appoint, in the general court,
according to the laws of the land. If found guilty, he or they shall be either
for ever disabled to hold any office under government, or be removed from such
office pro tempore, or subjected to such pains or penalties as the law shall
direct.

If all or any of the judges of the general court should, on good grounds (to
be judged of by the house of delegates) be accused of any of the crimes or
offenses above mentioned, such house of delegates may in like manner impeach
the judge or judges so accused, to be prosecuted in the court of appeals; and
he or they, if found guilty, shall be punished in the same manner as is
prescribed in the preceding clause.

Commissions and grants shall r^n, In the name of the commonwealth of Virginia,
and bear test by the governor, with the seal of the commonwealth annexed. Writs
shall run in the same manner, and bear test by the clerks of the several
courts. Indictments shall conclude, Against the peace and dignity of the
commonwealth.

A treasurer shall be appointed annually, by joint ballot of both houses.

All escheats, penalties, and forfeitures, heretofore going to the king, shall
go to the commonwealth, save only such as the legislature may abolish, or
otherwise provide for.

The territories contained within the charters erecting the colonies of
Maryland, Pennsylvania, North and South Carolina, are hereby ceded, released,
and for ever confirmed to the people of these colonies respectively, with all
the rights of property, jurisdiction and government, and all other rights
whatsoever, which might at any time heretofore have been claimed by Virginia,
except the free navigation and use of the rivers Potomaque and Pokomoke, with
the property of the Virginia shores and strands bordering on either of the said
rivers, and all improvements which have been or shall be made thereon. The
western and northern extent of Virginia shall in all other respects stand as
fixed by the charter of king James I. in the year one thousand six hundred and
nine, and by the public treaty of peace between the courts of Britain and
France, in the year one thousand seven hundred and sixty three; unless, by act
of this legislature, one or more governments be established westward of the
Allegheny mountains. And no purchases of lands shall be made of the indian
natives but on behalf of the public, by authority of the general assembly.

NORTH CAROLINA. The CONSTITUTION or FORM of GOVERNMENT, agreed to and resolved
upon, by the Representatives of the Freemen of the State of North Carolina,
elected and chosen for that particular Purpose, in CONGRESS assembled, at
Halifax, Dec. 18, 1776.
A DECLARATION of RIGHTS, etc.
1. THAT all political power is vested in, and derived from, the people only.

2. That the people of this state ought to have the sole and exclusive right of
regulating the intern^l government and police thereof.

3. That no man, or set of men are entitled to exclusive or separate emoluments
or privileges from the community, but in consideration of public services.

4. That the legislative, executive, and supreme judicial powers of government,
ought to be for ever separate and distinct from each other.

5. That all powers of suspending laws, or the execution of laws by any
authority, without consent of the representatives of the people, is injurious
to their rights, and ought not to be exercised.

6. That elections of members, to serve as representatives in general assembly,
ought to be free.

7. That in all criminal pros^cutions every man has a right to be informed of
the accusation against him, and to confront the accusers and witnesses with
other testimony, and shall not be compelled to give evidence against himself.

8. That no freeman shall be put to answer any criminal charge but by
indictment, presentment, or impeachment.

9. That no freeman shall be convicted of any crime, but by the unanimous
verdict of a jury of good and lawful men, in open court as heretofore used.

10. That excessive bail should not be required, nor excessive fines imposed,
nor cruel or unusual punishments inflicted.

11. That general warrants whereby an officer or messenger may be commanded to
search s^spected places, without evidence of the fact committed, or to seize
any person or persons not named, whose offenses are not particularly described
and supported by evidence, are dangerous to liberty, and ought not to be
granted.

12. That no freeman ought to be taken, imprisoned, or disseized of his
freehold, liberties or privileges, or outlawed or exiled or in any manner
destroyed or deprived of his life, liberty, or property, but by the law of the
land.

13. That every freeman restrained of his liberty, is entitled to a remedy, to
enquire into the lawfulness thereof, and to remove the same if unlawful, and
that such remedy ought not to be denied or delayed.

14. That in all controversies at law respecting property, the ancient mode of
trial by jury is one of the best securities of the rights of the people, and
ought to remain sacred and inviolable.

15. That the freedom of the press is one of the great bulwarks of liberty, and
therefore ought never to be restrained.

16. That the people of this state ought not to be taxed, or made subject to
the payment of any impost or duty, without the consent of themselves, or their
representatives in general assembly freely given.

17. That the people have a right to bear arms for the defense of the state;
and as standing armies in time of peace are dangerous to liberty, they ought
not to be kept up; and th^^ the military should be kept under strict
subordination to, and governed by the civil power.

18. That the people have a right to assemble together, to consult for their
common good, to instruct their representatives, and to apply to the legislature
for redress of grievances.

19. That all men have a natural and unalienable right to worship Almighty God,
according to the dictates of their own conscience.

20. That for redress of grievances, and for amending and strengthening the
laws, elections ought to be often held.

21. That a frequent recurrence to fundamental principles is absolutely
necessary to preserve the blessings of liberty.

22. That no hereditary emoluments, privileges, or honors, o^ght to be granted
or conferred in this state.

23. That perpetuitive and monopolies are contrary to the genius of ^ f^ee
state, and ought not to be allowed.

24. That retrospective laws, punishing facts committed before the existe^ce of
such laws, and by them only declared criminal, are oppressive, unjust, and
incompatible with liberty, wherefore no ex po^t facto law ought to be made.

25. The property of the soil in a free government being one of the essential
rights of the collective body of the people, it is necessary, in order to avoid
future disputes, that the limits of the state should be ascertained with
precision; and as the former temporary line between North and South Carolina
was confirmed and extended by commissioners, appointed by the legislatures of
the two states, agreeable to the order of the late king George II. in council,
that line, and that only, should be esteemed the southern boundary of this
state, that is to say, beginning on the sea side at a cedar stake, at or near
the mouth of little river (being the southern extremity of Brunswic county),
and running from thence a north-west course through the boundary house, which
stands in thirty three degrees fifty six minutes, to thirty five degrees north
latitude, and from thence a west course, so far as is mentioned in the charter
of king Charles II. to the late proprietors of Carolina: Therefore all the
territory, seas, waters, and harbors, with their appurtenance, lying between
the line above described, and the southern line of the state of Virginia, which
begins on the sea shore, in thirty six degrees thirty minutes north latitude,
and from thence runs west, agreeable to the said charter of king Charles, are
the right and property of the people of this state, to be held by them in
sovereignty; any partial line, without the consent of the legislature of this
state, at any time thereafter directed, or laid out in anywise notwithstanding.
Provided always, That this declaration of right shall not prejudice any nation
or nations of indians, from enjoying such hunting grounds as may have been, or
hereafter shall be secured to them, by any former or future legislature of this
state. And provided also, That it shall not be construed so as to prevent the
establishment of one or more governments westward of this state, by consent of
the legislature. And provided further, That nothing herein contained shall
affect the titles or possessions of individuals, holding or claiming under the
laws heretofore in force, or grants heretofore made by the late king George
III. or his predecessors, or the late lords proprietors, or any of them.

The CONSTITUTION or FORM of GOVERNMENT, etc.
WHEREAS allegiance and protection are in their nature reciprocal, and the one
should of right he refused when the other is withdrawn; and whereas George the
Third, king of Great Britain, and late sovereign of the British American
colonies, has not only withdrawn from them his protection, but by an act of
the British legislature declared the inhabitants of these states out of the
protection of the British crown, and all their property found upon the high
seas, liable to be seized and confiscated to the uses mentioned in the said
act; and the said George the Third has also sent fleets and armies to prosecute
a cruel war against them, for the purpose of reducing the inhabitants of the
said colonies to a state of abject slavery; in consequence whereof all
government under the said king within the said colonies has ceased, and a
total dissolution of government in many of them has taken place. And whereas
the continental congress, having considered the premises, and other previous
violations of the rights of the good people of America, have therefore
declared, that the thirteen united colonies are of right wholly absolved from
all alle^^ance to the British crown, or any other foreign jurisdiction
whatsoever; and that the said colonies now are, and for ever shall be, free and
independent states: Wherefore, in our present state, in order to prevent
anarchy and confusion, it becomes necessary that government should be
established in this state; therefore we, the representatives of the freemen of
North Carolina, chosen and assembled in congress, for the express purpose of
framing a constitution, under the authority of the people, most conducive to
their happiness and prosperity, do declare, that a government for this state
shall be established in manner and form following, to wit.

1. That the legislative authority shall be vested in two distinct branches,
both dependent on the people, to wit, a Senate, and House of Commons.

2. That the senate shall be composed of representatives annually chosen by
ballot, one for each county in the state.

3. That the house of commons shall be composed of representatives annually
chosen by ballot, two for each county, and one for each of the towns of
Edentown, New-bern, Wilmington, Salisbury, Hillsborough, and Hallifax.

4. That the senate and house of commons, assembled for the purpose of
legislation, shall be denominated, The General Assembly.

5. That each member of the senate shall have usually resided in the county in
which he is chosen, for one year immediately preceding his election, and for
the same time shall have possessed, and continue to possess, in the county
which he represents, not less than three hundred acres of land in fee.

6. That each member of the house of commons shall have usually resided in the
county in which he is chosen, for one year immediately preceding his election,
and for six months shall have possessed, and continue to possess, in the county
which he represents, not less than one hundred acres of land in fee, or for the
term of his own life.

7. That all freemen of the age of twenty-one years, who have been inhabitants
of any one county within the state, twelve months immediately preceding the day
of any election, and possessed of a freehold within the same county of fifty
acres of land for six months next before, and at the day of election, sh^l
(...) ^ntitled to vote for a member of the senate.

8. That all freemen of the age of twenty-one years, who have been inhabitants
of any county within the state twelve months immediately preceding the day of
any election, and shall have paid public taxes, shall be entitled to vote for
members of the house of commons, for the county in which he resides.

9. That all persons possessed of a freehold in any town in this state, having
a right of representation, and also all freemen who have been inhabitants of
any such town twelve months next before, and at the day of election, and shall
have paid public taxes, shall be entitled to vote for a member to represent
such town in the house of commons. Provided always, That this section shall not
entitle any inhabitant of such town to vote for members of the house of commons
for the county in which he may reside, nor any freeholder in such county who
resides without or beyond the limits of such town, to vote for a member for
said town.

10. That the senate and house of commons when met, shall each have power to
choose a speaker, and other their officers, be judges of the qualifications and
elections of their members; sit upon their own adjournments from day to day;
and prepare bills to be passed into laws. The two houses shall direct writs of
election for supplying intermediate vacancies, and shall also jointly, by
ballot, adjourn them^^lves to any future day and place.

11. That all bills shall be read three times in each house before they pass
into laws, and be signed by the speaker of both houses.

12. That every person who shall be chosen a member of the senate or house of
commons, or appointed to any office or place of trust, before taking his seat,
or entering upon the execution of his office, shall take an oath to the state,
and all officers shall also take an oath of office.

13. That the general assembly shall, by joint ballot of both houses, appoint
judges of the supreme courts of law and equity, judges of admiralty, and
attorney general, who shall be commissioned by the governor, and hold their
offices during good behavior.

14. That the senate and house of commons shall have power to appoint the
generals and field officers of the militia, and all officers of the regular
army of this state.

15. That the senate and house of commons, jointly, at their first meeting
after each annual election, shall by ballot elect a governor for one year, who
shall not be eligible to that office longer than three years in six successive
years. That no person under thirty years of age, and who has not been a
resident in this state above five years, and having in the state a freehold in
lands and tenements above the value of one thousand pounds, shall be eligible
as a governor.

16. That the senate and house of commons, jointly, at their first meeting
after each annual election, shall by ballot elect seven persons to be a council
of state for one year, who shall advise the governor in the execution of his
office, and that four members shall be a quorum; their advice and proceedings
shall be entered in a journal to be kept for that purpose only, and signed by
the members present, to any part of which any member present may enter his
dissent. And such journal shall be laid before the general assembly, when
called for by them.

17. That there shall be a seal of this state, which shall be kept by the
governor, and used by him as occasion may require; and shall be called, The
Great Seal of the state of North Carolina, and be affixed to all grants and
commissions.

18. The governor for the time being, shall be captain general and commander in
chief of the militia; and in the recess of the general assembly shall have
power, by and with the advice of the council of state, to embody the militia
for the public safety.

19. That the governor for the time being, shall have power to draw for, and
apply such sums of money as shall be voted by the general assembly for the
contingencies of government, and be accountable to them for the same. He also
may, by and with the advice of the council of state, lay embargoes, or prohibit
the importation of any commodity, for any term not exceeding thirty days at any
one time, in the recess of the general assembly; and shall have the power of
granting pardons and reprieves, except where the prosecution shall be carried
on by the general assembly, or the law shall otherwise direct; in which case he
may, in the recess, grant a reprieve until the next sitting of the general
assembly; and may exercise all the other executive powers of government,
limited and restrained, as by this constitution is mentioned, and according to
the laws of the state. And on his death, inability, or absence from the state,
the speaker of the senate for the time being; and in case of his death,
inability, or absence from the state, the speaker of the house of commons shall
exercise the powers of government, after such death, or during such absence or
inability, of the governor, or speaker of the senate, or until a new nomination
is made by the general assembly.

20. That in every case where any officer, the right of whose appointment is by
this constitution vested in the general assembly, shall, during their recess
die, or his office by other means become vacant, the governor shall have power,
with the advice of the council of state, to fill up such vacancy by granting a
temporary commission, which shall expire at the end of the next session of the
general assembly.

21. That the governor, judges of the supreme court of law and equity, judges
of admiralty, and attorney general, shall have adequate salaries, during their
continuance in office.

22. That the general assembly shall, by joint ballot of both houses, annually
appoint a treasurer or treasurers for this state.

23. That the governor, and other officers offending against the state, by
violating any part of this constitution, mal-administration, or corruption, may
be prosecuted on the impeachment of the general assembly, or presentment of the
grand jury of any court of supreme jurisdiction in this state.

24. That the general assembly shall, by joint ballot of both houses,
triennally appoint a secretary for this state.

25. That no persons, who heretofore have been, or hereafter may be receivers
of public moneys, shall have a seat in either house of general assembly, or be
eligible to any office in this state, until such person shall have fully
accounted for, and paid into the treasury, all sums for which they may be
accountable and liable.

26. That no treasurer shall have a seat either in senate, house of commons, or
council of state, during his continuance in that office, or before he shall
have finally settled his accounts with the public, for all the moneys which may
be in his hands, at the expiration of his office, belonging to the state, and
has paid the same into the hands of the succeeding treasurer.

27. That no officer in the regular army or navy, in the service and pay of the
united states, of this or any other state, nor any contractor or agent for
supplying such army or navy with clothing or provisions, shall have a seat
either in the senate, house of commons, or council of state, or be eligible
thereto; and any member of the senate, house of commons, or council of state,
being appointed to, and accepting of such office, shall thereby vacate his seat.

28. That no member of the council of state shall have a seat either in the
senate or house of commons.

29. That no judge of the supreme court of law or equity, or judge of
admiralty, shall have a seat in the senate, house of commons, or council of
state.

30. That no secretary of this state, attorney general, or clerk of any court
of record, shall have a seat in the senate, house of commons, or council of
state.

31. That no clergyman or preacher of the gospel, of any denomination, shall be
capable of being a member of either the senate, house of commons, or cou^^il of
state, while he continues in the exercise of the (...) function.

32. That no person who shall deny the being of God, or the truth of the
Protestant religion, or the divine authority either of the Old or New
Testament, or who shall hold religious principles incompatible with the freedom
and safety of the state, shall be capable of holding any office, or place of
trust or profit in the civil department within this state.

33. That the justices of the peace within their respective counties in this
state, shall in future be recommended to the governor for the time being, by
the representatives in general assembly, and the governor shall commission them
accordingly; and the justices, when so commissioned, shall hold their offices
during good behavior, and shall not be removed from office by the general
assembly, unless for misbehaviour, absence, or inability.

34. That there shall be no establishment^ f^^ny one religious church or
denomination in this state in preference to any other, neither shall any
person, on any pretense whatsoever, be compelled to attend any place of worship
contrary to his own faith or judgment, nor be obliged to pay for the purchase
of any glebe, or the building of any house of worship, or for the maintenance
of any minister or ministry, contrary to what he believes right, or has
voluntarily and personally engaged to perform; but all persons shall be at
liberty to exercise their own mode of worship. Provided, That nothing herein
contained shall be constructed to exempt preachers of treasonable or seditious
discourses from legal trial and punishment.

35. That no person in the state shall hold more than one lucrative office at
any one time. Provided, That no appointment in the militia, or the office of a
justice of the peace, shall be considered as a lucrative office.

36. That all commissions and grants shall run in the name of the state of
North Carolina, and bear test, and be signed by the governor. All writs shall
run in the same manner, and bear test, and be signed by the clerks of the
respective courts. Indictments shall conclude, Against the peace and dignity of
the state.

37. That the delegates for this state to the continental congress, while
necessary, shall be chosen annually by the general assembly, by ballot, but may
be superseded in the mean time in the same manner, and no person shall be
elected to serve in that capacity for more than three years successively.

38. That there shall be a sheriff, coroner, or coroners, and constables, in
each county within this state.

39. That the person of a debtor, where there is not a strong presumption of
fraud, shall not be continued in prison, after delivering up, bona fide, all
his estate, real and personal, for the use of his creditors, in such manner as
shall be hereafter regulated by law. All prisoners shall be bailable by
sufficient sureties, unless for capital offenses, when the proof is evident, or
the presumption great.

40. That every foreigner who comes to settle in this state, having first taken
an oath of allegiance to the same, may purchase, or by other just means
acquire, hold, and transfer land, or other real estate; and after one year's
residence, shall be deemed a free citizen.

41. That a school or schools shall be established by the legislature, for the
convenient instruction of youth, with such salaries to the masters, paid by the
public, as may enable them to instruct at low prices; and all useful learning
shall be duly encouraged and promoted in one or more universities.

42. That no purchase of lands shall be made of the indian natives, but on
behalf of the public, by authority of the general assembly.

43. That the future legislature of this st^te shall regulate intails in such a
manner as to prevent is perpetuities.

44. That the declaration of rights is hereby declared to be part of the
constitution of this state, and ought never to be violated, on any pretense
whatsoever.

45. That any member of either house of general assembly shall have liberty to
dissent from, and protest against, any act or resolve which he may think
injurious to the public, or any individual, and have the reasons of his dissent
entered on the journals.

46. That neither house of the general assembly shall proceed upon public
business, unless a majority of all the members of such house are actually
present; and that upon a motion made and seconded, the yeas and nays upon any
question shall be taken and entered on the journals; and that the journals of
the proceedings of both houses of the general assembly shall be printed, and
made public, immediately after their adjournment.

This constitution is not intended to preclude the present congress from making
a temporary provision for the well ordering of this state, until the general
assembly shall establish government agreeable to the mode herein before
described.

RICHARD CASWELL, PRESIDENT.
Dec^^ber the eighteenth, one thous^nd seven hundred and sev^nty six, read the
third time, and ratified in open congress.

By Order, JAMES GREEN, Jun. Secretary.



SOUTH CAROLINA. An ACT for establishing the CONSTITUTION of the State of
South Carolina, passed the 19th day of March, 1778.
WHEREAS the constitution or form of government agreed to and resolved upon by
the freemen of this country, met in congress the 26th day of March, 1776, was
temporary only, and suited to the situation of their public affairs at that
period, looking forward to an accommodation with Great Britain, an event then
desired: And whereas the united colonies of America have been since constituted
independent states, and the political connection heretofore subsisting between
them and Great Britain entirely dissolved, by the declaration of the honorable
the continental congress, dated the 4th day of July 1776, for the many great
and weighty reasons therein particularly set forth; it therefore becomes
absolutely necessary to frame a constitution suitable to that great event: Be
it therefore constituted and enacted, by his excellency Rawlins Lowndes, Esquire.
president and commander in chief in and over the state of South Carolina, by
the honorable the legislative council and general assembly, and by the
authority of the same, That the following articles agreed upon by the freemen
of this state, now met in general assembly, be deemed and held the constitution
and form of government of the said state, unless altered by the legislative
authority thereof: which constitution or form of government shall immediately
take place and be of force from the passing of this act, excepting such parts
as are hereafter mentioned and specified.

1. That the style of this country be hereafter, The State of South Carolina.

2. That the legislative authority be vested in a general assembly, to consist
of two distinct bodies, a senate and house of representatives; but, that the
legislature of this state, as established by the constitution or form of
government, passed the 26th of March 1776, shall continue and be in full force,
until the 29th day of November next ensuing.

3. That as soon as may be after the first meeting of the senate and house of
representatives, and at every first meeting of the senate and house of
representatives thereafter, to be elected by virtue of this constitution, they
shall, jointly, in the house of representatives, choose by ballot, from among
themselves or from the people at large, a governor and commander in chief, a
lieutenant governor, both to continue for two years, and a privy council, all
of the protestant religion; and till such choice shall be made, the former
president, or governor and commander in chief, and vice president, or
lieutenant governor, as the case may be, and privy council, shall continue to
act as such.

4. That a member of the senate or house of representatives, being chosen and
acting as governor and commander in chief, or lieutenant governor, shall vacate
his seat, and another person shall be elected in his room.

5. That every person who shall be elected governor and commander in chief of
the state, or lieutenant governor, or a member of the privy council, shall be
qualified as follows, that is to say, The governor and lieutenant governor
shall have been residents in this state for ten years, and the members of the
privy council five years, preceding their said election, and shall have in this
state a settled plantation or freehold, in their and each of their own right,
of the value of at least ten thousand pounds currency, clear of debt; and on
being elected, they shall respectively take an oath of qualification in the
house of representatives.

6. That no future governor and commander in chief who shall serve for two
years, shall be eligible to serve in the said office after the expiration of
the said term, until the full end and term of four years,

7. That no person in this state shall hold the office of governor thereof, or
lieutenant governor, and any other office or commission, civil or military,
(except in the militia) either in this or any other state; or under the
authority of the continental congress, at one and the same time.

8. That in case of the impeachment of the governor and commander in chief, or
his removal from office, death, resignation, or absence from the state, the
lieutenant governor shall succeed to his office, and the privy council shall
choose, out of their own body, a lieutenant governor of the state. And in case
of the impeachment of the lieutenant governor, or his removal from the office,
death, resignation, or absence from the state, one of the privy council, to be
chosen by themselves, shall succeed to his office, until a nomination to those
offices respectively, by the senate and house of representatives, for the
remainder of the time for which the officer so impeached, removed from offi^e,
dying, resigning, or being absent, was appointed.

9. That the privy council shall consist of the lieutenant governor for the
time being, and eight other members, five of whom shall be a quorum, to be
chosen as before directed, four to serve for two years, and four for one year,
and at the expiration of one year, four others shall be chosen, in the room of
the last four to serve for two years, and all future members of the privy
council shall thenceforward be elected to serve for two years, whereby there
will be a new election every year for half of the privy council, and a constant
ro^ation established; but no member of the privy council, who shall serve for
two years shall be eligible to serve therein after the expiration of the said
term, until the full end and term of four years: Provided always, that no
officer of the army or navy, in the service of the continent or this state, nor
judge of any of the courts of law shall be eligible; nor shall the father, son
or brother of the governor for the time being, be elected in the privy council
during his administration. A member of the senate or house of representatives,
being chosen of the privy council, shall not thereby lose his seat in the
senate or house of representatives, unless he be elected lieutenant governor,
in which case he shall, and another person shall be chosen in his stead. The
privy council is to advise the governor and commander in chief, when required,
but he shall not he bound to consult them unless directed by law. If a member
of the privy council shall die or depart the state, during the recess of the
general assembly, the privy council shall choose another to act in his room,
until a nomination by the senate and house of representatives shall take place.
The clerk of the privy council shall keep a regular journal of all their
proceedings, in which shall be entered the yeas and nays on every question, and
the opinion, with the reasons at large, of any member who desires it; which
journal shall be laid before the legislature, when required by either house.

10. That in case of the absence from the seat of government, or sickness of
the governor and the lieutenant governor, any one of the privy council may be
empowered by the governor, under his hand and seal, to act in his room; but
such appointment shall not vacate his seat in the senate, house of
representatives, or privy council.

11. That the executive authority be vested in the governor and commander in
chief, in manner herein mentioned.

12. That each parish and district throughout this state, shall on the last
Monday in November next, and the day following, and on the same days of every
second year thereafter, elect, by ballot, one member of the senate; except the
district of St. Philip and St. Michael's parishes, Charlestown, which shall
elect two members, and except also the district between Broad and Saludy
rivers, in three divisions, viz. the lower district, little river district, and
upper or spartan district, each of which said divisions shall elect one member;
and except the parishes of St. Matthew and Orange, which shall elect one
member; and also except the parishes of Prince George and All Saints, which
shall elect one member. And the election of senators for such parishes
respectively, shall, until otherwise altered by the legislature, be at the
parish of Prince George, for the said parish and the parish of All Saints, and
at the parish of St. Matthew for that parish and the parish of Orange; to meet
on the first Monday in January then next, at the seat of government, unless the
casualties of war or contagious disorders should render it unsafe to meet
there; in which case the governor and commander in chief for the time being,
may, by proclamation, with the advice and consent of the privy council, appoint
a more secure and convenient place of meeting; and to continue for two years,
from the said last Monday in November; and that no person shall be eligible to
a seat in the said senate, unless he be of the Protestant religion, and has
attained the age of thirty years, and has been a resident in this state at
least five years. Not less than thirteen members shall be a quorum to do
business, but the president or any three members may adjourn from day to day.
No person who resides in the parish or district for which he is elected, shall
take his seat in the senate, unless he possesses a settled estate and freehold,
in his own right, in the said parish or district, of the value of two thousand
pounds currency at least, clear of debt; and no non-resident shall be eligible
to a seat in the said senate, unless he is owner of a settled estate and
freehold, in his own right, in the parish or district where he is elected, of
the value of seven thousand pounds currency at least, also clear of debt.

13. That on the last Monday in November next, and the day following, and on
the same days of every second year thereafter, members of the house of
representatives shall be chosen, to meet on the first Monday in January then
next, at the seat of government, unless the casualities of war or contagious
disorders should render it unsafe to meet there, in which case the governor and
commander in chief for the time being, may by proclamation, with the advice and
consent of the privy council, appoint a more secure and convenient place of
meeting; and to continue for two years from the said last Monday in November.
Each parish and district within this state, shall send members to the general
assembly in the following proportions, that is to say, The parish of St. Philip
and St. Michael, Charlestown, thirty members. The parish of Christ-Church, six
members. The parish of St. John, in Berkley county, six members. The parish of
St. Andrew, six members. The parish of St. George, Dorchester, six members. The
parish of St. James, Goose-creek, six members. The parish of St. Thomas and St.
De^nis, six members. The parish of St. Paul, six member. The parish of St.
Bartholomew, six members. The parish of St. Helena, six members. The parish of
St. James, Santee, six members. The parish of Prince George, Winyah, four
members. The parish of All Saints, two members. The parish of Prince Frederick,
six members. The parish of St. John, in Colleton county, six members. The
parish of St. Peter, six members The parish of prince William, six members. The
parish of St. Stephen, six members. The district to the eastward of Wateree
river, ten members. The district of Ninety-Six, ten members. The district of
Saxe-Gotha, six members. The district between Broad and Saludy rivers, in three
divisions, viz. The Lower district, four members. The Little River district,
four members. The Upper or Spartan district, four members.
The district between Broad and Catawba rivers, ten members. The district
called the New Acquisition, ten members. The parish of St. Matthew, three
members. The parish of Orange, three members. The parish of St. David, six
members. The district between Savannah river, and the north fork of Edisto, six
members.


And the election of the said members shall be conducted, as near as may be,
agreeable to the directions of the present or any future election act or acts.
And where there are no churches or churchwardens in a district or parish, the
house of representatives, at some convenient time before their expiration,
shall appoint places of election, and persons to receive votes and make
returns. The qualification of electors shall be, that every free white man, and
no other person, who acknowledges the being of a God, and believes in a future
state of rewards and punishments, and who has attained to the age of one and
twenty years, and has been a resident and an inhabitant in this state for the
space of one whole year, before the day appointed for the election he offers to
give his vote at, and has a freehold at least of fifty acres of land, or a
town lot, and has been legally seized and possessed of the same, at least six
months previous to such election, or has paid a tax the preceding year, or was
taxable the present year, at least six months previous to the said election, in
a sum equal to the tax on fifty acres of land, to the support of this
government, shall be deemed a person qualified to vote for, and shall be
capable of electing a representative or representatives, to serve as a member
or members in the senate, and house of representatives, for the parish or
district where he actually is a resident, or in any other parish or district,
in this state, where he has the like freehold. Electors shall take an oath or
affirmation of qualification, if required by the returning officer. No person
shall be eligible to sit in the house of representatives, unless he be of the
Protestant religion, and has been a resident in this state for three years,
previous to his election. The qualification of the elected, if residents in the
parish or district for which they shall be returned, shall be the same as
mentioned in the election act, and construed to mean clear of debt. But no
non-resident shall be eligible to a seat in the house of representatives,
unless he is owner of a settled estate and freehold, in his own right, of the
value of three thousand and five hundred pounds currency at least, clear of
debt, in the parish or district for which he is elected.

14. That if any parish or district neglects or refuses to elect members; or if
the members chosen do not meet in general assembly; those who do meet shall
have the powers of the general assembly. Not less than sixty-nine members shall
make a house of representatives to do business; but the speaker, or any seven
members may adjourn from day to day.

15. That at the expiration of seven years after the passing of this
constitution, and at the end of every fourteen years thereafter, the
representation of the whole state shall be proportioned in the most equal and
just manner, according to the particular and comparative strength, and taxable
property, of the different parts of the same; regard being always had to the
number of white inhabitants, and such taxable property.

16. That all money-bills for the support of government, shall originate in the
house of representatives, and shall not be altered or amended by the senate,
but may be rejected by them: And that no money be drawn out of the public
treasury, but by the legislative authority of the state. All other bills and
ordinances may take rise in the senate or house of representatives, and be
altered, amended, or rejected by either. Acts and ordinances having passed the
general assembly, shall have the great seal affixed to them, by a joint
committee of both houses, who shall wait upon the governor to receive and
return the seal; and shall then he signed by the president of the senate, and
speaker of the house of representatives, in the senate house, and shall
thenceforth have the force and validity of a law, and be lodged in the
secretary's office. And the senate and house of representatives respectively,
shall enjoy all other privileges which have at any time been claimed, or
exercised by the commons house of assembly.

17. That neither the senate nor house of representatives shall have power to
adjourn themselves for any longer time than three days, without the mutual
consent of both. The governor and commander in chief shall have no power to
adjourn, prorogue, or dissolve them: But may, if necessary, by and with the
advice and consent of the privy council convene them, before the time to which
they shall stand adjourned. And where a bill has been rejected by either
house, it shall not be brought in again that session, without leave of the
house, and a notice of six days being previously given.

18. That the senate and house of representatives shall each choose their
respective officers by ballot, without control. And that, during a recess, the
president of the senate, and speaker of the house of representatives, shall
issue writs for filling up vacancies, occasioned by death in their respective
houses, giving at least three weeks, and not more than thirty-five days
previous notice, of the time appointed for the election.

19. That if any parish or district shall neglect to elect a member or members,
on the day of election; or in case any person chosen a member of either house,
shall refuse to qualify and take his seat as such, or die, or depart the state;
the senate or house of representatives, as the case may be, shall appoint
proper days for electing a member or members, in such cases respectively.

20. That if any member of the senate or house of representatives, shall accept
any place of emolument, or any commission (except in the militia, or commission
of the peace) and except as is excepted in the tenth article, he shall vacate
his seat, and there shall thereupon be a new election; but he shall not be
disqualified from serving, upon being re-elected, unless he is appointed
secretary of the state, a commissioner of the treasury, an officer of the
customs, register of mesne conveyances, a clerk of either of the courts of
justice, sheriff, powder-receiver, clerk of the senate, house of
representatives, or privy council, surveyor-general, or commissary of military
stores; which officers are hereby declared disqualified from being members
either of the senate or house of representatives.

21. And whereas the ministers of the gospel are, by their profession,
dedicated to the service of God, and the care of souls, and ought not to be
di^e^ted from the great duties of their function; theref^^^, no minister of the
gospel, or public preacher, of any religious persuasion, while he continues in
the exercise of his pastoral function, and for two years after, shall be
eligible either as governor, lieutenant governor, a member of the senate, house
of representatives, or privy council in this state.

22. That the delegates to represent this state in the congress of the united
states, be chosen annually, by the senate and house of representatives, jointly
by ballot, in the house of representatives. And nothing contained in this
constitution, shall be construed to extend to vacate the seat of any member,
who is or may be a delegate from this state to congress, as such.

23. That the form of impeaching all officers of the state, formal and corrupt
conduct in their respective offices, not amenable to any other jurisdiction, be
vested in the house of representatives: But, that it shall always be necessary,
that two-third parts of the members present do consent to, and agree in, such
impeachment. That the senators and such of the judges of this state, as are not
members of the house of representatives, be a court for the trial of
impeachments, under such regulations as the legislature shall establish: And
that, previous to the trial of every impeachment, the members of the said court
shall respectively be sworn, truly and impartially to try and determine the
charge in question, according to evidence. And no judgment of the said court,
except judgment of acquittal, shall be valid, unless it shall be assented to by
two-third parts of the members then present. And on every trial, as well on
impeachments as others, the party accused shall be allowed counsel.

24. That the lieutenant governor of the state, and a majority of the
privy council, for the time being, shall, until otherwise altered by the
legislature, exercise the powers of a court of chancery. And there shall be
ordinance appointed in the several districts in the state, to be chosen by the
senate and house of representatives jointly, by ballot, in the house of
representatives, who shall, within their respective districts, exercise the
powers heretofore exercised by the ordinary: And until such appointment is
made, the present ordinary, in Charlestown, shall continue to exercise that
office as heretofore.

25. That the jurisdiction of the court of admiralty be confined to maritime
causes.

26. That justices of the peace shall be nominated by the senate and house of
representatives, jointly, and commissioned by the governor and commander in
chief, during pleasure. They shall be entitled to receive the fees heretofore
established by law; and not acting in the magistracy, they shall not be
entitled to the privileges allowed to them by law.

27. That all other judicial officers shall be chosen b^ ballot, jointly, by
the senate and house of representatives, and, except the judges of the court of
chancery, commissioned by the governor and commander in chief during good
behavior; but shall be removed on address of the senate and house of
representatives.

28. That the sheriffs, qualified as by law directed, shall be chosen in like
manner, by the senate and house of representatives, when the governor,
lieutenant governor, and privy council are chosen, and commissioned by the
governor and commander in chief for two years, and shall give security, as
required by law, before they enter on the execution of their office. No sheriff
who shall have served for two years, shall be eligible to serve in the said
office, after the expiration of the said term, until the full end and term of
four years, but shall continue in office until such choice be made: Nor shall
any person be eligible as sheriff, in any district, unless he shall have
resided therein for two years, previous to the election.

29. That two commissioners of the treasury, the secretary of the state, the
registers of mesne conveyances in each district attorney general, surveyor
general, powder receiver, collectors and comptrollers of the customs, and
waiters, be chosen in like manner, by the senate, and house of representatives,
jointly, by ballot, in the house of representatives, and commissioned by the
governor and commander in chief, for two years. That none of the said o^ficers
respectively, who shall have served for four years, shall be eligible to serve
in the said offices, after the expiration of the said term, until the full end
and term of four years, but shall continue in office until a new choice be
made: Provided, that nothing herein contained, shall extend to the several
persons appointed to the above offices respectively, under the late
constitution. And that the present, and all future commissioners of the
treasury, and powder receivers, shall each give bond, with approved security,
agreeable to law.

30. That all the officers in the army and navy of this state, of and above the
rank of captain, shall be chosen by the senate and house of representatives,
jointly, by ballot, in the house of representatives, and commissioned by the
governor and commander in chief; and that all other officers in the army and
navy of this state, shall be commissioned by the governor and commander in
chief.

31. That in case of vacancy, in any of the offices above directed to be filled
by the senate and house of representatives, the governor and commander in
chief, with the advice and consent of the privy council, may appoint others in
their stead, until there shall be an election by the senate and house of
representatives to fill those vacancies respectively.

32. That the governor and commander in chief, with the advice and consent of
the privy council, may appoint, during pleasure, until otherwise directed by
law, all other necessary officers, except such as are now by law directed to be
otherwise chosen.

33. That the governor and commander in chief shall have no power to commence
war, or conclude peace, or enter into any final treaty, without the consent of
the senate and house of representatives.

34. That the resolutions of the late congresses of this state, and all laws
now of force here (and not hereby altered) shall so continue, until altered or
repealed by the legislature of this state, unless where they are temporary, in
which case they shall expire, at the times respectively limited for their
duration.

35. That the governor and commander in chief for the time being, by and with
the advice and consent of the privy council, may lay embargoes, or prohibit the
exportation of any commodity, for any time, not exceeding thirty days, in the
recess of the general assembly.

36. That all persons who shall be chosen and appointed to any office, or to
any place of trust, civil or military, before entering upon the execution of
office, shall take the following oath:

"I, A. B. do acknowledge the state of South Carolina to be a free,
independent, and sovereign state, and that the people thereof owe no allegiance
or obedience to George the Third, king of Great Britain: And I do renounce,
refuse, and abjure, any allegiance or obedience to him: And I do swear or
affirm (as the case may be) that I will, to the utmost of my power, support,
maintain and defend the said state, against the said king George the Third, and
his heirs and successors, and his or their abettors, assistants, and adherents,
and will serve the said state in the office of with fidelity and honor, and
according to the best of my skill and understanding. So help me God."

37. That adequate yearly salaries be allowed to the public officers of this
state, and be fixed by law.

38. That all persons and religious societies, who acknowledge that there is
one God, and a future state of rewards and punishments, and that God is
publicly to be worshipped, shall be freely tolerated. The christian Protestant
religion shall be deemed, and is hereby constituted and declared to be the
established religion of this state. That all denominations of christian
Protestants in this state, demeaning themselves peaceably and faithfully, shall
enjoy equal religious and civil privileges. To accomplish this desirable
purpose, without injury to the religious property of those societies of
christians, which are by law already incorporated, for the purpose of religious
worship: and to put it fully into the power of every other society of christian
Protestants, either already formed, or hereafter to be formed, to obtain the
like incorporation, it is hereby constituted, appointed, and declared, That the
respective societies of the church of England, that are already formed in this
state, for the purposes of religious worship, shall still continue incorporate,
and hold the religious property now in their possession. And that, whenever
fifteen or more male persons, not under twenty-one years of age, professing the
christian Protestant religion, and agreeing to unite themselves in a society,
for the purposes of religious worship, they shall (on complying with the terms
hereinafter mentioned) be, and be constituted, a church, and be esteemed and
regarded in law, as of the established religion of the state, and on a petition
to the legislature, shall be entitled to be incorporated, and to enjoy equal
privileges. That every society of christians, so formed, shall give themselves
a name or denomination, by which they shall be called and known in law; and all
that associate with them for the purposes of worship, shall be esteemed as
belonging to the society so called: But that, previous to the establishment and
incorporation of the respective societies of every denomination as aforesaid,
and in order to entitle them thereto, each society so petitioning, shall have
agreed to, and subscribed, in a book, the following five articles, without
which, no agreement or union of men, upon pretense of religion, shall entitle
them to be incorporated, and esteemed as a church of the established religion
of this state:

First, That there is one eternal God, and a future state of rewards and
punishments.

Second, That God is publicly to be worshipped.

Third, That the christian religion is the true religion.

Fourth, That the holy Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, are of divine
inspiration, and are the rule of faith and practice.

Fifth, That it is lawful, and the duty of every man, being thereunto called by
those that govern, to bear witness to truth.

That every inhabitant of this state, when called to make an appeal to God, as
a witness to truth, shall be permitted to do it in that way which is most
agreeable to the dictates of his own conscience. And, that the people of this
state may for ever enjoy the right of electing their own pastors or clergy;
and, at the same time, that the state may have sufficient security for the due
discharge of the pastoral office, by those who shall be admitted to be
clergymen, no person shall officiate as minister of any established church, who
shall not have been chosen by a majority of the society to which he shall
minister, or by persons appointed by the said majority to choose and procure a
minister for them, nor until the minister so chosen and appointed, shall have
made and subscribed the following declaration, over and above the aforesaid
five articles, viz.

"That he is determined, by God's grace, out of the holy scriptures, to
instruct the people committed to his charge, and to teach nothing (as required
of necessity to eternal salvation) but that which he shall be persuaded may be
concluded and proved from the scripture; that he will use both public and
private admonitions, as well to the sick as to the whole, within his cure, as
need shall require, and occasion shall be given; and that he will be diligent
in prayers, and in reading of the holy Scriptures, and in such studies as help
to the knowledge of the same; that he will be diligent to frame and fashion his
own self, and his family, according to the doctrine of Christ, and to make both
himself and them, as much as in him lies, wholesome examples and patterns to
the flock of Christ; that he will maintain and set forwards, as much as he can,
quietness, peace, and love, among all people, and especially among those that
are or shall be committed to his charge."

No person shall disturb or molest any religious assembly, nor shall use any
reproachful, reviling, or abusive language, against any church; that being the
certain way of disturbing the peace, and of hindering the conversion of any to
the truth, by engaging them in quarrels and animosities, to the hatred of the
professors, and that profession which otherwise they might be brought to assent
to. No person whatsoever, shall speak any thing, in their religious assembly,
irreverently or seditiously of the government of this state. No person shall,
by law, be obliged to pay toward the maintenance and support of a religious
worship that he does not freely join in, or has not voluntarily engaged to
support: But the churches, chapels, parsonages, glebes, and all other property,
now belonging to any societies of the church of England, or any other religious
societies, shall remain, and be secured to them for ever. The poor shall be
supported, and elections managed, in the accustomed manner, until laws shall be
provided, to adjust those matters in the most equitable way.

39. That the whole state shall, as soon as proper laws can be passed for those
purposes, be divided into districts and counties, and county courts established.

40. That the penal laws, as heretofore used, shall be reformed, and
punishments made, in some cases, less sanguinary, and, in general, more
proportionate to the crime.

41. That no freeman of this state be taken, or imprisoned, or disseized of his
freehold, liberties or privileges, or outlawed, or exiled, or in any manner
destroyed, or deprived of his life, liberty, or property, but by the judgment
of his peers, or by the law of the land.

42. That the military be subordinate to the civil power of the state.

43. That the liberty of the press be inviolably preserved.

44. That no part of this constitution shall be altered without a notice of
ninety days being previously given; nor shall any part of the same be changed
without the consent of a majority of the members of the senate and house of
representatives.

45. That the senate and house of representatives, shall not proceed to the
election of a governor or lieutenant governor, until there be a majority of
both houses present.

In the Council Chamger, the 19 th Day of March, 1778. Assented to, RAWLINS
LOWNDES. HUGH RUTLEDGE, Speaker of the Legislative Council. THOMAS BE, Speaker
of the General Assembly.

In the GENERAL ASSEMBLY, the 19th Day of March, 1778.

Published by order of the House, PETER TIMOTHY, C. G. A.



GEORGIA. The CONSTITUTION of the State of Georgia, unanimously agreed to, in
CONVENTION, the 5th of February, 1777.
WHEREAS the conduct of the legislature of Great Britain for many years past,
has been so oppressive on the people of America, that of late years, they have
plainly declared, and asserted a right to raise taxes upon the people of
America, and to make laws to bind them in all cases whatsoever, without their
consent; which conduct being repugnant to the common rights of mankind, has
obliged the Americans, as freemen to oppose such oppressive measures, and to
assert the rights and privileges they are entitled to, by the laws of nature
and reason; and accordingly it has been done by the general consent of all the
people of the states of New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island,
Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, the counties of Newcastle,
Kent, and Sussex on Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina,
South Carolina, and Georgia, given by their representatives met together in
general congress in the city of Philadelphia.

And whereas it has been recommended by the said Congress on the fifteenth of
May last, to the respective assemblies and conventions of the united states,
where no government, sufficient to the exigencies of their affairs, has been
hitherto established, to adopt such government, as may, in the opinion of the
representatives of the people, best conduce to the happiness and safety of
their constituents in particular, and America in general.

And whereas the independence of the united states of America has been also
declared, on the fourth day of July, one thousand seven hundred and
seventy-six, by the said honorable congress, and all political connection
between them and the crown of Great Britain, is in consequence thereof
dissolved.

We, therefore, the representatives of the people, from whom all power
originates, and for whose benefit all government is intended, by virtue of the
power delegated to us, do ordain and declare, and it is hereby ordained and
declared, that the following rules and regulations be adopted for the future
government of this state.

1. The legislative, executive, and judiciary departments shall be separate and
distinct, so that neither exercise the powers properly belonging to the other.

2. The legislature of this state shall be composed of the representatives of
the people, as is herein after pointed out: And the representatives shall be
elected yearly, and every year, on the first Tuesday in December; and the
representatives so elected, shall meet the first Tuesday in January following,
at Savannah, or any other place or places, where the house of assembly for the
time being shall direct.

On the first day of the meeting of the representatives so chosen, they shall
proceed to the choice of a governor, who shall be styled, Honorable; and of an
executive council, by ballot out of their own body; viz. two from each county,
except those counties which are not yet entitled to send ten members. One of
each county shall always attend where the governor resides, by monthly
rotation, unless the members of each county agree for a longer or shorter
period; this is not intended to exclude either member attending: The remaining
number of representatives shall be called The House of Assembly; and the
majority of the members of the said house shall have power to proceed on
business.

3. It shall be an unalterable rule, that the house of assembly shall expire,
and be at an end yearly and every year, on the day preceding the day of
election, mentioned in the foregoing rule.

4. The representation shall be divided in the following manner: Ten members
for each county, as is herein after directed, excepting the county of Liberty,
which contains three parishes, and that shall be allowed fourteen.

The ceded lands, north of Ogeechie shall be one county, and known by the name
of Wilkes.

The parish of St. Paul shall be another county, and known by the name of
Richmond.

The parish of St. George shall be another county, and known by the name of
Burke.

The parish of St. Matthew, and the upper part of St. Philip, above Canouchie,
shall be another county, and known by the name of Effingham.

The parish of Christ-Church, and the lower part of St. Philip, below
Canouchie, shall be another county, and known by the name of Chatham.

The parishes of St. John, St. Andrew, and St. James, shall be another county,
and known by the name of Liberty.

The parishes of St. David and St. Patrick shall be another county, and known
by the name of Glyn.

The parishes of St. Thomas and St. Mary shall be another county, and known by
the name of Camden.

The port and town of Savannah shall be allowed four members to represent their
trade.

The port and town of Sunbu^y shall be allowed two members to represent their
tr^^e

5. The two counties of Glyn. and Camden shall have one representative each,
and also they, and all other counties that may hereafter be laid out by the
house of assembly, shall be under the following regulations, viz. at their
first institution, each county shall have one member, provided the inhabitants
of said county shall have ten electors; and if thirty, they thall have two; if
forty, three; if sixty, four; if eighty, six; if an hundred and upwards, ten;
at which time two executive counselors shall be chosen from them, as is
directed for the other counties.

6. The representatives shall be chosen out of the residents in each county,
who shall have resided, at least twelve months in this state, and three months
in the county where they shall be elected; except the freeholders of the
counties of Glyn and Camden, who are in a state of alarm, and who shall have
the liberty of choosing one member each, as specified in the articles of this
constitution, in any other county, until they have residents sufficient to
qualify them for more: And they shall be of the Protestant religion, and of the
age of twenty-one years, and shall be possessed in their own right of two
hundred and fifty acres of land, or some property to the amount of two hundred
and fifty pounds.

7. The house of assembly shall power to make such laws and regulations, as may
be conducive to the good order and well being of the state; provided such laws
and regulations be not repugnant to the true intent and meaning of any rule or
regulation, contained in this constitution.

The house of assembly shall also have power to repeal all laws, and
ordinances, they find injurious to the people: And the house shall choose its
own speaker, appoint its own officers, settle its own rules of proceeding, and
direct writs of election, for supplying intermediate vacancies; and shall have
power of adjournment to any time, or times within the year.

8. All laws and ordinances shall be three times read, and each reading shall
be on different and separate days, except in cases of great necessity and
danger; and all laws and ordinances shall be sent to the executive council,
after the second reading, for their perusal and advice.

9. All male white inhabitants, of the age of twenty-one years, and possessed,
in his own right, of ten pounds value, and liable to pay tax in this state, or
being of any mechanic trade, and shall have been a resident six months in this
state, shall have a right to vote at all elections for representatives, or any
other officers, herein agreed to be chosen by the people at large; and every
person having a right to vote at any election, shall vote by ballot personally.

10. No officer whatever shall serve any process, or give any other hindrance
to any person entitled to vote, either in going to the place of election, or
during the time of the said election, or on their returning home from such
election; nor shall any military officer, or soldier, appear at any election in
a military character, to the intent that all elections may be free and open.

11. No person shall be entitled to more than one vote, which shall be given in
the county where such person resides, except as before excepted; nor shall any
person, who holds any title of nobility, be entitled to a vote, or be capable
of serving as a representative, or hold any post of honor, profit or trust, in
this state, whilst such person claims his title of nobility; but if the person
shall give up such distinction, in the manner as may be directed by any future
legislature, then, and in such case, he shall be entitled to a vote, and
represent, as before directed; and enjoy all the other benefits of a free
citizen

12. Every person absenting himself from an election, and shall neglect to give
in his, or their ballot, at such election, shall be subject to a penalty not
exceeding five pounds; the mode of recovery, and also the appropriation
thereof, to be pointed out, and directed by act of the legislature; provided
nevertheless, that a reasonable excuse shall be admitted.

13. The manner of electing representatives shall be by ballot, and shall be
taken by two or more justices of the peace, in each county, who shall provide a
convenient box for receiving the said ballots; and on closing the poll, the
ballots shall be compared in public, with the lists of voters, that have been
taken, and the majority immediately declared; a certificate of the same being
given to the persons elected, and also a certificate returned to the house of
representatives.

14. Every person entitled to vote shall take the following oath or
affirmation, if required, viz.

"I, A. B. do voluntarily and solemnly swear, (or affirm, as the case may be)
that I do owe true allegiance to this state, and will support the constitution
thereof. So help me God."

15. Any five of the representatives elected, as before directed, being met,
shall have power to administer the following oath, to each other; and they or
any other member, being so sworn, shall in the house administer the oath, to
all other members that attend, in order to qualify them to take their seats,
viz.

"I, A. B. do solemnly swear, that I will bear true allegiance to the state of
Georgia, and will truly perform the trust reposed in me; and that I will
execute the same to the best of my knowledge, for the benefit of this state,
and the support of the constitution thereof; and that I have obtained my
election, without fraud or bribe whatever. So help me God."

16. The continental delegates shall be appointed annually by ballot, and shall
have a right to sit, debate and vote, in the house of assembly, and be deemed a
part thereof; subject however to the regulations contained in the twelfth
article of the confederation of the united states.

17. No person bearing any post of profit under this state, or any person
bearing any military commission, under this or any other state, or states,
except officers of the militia, shall be elected a representative. And if any
representative shall be appointed to any place of profit, or military
commission, which he shall accept, his seat shall immediately become vacant,
and he shall be incapable of re-election, whilst holding such office.

By this article it is not to be understood, that the office of a justice of
the peace is a post of profit.

18. No person shall hold more than one office of profit, under this state, at
one and the same time.

19. The governor shall, with the advice of the executive council, exercise the
executive powers of government, according to the laws of this state, and the
constitution thereof; save only in the case of pardons, and remission of fines,
which he shall in no instance grant; but he may reprieve a criminal, or suspend
a fine, until the meeting of the assembly, who may determine therein, as they
shall judge fit.

20. The governor, with the advice of the executive council, shall have power
to call the house of assembly together, upon any emergency, before the time
which they stand adjourned to.

21. The governor, with the advice of the executive council, shall fill up all
intermediate vacancies, that shall happen in offices, till the next general
election: And all commissions civil and military shall be issued by the
governor, under his hand, and the great seal of the state.

22. The governor may preside in the executive council at all times, except
when they are taking into consideration, and perusing the laws and ordinances,
offered to them by the house of assembly.

23. The governor shall be chosen annually by ballot, and shall not be eligible
to the said office, for more than one year out of three, nor shall he hold any
military commission, under any other state or states.

The governor shall reside at such place as the house of assembly for the time
being shall appoint.

24. The governor's oath.

"I, A. B. elected governor of the state of Georgia, by the representatives
thereof, do solemnly promise and swear, that I will, during the term of my
appointment, to the best of my skill and judgment, execute the said office
faithfully, and conscientiously, according to law, without favor, affection,
or partiality; that I will, to the utmost of my power, support, maintain, and
defend the state of Georgia, and the constitution of the same; and use my
utmost endeavors to protect the people thereof, in the secure enjoyment of all
their rights, franchises and privileges; and that the laws and ordinances of
the state be duly observed, and that law and justice in mercy be executed in
all judgments. And I do further solemnly promise and swear, that I will
peaceably and quietly resign the government to which I have been elected, at
the period to which my continuance in the said office is limited by the
constitution: And lastly, I do also solemnly swear, that I have not accepted of
the government, whereunto I am elected, contrary to the articles of this
constitution. So help me God."

This oath to be administered to him by the speaker of the assembly.

The same oath to be administered by the speaker to the president of the
council.

No person shall be eligible to the office of governor, who has not resided
three years in this state.

25. The executive council shall meet the day after their election, and proceed
to the choice of a president out of their own body; they shall have power to
appoint their own officers, and settle their own rules of proceedings.

The council shall always vote by counties, and not individually.

26. Every counselor, being present, shall have power of entering his protest
against any measures in council, he has not consented to; provided he does it
within three days.

27. During the sitting of the assembly, the whole of the executive council
shall attend, unless prevented by sickness, or some other urgent necessity; and
in that case, a majority of the council shall make a board, to examine the laws
and ordinances sent them by the house of assembly; and all laws and ordinances
sent to the council, shall be returned in five days after, with their remarks
thereon.

28. A committee from the council sent with any proposed amendments to any law,
or ordinance, shall deliver their reasons for such proposed amendments, sitting
and covered; the whole house at that time, except the speaker, uncovered.

29. The president of the executive council, in the absence or sickness of the
governor, shall exercise all the powers of the governor.

30. When any affair that requires secresy shall be laid before the governor,
and the executive council, it shall be the duty of the governor, and he is
hereby obliged to administer the following oath, viz.

"I, A. B. do solemnly swear, that any business that shall be at this time
communicated to the council, I will not, in any manner whatever, either by
speaking, writing, or otherwise reveal the same, to any person whatever, until
leave given by the council, or when called upon by the house of assembly; and
all this I swear without any reservation whatever. So help me God."

And the same oath shall be administered to the secretary, and other officers,
necessary to carry the business into execution.

31. The executive power shall exist, till renewed, as pointed out by the rules
of this constitution.

32. In all transactions between the legislative and executive bodies, the same
shall be communicated by message, to be delivered from the legislative body to
the governor, or executive council, by a committee; and from the governor to
the house of assembly, by the secretary of the council, and from the executive
council, by a committee of the said council.

33. The governor, for the time being, shall be captain general, and commander
in chief, over all the militia, and other military and naval forces belonging
to this state.

34. All militia commissions shall specify, that the person commissioned shall
continue during good behavior.

35. Every county in this state, that has, or hereafter may have, two hundred
and fifty men, and upwards, liable to bear arms, shall be formed into a
battalion, and when they become too numerous for one battalion, they shall be
formed into more, by bill of the legislature; and those counties that have a
less number than two hundred and fifty, shall be formed into independent
companies.

36. There shall be established in each county a court, to be called a superior
court, to be held twice in each year, on the first Tuesday in March, in the
county of Chatham.

The second Tuesday in March, in the county of Effingham.

The third Tuesday in March, in the county of Burke.

The fourth Tuesday in March, in the county of Richmond.

The next Tuesday in the county of Wilkes.

And Tuesday fortnight, in the county of Liberty.

The next Tuesday in the county of Glyn.

The next Tuesday, in the county of Camden.

The like courts to commence in October, and continue as above.

37. All causes and matters of dispute, between any parties, residing in the
same county, to be tried within the county.

38. All matters in dispute between contending parties, residing in different
counties, shall be tried in the county where the defendent resides; except in
cases of real estates, which shall be tried in the county where such real
estate lies.

39. All matters of breach of the peace, felony, murder, and treason against
the state, to be tried in the county, where the crime was committed. All
matters of dispute, both civil and criminal, in any county, where there is not
a sufficient number of inhabitants, to form a court, shall be tried in the next
adjacent county, where a court is held.

40. All causes of what nature soever, shall be tried in the superior court,
except as hereafter mentioned; which court shall consist of the chief justice,
and three or more of the justices residing in the county; in case of the
absence of the chief justice, the senior justice on the bench shall act as
chief justice, with the clerk of the county, attorney for the state, sheriff,
coroner, constable, and the jurors. And in case of the absence of any of the
aforementioned officers, the justices on the bench to appoint others in their
room pro tempore. And if any plantiff or defendent in civil causes shall be
dissatisfied with the determination of the jury, then, and in that case, they
shall be at liberty within three days, to enter an appeal from that verdict;
and demand a new trial by a special jury, to be nominated as follows, viz. each
party, plantiff and defendent, shall choose six, six more names shall be taken
indifferently out of a box provided for that purpose, the whole eighteen to be
summoned, and their names to be put together into the box, and the first twelve
that are drawn out, being present, shall be the special jury to try the cause,
and from which there shall be no appeal.

41. The jury shall be judges of law, as well as of fact, and shall not be
allowed to bring in a special verdict; but if all, or any of the jury, have any
doubts concerning points of law, they shall apply to the bench, who shall each
of them in rotation give their opinion.

42. The jury shall be sworn to bring in a verdict according to law, and the
opinion they entertain of the evidence; provided it be not repugnant to the
rules and regulations contained in this constitution.

43. The special jury shall be sworn to bring in a verdict, according to law,
and the opinion they entertain of the evidence; provided it be not repugnant to
justice, equity and conscience, and the rules and regulations contained in this
constitution, of which they shall judge.

44. Captures both by sea and land to be tried in the county where such shall
be carried in; a special court to be called by the chief justice, or in his
absence, by the then senior justice in the said county, upon application of the
captors or claimants, which cause shall be determined within the space of ten
days. The mode of proceeding and appeal shall be the same as in the superior
courts, unless after the second trial, an appeal is made to the continental
congress; and the distance of time, between the first and second trial, shall
not exceed fourteen days: And all maritime causes to be tried in like manner.

45. No grand jury shall consist of less than eighteen, and twelve may find a
bill.

46. That the court of conscience be continued as heretofore practiced, and
that the jurisdiction thereof be extended to try causes, not amounting to more
than ten pounds.

47. All executions exceeding five pounds, except in the case of a court
merchant, shall be stayed, until the first Monday in March; provided security
be given for debts and costs.

48. All the costs attending any action in the superior court shall not exceed
the sum of three pounds, and that no cause be allowed to depend in the superior
court longer than two terms.

49. Every officer of the state shall be liable to be called to account by the
house of assembly.

50. Every county shall keep the public records belonging to the same; and
authenticated copies of the several records, now in the possession of this
state, shall be made out, and deposited in that county to which they belong.

51. Estates shall not be entailed, and when a person dies intestate, his or
her estate shall be divided equally among their children; the widow shall have
a child's share, or her dower, at her option; all other intestates estates to
be divided, according to the act of distribution, made in the reign of Charles
the second; unless otherwise altered by any future act of the legislature.

52. A register of probates shall be appointed by the legislature in every
county, for proving wills, and granting letters of administration.

53. All civil officers in each county shall be annually elected, on the day of
the general election, except justices of the peace, and registers of probates,
who shall be appointed by the house of assembly.

54. Schools shall be erected in each county, and supported at the general
expense of the state, as the legislature shall hereafter point out.

55. A courthouse and goal shall be erected at the public expense in each
county, where the present convention, or the future legislature, shall point
out and direct.

56. All persons whatever shall have the free exercise of their religion;
provided it be not repugnant to the peace and safety of the state; and shall
not, unless by consent, support any teacher, or teachers, except those of their
own profession.

57. The great seal of the state shall have the following device; on one side a
scroll, whereon shall be engraved, The Constitution of the State of Georgia,
and the motto, Pro bono publico; on the other side, an elegant house, and other
buildings, fields of corn, and meadows covered with sheep and cattle; a river
running through the same, with a ship under full sail, and the motto, Deus
nobis haet Otia fecit.

58. No person shall be allowed to plead in the courts of law, in this state,
except those who are authorized so to do, by the house of assembly; and if any
person so authorized shall be found guilty of mal-practice before the house of
assembly, they shall have power to suspend them. This is not intended to
exclude any person from that inherent privilege of every freeman, the liberty
to plead his own cause.

59. Excessive fines shall not be levied, nor excessive bail demanded.

60. The principles of the habeas corpus act, shall be part of this
constitution.

61. Freedom of the press, and trial by jury, to remain inviolate for ever.

62. No clergyman, of any denomination, shall be allowed a seat in the
legislature.

63. No alteration shall be made in this constitution without petitions from a
majority of the counties, and the petitions from each county to be signed by a
majority of voters in each county within this state. At which time the assembly
shall order a convention to be called for that purpose, specifying the
alterations to be made, according to the petitions preferred to the assembly by
the majority of the counties, as aforesaid

IN CONGRESS, JULY 4, 1776. A DECLARATION By the Representatives of the UNITED
STATES of AMERICA, in CONGRESS assembled.
WHEN, in the course of human events, it becomes necessary for one people to
dissolve the political bands which have connected them with another, and to
assume among the powers of the earth, the separate and equal station to which
the laws of nature and of nature's God entitle them; a decent respect to the
opinions of mankind requires that they should declare the causes which impel
them to the separation.

We hold these truths to be self evident; that all men are created equal; that
they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights; that among
these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. That to secure these
rights, governments are instituted among men, deriving their just powers from
the consent of the governed; that whenever any form of government becomes
destructive of these ends, it is the right of the people to alter or to abolish
it, and to institute new government, laying its foundation on such principles,
and organizing its powers in such form, as to them shall seem most likely to
effect their safety and happiness. Prudence, indeed, will dictate that
governments long established should not be changed for light and transient
causes; and accordingly all experience has shown, that mankind are more
disposed to suffer, while evils are sufferable, than to right themselves by
abolishing the forms to which they are accustomed. But when along train of
abuses and usurpations, pursuing invariably the same object, evinces a design
to reduce them under absolute despotism, it is their right, it is their duty,
to throw off such government and to provide new guards for their future
security. Such has been the patient sufferance of these colonies; and such is
now the necessity which constrains them to alter their former systems of
government. The history of the present king of Great Britain is a history of
repeated injuries and usurpations, all having in direct object the
establishment of an absolute tyranny over these states. To prove this, let
facts be submitted to a candid world.

He has refused his assent to laws, the most wholesome and necessary for the
public good.

He has forbidden his governors to pass laws of immediate and pressing
importance, unless suspended in their operation till his assent should be
obtained; and when so suspended he has utterly neglected to attend to them.

He has refused to pass other laws for the accommodation of large districts of
people, unless those people would relinquish the right of representation in the
legislature, a right inestimable to them, and formidable to tyrants only.

He has called together legislative bodies at places unusual, uncomfortable,
and distant from the depository of their public records, for the sole purpose
of fatiguing them into compliance with his measures.

He has dissolved representative houses repeatedly, for opposing with manly
firmness his invasions on the rights of the people.

He has refused, for a long time after such dissolutions, to cause others to be
elected; whereby the legislative powers, incapable of annihilation, have
returned to the people at large for their exercise; the state remaining in the
mean time exposed to all the danger of invasion from without, and convulsions
within.

He has endeavored to prevent the population of these states; for that purpose
obstructing the laws for naturalization of foreigners; refusing to pass others
to encourage their migrations hither, and raising the conditions of new
appropriations of lands.

He has obstructed the administration of justice, by refusing his assent to
laws for establishing judiciary powers.

He has made judges dependent on his will alone, for the tenure of their
offices, and the amount and payment of their salaries.

He has erected a multitude of new offices, and sent hither swarms of officers
to harrass our people, and eat out their substance.

He has kept among us in times of peace, standing armies, without the consent
of our legislatures.

He has affected to render the military independent of and superior to the
civil power.

He has combined with others to subject us to a jurisdiction foreign to our
constitution, and un-acknowledged by our laws; giving his assent to their acts
of pretended legislation.

For quartering large bodies of armed troops among us:

For protecting them, by a mock trial, from punishment for any murders which
they should commit on the inhabitants of these states:

For cutting off our trade with all parts of the world:

For imposing taxes on us without our consent:

For depriving us, in many cases, of the benefits of trial by jury:

For transporting us beyond seas to be tried for pretended offenses:

For abolishing the free system of English laws in a neighboring province,
establishing therein an arbitrary government, and enlarging its boundaries, so
as to render it at once an example and fit instrument for introducing the same
absolute rule into these colonies:

For taking away our charters, abolishing our most valuable laws, and altering
fundamentally the forms of our governments:

For suspending our own legislatures, and declaring themselves invested with
power to legislate for us in all cases whatsoever.

He has abdicated government here, by declaring us out of his protection, and
waging war against us.

He has plundered our seas, ravaged our coasts, burnt our towns, and destroyed
the lives of our people.

He is, at this time, transporting large armies of foreign mercenaries to
complete the works of death, desolation and tyranny, already begun with
circumstances of cruelty and perfidy, scarcely paralleled in the most barbarous
ages, and totally unworthy the head of a civilized nation.

He has constrained our fellow citizens, taken captive on the high seas, to
bear arms against their country, to become the executioners of their friends
and brethren, or to fall themselves by their hands.

He has excited domestic insurrections amongst us, and has endeavored to bring
on the inhabitants of our frontiers the merciless indian savages, whose known
rule of warfare is an undistinguished destruction of all ages, sexes and
conditions.

In every stage of these oppressions we have petitioned for redress in the most
humble terms: our repeated petitions have been answered only by repeated
injury. A prince, whose character is thus marked by every act which may define
a tyrant, is unfit to be the ruler of a free people.

Nor have we been wanting in attention to our British brethren. We have warned
them from time to time of attempts made by their legislature to extend an
unwarrantable jurisdiction over us. We hare reminded them of the cirstances of
our emigration and settlement here. We have appealed to their native justice
and magnanimity, and we have conjured them, by the ties of our common kindred,
to disavow these usurpations, which would inevitably interrupt our connections
and correspondence. They too have been deaf to the voice of justice and of
consanguinity. We must, therefore, acquiesce in the necessity, which denounces
our separation, and hold them, as we hold the rest of mankind, enemies in war,
in peace friends.

We, therefore, the Representatives of the United States of America, in General
Congress assembled, appealing to the Supreme Judge of the world for the
rectitude of our intentions, do, in the name and by the authority of the good
people of these colonies, solemnly publish and decl^^e, That these United
Colonies are, and of right ought to be FREE and INDEPENDENT STATES; That they
are absolved from all allegiance to the British crown, and that all political
connection between them and the state of Great Britain is and ought to be
totally dissolved; and that as Free and Independent States, they have full
power to levy war, conclude peace, contract alliances, establish commerce, and
to do all other acts and things which independent states may of right do. And
for the support of this declaration, with a firm reliance on the protection of
divine providence, we mutually pledge to each other our lives, our fortunes,
and our sacred honor.

JOHN HANCOCK. NEW HAMPSHIRE, Josiah Bartlett, William Whipple, Matthew
Thornton.
MASSACHUSETTS BAY, Samuel Adams, John Adams, Robert Treat Pain, Elbridge
Gerry.
RHODE ISLAND, etc. Stephen Hopkins, William Ellery.
CONNECTICUT, Roger Sherman, Samuel Huntington, William Williams, Oliver
Wolcott.
NEW YORK, William Floyd, Philip Livingston, Francis Lewis, Lewis Morris.
NEW JERSEY, Richard Stockton, John Witherspoon, Francis Hopkinson, John Heart,
Abraham Clark,
PENNSYLVANIA, Robert Morris, Benjamin Rush, Benjamin Franklin, John Morton,
George Clymer, James Smith, George Tailor, James Wilson, George Ross.
DELAWARE, Caesar Rodney, George Read.
MARYLAND, Samuel Chase, William Paca, Thomas Stone, Charles Carroll, of
Carrollton.
VIRGINIA, George With, Richard Henry Lee, Thomas Jefferson, Benjamin
Harrison, Thomas Nelson, jun. Francis Lightfoot Lee, Carter Braxton.
NORTH CAROLINA, William Hooper, Joseph Hewes, John Penn.
SOUTH CAROLINA, Edward Rutledge, Thomas Heyward, jun. Thomas Lynch, jun.
Arthur Middleton,
GEORGIA, Button Gwinnett, Lyman Hall, George Walton.



ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION and PERPETUAL UNION, BETWEEN The States of
New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island and Providence Plantations,
Connecticut, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia,
North Carolina, South Carolina and Georgia.
Article 1. THE style of this confederacy shall be, "The United States of
America."

Art. 2. Each state retains its sovereignty, freedom and independence, and
every power, jurisdiction and right which is not by this confederation expressly
delegated to the united states in congress assembled.

Art. 3. The said states hereby severally enter into a firm league of
friendship with each other, for their common defense, the security of their
liberties, and their mutual and general welfare, binding themselves to assist
each other, against all force offered to, or attacks made upon them, or any of
them, on account of religion, sovereignty, trade, or any other pretense
whatever.

Art. 4. The better to secure and perpetuate mutual friendship and intercourse
among the people of the different states in this union, the free inhabitants of
each of these states, paupers, vagabonds, and fugitives from justice excepted,
shall be entitled to all privileges and immunities of free citizens in the
several states; and the people of each state shall have free ingress and
regress to and from any other state, and shall enjoy therein all the privileges
of trade and commerce, subject to the same duties, impositions and restrictions
as the inhabitants thereof respectively, provided that such restrictions shall
not extend so far as to prevent the removal of property imported into any
state, to any other state of which the owner is an inhabitant; provided also
that no imposition, duties or restriction shall be laid by any state, on the
property of the united states, or either of them.

If any person guilty of, or charged with treason, felony, or other high
misdemeanor in any state, shall flee from justice, and be found in any of the
united states, he shall upon demand of the governor, or executive power of the
state from which he fled, be delivered up and removed to the state having
jurisdiction of his offense.

Full faith and credit shall be given in each of these states to the records,
acts and judicial proceedings of the courts and magistrates of every other
state.

Art. 5. For the more convenient management of the general interests of the
united states, delegates shall be annually appointed in such manner as the
legislature of each state shall direct, to meet in congress on the first Monday
in November, in every year, with a power reserved to each state, to recall its
delegates, or any of them, at any time within the year, and to send others in
their stead, for the remainder of the year.

No state shall be represented in congress by less than two, nor more than
seven members; and no person shall be capable of being a delegate for more than
three years, in any term of six years; nor shall any person, being a delegate,
be capable of holding any office under the united states, for which he, or any
other for his benefit, receives any salary, fees or emolument of any kind.

E^^ch state shall maintain its own delegates in a meeting of the states, and
while they act as members of the committee of the states.

In determining questions in the united states in congress assembled, each
state shall have one vote.

Freedom of speech and debate in congress shall not be impeached or questioned
in any court, or place out of congress, and the members of congress shall be
protected in their persons from arrests and imprisonments, during the time of
their going to and from, and attendance on congress, except for treason,
felony, or breach of the peace.

Art. 6. No state, without the consent of the united states in congress
assembled, shall send any embassy to, or receive any embassy from, or enter
into any conference, agreement, alliance, or treaty with any king, prince or
state; nor shall any person holding any office of profit or trust under the
united states, or any of them, accept of any present, emolument, office or
title of any kind whatever from any king, prince or foreign state; nor shall
the united states in congress assembled, or any of them, grant any title of
nobility.

No two or more states shall enter into any treaty, confederation or alliance
whatever between them, without the consent of the united states in congress
assembled, specifying accurately the purposes for which the same is to be
entered into, and how long it shall continue.

No state shall lay any imposts or duties, which may interfere with any
stipulations in treaties, entered into by the united states in congress
assembled, with any king, prince or state, in pursuance of any treaties already
proposed by congress, to the courts of France and Spain.

No vessels of war shall be kept up in time of peace by any state, except such
number only as shall be deemed necessary by the united states in congress
assembled, for the defense of such state, or its trade; nor shall any body of
forces he kept up by any state, in time of peace, except such number only, as
in the judgment of the united states, in congress assembled, shall be deemed
requisite to garrison the forts necessary for the defense of such state; but
every state shall always keep up a well regulated and disciplined militia,
sufficiently armed and accoutred, and shall provide and constantly have ready
for use, in public stores, a due number of field pieces and tents, and a proper
quantity of arms, ammunition, and camp equipage.

No state shall engage in any war without the consent of the united states in
congress assembled, unless such state be actually invaded by enemies, or shall
have received certain advice of a resolution being formed by some nation of
indians to invade such state, and the danger is so imminent as not to admit of
a delay, till the united states in congress assembled can be consulted: nor
shall any state grant commissions to any ships or vessels of war, nor letters
of marque or reprisal, except it be after a declaration of war by the united
states in congress assembled, and then only against the kingdom or state and
the subject thereof, against which war has been so declared, and under such
regulations as shall be established by the united states in congress assembled,
unless such state be infested by pirates, in which case vessels of war may be
fitted out for that occasion, and kept so long as the danger shall continue, or
until the united states in congress assembled shall determine otherwise.

Art. 7. When landforces are raised by any state for the common defense, all
officers of or under the rank of colonel, shall be appointed by the legislature
of each state respectively, by whom such forces shall be raised, or in such
manner as such state shall direct, and all vacancies shall be filled up by the
state which first made the appointment.

Art. 8. All charges of war, and all other expenses that shall be incurred for
the common defense or general welfare, and allowed by the united states in
congress assembled, shall be defrayed out of a common treasury, which shall be
supplied by the several states, in proportion to the value of all land within
each state, granted to or surveyed for any person, as such land and the
buildings and improvements thereon shall be estimated, according to such mode
as the united states in congress assembled, shall from time to time direct and
appoint. The taxes for paying that proportion shall be laid and levied by the
authority and direction of the legislature of the several states within the
time agreed upon by the united states in congress assembled.

Art. 9. The united states in congress assembled, shall have the sole and
exclusive right and power of determining on peace and war, except in the cases
mentioned in the sixth article; of sending and receiving ambassadors; entering
into treaties and alliances, provided that no treaty of commerce shall be made,
whereby the legislative power of the respective states shall be restrained from
imposing such imposts and duties on foreigners, as their own people are
subjected to, or from prohibiting the exportation or importation of any species
of goods or commodities whatsoever; of establishing rules for deciding in all
cases, what captures on land or water shall be legal, and in what manner prizes
taken by land or naval forces in the service of the united states shall be
divided or appropriated; of granting letters of marque and reprisal in times of
peace; appointing courts for the trial of piracies and felonies committed on
the high seas, and establishing courts for receiving and determining finally
appeals in all cases of captures, provided that no member of congress shall be
appointed a judge of any of the said courts.

The united states in congress assembled shall also be the last resort on
appeal in all disputes and differences now subsisting or that hereafter may
arise between two or more states concerning boundary, jurisdiction, or any
other cause whatever; which authority shall always be exercised in the manner
following. Whenever the legislative or executive authority or lawful agent of
any state in controversy with another, shall present a petition to congress,
stating the matter in question, and praying for a hearing, notice thereof shall
be given by order of congress to the legislative or executive authority of the
other state in controversy, and a day assigned for the appearance of the
parties by their lawful agents, who shall then be directed to appoint by joint
consent, commissioners or judges to constitute a court for hearing and
determining the matter in question; but if they cannot agree, congress shall
name three persons out of each of the united states, and from the list of such
persons each party shall alternately strike out one, the petitioners beginning,
until the number shall be reduced to thirteen; and from that number not less
than seven, nor more than nine names as congress shall direct, shall in the
presence of congress be drawn out by lot; and the persons whose names shall be
so drawn, or any five of them, shall be commissioners or judges, to hear and
finally determine the controversy, so always as a major part of the judges, who
shall hear the cause, shall agree in the determination: and if either party
shall neglect to attend at the day appointed, without showing reasons which
congress shall judge sufficient, or being present shall refuse to strike, the
congress shall proceed to nominate three persons out of each state, and the
secretary of congress shall strike in behalf of such party absent or refusing;
and the judgment and sentence of the court to be appointed, in the manner
before prescribed, shall be final and conclusive; and if any of the parties
shall refuse to submit to the authority of such court, or to appear or defend
their claim or cause, the court shall nevertheless proceed to pronounce
sentence, or judgment, which shall in like manner be final and decisive; the
judgment or sentence and other proceedings being in either case transmitted to
congress, and lodged among the acts of congress, for the security of the
parties concerned: provided, that every commissioner, before he sits in
judgment, shall take an oath, to be administered by one of the judges of the
supreme or superior court of the state, where the cause shall be tried, "well
and truly to hear and determine the matter in question, according to the best
of his judgment, without favor, affection, or hope of reward:" provided also,
that no state shall be deprived of territory, for the benefit of the united
states.

All controversies concerning the private right of soil claimed under different
grants of two or more states, whose jurisdictions as they may respect such
lands, and the states which passed such grants are adjusted, the said grants or
either of them being at the same time claimed to have originated antecedent to
such settlement of jurisdiction, shall on the petition of either party to the
congress of the united states, be finally determined, as near as may be, in the
same manner as is before prescribed for deciding disputes respecting
territorial jurisdiction between different states.

The united states in congress assembled shall also have the sole and exclusive
right and power of regulating the alloy and value of coin struck by their own
authority, or by that of the respective states; fixing the standard of weights
and measures throughout the united states; regulating the trade and managing
all affairs with the indians, not members of any of the states, provided that
the legislative right of any state within its own limits be not infringed or
violated; establishing and regulating post-offices from one state to another,
throughout all the united states, and exacting such postage on the papers
passing through the same, as may be requisite to defray the expenses of the
said office; appointing all officers of the land forces, to the service of the
united states, excepting regimental officers; appointing all the officers of
the naval forces, and commissioning all officers whatever in the service of the
united states, making rules for the government and regulation of the said land
and naval forces, and directing their operations.

The united states in congress assembled shall have authority to appoint a
committee, to sit in the recess of congress, to be denominated, A Committee of
the States, and to consist of one delegate from each state; and to appoint such
other committees and civil officers as may be necessary for managing the
general affairs of the united states under their direction; to appoint one of
their number to preside, provided that no person be allowed to serve in the
office of president more than one year in any term of three years; to ascertain
the necessary sums of money to be raised for the service of the united states,
and to appropriate and apply the same for defraying the public expenses; to
borrow money or emit bills on the credit of the united states, transmitting
every half year to the respective states an account of the sums of money so
borrowed or emitted; to build and equip a ^avy; to agree upon the number of
land forces, and to make ^^quisitions from each state for its quota, in
proportion (...) number of white inhabitants in such state, which requis^^^n
shall be binding, and thereupon the legislature of each state shall appoint the
regimental officers, raise the men, and cloth, arm, and equip them in a
soldier like manner, at the expense of the united states, and the officers and
men so clothed, armed, and equipped, shall march to the place appointed, and
within the time agreed on by the united states in congress assembled: but if
the united states in congress assembled shall, on consideration of
circumstances, judge proper that any state should not raise men, or should
raise a smaller number than its quota, and that any other state should raise a
greater number of men than the quota thereof, such extra number shall be
raised, officered, clothed, armed, and equipped in the same manner as the
quota of such state, unless the legislature of such state shall judge that such
extra number cannot be safely spared out of the same, in which case they shall
raise, officer, cloth, arm, and equip, as many of such extra number as they
judge can be safely spared. And the officers and men so clothed, armed, and
equipped, shall march to the place appointed, and within the time agreed on by
the united state in congress assembled.

The united states in congress assembled shall never engage in a war, nor grant
letters of marque and reprisal, in time of peace, nor enter into any treaties
or alliances, nor coin money, nor regulate the value thereof, nor ascertain the
sums and expenses necessary for the defense and welfare of the united states,
or any of them, nor emit bills, nor borrow money on the credit of the united
states, nor appropriate money, nor agree upon the number of vessels of war, to
be built or purchased, or the number of land or sea forces to be raised, nor
appoint a commander in chief of the army or navy, unless nine states assent to
the same: Nor shall a question on any other point, except for adjourning from
day to day, be determined, unless by the votes of a majority of the united
states in congress assembled.

The congress of the united states shall have power to adjourn to any time
within the year, and to any place within the united states, so that no period
of adjournment be for a longer duration than the space of six months, and shall
publish the journal of their proceedings monthly, except such parts thereof
relating to treaties, alliances or military operations, as in their judgment
require secrecy; and the yeas and nays of the delegates of each state on any
question shall be entered on the journal, when it is desired by any delegate;
and the delegates of a state, or any of them, at his or their request shall be
furnished with a transcript of the said journal, except such parts as are above
excepted, to lay before the legislatures of the several states.

Art. 10. The committee of the states, or any nine of them, shall be authorized
to execute, in the recess of congress, such of the powers of congress as the
united states in congress assembled, by the consent of nine states, shall from
time to time think expedient to vest them with; provided that no power be
delegated to the said committee, for the exercise of which, by the articles of
confederation, the voice of nine states, in the congress of the united states
assembled, is requisite.

Art. 11. Canada acceding to this confederation, and joining in the measures of
the united states, shall be admitted into, and entitled to all the advantages
of this union: But no other colony shall be admited into the same, unless such
admission be agreed to by nine states.

Art. 12. All bills of credit emitted, moneys borrowed and debts contracted by,
or under the authority of congress, before the assembling of the united states,
in pursuance of the present confederation, shall be deemed and considered as a
charge against the united states, for payment and satisfaction whereof the said
united states, and the public faith are hereby solemnly pledged.

Art. 13. Every state shall abide by the determinations of the united states,
in congress assembled, on all questions which by this confederation are
submitted to them. And the articles of this confederation shall be inviolably
observed by every state, and the union shall be perpetual; nor shall any
alteration at any time hereafter be made in any of them; unless such alteration
be agreed to in a congress of the united states, and be afterward confirmed by
the legislatures of every state.

AND WHEREAS it has pleased the great Governor of the world to incline the
hearts of the legislatures we respectively represent in congress, to approve
of, and to authorize us to ratify the said articles of confederation and
perpetual union. KNOW YE, that we, the undersigned delegates, by virtue of the
power and authority to us given for that purpose, do, by these presents, in the
name and in behalf of our respective constituents, fully and entirely ratify
and confirm each and every of the said articles of confederation and perpetual
union, and all and singular the matters and things therein contained. And we do
further solemnly plight and engage the faith of our respective constituents,
that they shall abide by the determinations of the united states in congress
assembled, on all questions which by the said confederation are submitted to
them; and that the articles thereof shall be inviolably observed by the states
we respectively represent; and that the union shall be perpetual. IN WITNESS
whereof, we have hereunto set our hands in congress.

DONE at Philadelphia, in the state of Pennsylvania, the 9th day of July, in
the year of our Lord, 1778. and in the third year of the independence of
America. The aforesaid articles of confederation were finally ratified on the
first day of March 1781; the state of Maryland having, by their members in
congress, on that day acceded thereto, and completed the same.

NEW HAMPSHIRE, Josiah Bartlett, John Wentworth, jun.
MASSACHUSETTS BAY, John Hancock, Samuel Adams, Elbridge Gerry, Francis Dana,
James Lovell, Samuel Holten.
RHODE ISLAND, etc. William Ellery, Henry Merchant, John Collins.
CONNECTICUT, Roger Sherman, Samuel Huntington, Oliver Wolcott, Titus Hosmer,
Andrew Adams.
NEW YORK, James Duane, Francis Lewis, William Duer, Governeur Morris,
NEW JERSEY, John Witherspoon, Nathaniel Scudder.
PENNSYLVANIA, Robert Morris, Daniel Roberdeau, Jonathan Bayard Smith, William
Clingan, Joseph Reed.
DELAWARE, Thomas McKean, John Dickinson, Nicholas Vandyke,
MARYLAND, John Hanson, Daniel Carroll,
VIRGINIA, Richard Henry Lee, John Banister, Thomas Adams, John Harvey, Francis
Lightfoot Lee.
NORTH CAROLINA, John Penn, Cornelius Harnett, John Williams.
SOUTH CAROLINA, Henry Laurens, William Henry Drayton, John Matthews, Richard
Hutson, Thomas Heyward jun.
GEORGIA, John Walton, Edward Telfair, Edward Longworthy.





TREATIES BETWEEN HIS MOST CHRISTIAN MAJESTY, AND THE THIRTEEN UNITED STATES OF
AMERICA.
TREATY of AMITY and COMMERCE.
LOUIS by the Grace of GOD, King of France and Navarre, To all who shall see
these presents, Greeting:
THE Congress of the thirteen united states of North America, having by their
plenipotentiaries residing at Paris, notified their desire to establish with us
and our states, a good understanding and perfect correspondence, and having for
that purpose proposed to conclude with us a Treaty of Amity and Commerce: We
having thought it our duty to give to the said states a sensible proof of our
affection, determining us to accept of their proposals: For these causes, and
other good considerations us thereunto moving, we, reposing entire confidence
in the abilities and experience, zeal and fidelity for our service, of our dear
and ^^loved Conrad Alexander Gerard, royal syndic of the city of Strasbourg,
and secretary of our council of state, have nominated, appointed, and
commissioned, and by these presents signed with our hand, do nominate, appoint
and commission him our plenipotentiary, giving him power and special command
for us and in our name to agree upon, conclude and sign with the
plenipotentiaries of the united states, equally furnished in due form with full
powers, such treaty, convention, and articles of commerce and navigation as he
shall think proper, willing that he act with the same authority as we might or
could act, if we were personally present, and even as though he had more
special command than what is herein contained; promising in good faith and on
the word of a king, to agree to, confirm, and establish for ever, and to
accomplish and execute punctually, all that our said dear and beloved Conrad
Alexander Gerard shall stipulate and sign, by virtue of the present power,
without contravening it in any manner, or suffering it to be contravened for
any cause, or under any pretext whatsoever; and also to ratify the same in due
form, and cause our ratification to be delivered and exchanged in the time that
shall be agreed on. For such is our pleasure. In testimony whereof we have
hereunto set our seal. Done at Versailles, this thirtieth day of January, in
the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and seventy-eight, and the
fourth year of our reign.

(Signed) (L. S.) LOUIS. (Underneath) By the King. GRAVIER de VERGENNES.

THE TREATY.
THE Most Christian King, and the Thirteen United States of North America, to
wit, New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York,
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina,
South Carolina, and Georgia, willing to fix in an equitable and permanent
manner, the rules which ought to be followed relative to the correspondence and
commerce which the two parties desire to establish between their respective
countries, states, and subjects; his most christian majesty and the said united
states have judged that the said end could not be better obtained, than by
taking for the basis of their agreement, the most perfect equality and
^eciprocity, and by carefully avoiding all those burth^nsome preferences which
are usually sources of debate, embarrassment and discontent; by leaving also
each party at liberty to make respecting navigation and commerce, those
interior regulations which it shall find most convenient to itself, and by
founding the advantage of commerce solely upon reciprocal utility, and the just
rules of free intercourse; reserving withal to each party the liberty of
admitting, at its pleasure, other nations to a participation of the same
advantages. It is in the spirit of this intention, and to fulfill these views,
that his said majesty having named and appointed for his plenipotentiary,
Conrad Alexander Gerard, royal syndic of the city of Strasbourg, secretary of
his majesty's council of state; and the united states on their part, having
fully empowered Benjamin Franklin, deputy from the state of Pennsylvania to the
general congress, and president to the convention of the said state; Silas
Deane, late deputy from the state of Connecticut to the said congress, and
Arthur Lee, counselor at law: The said respective plenipotentiaries, after
exchanging their powers, and after mature deliberation, have concluded and
agreed upon the following articles.

Article 1. THERE shall be a firm, inviolable and universal peace, and a true
and sincere friendship between the most christian king, his heirs and
successors, and the united states of America, and the subjects of the most
christian king and of the said states, and between the countries, islands,
cities and towns situate under the jurisdiction of the most christian king, and
of the said united states, and the people and inhabitants of every degree,
without exception of persons or places, and the terms herein after mentioned,
shall be perpetual between the most christian king, his heirs and successors,
and the said united states.

Art 2. The most christian king and the united states engage mutually not to
grant any particular favor to other nations, in respect of, commerce and
navigation, which shall not immediately become common to the other party, who
shall enjoy the same favor freely, if the concession was freely made, or on
allowing the same compensation, if the concession was conditional.

Art. 3. The subjects of the most christian king shall pay in the ports,
havens, roads, countries, islands, cities or towns of the united states, or any
of them, no other or greater duties or imposts, of what nature soever they may
be, or by what name soever called, than those which the nations most favored
are or shall be obliged to pay; and they shall enjoy all the rights, liberties,
privileges, immunities and exemptions in trade, navigation and commerce,
whether in passing from one port in the said states to another, or in going to
and from the same, from and to any part of the world, which the said nations do
or shall enjoy.

Art. 4. The subjects, people and inhabitants of the said united states, and
each of them, shall not pay in the ports, havens, roads, islands, cities and
places under the domination of his most christian majesty, in Europe, any other
or greater duties or imposts, of what nature soever they may be, or by what
name soever called, than those which the most favored nations are or shall be
obliged to pay; and they shall enjoy all the rights, liberties, privileges,
immunities, and exemptions in trade, navigation and commerce, whether in
passing from one port in the said dominions in Europe, to another, or in going
to and from the same, from and to any part of the world, which the said nations
do or shall enjoy.

Art. 5. In the above exemption is particularly comprised, the imposition of
one hundred sous per ton, established in France on foreign ships, unless when
the ships of the united states shall load with the merchandise of France, for
another port of the same dominion; in which case the said ships shall pay the
duty above mentioned, so long as other nations the most favored shall be
obliged to pay it; but it is understood, that the said united states, or any of
them, are at liberty, when they shall judge it proper, to establish a duty
equivalent in the same case.

Art. 6. The most christian king shall endeavor, by all the means in his
power, to protect and defend all vessels and the effects belonging to the
subjects, people or inhabitants of the said united states, or any of them,
being in his ports, havens or roads, or on the seas near his countries,
islands, cities or towns; and to recover and restore to the right owners, their
agents or attorneys, all such vessels and effects which shall be taken within
his jurisdiction; and the ships of war of his most christian majesty, or any
convoy sailing under his authority, shall, upon all occasions, take under their
protection all vessels belonging to the subjects people, or inhabitants of the
said united states, or any of them, and holding the same course, or going the
same way, and shall defend such vessels, as long as they hold the same course,
or go the same way, against all attacks, force or violence, in the same manner
as they ought to protect and defend the vessels belonging to the subjects of
the most christian king.

Art. 7. In like manner the said united states, and their ships of war sailing
under their authority, shall protect and defend, conformably to the tenor of
the preceding article, all the vessels and effects belonging to the subjects
of the most christian king, and use all their endeavors to recover, and cause
to be restored, the said vessels and effects that shall have been taken within
the jurisdiction of the said united states, or any of them.

Art. 8. The most christian king will employ his good offices and interposition
with the king or emperor of Morocco or Fez; the regencies of Algiers, Tunis and
Tripoly, or with any of them; and also with every other prince, state or power,
of the coast of Barbary in Africa; and the subjects of the said king, emperor,
states and powers, and each of them, in order to provide as fully and
efficaciously as possible for the benefit, convenience and safety of the said
united states, and each of them, their subjects, people and inhabitants, and
their vessels and effects, against all violence, insults, attacks or
depredations, on the part of the said princes, and states of Barbary, or their
subjects.

Art. 9. The subjects, inhabitants, merchants, commanders of ships, masters and
mariners of the states, provinces and dominions of each party respectively,
shall abstain and forbear to fish in all places possessed, or which shall be
possessed by the other party; the most christian king's subjects shall not fish
in the havens, bays, creeks, roads, coasts or places, which the said united
states hold, or shall hereafter hold; and in like manner the subjects, people
and inhabitants of the united states, shall not fish in the havens, bays,
creeks, roads, coasts or places, which the most christian king possesses, or
shall hereafter possess; and if any ship or vessel shall be found fishing,
contrary to the tenor of this treaty, the said ship or vessel with its lading,
(proof being made thereof) shall be confiscated; it is however understood that
the exclusion stipulated in the present article, shall take place only so long
and so far, as the most christian king or the united states shall not in this
respect have granted an exemption to some other nation.

Art. 10. The united states, their citizens and inhabitants, shall never
disturb the subjects of the most christian king in the enjoyment and exercise
of the right of fishing on the banks of Newfoundland, nor in the indefinite and
exclusive right which belongs to them on that part of the coast of that island
which is designed by the treaty of Utrecht, nor in the right relative to all
and each of the isles which belong to his most christian majesty, the whole
conformable to the true sense of the treaties of Utrecht and Paris.

Art. 11. The subjects and inhabitants of the said united states, or any one of
them, shall not be reputed Aubains in France, and consequently shall be
exempted from the Droit d' Aubaine, or other similar duty, under what name
soever; they may by testament, donation, or otherwise, dispose of their goods,
moveable and immovable, in favor of such persons as to them shall seem good,
and their heirs, subjects of the united states, residing whether in France or
elsewhere, may succeed them, ab intestat, without being obliged to obtain
letters of naturalization, and without having the effect of this concession
contested or impeded, under pretext of any rights or prerogatives of provinces,
cities, or private persons; and the said heirs, whether such by particular
title, or ab intestat, shall be exempt from all duty called Droit de
detraction, or other duty of the same kind; saving nevertheless the local
rights or duties, as much and as long as similar ones are not established by
the united states, or any of them. The subjects of the most christian king
shall enjoy on their part, in all the dominions of the said states, an entire
and perfect reciprocity, relative to the stipulations contained in the present
article: But it is at the same time agreed, that its contents shall not effect
the laws made, or that may be made hereafter in France, against emigrations,
which shall remain in all their force and vigor; and the united states, on
their part, or any of them, shall be at liberty to enact such laws, relative to
that matter, as to them shall seem proper.

Art. 12. The merchant ships of either of the parties, which shall be making
into a port belonging to the enemy of the other ally, and concerning whole
voyage and the species of goods on board her, there shall be just grounds of
suspicion, shall be obliged to exhibit, as well upon the high seas, as in the
ports and havens, not only her passports, but likewise certificates, expressly
showing that her goods are not of the number of those which have been
prohibited as contraband.

Art. 13. If, by exhibiting of the abovesaid certificates, the other party
discover there are any of those sorts of goods which are prohibited and
declared contraband, and consigned for a port under the obedience of his enemy,
it shall not be lawful to break up the hatches of such ship, or to open any
chest, coffers, parks, casks, or any other vessels found therein, or to remove
the smallest parcels of her goods, whether such ship belongs to the subjects of
France, or the inhabitants of the said united states, unless the lading be
brought on shore, in the presence of the officers of the court of admiralty,
and an inventory thereof made; but there shall be no allowance to sell,
exchange, or alienate the same in any manner, until that after due and lawful
process shall have been had against such prohibited goods, and the court of
admiralty shall, by a sentence pronounced, have confiscated the same, saving
always as well the ship itself, as any other goods found therein, which by this
treaty are to be esteemed free, neither may they be detained on pretense of
their being as it were infected by the prohibited goods, much less shall they
be confiscated as lawful prize; but if not the whole cargo, but only part
thereof shall consist of prohibited or contraband goods, and the commander of
the ship shall be ready and willing to deliver them to the captor who has
discovered them, in such case the captor having received those goods, shall
forthwith discharge the ship, and not hinder her by any means freely to
prosecute the voyage on which she was bound. But in case the contraband
merchandises cannot be all received on board the vessel of the captor, then the
captor may, notwithstanding the offer of delivering him the contraband goods,
carry the vessel into the nearest port, agreeable to what is above directed.

Art. 14. On the contrary it is agreed, that whatever shall be found to be
laden by the subjects and inhabitants of either party on any ship belonging to
the enemies of the other, or to their subjects, the whole, although it be not
of the sort of prohibited goods, may be confiscated in the same manner as if it
belonged to the enemy, except such goods and merchandise as were put on board
such ship before the declaration of war, or even after such declaration, if so
be it were done without knowledge of such declaration; so that the goods of the
subjects and people of either party, whether they be of the nature of such as
are prohibited or otherwise, which, as is aforesaid, were put on board any ship
belonging to an enemy before the war, or after the declaration of the same,
without the knowledge of it, shall no ways be liable to confiscation, but shall
well and truly be restored without delay to the proprietors demanding the same;
but so as that if the said merchandises be contraband, it shall not be any ways
lawful to carry them afterward to any ports belonging to the enemy. The two
contracting parties agree, that the term of two months being passed after the
declaration of war, their respective subjects, from whatever part of the world
they come, shall not plead the ignorance mentioned in this article.

Art. 15. And that more effectual care may be taken for the security of the
subjects and inhabitants of both parties, that they suffer no injury by the men
of war or privateers of the other party, all the commanders of the ships of his
most christian majesty and of the said united states, and all their subjects
and inhabitants, shall be forbid doing any injury or damage to the other side;
and if they act to the contrary they shall be punished, and shall moreover be
bound to make satisfaction for all matter of damage, and the interest thereof,
by reparation, under the pain and obligation of their persons and goods.

Art. 16. All ships and merchandise of what nature soever, which shall be
rescued out of the hands of any pirates or robbers on the high seas, shall be
brought into some port of either state, and shall be delivered to the custody
of the officers of that port, in order to be restored entire to the true
proprietor, as soon as due and sufficient proof shall be made concerning the
property thereof.

Art. 17. It shall be lawful for the ships of war of either party, and
privateers, freely to carry whithersoever they please, the ships and goods
taken from their enemies, without being obliged to pay any duty to the officers
of the admiralty, or any other judges; nor shall such prizes be arrested or
seized when they come to and enter the port of either party; nor shall the
searchers or other officers of those places search the same, or make
examination concerning the lawfulness of such prizes; but they may hoist sail
at any time, and depart and carry their prizes to the places expressed in their
commissions, which the commanders of such ships of war shall be obliged to
show: On the contrary, no shelter or refuge shall be given in their ports to
such as shall have made prize of the subjects, people, or property of either of
the parties; but if such shall come in, being forced by stress of weather, or
the danger of the sea, all proper means shall be vigorously used, that they go
out and retire from thence as soon as possible.

Art. 18. If any ship belonging to either of the parties, their people, or
subjects, shall within the coasts or dominions of the other, stick upon the
sands, or be wrecked or suffer any other damage, all friendly assistance and
relief shall be given to the persons shipwrecked, or such as shall be in danger
thereof. And letters of safe conduct shall likewise be given to them for their
free and quiet passage from thence, and the return of every one to his own
country.

Art. 19. In case the subjects and inhabitants of either party, with their
shipping, whether public and of war, or private and of merchants, be forced
through stress of weather, pursuit of pirates or enemies, or any other urgent
necessity, for seeking of shelter and harbor, to retreat and enter into any of
the rivers, bays, roads, or ports belonging to the other party, they shall be
received and treated with all humanity and kindness, and enjoy all friendly
protection and help; and they shall be permitted to refresh and provide
themselves at reasonable rates with victuals, and all things needful for the
sustenance of their persons, or reparation of their ships, and convenience of
their voyage, and they shall no ways be detained or hindered from returning out
of the said ports or roads, but may remove and depart when and whither they
please, without any let or hindrance.

Art. 20. For the better promoting of commerce on both sides, it is agreed,
that if a war should break out between the said two nations, six months after
the proclamation of war shall be allowed to the merchants in the cities and
towns where they live, for selling and transporting their goods and
merchandises; and if any thing be taken from them, or any injury be done them
within that term, by either party, or the people or subjects of either, full
satisfaction shall be made for the same.

Art. 21. No subject of the most christian king shall apply for or take any
commission or letters of marque for arming any ship or ships to act as
privateers against the said united states or any of them, or against the
subjects, people, or inhabitants of the said united states or any of them, or
against the property of any of the inhabitants of any of them from any prince
or state with which the united states shall be at war; nor shall any citizen,
subject, or inhabitant of the said united states or any of them, apply for or
take any commission or letters of marque for arming any ship or ships to act as
privateers against the subjects of the most christian king, or any of them, or
the property of any of them, from any prince or state with which the said king
shall be at war; and if any person of either nation shall take such commission
or letters of marque, he shall be punished as a pirate.

Art. 22. It shall not be lawful for any foreign privateers, not belonging to
the subjects of the most christian king, nor citizens of the said united
states, who have commissions from any other prince or state, at enmity with
either nation, to fit their ships in the ports of either the one or the other
of the aforesaid parties, to sell what they have taken, or in any other manner
whatsoever to exchange their ships, merchandises or any other lading; neither
shall they be allowed even to purchase victuals, except such as shall be
necessary for their going to the next port of that prince or state from which
they have commissions.

Art. 23. It shall be lawful for all and singular the subjects of the most
christian king, and the citizens, people and inhabitants of the said united
states, to sail with their ships with all manner of liberty and security, no
distinction being made who are the proprietors of the merchandise laden
thereon, from any port to the places of those who now are or hereafter shall be
at enmity with the most christian king or the united states. It shall likewise
be lawful for the subjects and inhabitants aforesaid, to sail with the ships
and merchandises aforementioned, and to trade with the same liberty and
security from the places, ports and havens of those who are enemies of both or
either party, without any opposition or disturbance whatsoever, not only
directly from the places of the enemy aforementioned to neutral places, but
also from one place belonging to an enemy to another place belonging to an
enemy, whether they be under the jurisdiction of the same prince, or under
several. And it is hereby stipulated, that free ships shall also give a freedom
to goods, and that every thing shall be deemed free and exempt which shall be
found on board the ships belonging to the subjects of either of the
confederates, although the whole lading or any part thereof should appertain to
the enemies of either, contraband goods being always excepted. It is also
agreed in like manner, that the same liberty be extended to persons who are on
board a free ship, with this effect, that although they be enemies to both or
either party, they are not to be taken out of that free ship, unless they are
soldiers and in actual service of the enemies.

Art. 24. This liberty of navigation and commerce shall extend to all kinds of
merchandises, except those only which are distinguished by the name of
contraband, and under this name of contraband or prohibited goods shall be
comprehended arms, great guns, bombs with their fuses and other things
belonging to them, cannon ball, gun powder, match, pikes, swords, lances,
spears, halberds, mortars, petards, grenadoes, saltpetre, muskets, musket-ball,
bucklers, helmets, breast-plates, coats of mail, and the like kinds of arms,
proper for arming soldiers, musket rests, belts, horses with their furniture,
and all other warlike instruments whatever. These merchandises which follow
shall not be reckoned among contraband or prohibited goods; that is to say, all
sorts of clothes, and all other manufactures woven of any wool, flax, silk,
cotton, or any other materials whatever, all kinds of wearing apparel, together
with the species whereof they are used to be made, gold and silver, as well
coined as uncoined, tin, iron, latten, copper, brass, coals; as also wheat and
barley, and any other kind of corn or pulse, tobacco, and likewise all manner
of spices, salted and smoaked flesh, salted fish, cheese and butter, beer,
oils, wines, sugars, and all sorts of salts, and in general all provisions
which serve for the nourishment of mankind and the sustenance of life;
furthermore, all kinds of cotton, hemp, flax, tar, pitch, ropes, cables, sails,
sail-cloth, anchors and any parts of anchors, also ships masts, planks, boards
and beams of what trees soever, and all other things proper either for building
or repairing ships, and all other goods whatever which have not been worked
into the form of any instrument of thing prepared for war by land or sea, shall
not be reputed contraband, much less such as have been already wrought up for
any other use; all which shall be wholly reckoned among free goods; as likewise
all other merchandises and things which are not comprehended and particularly
mentioned in the foregoing enumeration of contraband goods, so that they may be
transported and carried in the freest manner by the subjects of both
confederates, even to places belonging to an enemy, such towns or places being
only excepted, as are at that time besieged, blocked up or invested.

Art. 25. To the end that all manner of dissentions and quarrels may be avoided
and prevented, on one side and the other, it is agreed, that in case either of
the parties hereto, should be engaged in war, the ships and vessels belonging
to the subjects or people of the other ally must be furnished with sea letters
or passports, expressing the name, property and bulk of the ship, as also the
name and place of habitation of the master or commander of the said ship, that
it may appear thereby that the ship really and truly belongs to the subjects of
one of the parties, which passport shall be made out and granted according to
the form annexed to this treaty; they shall likewise be recalled every year,
that is, if the ship happens to return home within the space of a year; it is
likewise agreed, that such ships being laden are to be provided not only with
passports as above mentioned, but also with certificates, containing the
several particulars of the cargo, the place whence the ship sailed, and whether
she is bound, that so it may be known whether any forbidden or contraband goods
be on board of the same, which certificates shall be made out by the officers
of the place whence the ship set sail, in the accustomed form; and if any one
shall think it fit or advisable to express in the said certificates, the
person to whom the goods on board belong, he many freely do so.

Art. 26. The ships of the subjects and inhabitants of either of the parties
coming upon any coast belong^^g to either of the said allies, but not willing
to enter into port, or being entered into port and not willing to unload their
cargoes or break bulk, they shall be treated according to the general rules
prescribed or to be prescribed relative to the object in question.

Art. 27. If the ships of the said subjects, people or inhabitants of either of
the parties shall be met with, either sailing along the coasts or on the high
seas, by any ship of war of the other, or by any privateers, the said ships of
war or privateers, for the avoiding of any disorder, shall remain out of cannon
shot, and may send their boats on board the merchant ship which they shall so
meet with, and may enter her to the num^er of two or three men only, to whom
the master or commander of such ship or vessel shall exhibit his passport
concerning the property of the ship, made out according to the form inserted in
this present treaty, and the ship, when she shall have showed such passport,
shall be free and at liberty to pursue her voyage, so as it shall not be lawful
to molest or search in any manner, or to give her chase or to force her to quit
her intended course.

Art 28. It is also agreed, that all goods, when once put on board the ships or
vessels of either of the two contracting parties, shall be subject to no
further visitation, but all visitation or search shall be made before hand, and
all prohibited goods shall be stopped on the spot before the same be put on
board, unless there are manifest tokens or proofs of fraudulent practice; nor
shall either the persons or goods of the subjects of his most christian majesty
or the united states, be put under any arrest or molested by any other kind of
embargo for that cause, and only the subject of that state to whom the said
goods have been or shall be prohibited, and who shall presume to sell or
alienate such sort of goods, shall be duly punished for the offense.

Art. 29. The two contracting parties grant mutually the liberty of having each
in the ports of the other, consuls, vice-consuls, agents and commissaries,
whose functions shall be regulated by a particuliar agreement.

Art. 30. And the more to favor and facilitate the commerce which the subjects
of the united states may have with France, the most christian king will grant
them in Europe one or more free ports, where they may bring and dispose of all
the produce and merchandise of the thirteen united states; and his majesty will
also continue to the subjects of the said states, the free ports which have
been and are open in the French islands of America, of all which free ports the
said subjects of the united states shall enjoy the use, agreeable to the
regulations which relate to them.

Art. 31. The present treaty shall be ratified on both sides, and the
ratifications shall be exchanged in the space of six months, or sooner, if
possible.

IN FAITH WHEREOF the respective plenipotentiaries have signed the above
articles both in the French and English languages; declaring, nevertheless,
that the present treaty was originally composed and concluded in the French
language, and they have thereto affixed their seals.

DONE at PARIS, this Sixth Day of February, One Thousand Seven Hundred and
Seventy-Eight. (L. S.) C. A. GERARD. (L. S.) B. FRANKLIN. (L. S.) SILAS DEANE.
(L. S.) ARTHUR LEE.


Form of the Passports and Letters which are to be given to the Ships and
Barques according to the Twenty-fifth Article of this Treaty. To all who shall
see these presents, Greeting.
IT is hereby made known, that leave and permission has been given to (...),
master and commander of the ship called (...) of the town of (...) burden
(...) tons or thereabouts, lying at present in in the port and haven of (...)
and bound for (...) and laden with (...) After that this ship has been visited,
and before sailing, he shall make oath before the officers who have the
jurisdiction of maritime affairs, that the said ship belongs to one or more of
the subjects of (...) the act whereof shall be put at the end of these
presents; as likewise that he will keep and cause to be kept by his crew on
board, the marine ordinances and regulations, and enter in the proper office a
list, signed and witnessed, containing the names and sirnames, the places of
birth and abode of the crew of his ship, and of all who shall embark on board
her, whom he shall not take on board without the knowledge and permission of
the officers of the marine, and in every port or haven where he shall enter
with his ship, he shall show his present leave to the officers and judges of
the marine, and shall give a faithful account to them of what passed and was
done during his voyage, and he shall carry the colors, arms and ensign of the
king, or united states during his voyage. In witness whereof we have have
signed these presents and put the seal of our arms thereunto, and caused the
same to be countersigned by (...) at (...) the (...) day of (...) Anno Domini

TREATY OF ALLIANCE, EVENTUAL and DEFENSIVE.
LOUIS by the Grace of GOD, King of France and Navarre, To all who shall see
these presents, Greeting:
THE Congress of the united states of North America, having by their
plenipotentiaries residing in France, proposed to form with us a defensive and
eventual Alliance: Willing to give the said states an efficacious proof of the
interest we take in their prosperity, we have determined to conclude the said
alliance. For these causes and other good considerations thereto moving, we,
reposing entire confidence in the capacity and experience, zeal and fidelity
for our service, of our dear and beloved Conrad Alexander Gerard, royal syndic
of the city of Strasbourg, secretary of our council of state, have nominated,
commissioned and deputed, and by these presents signed with our hand, do
nominate, commission and depute him our plenipotentiary, giving him power and
special command to act in this quality, and confer, negociate, treat and agree
conjointly with the above mentioned plenipotentiaries of the united states,
invested in the like manner with powers in due form to determine, conclude and
sign such articles, conditions, conventions, declarations, definitive treaty,
and any other acts whatever, as he shall judge proper to answer the end which
we propose; promising on the faith and word of a king, to agree to, confirm and
establish for ever, to accomplish and execute puctually whatever our said dear
and beloved Conrad Alexander Gerard shall have stipulated and signed in virtue
of the present power, without ever contravening it, or suffering it to be
contravened for any cause and under any pretext whatever; as likewise to cause
our letters of ratification to be made in due form, and to have them delivered
in order to to be exchanged at the time that shall be agreed upon. For such is
our pleasure. In testimony whereof we have set our seal to these presents.
Given at Versailles, the thirtieth day of the mouth January, in the year of
grace one thousand seven hundred and seventy-eight, and the fourth of our reign.

(Signed) (L. S.) LOUIS. By the King. GRAVIER de VERGENNES.

THE TREATY.
THE Most Christian King and the United States of North America, to wit.
New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York,
New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland, Virginia, North Carolina and
Georgia, having this day concluded a Treaty of Amity and Commerce, for the
reciprocal advantage of their subjects and citizens, have thought it necessary
to take into consideration the means of strengthening those engagements, and of
rendering them useful to the safety and tranquillity of the two parties;
particularly in case Great Britain, in resentment of that connection, and of
the good correspondence which is the object of the said treaty, should break
the peace with France, either by direct hostilities, or by hindering her
commerce and navigation in a manner contrary to the rights of nations, and the
peace subsisting between the two crowns. And his majesty and the said united
states having resolved in that case, to join their councils and ^Forts against
the enterprises of their common enemy.

The respective plenipotentiaries empowered to concert the clauses and
conditions proper to fulfill the said intentions, have, after the most mature
deliberation, concluded and determined on the following articles.

Article 1. IF war should break out between France and Great Britain, during
the continuance of the present war between the united states and England, his
majesty and the said united states shall make it a common cause, and aid each
other mutually with their good offices, their counsels and their forces,
according to the exigence of conjunctures, as becomes good and faithful allies.

Art. 2. The essential and direct end of the present defensive alliance is, to
maintain effectually the liberty, sovereignty, and independence absolute and
unlimited, of the said united states, as well in matters of government as of
commerce.

Art. 3. The two contracting parties shall, each on its own part, and in the
manner it may judge most proper, make all the efforts in it is power against
their common enemy, in order to attain the end proposed.

Art. 4. The contracting parties agree, that in case either of them should form
any particular enterprise in which the concurrence of the other may be desired,
the party whose concurrence is desired, shall readily and with good faith join
to act in concert for that purpose, as far as circumstances and its own
particular situation will permit, and in that case, they shall regulate by a
particular convention, the quantity and kind of succor to be furnished, and
the time and manner of its being brought into action, as well as the advantages
which are to be its compensation.

Art. 5. If the united states should think fit to attempt the reduction of the
British power, remaining in the northern parts of America, or the islands of
Bermudas, those countries or islands, in case of success, shall be consederated
with, or dependent upon the said united states.

Art. 6. The most christian king renounces forever the possession of the
islands of Bermudas, as well as of any part of the continent of North America,
which before the treaty of Paris, in 1763, or in virtue of that treaty, were
acknowledged to belong to the crown of Great Britain, or to the united states,
heretofore called British colonies, or which are at this time, or have lately
been under the power of the king and crown of Great Britain.

Art. 7. If his most christian majesty shall think proper to attack any of the
islands situated in the Gulf of Mexico, or near that gulf, which are at
present under the power of Great Britain, all the said isles, in case of
success, shall appertain to the crown of France.

Art. 8. Neither of the two parties shall conclude either truce or peace with
Great Britain, without the formal consent of the other first obtained; and they
mutually engage not to lay down their arms, until the independence of the
united states shall have been formally or tacitly assured, by the treaty or
treaties that shall terminate the war.

Art. 9. The contracting parties declare, that being resolved to fulfill each on
it is own part, the clauses and conditions of the present treaty of alliance,
according to its own power and circumstances, there shall be no after-claim of
compensation, on one side or the other, whatever may be the event of the war.

Art. 10. The most christian king and the united states agree, to invite or
admit other powers, who may have received injuries from England, to make common
cause with them, and to accede to the present alliance, under such conditions
as shall be freely agreed to, and settled between all the parties.

Art. 11. The two parties guarantee mutually from the present time and forever,
against all other powers, to wit. The united states to his most christian
majesty, the present possessions of the crown of France in America, as well as
those which it may acquire by the future treaty of peace; and his most
christian majesty guarantees on his part to the united states, their liberty,
sovereignty, and independence, absolute and unlimited, as well in matters of
government as commerce, and also their possessions, and the additions or
conquests, that their confederation may obtain during the war, from any of the
dominions now, or heretofore possessed by Great Britain in North America;
conformable to the fifth and sixth articles above written, the whole as their
possession shall be fixed and assured to the said states, at the moment of the
cessation of their present war with England.

Art. 12. In order to fix more precisely the sense and application of the
preceding article, the contracting parties declare, that in case of a rupture
between France and England, the reciprocal guarantee declared in the said
article, shall have its full force and effect, the moment such war shall break
out; and if such rupture shall not take place, the mutual obligations of the
said guarantee shall not commence until the moment of the cessation of the
present war, between the united states and England, shall have ascertained
their possessions.

Art. 13. The present treaty shall be ratified on both sides, and the
ratifications shall be exchanged in the space of six months, or sooner, if
possible.

IN FAITH WHEREOF the respective plenipotentiaries, to wit, on the part of the
most christian king, Conrad Alexander Gerard, royal syndic of the city of
Strasbourg, and secretary of his majesty's council of state; and on the part of
the united states, Benjamin Franklin, deputy to the general congress from the
state of Pennsylvania, and president of the convention of said state; Silas
Deane, heretofore deputy from the state of Connecticut; and Arthur Lee,
counselor at law, have signed the above articles both in the French and
English languages; declaring nevertheless, that the present treaty was
originally composed and concluded in the French language, and they have
hereunto affixed their seals.

DONE at PARIS, this Sixth Day of February, One Thousand Seven Hundred and
Seventy-Eight. (L. S) C A. GERARD. (L. S.) B. FRANKLIN. (L. S.) SILAS DEANE.
(L. S.) ARTHUR LEE.


THE END.

