LORD CHESTERFIELD's ADVICE TO HIS SON, ON MEN AND MANNERS: OR, A NEW SYSTEM OF
EDUCATION IN WHICH THE PRINCIPLES OF POLITENESS, THE ART OF ACQUIRING A
KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD, WITH EVERY INSTRUCTION NECESSARY TO FORM A MAN OF
HONOR, VIRTUE, TASTE, AND FASHION, ARE LAID DOWN IN A PLAIN, EASY, FAMILIAR
MANNER, ADAPTED TO EVERY STATION AND CAPACITY. THE WHOLE ARRANGED ON A PLAN
ENTIRELY NEW.

LONDON: Printed. PHILADELPHIA: Reprinted and Sold by T. BRADFORD AND P. HALL.
M.DCC.LXXXI.

ADVERTISEMENT.
FEW characters among the nobility of this age and nation are better known than
that of the late ingenious and witty EARL of CHESTERFIELD; who was alike
distinguished in the polite, the political, and the learned circles. With a
great portion of good sense, he possessed a perfect knowledge of mankind; he
was a complete gentleman, and a delightful companion. Blessed with such rare
talents and amiable qualities, no man surely was ever more happily qualified to
assume the PRECEPTOR, and to dictate A SYSTEM OF EDUCATION.

In this character, however, it is more than probable his Lordship would never
have appeared, had he not, luckily for posterity, had a NATURAL SON, (by one
MADAME DU BOUCHET, a French Lady), whom he loved, and cherished, with all the
fondness of a father, and whose education was for many years the chief
engagement of his life.

The following sheets contain his Lordship's ADVICE to that SON, whom he meant
to form, what he was himself, an all-accomplished man; and in which the Reader
is presented with a selection of his Lordship's most beautiful thoughts on
various subjects; his judicious Remarks on MEN and MANNERS, and useful
Observations to form the MAN of VIRTUE, TASTE, and FASHION.

CONTENTS.
ABSENCE of Mind Page 1 Attention Page 3 Awkwardness of different Kinds Page 6
Bashfulness Page 9 Company Page 12 Good company defined Page 13 Rules for
behavior in Company Page 15
Rules for conversation Page 17 Talking Page ib. Learn the Characters of
Company before you talk much Page ib.
Telling Stories, and Digressions Page ib. Never seize People by the Button
Page 18 Long Talkers and Whisperers Page ib. Inattention to Persons speaking
Page ib. Never interrupt any speaker Page 19 Adopt, rather than give the
subject Page ib. Conceal your Learning Page 20 Contradict with Politeness Page
ib. Avoid Argument, if possible Page 21 Always debate with Temper Page ib.
Observe local ^priety Page ib. Jokes, Bons Mo^s, etc. Page ib. Avoid Egotism
Page 22 Never seem dark and mysterious Page 25 Look People in the Face when
speaking Page ib. Never retail private Scandal Page 26 Never indulge general
Reflections Page ib. Mimicry should be held in Contempt Page 27 Swearing
equally wicked and illiberal Page 27 Sneering Page ib. Talk not of your own, or
others Domestic Affairs Page 28 Explicitness in Conversation Page ib. Secrecy
Page ib. Adapt your Conversation to the Company Page 29 Never suppose yourself
the Subject or Laugh of the Company Page ib. Exterior Seriousness Page 30
Economy Page 31 Friendship Page 32 Good Breeding Page 35 Graces Page 41 Art of
Pleasing Page ib. Address Page 43 Choice of Amusements Page 44 Carving Page ib.
Chit Chat Page 45 Cleanliness Page 46 Compliments Page 47 Diction Page 48 Dress
and Dancing Page ib. Drinking of Healths Page 50 A Modest Assurance is
necessary Page 51 Hurry Page ib. Laughter Page 52 Letter-Writing Page 53
Nicknames Page 54 Pronounciation and Speaking Page ib. Spelling Page 55 Style
Page 56 Writing Page 57 Vulgar Expressions Page ib. Cautions against sundry odd
Habits Page 58
Knowledge of the World Page 60 How to acquire a Knowledge of the World Page
ib. Never show a Contempt for any one Page 61 Make no man feel his Inferiority
Page 62 Never expose People's Weaknesses, etc. Page ib. Study command of Temper
and Countenance Page 63 Judge of other Men's by your own Feelings Page 65 Avoid
seeing an Affront if possible Page 66 Dissemble Resentment toward Enemies Page
67 Trust not too much to any Man's Honesty Page 69 Study the Passions and
Foibles of both Sexes Page 70 Flatter the vanity of all Page 71 Suspect those
who remarkably affect any Virtue Page 72 Be upon your guard against proffered
Friendships Page ib. Never believe a Man who swears to the Truth of a Thing
Page 73 Shun ^riotous Connections Page ib. Seeming Ignorance frequently
necessary Page 74 Conformity and Flexibility of Manners useful Page 76 Spirit
Page 77 Never neglect old Acquaintance Page 78
Lying Page 79 Dignity of Manners Page 82 Romping, Waggery, etc. Page ib. Pride
Page 83 Flattery Page ib. Vulgar Expressions Page ib. Frivolous Curiosity, etc.
Page ib.
Gentleness of Manners with Firmness of Mind Page 84 Deliver Commands with
Mildness Page 85 Ask a Favor, or solicit a Right, with Softness Page 86 Check
a Hastiness of Temper Page 87 Behavior toward Friends and Enemies Page 88 Be
civil, easy, and frank with Rivals Page ib.
Moral Character Page 89 Commonplace Observations Page 92 Religion Page ib.
Matrimony Page ib. Courts and Cottages Page 93
Oratory Page 94 Pedantry Page 97 Never pronounce arbitrarily Page 98 Affect
not to prefer the Ancients to the Moderns Page ib. Reason not from the
Authority of Ancient Poets or Historians Page ^9 Abstain from learned
Ostentation Page ib.
Pleasure Page (...) Prejudices Page 104 Religion Page 105 Employment of Time
Page 106 Laziness Page 107 Reading Page 108 Transacting Business Page 109
Method Page ib. Frivolousness Page 112
Vanity Page 113 Virtue Page 115 Useful Miscellaneous Observations on Men and
Manners Page 119
LORD CHESTERFIELD's ADVICE TO HIS SON.
ABSENCE OF MIND.
AN absent Man is generally either a very weak, or a very affected man; he is,
however, a very disagreeable man in company. He is defective in all the common
offices of civility; he does not enter into the general conversation, but
breaks into it from time to time, with some starts of his own, as if he waked
from a dream. He seems wrapped up in thought, and possibly does not think at
all: he does not know his most intimate acquaintance by sight, or answers them
as if he were at cross purposes. He leaves his hat in one room, his cane in
another, and would probably leave his shoes in a third, if his buckles though
awry, did not save them. This is a sure indication, either of a mind so weak
that it cannot bear above one object at a time; or so affected, that it would
be supposed to be wholly engrossed, by some very great and important objects.
Sir Isaac Newton, Mr. Lock, and perhaps five or six more since the creation,
may have had a right to absence, from the intense thought their investigations
required.

No man is, in any degree, fit for either business or conversation, who does
not command his attention to the present object he what it will. When I see a
man absent in mind, I choose to be absent in body; for it is almost impossible
for me to stay in the room, as I cannot stand inattention and awkwardness.

I would rather be in company with a dead man, than with an absent one; for if
the dead man affords me no pleasure at least he shows me no contempt; whereas
the absent man very plainly, though silently, tells me that he does not think
me worth his attention. Besides, an absent man can never make any observations
upon the characters, customs and manners of the company. He may be in the best
companies all his lifetime, (if they will admit him) and never become the
wiser: we may as well converse with a deaf man, as an absent man. It is indeed
a practical blunder to address ourselves to a man, who we plainly perceive
neither hears, minds, nor understands us.

ATTENTION.
A MAN is fit for neither business nor pleasure, who either cannot, or does
not, command and direct his attention to the present object, and in some
degree, banish, for that time, all other objects from his thoughts. If at a
ball, a supper, or a party of pleasure, a man were to be solving, in his own
mind, a problem in Euclid, he would be a very bad companion, and make a poor
figure in that company; or if, in studying a problem in his closet, he were to
think of a minuet, I am apt to believe that he would make a very poor
mathematician.

There is time enough for every thing, in the course of the day, if you do but
one thing at once; but there is not time enough in the year, if you will do two
things at a time.

This steady and undissipated attention to one object is a sure mark of a
superior genins; as hurry, bustle and agitation, are the never-failing symptoms
of a weak and frivolous mind.

Indeed, without attention nothing is to be done: want of attention, which is
really want of thought, is either folly or madness. You should not only have
attention to every thing, but a quickness of attention, so as to observe at
once, all the people in the room; their motions, their looks, and their words;
and yet without staring at them, and seeming to be an observer. This quick and
unobserved observation is of infinite advantage in life, and is to be acquired
with care; and, on the contrary, what is called absence, which is a
thoughtlessness and want of attention about what is doing, makes a man so like
either a fool or a madman, that, for my part, I see no real difference. A fool
never has thought; a madman has loft it; and an absent man is, for the time,
without it.

In short, the most material knowledge of all, I mean the knowledge of the
world, is never to be acquired without great attention; and I know many old
people, who, though they have lived long in the world, are but children still
as to the knowledge of it, from their levity, and inattention. Certain forms,
which all people comply with, and certain arts, which all people aim at, hide,
in some degree, the truth, and give a general exterior resemblence to almost
every body. Attention and sagacity must see through that veil, and discover the
natural character.

Add to this, there are (...) attentions which are infinitely engaging, and
which sensibly affect that degr^e of pride and ^olf love which is inseparable
from human nature; as they are unquestionable proofs of the regard and
consideration which we have for the persons to whom we pay them. As for
example^. Suppose you invited any body to dine or sup with you, you ought to
recollect if you had observed that they had any favorite dish, and tak^ care
to provided it for them, and when it came, you should say, You seemed to me, at
such and such a place, to give this dish preference, and therefore ordered it.
This is the wine that I observed you like, and therefore I procured some.
Again: Most people have their weaknesses; they have their aversions or their
likings to such or such things. If we were to laugh at a man for his aversion
to a cat or cheese (which are common antipathies,) or by inattention or
negligence, to let them come in his way where we could prevent it; he would in
the first case, think himself insulted; and in the second slighted; and would
remember both. But, on the other hand, our care to procure for him what he
likes, and to remove from him what he dislikes, shows him that he is at least
an object of our attention, flatters his vanity, and perhaps makes him more
your friend, than a more important service would have done. The more trifling
these things are, the more they prove your attention for the person, and are
consequently the more engaging. Consult your own breast, and recollect how
these little attentions, when shown you by others, flatter that degree of
self-love and vanity from which no man living is free. Reflect how they incline
and attract you to that person, and how you are propitiated afterward to all
which that person says or does. The same causes will have the same effects in
your favor.

AWKWARDNESS OF DIFFERENT KINDS.
MANY very worthy and sensible people have certain odd tricks, ill habits, and
awkwardness in their behavior, which excite a disgust to and dislike of their
persons, that cannot be removed or overcome by any other valuable endowment or
merit which they may possess.

Now, awkwardness can proceed but from too causes; either from not having kept
good company, or from not having attended to it.

When an awkward fellow first comes into a room, it is highly probable, that
his sword gets between his legs, and throws him down, or makes him stumble, at
least; when he has recovered this accident, he goes and places himself in the
very place of the whole room where he should not; there he soon lets his hat
fall down, and, in taking it up again, throws down his cane; in recovering his
cane, his hat falls a second time: so that he is a quarter of an hour before he
is in order again. If he drinks tea or coffee, he certainly scalds his mouth,
and lets either the cup or the saucer fall, and spills the tea or coffee in his
breeches. At dinner, his awkwardness distinguishes itself particularly, as he
has more to do: there be holds his knife, fork and spoon, differently from
other people; eats with his knife to the great danger of his mouth, picks his
teeth with his fork, and puts his spoon, which has been in his throat twenty
times, into the dishes again. If he is to carve, can never hit the joint; but
in his vain efforts to cut through the bone, scatters the sauce in every body's
face. He generally daubs himself with soup and grease, though his napkin is
commonly stuck through a button hole, and tickles his chin. When he drinks, he
infallibly coughs in his glass, and besprinkles the company. Besides all this
he has strange tricks and gestures; such as snuffing up his nose, or blowing
it, and looking afterward in his handkerchief, so as to make the company sick.
His hands are troublesome to him when he has not something in them, and he does
not know where to put them: but they are in perpetual motion between his bosom
and his breeches: he does not wear his clothes, and in short, does nothing like
other people. All this, I own, is not in any degree criminal; but it is highly
disagreeable and ridiculous in company, and ought most carefully to be avoided
by whoever desires to please.

From this account of what you should not do, you may easily judge what you
should do, and a due attention to the manners of people of fashion, and who
have seen the world, will make it habitual and familiar to you.

There is, likewise, an awkwardness of expression and words most careful to be
avoided; such as false Engli^, bad pronunciation, old sayings, and common
proverbs; which are so many pro^fs of having kept bad and low company. For
example: if, instead of saying that tastes are different, and that every man
has his own peculiar one, you should let off a proverb, and say, that what is
one man's meat is another man's porion: or else, every one as they like, as the
good man said when he kissed his cow, every body would be persuaded that you
had never kept company with any body above footmen and house maids.

There is likewise an awkwardness of the mind, that ought to be, and with care
may be, avoided: as for instance: to ^istake or forget names; to speak of Mr.
What-d'ye-call-him, or Mrs. Thingum, or How d'ye-call her, is excessively
awkward and ordinary. To call people by improper titles and appellations is so
too; as my Lord, for Sir; and Sir, for my Lord. To begin a story or a narration
when you are not perfect in it, and cannot go through with it, but are forced,
possibly to say, in the middle of it, "I have forgot the rest," is very
unpleasant and bungling. One must be extremely exact, clear, and perspicuous in
every thing one says; otherwise, instead of entertaining or informing others,
one only tires and puzzles them.

BASHFULNESS.
BASHFULNESS is the distinguishing character of an English booby, who appears
freightened out of his wits if people of fashion speak to him, and blushes and
stammers without being able to give a proper answer; by which means he becomes
truly ridiculous from the groundless fear of being laughed at.

There is a very material difference between modesty and awkward bashfulness,
which is as ridiculous as true modesty is commendable: it is as absurd to be a
simpleton as to be an impudent fellow; and we make ourselves contemptible, if
we cannot come into a room and speak to people without being out of
countenance, or without embarrassment. A man who is really diffident, timid,
and bashful, be his merit what it will, never can push himself in the world,
his despondency throws him into inaction, and the forward, the bustling, and
the petulent will always precede him. The manner makes the whole difference.
What would be impudence in one man, is only a proper and decent assurance in
another. A man of sense, and of knowledge of the world, will assert his own
rights, and pursue his own objects as steadily and intrepidly as the most
impudent man living, and commonly more so; but then he has art enough to give
an outward air of modesty to all he does. This engages and prevails, whilst the
very same things shock and fail, from the over-bearing or impudent manner only
of doing them.

Englishmen, in general, are ashamed of going into company, when we avoid
singularity, what should we be ashamed of? And why should not we go into a
mixed company, with as much ease, and as little concern, as we would go into
our own room? Vice and ignorance are the only things we ought to be ashamed of:
while we keep clear of them, we may venture any where without fear or concern.
Nothing sinks a young man into low company so surely as bashfulness. If he
thinks that he shall not, he most surely will not please.

Some, indeed, from feeling the pain and inconveniences of Bashfulness, have
rushed into the other extreme, and turned impudent, as cowards sometimes grow
desperate from excess of danger: but this is equally to be avoided, there being
nothing more generally shocking than impudence. The medium between these two
extremes points out the well-bred man, who always feels himself firm and easy
in all companies: who is modest without being bashful, and steady without being
impudent.

A mean fellow is ashamed and embarrassed when he comes into company, is
disconcerted when sp^^en to, answers with difficulty, and does not know how to
dispose of his hands: but a gentleman who is acquainted with the world, a pears
in company with a graceful and proper assurance, and is perfectly easy and
unembarrassed. He is not dazzled by superior rank; he pays all the respect that
is due to it, without being disconcerted: and can converse as easily with a
king as with any one of his subjects. This is the great advantage of being
introduced young into good company, and of conversing with our superiors. A
well bred man will converse with his inferiors without insolence, and with his
superiors with respect, and with ease. Add to this, that a man of a
gentleman-like behavior, though of inferior parts, is better received than a
man of superior abilities, who is unacquainted with the world. Modesty, and a
polite, easy assurance, should be united.

COMPANY.
TO keep good company, especially at our first setting out, is the way to
receive good impressions. Good company is not what respective setts of good
company are pleased ^ither to call or think themselves. It consist^ ^hiefly
(though not wholly) of people of considerable birth, rank, and character; for
people of neither birth nor rank are frequently and very justly admitted into
it, if distinguished by any peculiar merit, or eminency in any liberal art or
science. So motely a thing is good company, that many people, without birth,
rank, o^ me it, intrude into it by their own forwardness, and others get into
it by the protection of some considerable person. In this fashionable good
company, the best manners and the purest language are most unquestionably to be
learnt: for they establish and give the ton to both, which are called the
language and manners of good company; neither of them being ascertained by any
legal tribunal.

A company of people of the first quality cannot be called good company, in the
common acceptance of the phrase, unless they are the fashionable and
accredited company of the place; for people of the first quality can be as
silly, as ill bred, and as worthless as people of the meanest degree. And a
company, consisting wholly of people of a very low condition, whatever their
merit or talents may be, can never be called good company; and therefore should
not be much frequented, though by no means despised.

A company wholly composed of learned men, though greatly to be respected, is
not meant by the words GOOD COMPANY: they cannot have the easy and polished
manner^ of the world, as they do not live in it. If we can bear our parts well
in such a company, it will be proper to be in it sometimes, and we shall be
more esteemed in other companies for having a place in that.

A company consisting wholly of professed wits and poets, is very inviting to
young men, who are pleased with it if they have wit themselves; and if they
have none, are foolishly proud of being one of it. But such companies should be
frequented with moderation and judgment. A wit is a very unpopular
denomination, as it carries terror along with it; and people are as much afraid
of a wit in company, as a woman is of a gun, which she supposes may go off of
itself, and do her a mischief. Their acquaintance, however, is worth seeking,
and their company worth frequenting; but not exclusively of others, nor to such
a degree as to be considered only of one of that particular set.

Above all things, endeavor to keep company with people above you; for there
you rise, as much as you sink with people below. When I say company above you,
I do not mean with regard to their birth; but with regard to their merit, and
the light in which the world considers them.

There are two sorts of good company; one, which is called BEAU MONDE, and
consists of those people which have the lead in courts, and in the gay part of
life; the other consists of those who are distinguished by some particular
merit, or who excel in some particular and valuable arts or science.

Be equally careful to avoid that low company, which, in every sense of the
word, is low indeed; low in rank, low in its parts, low in manners, and low in
merit. Vanity, that source of many of our follies, and of some of our crimes,
has sunk many a man into company in every light infinitely below him, for the
sake of being the first man in it. There he dictates, is applauded, and
admired: bu^ he soon disgraces himself, and disqualifies himself for any better
company.

Having thus pointed out what company you should avoid, and what company you
should associate with, I shall next lay down a few

When a young man, new in the world, first gets into company, he determines to
conform to and imitate it. But he too often mistakes the object of his
imitation. He has frequently heard the absu^d te^m of genteel and fashionable
vices. He there observes some people who shine and who in general are admired
and ^steemed; and perceives that these people are rakes, drunkards, or
gamesters; he therefore adopts their vices, mistaking their defects for their
perfections, and imagining that they owe their fashion and their luster to
these g^nt^el vice. But it is exactly the reverse; for these people have
acquired the reputation by their parts, their learning, their good breeding,
and other real accomplishments; and are only blemished and lowered in the
opinions of all reasonable people, by these general and fashionable vices. It
is therefore plain, that in these mixed characters, the good part only makes
people forgive but not approve the bad.

If a man should unfortunately have any vices, he ought at least to be content
with his own, and not adopt other people's. The adoption of vice has ruined ten
times more young men than natural inclinations.

Let us imitate the real perfections of the good company into which we may get;
copy their politeness, their carriage, their address, and the easy and
well-bred turn of their conversation; but we should remember, that, let them
shine ever so bright, their vices, if they have any, are so many blemishes,
which we would no more endeavor to imitate, than we would make artificial
warts upon our faces because some very handsome man had the misfortune to have
a natural one upon his. We should, on the contrary, think how much handsomer he
would have been without it.

Having thus given you instructions for making you well received in good
company, I proceed next to lay before you, the polite.

RULES FOR CONVERSATION.
TALKING.
WHEN you are in company talk often, but never long; in that case, if you do
not please, at least you are sure not to tire your hearers.

Learn the characters of company before you talk much.
Inform yourself of the characters and situations of the company, before you
give way to what your imagination may prompt you to say. There are, in all
companies, more wrong heads than right ones, and many more who deserve, than
who like censure. Should you therefore expatiate in the praise of some virtue,
which some in company notoriously want; or declaim against any vice, which
others are notoriously infected with: your reflections, however general and
unapplied, will, by being applicable, be thought personal, and levelled at
those people. This consideration points out to you sufficiently not to be
suspicious and captious yourself, nor to suppose that things, because they may,
are therefore meant at you.

Telling stories and digressions.
Tell stories very seldom, and, absolutely, never but where they are apt, and
very short. Omit every circumstance that is not material, and beware of
digressions. To have frequent recourse to narrative, be^ays great want of
imagination.

Seizing people by the button.
Never hold any body by the button, or the hand, in order to be heard out; for,
if people are not willing to hear you, you had much better hold your tongue
than them.

Long talkers and whisperers.
Long talkers generally single out some unfortunate man in company, to whisper,
or at least, in a half voice, to convey a continuity of words to. This is
excessively ill bred, and, in some degree, a fraud; conversation-stock being a
joint and common property. But, if one of these unmerciful talkers lays hold of
you, hear him with patience, (and at least seeming attention) if he is worth
obliging; for nothing will oblige him more than a patient hearing, as nothing
would hurt him more, than either to leave him in the midst of his discourse, or
to discover your impatience under your affliction.

Inattention to persons speaking.
There is nothing so brutally shocking, nor so little forgiven, as a seeming
inattention to the person who is speaking to you; and I have known many men
knocked down for a much slighter provocation than that inattention which I
mean. I have seen many people, who while you are speaking to them, instead of
looking at, and attending to you, fix their eyes upon the ceiling, or some
other part of the room, look out of the window, play with a dog, twirl their
snuff box, or pick their nose. Nothing discovers a little, futile, frivolous
mind more than this, and nothing is so offensively ill bred: it is an explicit
declaration on your part, that ever the most trifling object deserves your
attention more than all that can be said by the person who is speaking to you.
Judge of the sentiments of hatred and resentment which such treatment must
excite in every breast, where any degree of self-love dwells. I repeat it again
and again, that sort of vanity and selflove is inseparable from human nature,
whatever may be its rank or condition; even your footman will sooner forget and
forgive a beating, than any manifest mark of slight and contempt. Be therefore,
not only really, but seemingly and manifestly attentive to whoever speaks to
you.

Never interrupt any speaker.
It is considered as the height of ill manners to interrupt any person while
speaking, by speaking yourself, or calling off the attention of the company to
any subject. This, however, every child knows.

Adopt, rather than give the subject.
Take, rather than give, the subject of the company you are in. If you have
parts you will show them, more or less, upon every subject; and if you have
not, you had better talk sillily upon a subject of other people's, than of your
own choosing.

Conceal your learning from the company.
Never display your learning but on particular occasions. Reserve it for
learned men, and let even these rather extort it from you, than appear forward
to display it. Hence you will be deemed modest, and reputed to possess more
knowledge than you really have. Never seem wiser or more learned than your
company. The man who affects to display his learning, will be frequently
questioned; and if found superficial, will be ridiculed and despised; if
otherwise, he will be deemed a pedant. Nothing can lessen real merit (which
will always show itself) in the opinion of the world, but an ostentatious
display of it by its possessor.

Contradict with politeness.
When you oppose or contradict any person's assertion or opinion, let your
manner, your air, your terms, and your tone of voice, be soft and gentle, and
that easily and naturally, not affectedly. Use palliatives when you contradict;
such as, I may be mistaken, I am not sure, but I believe, I should rather
think, etc. Finish any argument or dispute with some little good humoured
pleasantry, to show that you are neither hurt yourself, nor meant to hurt your
antagonist; for an argument, kept up a good while, often occasions a temporary
alienation on each side.

Avoid argument, if possible.
Avoid, as much as you can, in mixed companies, argumentative, polemical
conversations; which certainly indispose, for a time, the contending parties
toward each other; and, if the controversy grows warm and noisy, endeavor to
put an end to it by some genteel levity or joke.

Always debate with temper.
Arguments should never be maintained with heat and clamor, though we believe
or know ourselves to be in the right; we should give our opinions modestly and
coolly, and if that will not do, endeavor to change the conversation, by
saying, We shall not be able to convince one another, nor is it necessary that
we should, so let us talk of something else.

Local propriety to be observed.
Remember that there is a local propriety to be observed in all companies; and
that what is extremely proper in one company, may be, and often is, highly
improper in another.

Jokes, BONS MOTS, etc.
The jokes, BONS MOTS, the little adventures which may do very well in one
company, will seem flat and tedious when related in another. The particular
characters, the habits, the cant of one company may give merit to a word, or a
gesture, which would have none at all if divested of those accidental
circumstances. Here people very commonly err; and fond of something that has
entertained them in one company, and in certain circumstances, repeat it with
emphasis in another, where it is either insipid, or it may be, offensive, by
being ill timed or misplaced. Nay, they often do it with this filly preamble;
"I will tell you an excellent thing; or," I "will tell you the best thing in
the world." This raises expectations, which when absolutely disappointed, make
the relator of this excellent thing look, very deservedly, like a fool.

Egotism.
Upon all occasions avoid speaking of yourself, if it be possible. Some,
abruptly, speak advantageously of themselves, without either pretense or
provocation* This is downright impudence. Others proceed more artfully, as
they imagine; form accusations against themselves, and complaining of calumnies
which they never heard, in order to justify themselves and exhibit a catalogue
of their many virtues. They acknowledge, indeed, it may appear odd, that they
should task thus of themselves, it is what they have a great aversion to, and
what they could not have done if they had not been thus unjustly and
scandalously abused. This thin veil of modesty drawn before vanity, is much too
transparent to conceal it, even from those who have but a moderate share of
penetration.

Others go to work more modestly, and more ^lily still; they confess themselves
guilty of all the Cardinal Virtues, by first degrading them into weaknesses,
and then acknowledging their misfortune is being made up of those weaknesses
They cannot see people laboring under misfortunes, without sympathizing with,
and endeavoring to help them. They cannot see their fellowcreatures in
distress without relieving them; though, truly, their circumstances cannot very
well afford it. They cannot avoid speaking the truth, though they acknowledge
it to be sometimes imprudent. In short, they confess that, with all these
weaknesses, they are not fit to live in the world, much less to prosper in it.
But they are now too old to pursue a contrary conduct, and therefore they must
rub on as well as they can.

Though this may appear too ridiculous and outre even for the stage, yet it is
frequently met with upon the common stage of the world: This principle of
vanity and pride is so strong in human nature, that it descends even to the
lowest objects; and we often see people fishing for praise, where, admitting
all they say to be true, no just praise is to be caught. One perhaps affirms,
that he has rode post an hundred miles in six hours: probably thi^ is a
falsehood; but, even supposing it to be true, what then? Why it must be admitted
that he is a very good Post-boy, that is all. Another asserts, perhaps not
without a few oaths, that he has drank six or eight bottles of wine at a
sitting. It would be chatitable to believe such a man a liar; for if we do not,
we must certainly pronounce him a beast.

There are a thousand such follies and extravagancies which vanity draws people
into, and which always defeat their own purposes. The only method of avoiding
these evils, is never to speak of ourselves. But when, in a narrative, we are
obliged to mention ourselves, we should take care not to drop a single word
that can directly, or indirectly, be construed as fishing for applause. Be our
characters what they will, they will be known; and nobody will take them upon
our own words. Nothing that we can say ourselves will varnish our defects, or
add luster to our perfections; but, on the contrary, it will often make the
former more glaring, and the latter obscure. If we are silent upon our own
merits, neither envy, indignation, nor ridicule will obstruct or allay the
applause which we may really deserve. But, if we are our own panegyrists upon
any occasion, however artfully dressed or disguised, every one will conspire
against us, and we shall be disappointed of the very end we aim at.

Be not dark nor mysterious.
Take care never to seem dark and mysterious; which is not only a very
unamiable character, but a very suspicious one too: if you seem mysterious with
others, they will be really so with you, and you will know nothing. The height
of abilities is, to have a frank, open, and ingenious exterior, with a prudent
and reserved interior; to be upon your own guard, and yet by a seeming natural
openness, to put people off of theirs. The majority of every company will avail
themselves of every indiscreet and unguarded expression of yours, if they can
turn it to their own advantage.

Look people in the face when speaking.
Always look people in the face when you speak to them; the not doing it is
thought to imply conscious guilt: besides that you lose the advantage of
observing, by their countenances, what impression your discourse makes upon
them. In order to know people's real sentiments, I trust much more to my eyes
than to my ears; for they can say whatever they have a mind I should hear; but
they can seldom help looking what they have no intention that I should know.

SCANDAL.
Private scandal should never be received nor retailed willingly: for though
the defamation of others may for the present gratify the malignity or the pride
of our hearts, yet cool reflection will draw very disadvantageous conclusions
from such a disposition: In scandal, as in robbery, the receiver is always
thought as bad as the thief.

Never indulge general reflections.
Never, in conversation attack whole bodies of any kind, for you may thereby
unnecessarily make yourself a great number of enemies. Among women, as among
men, there are good as well as bad, and it may be, full as many or more good
than among men. This rule holds as to lawyers, soldiers, parsons, courtiers,
citizens, etc. They are all men subject to the same passions and sentiments,
differing only in the manner according to their several educations; and it
would be as imprudent as unjust to attack any of them by the lump. Individuals
forgive sometimes, but bodies and societies never do. Many young people think
it very genteel and witty to abuse the clergy, in which they are extremely
mistaken; since, in my opinion, parsons are very like men, and neither the
better nor the worse for wearing a black gown. All general reflections upon
nations and societies are the trite, threadbare jokes of those who set up for
wit without having any, and so have recourse to common place. Judge of
individuals from your own knowledge of them, and not from the sex, profession,
or denomination.

MIMICRY.
Mimicry, which is the common and favorite amusement of little, low minds, is
in the utmost contempt with great ones. It is the lowest and most illiberal of
all buffoonery. We should neither practice it, nor applaud it in others.
Besides that, the person mimiced is insulted; and, as I have often observed to
you before, an insult is never forgiven.

SWEARING.
We may frequently hear some people in good company, interlard their
conversation with oaths, by way of embellishment, as they suppose; but we must
observe too, that those who do so, are never those who contribute, in any
degree, to give that company the denomination of good company. They are
generally people of low education; for swearing, without having a single
temptation to plead, is as silly, and as illiberal, as it is wicked.

SNEERING.
Whatever we say in company, if we say it with a supercilious, cynical face, or
an embarrassed countenance, or a silly disconcerted grin, it will be ill
received. If we mutter it, or utter it distinctly and ungracefully, it will be
still worse received.

Talk not of your own nor other persons private affairs.
Never talk of your own or other people's domestic affairs; yours are nothing
to them but tedious, theirs are nothing to you. It is a tender subject, and it
is a chance if you do not touch somebody or other's sore place. In this case,
there is no trusting to specious appearances, which are often too contrary to
the real situation of things between men and their wives, parents and their
children, seeming friends, etc. that, with the best intentions in the world, we
very often make some very disagreeable blunders.

Explicitness.
Nothing makes a man look sillier, in company, than a joke or pleasantry not
relished, or not understood; and, if he meets with a profound silence when he
expected a general applause; or, what is still worse, if he is desired to
explain the joke or bon mot, his awkwardness and embarrassed situation is
easier imagined than described.

Secrecy.
Be careful how you repeat in one company what you hear in another. Things
seemingly indifferent may by circulation, have much graver consequences than
may be imagined. There is a kind of general tacit trust in conversation by
which a man is engaged not to report any thing out of it, though he is not
immediately enjoined secrecy. A retailer of this kind draws himself into a
thousand scrapes and discussions, and is shily and indifferently received
wherever he goes.

Adapt your conversation to the company.
Always adapt your conversation to the people you are conversing with; for I
suppose you would not talk upon the same subject, and in the same manner, to a
bishop, a philosopher, a captain, and a woman.

Never suppose yourself the subject or laugh of the company.
People of an ordinary, low education, when they happen to fall into good
company, imagine themselves the only object of its attention: if the company
whispers, it is, to be sure, concerning them; if they laugh, it is at them; and
if any thing ambiguous, that by the most forced interpretation can be applied
to them, happens to be said, they are convinced that it was meant at them; upon
which they grow out of countenance first, and then angry. This mistake is very
well ridiculed in the stratagem, where Scrub says, I am sure they talked of me,
for they laughed consumedly. A well bred man thinks, but never seems to think
himself slighted, undervalued, or laughed at in company, unless where it is so
plainly marked out, that his honor obliges him to resent it in a proper
manner. On the contrary, a vulgar man is captious and jealous; eager and
impetuous about trifles He suspects himself to be slighted, thinks every thing
that is said meant at him: if the company happens to laugh, he is persuaded
they laugh at him; he grows angry and testy, says something very impertinent,
and draws himself into a scrape, by showing what he calls a proper spirit, and
asserting himself. The conversation of a vulgar man also always favors
strongly of the lowness of his education and company. It turns chiefly upon his
domestic affairs, his servants, the excellent order he keeps in his own family,
and the little anecdotes of the neighborhood; all which he relates with
emphasis, as interesting matters. He is a man-gossip.

SERIOUSNESS.
A certain degree of exterior seriousness in looks and motions gives dignity,
without excluding wit and decent cheerfulness. A constant smirk upon the face,
and a whiffling activity of the body, are strong indications of subtlety.

ECONOMY.
A FOOL squanders away, without credit or advantage to himself, more than a man
of sense spends with both. The latter employs his money as he does his time,
and never spends a shilling of the one, nor a minute of the other, but in
something that is either useful or rationally pleasing to himself or others.
The former buys whatever he does not want, and does not pay for what he does
want. He cannot withstand the charms of a toy-shop; snuff-boxes, watches, heads
of canes, etc. are his destruction. His servants and tradesmen conspire with
his own indolence to cheat him; and, in a very little time, he is astonished,
in the midst of all the ridiculous superfluities, to find himself in want of
all the real comforts and necessaries of life.

Without care and method, the largest fortune will not, and with them, almost
the smallest will, supply all necessary expenses. As far as you can possibly,
pay ready money for every thing you buy, and avoid bills. Pay that money
yourself, and not through the hands of any servant; who always either
stipulates poundage, or requires a present for his good word, as they call it.
Where you must have bills (as for meat and drink, clothes, etc.) pay them
regularly every month, and with your own hand. Never, from a mistaken economy,
buy a thing you do not want, because it is cheap; or, from a silly pride,
because it is dear. Keep an account, in a book, of all that you receive, and of
all that you pay; for no man who knows what he receives, and what he pays, ever
runs out. I do not mean that you should keep an account of the shillings and
halfcrowns which you may spend in chair-hire, operas, etc. they are unworthy of
the time, and the ink, that they would consume; leave such minuties to dull,
penny-wise fellows. But remember, in enonomy, as well as in every other part of
life, to have the proper attention to proper objects, and the proper contempt
for little ones.

FRIENDSHIP.
YOUNG persons have commonly an unguarded frankness about them, which makes
them the easy prey and bubbles of the artful and the experienced: they look
upon every knave, or fool, who tells them that he is their friend, to be really
so; and pay that profession of simulated friendship with an indiscreet and
unbounded confidence, always to their loss, often to their ruin. Beware of
these proffered friendships. Receive them with great civility, but with great
incredulity too; and pay them with compliments, but not with confidence. Do not
suppose that people become friends at first sight, or even upon a short
acquaintance. Real friendship is a slow grower; and never thrives, unless
ingrafted upon a stock of known and reciprocal merit.

There is another kind of nominal friendship among young people, which is warm
for the time, but luckily of short duration. This friendship is hastily
produced, by their being accidentally thrown together, and pursuing the same
course of riot and debauchery. A fine friendship, truly! and well cemented with
drunkenness and lewdness. It should rather be called a conspiracy against
morals and good manners, and be punished as such by the civil magistrate.
However, they have the impudence, and the (...) to call this confederacy a
friendship. They lend one another money, for bad purposes; they engage in
quarrels, offensive and defensive, for their accomplices; they tell one another
all they know, and often more too; when, of a sudden, some accident disperses
them, and they think no more of each other, unless it be to betray and laugh at
their imprudent confidence.

When a man uses strong protestations or oaths to make you believe a thing,
which is of itself so probable that the bare saying of it would be sufficient,
depend upon it he deceives you, and is highly interested in making you believe
it, or else he would not take so much pains.

Remember to make a great difference between companions and friends; for a very
complaisant and agreeable companion may, and often does, prove a very improper
and a very dangerous friend. People will, in a great degree, form their opinion
of you, upon that which they have of your friends; and there is a Spanish
proverb which says, very justly, Tell me who you live with, and I will tell you
who you are. One may fairly suppose that a man, who make^ a knave or a fool his
friend, has something very bad to do, or to conceal. But, at the same time that
you carefully decline the friendship of knaves and fools, (...) can be called
friendship, there is no occasion to make either of them your enemies, wantonly
and unprovoked; for they are numerous bodies; and I would rather choose a secure
neutrality, than alliance, or war, with either of them. You may be a declared
enemy to their vices and follies, without being marked out by them as a
personal one. Their enmity is the next dangerous thing to their friendship. --
Have a real reserve with almost every body; and have a ^eeming reserve with
almost nobody; for it is very disageeable to seem reserved, and very dangerous
not to be so. Few people find the true medium; many are ridiculously mysterious
and reserved upon trifles; and many imprudently communicative of all they know.

GOOD-BREEDING.
GOOD-BREEDING has been very justly defined to be the result of much good
sense, some goodnature, and a little selfdenial for the sake of others, and
with a view to obtain the same indulgence from them.

Good-breeding alone can prepossess people in our favor at first sight; more
time being necessary to discover greater talents. Good-breeding, however, does
not consist in low bows, and formal ceremony, but in an easy, civil, and
respectable behavior.

Indeed, good sense, in many cases, must determine good-breeding; for what
would be civil at one time, and to one person, would be rude at another time,
and to another person: there are, however, some general rules of good-breeding.
As for example: To answer only yes, or no, to any person, without adding Sir,
My Lord, or Madam (as it may happen) is always extremely rude; and it is
equally so not to give proper attention and a civil answer, when spoken to:
such behavior convinces the person who is speaking to us, that we despise him,
and do not think him worthy of our attention, or an answer.

A well-bred person will take care to answer with complaisance when he is
spoken to; will place himself at the lower end of the table, unless bid to go
higher; will first drink to the lady of the house, and then to the master; he
will not eat awkwardly or dirtily, nor sit when others stand; and he will do
all this with an air of complaisance, and not with a grave ill-natured look, as
if he did it all unwillingly.

There is nothing more difficult to attain, or so necessary to possess, as
perfect good-breeding; which is equally inconsistent with a stiff formality, an
impertinent forwardness, and an awkward bashfulness. A little ceremony is
sometimes necessary, a certain degree of firmness is absolutely so: and an
awkward modesty is extremely becoming.

Virtue and learning, like gold, have their intrinsic value; but if they are
not polished, they certainly lose a great deal of their luster: and even
polished brass will pass upon more people than rough gold. What a number of
fins does the cheerful, easy, good-breeding of the French frequently cover!

My Lord Bacon says, That a pleasing figure is a perpetual letter of
recommendation. It is certainly an agreeable forerunner of merit, and smooths
the way for it.

A man of good-breeding should be acquainted with the forms and particular
customs of Courts. At Vienna, men always make curtsies instead of bows, to the
Emperor; in France, nobody bows to the King, or kisses his hand; but, in Spain
and England, bows are made, and hands are kissed. Thus every Court has some
peculiarity, which those who visit them ought previously to inform themselves
of, to avoid blunders and awkwardnesses.

Very few, scarcely any, are wanting in the respect which they should show to
those whom they acknowledge to be infinitely their superiors. The man of
fashion, and of the world, expresses it in its fullest extent; but naturally
easily, and without concern: whereas a man, who is not used to keep-good
company, expresses it awkwardly: one sees that he is not used to, and that it
costs him a great deal: but I never saw the worst-bred man living, guilty of
lolling, whistling, scratching his head, and suchlike indecencies, in company
that he respected. In such companies, therefore, the only point to be attended
to is, to show that respect, which every body means to show, in an easy,
unembarrassed, and graceful manner.

In mixed companies, whoever is admitted to make part of them, is, for the time
at least, supposed to be upon a footing of equality with the rest; and,
consequently, every one claims, and very justly, every mark of civility and
good-breeding. Ease is allowed, but carelessness and negligence are strictly
forbidden. If a man accosts you, and talks to you ever so dully or frivolously;
it is worse than rudeness, it is brutality, to show him, by a manifest
inattention to what he says, that you think him a fool or a blockhead, and not
worth hearing. It is much more so with regard to women; who, of whatever rank
they are, are entitled, in consideration of their sex, not only to an
attentive, but an officious good-breeding from men. Their little wants,
likings, dislikes, preferences, antipathies, fancies, whims, and even
impertinencies, must be officiously attended to, flattered, and, if possible,
guessed at and anticipated, by a well-bred man. You must never usurp to
yourself those conveniences and agremens which are of common right: such as
the best places, the best dishes, etc. but, on the contrary, always decline
them yourself, and offer them to others; who, in their turns, will offer them
to you; so that, upon the whole you will, in your turn, enjoy your share of
common right.

The third sort of good-breeding is local, and is variously modified, in not
only different countries, but in different towns of the same country. But it
must be founded upon the two former sorts; they are the matter; to which, in
this case, Fashion and Custom only give the different shapes and impressions.
Whoever has the two first sorts, will easily acquire this third sort of
good-breeding, which depends singly upon attention and observation. It is
properly the polish, the luster, the last finishing strokes of good-breeding. A
man of sense therefore carefully attends to the local manners of the respective
places where he is, and takes for his models those persons whom he observes to
be at the head of the fashion and good-breeding. He watches how they address
themselves to their superiors, how they accost their equals, and how they treat
their inferiors; and lets none of those little niceties escape him; which are
to good-breeding, what the last delicate and masterly touches are to a good
picture: and which the vulgar have no notion of, but by which good judges
distinguish the master. He attends even to their air, dress and motions, and
imitates them liberally, and not servilely; he copies, but does not mimic.
These personal graces are of very great consequence. They anticipate the
sentiments, before merit engage the understanding; they captivate the heart and
give rise, I believe, to the extravagant notions of Charms and Philters. Their
effects were so surprising, that they were reckoned supernatural.

In short, as it is necessary to possess learning, honor, and virtue, to gain
the esteem and admiration of mankind, so politeness and good-breeding are
equally necessary to render us agreeable in conversation, and common life.
Great talents are above the generality of the world; who neither possess them
themselves, nor are competent judges of them in others: but all are judges of
the lesser talents, such as civility, affability, and an agreeable address and
manner; because they feel the good effects of them, as making society easy and
agreeable.

To conclude; be assured that the profoundest learning, without good-breeding,
is unwelcome and tiresome pedantry, that a man who is not perfectly well bred,
is unfit for good-company, and unwelcome in it; and that a man, who is not
well-bred, is full as unfit for business as for company.

Make, then, good breeding, the great object of your thoughts and actions.
Observe carefully the behavior and manners of those who are distinguished by
their good-breeding; imitate, nay endeavor to excel that you may at least
reach them, and be convinced that good-beeding is, to all worldly
qualifications, what charity is to all christian virtues. Observe how it adorns
merit, and how often it covers the want of it.

GRACES.
Art of pleasing.
THE desire of pleasing is at least half the art of doing it; the rest depends
only upon the manner, which attention, observation, and frequenting good
company, will teach. Those who are lazy, careless, and indifferent whether they
please or not, we may depend upon it, will never please. The art of pleasing is
a very necessary one to possess: but a very difficult one to acquire. To do as
one would be done by, is the surest method of pleasing. Observe carefully what
pleases us in others, and probably the same things in us will please others. If
we are pleased with complaisance and attention of others to our humors, or
tastes, or our weaknesses; the same complaisance and attention on our parts to
theirs, will equally please them. Let us be serious, gay, or even trifling, as
we find the present humor of the company: this is an attention due from every
individual to the majority. The art of pleasing cannot be reduced to a receipt;
if it could, that receipt would be worth purchasing at any price. Good sense
and good nature are the principal ingredients; and our own observation, and the
good advice of others, must give the right color and taste to it.

The graces of the person, the countenance, and the way of speaking, are
essential things; the very same thing, said by a genteel person, in an engaging
way, and gracefully and distinctly spoken, would please: which would shock if
muttered out by an awkward figure, with a sullen serious countenance. The Poets
represent Venus as attended by the three Graces, to intimate, that even beauty
will not do without. Minerva ought to have three also; for, without them,
learning has few attractions.

If we examine ourselves seriously, why particular people please and engage us,
more than others of equal merit; we shall always find that it is because the
former have the graces, and the latter not. I have known many a woman, with an
exact shape, and a symetrical assemblage of beautiful features, please nobody;
while others, with very moderate shapes and features have charmed every body.
It is certain that Venus will not charm so much without her attendant Graces,
as they will without her. Among men, how often has the most solid merit been
neglected, unwelcome, or even rejected for want of them? while flimsy parts,
little knowledge, and less merit, introduced by the Graces, have been received,
cherished, and admired.

We proceed now to investigate what these Graces are, and to give some
instruction for acquiring them.

ADDRESS.
A man's fortune is frequently decided for ever by his first address. If it is
pleasing people are hurried involuntarily into a persuasion that he has a
merit, which possibly he has not; as on the other hand, if it is ungraceful,
they are immediately prejudiced against him; and unwilling to allow him the
merit which, it may be, he has. The worst bred man in Europe, should a lady
drop her fan, would certainly take it up and give it to her: the best bred man
in Europe could do no more. The di^^erence, however, would be considerable; the
latter would please by his graceful address in presenting it; the former would
be laughed at for doing it awkwardly. The carriage of a gentleman should be
genteel, and his motions graceful. He should be particularly careful of his
manner and address, when he presents himself in company. Let them be respectful
without meanness, easy without too much familiarity, genteel without
affectation, and insinuating without any seeming art or design. Men as well as
women are much oftener led by their hearts than by their understandings. The
way to the heart is, through the senses; please their eyes and their cars, and
the work is half done.

CHOICE of amusements.
A gentleman always attends even to the choice of his amusements. If at cards
he will not play at cribbage, all-fours, or putt; or in sports of exercise, be
seen at skittles, football, leap-frog, cricket, driving of coaches, etc. for
he knows that such an imitation of the manners of the Mob, will indelibly stamp
him with vulgarity. I cannot likewise avoid calling playing upon any musical
instrument illiberal in a gentlemen. Music is usually reckoned one of the
liberal arts, and not unjustly; but a man of fashion who is seen piping or
fiddling at a concert degrades his own dignity. If you love music, hear it; pay
fiddlers to play to you, but never fiddle yourself. It makes a gentleman appear
frivolous and contemptible, leads him frequently into bad company, and wastes
that time which might otherwise be well employed.

CARVING.
However trifling some things may seem, they are no longer so, when above half
the world thinks them otherwise. Carving, as it occurs at least once in every
day, is not below our notice. We should use ourselves to carve adroitly and
genteelly, without hacking half an hour across a bone, without bespattering the
company with the sauce, and without overturning the glasses into your
neighbor's pockets. To be awkward in this particular, is extremely
disagreeable and ridiculous. It is easily avoided by a little attention and
use; and a man who tells you gravely that he cannot carve, may as well tell you
that he cannot blow ^is nose; it is both as easy and as necessary.

CHIT CHAT.
Study to acquire that fashionable kind of small talk or chit chat, which
prevails in all polite assemblies, and which, trifling as it may appear, is of
use in mixed companies, and at table. It turns upon the public events of
Europe, and then is at its best; very often the number, the goodness or
badness, the discipline, or the clothing of the troops of different
principles; sometimes upon the families, the marriages, the relations of
princes, and considerable people; and, sometimes the magnificence of public
entertainments, balls, masquerades, etc. Upon such occasions, likewise it is
not amiss to know how (...) PARLER CUISINE, and to be able to dissert upon the
growth and flavor of wines. These, it is true are very little things; but they
are little things that occur very often, and therefore should be said AVEC
GENTILLESSE, IT GRACE.

CLEANLINESS.
The person should be accurately clean; the teeth, hands and nails, should be
particularly so: a dirty mouth has real ill consequences to the owner, for it
infallinly causes the decay as well as the intolerable pain of the teeth; and
is very offensive, for it will most inevitably stink. Nothing looks more
ordinary, vulgar, and illiberal, than dirty hands and ugly, uneven, ragged
^ails: the ends of which should be kept smooth and clean (not tipped with
black) and small segments of circles; and every time that the hands are wiped,
rub the skin round the nails backwards, that it may not grow up, and shorten
them too much. Upon no account whatever put your fingers in your nose or ears:
It is the most shocking, nasty, vulgar rudeness, that can be offered to
company. The ears should be washed well every morning, and in blowing the nose,
never look at it afterward.

These things may, perhaps, appear too insignificant to be mentioned; but when
it is remembered that a thousand little nameless things, which every one feels
but no one can describe, conspire to form that WHOLE of pleasing, I think we
ought not to call them trifling. Besides, a clean shirt and a clean person are
as necessary to health, as not to offend other people. I have ever held it as a
maxim, and which I have lived to see verified, That a man who is negligent at
twenty, will be a sloven at forty, and intolerable at fifty years of age.

Compliments.
Attend to the compliments of congratulation, or condolance, that you hear a
well-bred man make to his superiors, to his equals, and to his inferiors; watch
even his countenance and his tone of voice, for they all conspire in the main
point of pleasing. There is a certain distinguishing diction of a man of
fashion: he will not be content himself with saying like John Trott, to a
new-married man, "Sir, I wish you much joy;" or to a man who has lost his son,
"Sir, I am sorry for your loss;" and both with a countenance equally unmoved
but he will say in effect the same thing, in a more elegant and less trivial
manner, and with a countenance adapted to the occasion. He will advance with
warmth, vivacity, and a cheerful countenance, to the new married man, and
embracing him, perhaps say to him, If you do justice to my attachment to you,
you will judge of the joy that I feel upon this occasion, better than I can
express it, etc. To the other in affliction he will advance slowly, with a
grave composure of countenance, in a more deliberate manner, and with a lower
voice, perhaps say, I hope you do me the justice to be convinced, that I feel
whatever you feel, and shall ever be affected where you are concerned.

DICTION.
There is a certain language of conversation, a fashionable diction, of which
every gentleman ought to be perfectly master, in whatever language he speaks.
The French attend to it carefully, and with great reason; and their language,
which is a language of phrases, helps them out exceedingly. That delicacy of
diction is characteristical of a man of fashion and good company.

Dress and dancing.
Dress is one of the various ingredients that contribute to the art of
pleasing, and therefore an object of some attention; for we cannot help forming
some opinion of a man's sense and character from his dress. All affectation in
dress, implies a flaw in the understanding. Men of sense carefully avoid any
particular character in their dress; they are accurately clean for their own
sake, but all the rest is for the sake of other people. A man should dress as
well, and in the same manner, as the people of sense and fashion of the place
where he is: if he dresses more than they, he is a fop; if he dresses less, he
is unpardonably negligent: but, of the two, a young fellow should be rather too
much than too little dressed; the excess of that side will wear off, with a
little age and reflection.

The difference in dress between a man and a fop, is, that the fop values
himself upon his dress; and the man of sense laughs at it, at the same time
that he knows that he must not neglect it: there are a thousand foolish customs
of this kind, which, as they are not criminal, must be complied with, and even
cheerfully, by men of sense. Diogenes the Cynic was a wise man for despising
them, but a fool for showing it.

We should not attempt to rival, or to excel a fop in dress, but it is
necessary to dress to avoid singularity, and ridicule. Great care should be
taken to be always dressed like the reasonable people of our own age in the
place where we are, whose dress is never spoken of one way or another, as
neither too negligent, or too much studied.

Awkwardness of carriage is very alienating, and a total negligence of dress
and air, an impertinent insult upon custom and fashion. Women have great
influence as to a man's fashionable character; and an awkward man will never
have their votes, which are very numerous, and oftener counted than weighed.

When we are once well-dressed for a day, we should think no more of it
afterward; and, without any stiffness for fear of discomposing that dress we
should be as easy and natural as if we had no clothes on at all.

Dancing, likewise, though a silly trifling thing, is one of those established
follies which people of sense are sometimes obliged to conform to; and if they
do, they should be able to perform it well.

In dancing, the motion of the arms should be particularly attended to, as
these decide a man's being genteel or otherwise, more than any other part of
the body. A twist or stiffness in the wrist will make a man look awkward. If a
man dances well from the waist upwards, wears his hat well, and moves his head
properly, he dances well. Coming into a room, and presenting yourself to a
company should be also attended to, as this always gives the first impression,
which is often indelible. Those who present themselves well, have a certain
dignity in their air which, without the least seeming mixture of pride, at once
engages and is respected.

Drinking of healths.
Drinking of healths is now growing out of fashion, and is deemed unpolite in
good company. Custom once had rendered it universal, but the improved manners
of the age now consider it as absurd and vulgar. What can be more rude or
ridiculous than to interrupt persons at their meal with an unnecessary
compliment? Abstain then from this silly custom where you find it disused; and
use it only at those tables where it continues general.

ASSURANCE.
A steady assurance is too often improperly styled impudence. For my part, I
see no impudence, but on the contrary, infinite utility and advantage, in
presenting one's self with the same coolness and unconcern, in any, and every
company: till one can do that, I am very sure that one can never present one's
self well. Whatever is done under concern and embarrassment, must be ill done;
and, till a man is absolutely easy and unconcerned in every company, he will
never be thought to have kept good, nor be very welcome in it. Assurance and
intrepidity, under the white banner of seeming modesty, clear the way to merit,
that would otherwise be discouraged by difficulties in its journey: whereas
barefaced impudence, is the noisy and blundering harbinger of a worthless and
senseless usurper.

HURRY.
A man of sense may be in haste, but can never be in a hurry, because he knows,
that whatever he does in a hurry he must necessarily do very ill. He may be in
haste to dispatch an affair, but he will take care not to let that haste hinder
his doing it well. Little minds are in a hurry, when the object proves (as it
commonly does) too big for them, ^ey run, they hare, they puzzle, confound and
perplex themselves; they want to do every thing at once, and never do it at
all. But a man of sense takes the time necessary for doing the thing he is
about well; and his haste to dispatch a business, only appears by the
continuity of his application to it: he pursues it with a cool steadiness, and
finishes it before he begins any other.

Laughter.
Frequent and loud laughter is the characteristic of folly and illmanners: it
is the manner in which the mob express their silly joy at silly things; and
they call it being merry. In my mind, there is nothing so illiberal, and so
ill-bred, as audible laughter. True wit, or sense, never yet made any body
laugh: they are above it: they please the mind, and give a cheerfulness to the
countenance. But it is low buffoonery, or silly accidents, that always excite
laughter; and that is what people of sense and breeding should show themselves
above. A man's going to sit down in the supposition that he has a chair behind
him, and falling upon his breech for want of one, sets a whole company a
laughing, when all the wit in the world would not do it; a plain proof, in my
mind, how low and unbecoming a thing laughter is. Not to mention the
disagreeable noise that it makes, and the shocking distortion of the face that
it occasions.

Many people at first from awkwardness, have got a very silly and disagreeable
trick of laughing whenever they speak: and I know men of very good parts, who
cannot say the commonest thing without laughing; which makes those who do not
know them, take them at first for natural fools.

Letter writing.
It is of the utmost importance to write letters well; as this is a talent
which daily occurs, as well in business as in pleasure; and inaccuracies in
orthography, or in style, are never pardoned but in ladies, nor is hardly
pardonable in them. The Epistles of Cicero are the most perfect models of
good-writing.

Letters should be easy and natural, and convey to the persons to whom we send
them, just what we would say to those persons if we were present with them.

The best models of Letter-Writing are Cicero, Cardinal d'Ossat, Madame
Sevigne, and Compte Bussy Rabutin. Cicero's Epistles to Atticus, and to his
familiar friends, are the best examples in the friendly and familiar style. The
simplicity and clearness of the Letters of Cardinal d'Ossat, show how letters
of business ought to be written. For gay and amusing letters, there are none
that equal Compte Bussy's, and Madame Sevigne's. They are so natural, that they
seem to be the extempore conversations of two people of wit, rather than
letters.

Neatness in folding up, sealing, and directing letters, is by no means to be
neglected. There is something in the exterior, even of a letter, that may
please or displease, and consequently deserves some attention.

Nick name.
There is nothing that a young man at his first appearance in the world, has
more reason to dread, and therefore should take more pains to avoid, than
having any ridicule fixed on him. In the opinion even of the most rational men,
it will degrade him, but ruin him with the rest. Many a man has been undone by
acquiring a ridiculous nickname. The causes of nicknames among well bred men,
are generally the little defects in manner, elocution, air or address. To have
the appellation of muttering, awkward, ill bred, absent, left-legged, annexed
always to your name, would injure you more than you imagine; avoid then these
little defects, and you may set ridicule at defiance.

Pronounciation and speaking.
To acquire a graceful utterance, and aloud to some friend every day, and beg
of him to interrupt and correct you when you read too fast, do not observe the
proper stops, lay a wrong emphasis, or utter your words unintelligibly. You may
even read aloud to yourself, and tune your utterance to your own ear. Take care
to open your teeth when you read or speak, and articulate every word
distinctly; which last cannot be done but by sounding the final letter. But
above all, study to vary your voice according to the subject, and avoid a
monotony. Daily attention to these articles will, in a little time, render them
easy and habitual to you.

The voice and manner of speaking too, are not to be neglected; some people
almost shut their mouths when they speak, and mutter so that they are not to be
understood; others speak so fast, and sputter, that they are not to be
understood neither: some always speak as if they were talking to deaf people;
and others so low, that one cannot hear them. All these habits are awkward and
disagreeable, and are to be avoided by attention: they are the distinguishing
marks of the ordinary people, who have had no care taken of their education.
You cannot imagine how necessary it is to mind all these little things; for I
have seen many people, with great talents, ill received, for want of having
these talents; and others well received, only from their little talents, and
who had no great ones.

Spelling.
Orthography, or spelling well, is so absolutely necessary for a man of letters
or a gentleman, that one false spelling may six a ridicule on him for the
remainder of his life. Reading carefully will contribute, in a great measure,
to preserve you from exposing yourself by false spelling; for books are
generally well-spelled, according to the orthography of the times. Sometimes
words, indeed, are spelled differently by different authors, but those
instances are rare; and where there is only one way of spelling a word, should
you spell it wrong, you will be sure to be ridiculed. Nay, a woman of a
tolerable education would despise and laugh at her lover, if he should send her
an ill spelled billet doux.

Style.
Style is the dress of thoughts; and let them be ever so just, if your style is
homely, coarse, and vulgar, they will appear to as much disadvantage, and be as
ill-received, as your person, though ever so well proportioned, would, if dressed
in rags, dirt, and tatters. It is not every understanding that can judge of
matter; but every ear can and does judge, more or less of style.

Mind your diction, in whatever language you either write or speak; contract a
habit of correctness and elegance. Consider your style, even in the freest
conversation, and most familiar letters. After, at least if not before you have
said a thing, reflect if you could not have said it better.

WRITING.
Every man who has the use of his eyes and his right hand, can write whatever
hand he pleases. Nothing is so ungentleman-like as a school-boy's scrawl. I do
not desire you to write a stiff formal hand, like that of a schoolmaster, but
a genteel, legible and liberal character, and to be able to write quick. As to
the correctness and elegancy of your writing, attention to grammar does the
one, and to the best authors the other. Epistolary correspondence should be
easy and natural, and convey to the persons just what we would say if we were
with them.

Vulgar expressions.
Vulgarism in language is a certain characteristic of bad company, and a bad
education. Proverbial expessions, and trite sayings, are the flowers of the
rhetoric of a vulgar man. Would he say, that men differ in their tastes; he
both supports and adorns that opinion, by the good old saying, as he
respectfully calls it, "What is one man's meat, is another man's poison." If
any body attempts being smart, as he calls it, upon him, he gives them tit for
tat, aye, that he does. He has always some favorite word for the time being;
which for the sake of using often, he commonly abuses: such as vastly angry,
vastly kind, vastly handsome, and vastly ugly. Even this pronunciation of
proper words, carries the mark of the beast along with it. He calls the earth
earth: He is obleiged, not obliged to you. He goes to wards and not toward
such a place. He sometimes affects hard words, by way of ornament, which he
always mangles like a learned woman. A man of fashion never has recourse to
proverbs, and vulgar aphorisms; uses neither favorite words, nor hard words:
but takes great care to speak very correctly and grammatically, and to
pronounce properly; that is, according to the usage of the best companies.

Cautions against sundry odd babits.
Humming a tune within ourselves, drumming with our singers, making a noise
with your feet, and such awkward habits being all breaches of good manners, are
therefore indications of our contempt for the persons present, and consequently
should not be practiced.

Lating very quick, or very slow, is characteristic of vulgarity; the former
infers poverty; the latter, if abroad, that you are disgusted with your
entertainment; and if at home, that you are rude enough to give your friends
what you cannot eat yourself. Eating soup with your nose in the plate, is also
vulgar. So likewise is smelling to the meat while on the fork, before you put
it in your mouth. If you dislike what is sent upon your plate, leave it; but
never by smelling to, or examining it, appear to tax your friend with placing
unwholesome provisions before you.

Spitting on the floor or carpet is a filthy practice, and which, were it to
become general, would render it as necessary to change the carpets as the
table-cloths. Not to add, it will induce our acquaintance to suppose that we
have not been used to genteel furniture; for which reason alone, if for no
other, a man of liberal education should avoid it.

To conclude this article: Never walk fast in the streets, which is a mark of
vulgarity, ill-befitting the character of a gentleman or a man of fashion,
though it may be tolerable in a tradesman.

To stare any person full in the face, whom you may chance to meet, is an act
also of ill-breeding; it would seem to bespeak as if you saw something
wonderful in his appearance, and is therefore a tacit reprehension.

Keep yourself free, likewise, from all odd tricks or habits; such as
scratching yourself, putting your fingers to your mouth, nose, and ears,
thrusting out your tongue, snapping your fingers, biting your nails, rubbing
your hands, sighing aloud, an affected shivering of your body, gaping, and many
others, others, which I have noticed before: all which are imitations of the
manners of the mob, and degrading to a gentleman.

KNOWLEDGE OF THE WORLD.
WE should endeavor to hoard up, while we are young, a great stock of
knowledge: for though during that time of dissipation, we may not have occasion
to spend much of it, yet a time will come when we shall want it to maintain us.

The knowledge of the world is only to be acquired in the world, and not in a
closet. Books alone will never teach it you; but they will suggest many things
to your observation, which might otherwise escape you; and your own
observations upon mankind, when compared with those which you will find in
books, will help you to fix the true point.

To know mankind well, requires full as much attention and application as to
know books, and, it may be, more sagacity and discernment. I am, at this time,
acquainted with many elderly people, who have all passed their whole lives in
the great world, but with such levity and inattention, that they know no more
of it now than they did at fifteen. Do not flatter yourself, therefore, with
the thoughts that you can acquire this knowledge in the frivolous chit-chat of
idle companies; no, you must go much deeper than that. You must look into
people, as well as at them. Search therefore, with the greatest care, into the
characters of all those whom you converse with; endeavor to discover their
predominant passions, their prevailing weaknesses, their vanities, their
follies, and their humors; with all the right and wrong, wise and silly
springs of human actions, which make such inconsistent and whimsical beings of
us rational creatures.

There are no persons so insignificant and inconsiderable, but may, some time
or other, and in some thing or other, have it in their power to be of use to
you; which they certainly will not, if you have once shown them contempt.
Wrongs are often forgiven, but contempt never is. Our pride remembers it
forever. Remember therefore, most carefully to conceal your contempt, however
just, wherever you would not make an implacable enemy. Men are much more
unwilling to have their weaknesses and their imperfections known, than their
crimes; and if you hint to a man that you think him filly, ignorant, or even
ill-bred or awkward, he will hate you more, and longer than if you tell him,
plainly, that you think him a rogue.

Nothing is more insulting, than to take pains to make a man feel a mortifying
inferiority in knowledge, rank, fortune, etc. In the first it is both ill-bred
and ill-natured, and in the two latter article^ it is unjust, they not being in
his power. Good-breeding and goodnature incline us rather to raise people up
to ourselves, than to mortify and depress them. Besides, it is making ourselves
so many friends, instead of so many enemies. A constant attention to please, is
a most necessary ingredient in the art of pleasing; it flatters the self-love
of those to whom it is shown; it engages and captivates, more than things of
much greater importance. Every man is, in some measure, obliged to discharge
the social duties of life; but these attentions are voluntary acts, the
free will offerings of good-breeding and goodnature: they are received,
remembered, and returned as such. Women in particular, have a right to them;
and any omission, in that respect, is downright ill-breeding.

We should never yield to that temptation, which to most young men is very
strong, of exposing other people's weaknesses and infirmities, for the sake
either of diverting the company, or of showing our own superiority. We may, by
that means, get the laugh on our side for the present; but we shall make
enemies by it forever: and even those who laugh with us, will, upon reflection,
fear and despise us: it is ill-natured, and a good heart desires rather to
conceal than expose other people's weaknesses or misfortunes. If we have wit,
we should use it to please, and not to hurt: we may shi^^ like the sun in the
Temperate Zones, without scorching.

There are many inoffensive arts which are necessary in the course of the
world, and which he who practices the earliest, will please the most, and rise
the soonest. The spirits and vivacity of youth are apt to neglect them as
useless, or reject them as troublesome; but subsequent knowledge and experience
of the world remind us of their importance commonly when it is too late. The
principal of these things, is the mastery of one's temper, and that coolness of
mind and serenity of countenance, which hinders us from discovering, by words,
actions, or even looks, those passions or sentiments by which we are inwardly
moved or agitated; and the discovery of which gives cooler and abler people
such infinite advantages over us, not only in great business, but in all the
most common occurrences of life. A m^^ who does not possess himself enough to
hear disagreeable things, without visible marks of anger and change of
countenance, or agreeable ones without sudden bursts of joy, and expansion of
countenance, is at the mercy of every artful knave, or pert coxcomb. The former
will provoke or please you by design, to catch unguarded words or looks; by
which he will easily decypher the secrets of your heart, of which you should
keep the key yourself, and trust it with no man living. The latter will, by his
absurdity, and without intending it, produce the same discoveries, of which
other people will avail themselves.

If you find yourself subject to sudden starts of passion, or madness, (for I
see no difference between them, but in their duration) resolve, within
yourself, at least, never to speak one word while you feel that emotion within
you.

In short, make yourself absolute master of your temper, and your countenance,
so far, a^ least, as that no visible change do appear in either, whatever you
may feel inwardly. This may be difficult, but it is by no means impossible;
and, as a man of sense never attempts impossibilities, on one hand, or the
other, he is never discouraged by difficulties: on the contrary, he redoubles
his industry and his diligence, he perseveres, and infallibly prevails at last.
In any point, which prudence bids you pursue and which a manifest utility
attends, let difficulties only animate your industry, not deter you from the
pursuit. If one way has failed, try another; be active, persevere, and you will
conquer. Some people are to be reasoned, some flattered, some intimidated, and
some teazed into a thing; but, in general, all are to be brought into it at
last, if skilfully applied to, properly managed, and indefatigably attacked in
their several weak places. The time should likewise be judiciously chosen:
every man has his MOLLIA TEMPORA, but that is far from being all day long; and
you would choose your time very ill, if you applied to a man about one
business, when his head was full of another, or when his heart was full of
grief, anger, or any other disagreeable sentiment.

In order to judge of the inside of others, study your own, for men in general
are very much alike, and though one has one prevailing passion, and another has
another, yet their operations are much the same: and whatever engages or
disgusts, pleases or offend^ you, in others, will, mutatis mutandis, engage,
disgust, please, or offend others, in you Observe, with the utmost attention,
all the operations of your own mind, the nature of your passions, and the
various motives that determine your will; and you may in a great degree know
all mankind. For instance Do you find yourself hurt and mortified, when another
makes you feel his superiority, and your own inferiority, in knowledge, parts,
rank, or fortune? you will certainly take great care not to make a person,
whose good will, good word, interest, esteem, or friendship, you would gain,
feel that superiority in you, in case you have it. If disagreeable
insinuations, sly sneers, or repeated contradictions, teaze and irritate you,
would you use them where you wished to engage and please? Surely not: and I
hope you wish to engage and please, almost universally. The temptation of
saying a smart and witty thing, or bon mot, and the malicious applause with
which it is commonly received, have made people who can say them, and still
oftener, people who think they can, but cannot, and yet try, more enemies, and
implacable ones too, than any one other thing that I know of. When such things
then, shall happen to be said at your expense, (a sometimes they certainly
will) reflect seriously upon the sentiments of uneasiness, anger, and
resentment, which they excite in you; and consider whether it can be prudent,
by the same means, to excite the same sentiments in others against you. It is a
decided folly to lose a friend for a jest; but, in my mind, it is not a much
less degree of folly to make an enemy of an indifferent and neutral person, for
the sake of a bon mot. -- When things of this kind happen to be said of you,
the most prudent way is to seem not to suppose that they are meant at you, but
to dissemble and conceal whatever degree of anger you may feel inwardly; and,
should they be so plain that you cannot be supposed ignorant of their meaning,
to join in the laugh of the company against yourself; acknowledge the hit to be
a fair one, and the jest a good one, and play off the whole thing in seeming
good humor; but by no means reply in the same way; which only shows that you
are hurt, and publishes the victory which you might have concealed. Should the
thing said, indeed, injure your honor or moral character, remember there are
but two alternatives for a gentleman and a man of parts -- extreme politeness,
or a duel.

If a man notoriously and designedly insults and affronts you, knock him down;
but if he only injures you, your best revenge is to be extremely civil to him
in your outward behavior, though at the same time you counterwork him, and
return him the compliment, perhaps with interest. This is not perfidy nor
dissimulation; it would be so if you were at the same time to make professions
of esteem and friendship to this man; which I by no means recommend, but, on
the contrary, abhor. All acts of civility are, by common consent, understood to
be no more than a conformity to custom, for the quiet and convenience of
society, the agremens of which are not to be disturbed by private dislikes and
jealousies. Only women and little minds pout and spar for the entertainment of
the company, that always laughs at, and never pities them. For my own part,
though I would by no means give up any point to a competitor, yet I would pique
myself upon showing him rather more civility than to another man. In the first
place, this behavior infallibly makes all the laughers of your side, which is
a considerable party; and in the next place, it certainly pleases the object of
the competition, be it either man or woman; who never fail to say, upon such an
occasion, that they must own you have behaved yourself very handsomely in the
whole affair.

In short, let this be one invariable rule of your conduct: Never to show the
least symptom of resentment, which you cannot to a certain degree, gratify; but
always to smile where you cannot strike. There would be no living in the world,
if one could not conceal and even dissemble the just causes of resentment which
one meets with every day in active and busy life. Whoever cannot master his
humor, should leave the world, and retire to some hermitage in an unfrequented
defart. By showing an unavailing and sullen resentment, you authorize the
resentment of those who can hurt you, and whom you cannot hurt; and give them
that very pretense, which perhaps they wished for, of breaking with, and
injuring you; whereas the contrary behavior would lay them under the
restraints of decency, at least; a^^ either shackle or expose their malice.
Besides, captiousness, fullenness, and pouting, are most exceedingly illiberal
and vulgar.

Though men are all of one composition, the several ingredients are so
differently proportioned in each individual, that no two are exactly alike; and
no one, at all times, like himself. The ablest man will, sometimes, do weak
things: the proudest man, mean things: the honestest man, ill things; and the
wickedest man, good ones. Study individuals, then: and if you take (as you
ought to do) their outlines from their prevailing passion, suspend your last
finishing strokes till you have attended to and discovered the operations of
their inferior passions, appetites, and humors. A man's general character may
be that of the honestest man of the world: do not dispute it; you might be
thought envious or ill-natured: but at the same time, do not take this probity
upon trust, to such a degree as to put your life, fortune, or reputation in his
power. This honest man may happen to be your rival in power, in interest, or in
love; three passions that often put honesty to most severe trials, in which it
is too often cast: but first analyze this honest man yourself: and then, only
you will be able to judge, how far you may, or may not, with safety trust him.

If you would particularly gain the affection and friendship of particular
people, whether men or women, endeavor to find our their predominant
excellency, if they have one, and their prevailing weakness, which every body
has; and do justice to the one, and something more than justice to the other.
Men have various objects in which they may excel, or at least would be thought
to excel; and, though they love to hear justice done to them, where they know
that they excel, yet they are most and best flattered upon those points where
they wish to excel, and yet are doubtful whether they do or not. As for
example: Cardinal Richlieu, who was undoubtedly the ablest statesman of his
time, or perhaps of any other, had the idle vanity of being thought the best
poet too; he envied the great Corneille his reputation, and ordered a criticism
to be written upon the CID. Those therefore, who flattered skilfully, said
little to him of his abilities in state affairs, or at least but EN PAS SANI,
and as it might naturally occur. But the incense which they give him, the smoke
of which, they knew would turn his head in their favor, was as a BE^ESPRIT and
a poet. Why? Because he was sure of one excellency, and distrustful as to the
other.

You will easily discover every man's prevailing vanity, by observing his
favorite topic of conversation; for every man talks most of what he has most a
mind to be thought to excel in. Touch him but there, and you touch him to the
quick.

Women have, in general, but one object, which is their beauty; upon which
scarce any flattery is too gross for them to swallow. Nature has hardly formed
a woman ugly enough to be inse^sible to flattery upon her person; if her face
is so shocking, that she must, in some degree, be conscious of it, her figure
and her air, she trusts make ample amends for it. If her figure is deformed,
her face, she thinks, counterbalances it. If they are both bad, she comforts
herself, that she has graces; a certain manner; IE NE SCAIS QUOI, still more
engaging than beauty. This truth is evident, from the studied and elaborate
dress of the ugliest women in the world. An undoubted, uncontested, conscious
Beauty, is, of all women, the least sensible of flattery upon that head: she
knows it is her due, and is therefore obliged to nobody for giving it her. She
must be flattered upon her understanding; which, though she may possibly not
doubt of herself, yet she suspects that men may distrust.

Do not mistake me, and think that I mean to recommend to you abject and
criminal flattery: no, flatter nobody's vices or crimes: on the contrary, abhor
and discourage them. But there is no living in the world without a complaisant
indulgence for people's weaknesses, and innocent, though ridiculous vanities.
If a man has a mind to be thought wiser, and a woman handsomer, than they
really are, their error is a comfortable one to themselves, and an innocent one
with regard to other people; and I would rather make them my friends, by
indulging them in it, than my enemies, by endeavoring (and that to no purpose)
to undeceive them.

Suspect, in general, those who remarkably affect any one virtue; who raise it
above all others, and who, in a manner, intimate that they possess it
exclusively, I say suspect them: for they are commonly impostors: but do not be
sure that they are always so; for I have sometimes known saints really
religious, Blusterers really brave, Reformers of manners really honest, and
Prudes really chaste. Pry into the recesses of their hearts yourself, as far as
you are able, and never implicitly adopt a character upon common fame; which
though generally right as to the great outlines of characters, is always wrong
in some particulars.

Be upon your guard against those who, upon very slight acquaintance, obtrude
their unasked and unmerited friendship and confidence upon you; for they
probably cram you with them only for their own eating: but, at the same time,
do not roughly reject them upon that general supposition. Examine further, and
see whether those unexpected offers flow from a warm heart and a silly head, or
from a designing head and a cold heart; for knavery and folly have often the
same symptoms. In the first case, there is no dan^ in accepting them, --
valiant quantum valere possunt. In the latter case, it may be useful to seem to
accept them, and artfully to turn the battery on him who raised it.

If a man uses strong oaths or protestations to make you believe a thing, which
is of itself so likely and probable, that the ^are saying of it would be
sufficient, depend upon it he lies, and is highly interested in making you
believe it; or else he would not take so much pains.

There is an incontinency of friendship among young fellows, who are associated
by their mutual pleasures only, which has, very frequently, bad consequences. A
parcel of warm hearts, and unexperienced heads, heared by convivial m^th, and
possibly a little too much wine, vow, and reasly mean at the time, eternal
friendships to each other, and indiscreetly pour out their whole souls in
common, and without the least reserve. The considences are as indiscreetly
^ealed, as they were made; for new pleasures, and new places, soon dissolve
this ill-cemented connection; and then very ill uses are made of these rash
confidences. Bear your part, however, in young companies; nay, excel if you
can, in all the social and convivial joy and festivity that become youth. Trust
them with your love-tales, if you please; but keep your serious views secret.
Trust those only to some tried friend, more experienced than yourself, and who,
being in a different walk of life from you, is not likely to become your rival;
for I would not advise you to depend so much upon the heroic virtue of mankind,
as to hope or believe, that your competitor will ever be your friend, as to the
object of that competition.

A seaming ignorance is very often a most necessary part of worldly knowledge.
It is, for instance, commonly advisable to seem ignorant of what people offer
to tell you; and when they say, Have you not heard of such a thing? to answer,
No, and to let them go on, though you know it already. Some have a pleasure in
telling it, because they think they tell it well; others have a pride in it, as
being the sagacious discoverers; and many have a vanity in showing that they
have been, though very undeservedly, trusted: all these would be disappointed,
and consequently displeased, if you said, Yes. Seem always ignorant (unless to
one most intimate friend) of all matters of private scandal and defamation,
though you should hear them a thousand times, for the parties affected always
look upon the receiver to be almost as bad as the thief: and whenever they
become the topic of conversation, seem to be a skeptic, though you are really a
serious believer; and always take the extenuating part. But all this seeming
ignorance should be joined to thorough and extensive private informations: and,
indeed, it is the best method of procuring them; for most people have such a
vanity in showing a superiority over others, though but for a moment, and in
the merest trifles, that they will tell you what they should not, rather than
no^ show that they can tell what you did not know: besides that, such seeming
ignorance will make you pass for incurious, and consequently undesigning.
However, fish for facts, and take pains to be well informed of every thing that
passes; but fish judiciously, and not always, nor indeed often, in the shape of
direct questions; which always put people upon their guard, and, often
repeated, grow tiresome. But sometimes take the things that you would know, for
granted; upon which somebody will, kindly and officiously, set you right:
sometimes say, that you have heard so and so; and at other times seem to know
more than you do in order to know all that you want: but avoid direct
questioning as much as you can.

Human nature is the same all over the world; but its operations are so varied
by education and habit, that one must see it in all its d^esses, in order to be
intimately acquainted with it. The passion of ambition, for instance is the
same in a courtier, a soldier, or an ecclesiastic; but from their different
educations and habits they will take very different methods to gratify it.
Civility, which is a diposition to accommodate and oblige others, is
essentially the same in every country; but good-breeding, as it is called,
which is the manner of exerting that disposition, is different in almost every
country, and merely local; and every man of sense imitates and conforms to that
local good-breeding of the place which he is at. -- A conformity and
flexibility of manners is necessary in the course of the world; that is, with
regard to all things which are not wrong in themselves. The versatile ingenium
is the most useful of all. It can turn instantly from one object to another,
assuming the proper manner for each. It can be serious with the grave, cheerful
with the gay, and trifling with the frivolous.

Indeed, nothing is more engaging than a cheerful and easy conformity to
people's particular manners, habits, and even weaknesses; nothing (to use a
vulgar expression) should come amiss to a young fellow. He should be, for good
purposes, what Alcibiades was commonly for bad ones -- a Proteus, assuming with
ease, and wearing with cheerfulness, any shape. Heat, cold, luxury, abstinence,
gravity, gaiety, ceremony, easiness, learning, trifling, business, and
pleasure, are modes which he should be able to take, lay aside, or change
occasionally, with as much ease as he would take or lay aside his hat.

Young men are apt to think that every thing is to be carried by spirit and
vigor; that art is meanness, and that versatility and complaisance are the
refuge of pusillanimity and weakness. This most mistaken opinion gives an
indelicacy, an abruptness, and a roughness to the manners. Fools, who can never
be undeceived, retain them as long as they live; reflection, with a little
experience, makes men of sense shake them off soon. When they come to be a
little better acquainted with themselves, and with their own species, they
discover, that plain right reason is, nine times in ten the fettered and
shackled attendant of the triumph of the heart and the passions; consequently,
they address themselves nine times in ten to the conqueror, not to be
conquered: and conquerors, you know must be applied to in the gentlest, the
most engaging, and the most insinuating manner.

But unfortunately, young men are as apt to think themselves wise enough, as
drunken men are to think themselves sober enough. They look upon spirit to be a
much better thing than experience; which they call coldness. They are but half
mistaken; for though spirit without experience is dangerous, experience without
spirit is languid and defective. Their union which is very rare, is perfection:
you may join them, if you please, for all my experience is at your service; and
I do not desire one grain of your spirit in return. Use them both; and let them
reciprocally animate and check each other. I mean here, by the spirit of youth,
only the vivacity and presumption of youth; which hinder them from seeing the
difficulties or dangers of an undertaking; but I do not mean what the silly
vulgar calls spirit, by which they are captious jealous of their rank,
suspicious of being undervalued, and tart (as they call it) in their repartees,
upon the slightest occasions. This is an evil, and a very silly spirit, which
should be driven out, and transferred to an herd of swine.

To conclude: Never neglect or despise old, for the sake of new, or more
shining acquaintance, which would be ungrateful on your part, and never
forgiven on theirs. Take care to make personal friends, and as few personal
enemies as possible. I do not mean, by personal friends, intimate and
confidential friends, of which no man can hope to have half a dozen in the
whole course of his life; but I mean friends, in the common acceptance of the
word; that is, people who speak well of you, and who would rather do you good
than harm, consistently with their own interest, and no farther.

LYING.
NOTHING is more criminal, mean, or ridiculous, than Lying. It is the
production either of malice or cowardice, or vanity; but it generally misses of
its aim in every one of these views; for lies are always detected sooner or
later. If we advance a malicious lie, in order to affect any man's fortune or
character, we may, indeed, injure him for some time, but we shall certainly be
the greatest sufferers in the end; for as soon as we are detected, we are
blasted for the infamous attempt: and whatever is said afterward to the
disadvantage of that person, however true, passes for calumny. To lie, or to
equivocate, (which is the same thing) to excuse ourselves for what we have said
or done, and to avoid the danger of the shame that we apprehend from it, we
discover our fear as well as our falsehood; and only increase, instead of
avoiding, the danger and the shame; we show ourselves to be the lowest and
meanest of mankind, and are sure to be always treated as such. If we have the
misfortune to be in the wrong, there is something noble in frankly owning it;
it is the only way of atoning for it, and the only way to be forgiven. To
remove a present danger, by equivocating, evading, or shuffling, is something
so despicable, and betrays so much fear, that whoever practices them deserves
to be chastised.

There are people who indulge themselves in another sort of lying, which they
reckon innocent, and which in one sense is so; for it hurts nobody but
themselves. This sort of lying is the spurious offspring of vanity, begotten
upon folly: these people deal in the mavelous; they have seen some things
that never existed; they have seen other things which they never really saw,
though they did exist, only because they were thought worth seeing. Has any
thing remarkable been said or done in any place, or in any company; they
immediately present and declare themselves eye or ear witnesses of it. They
have done feats themselves, unattempted, or at least unperformed, by others.
They are always the heroes of their own fables; and think that they gain
consideration, or at least present attention by it. Whereas, in truth, all that
they get is ridicule and contempt, not without a good degree of distrust: for
one must naturally conclude, that he who will tell any lie from idle vanity,
will not scruple telling a greater for interest. Had I really seen any thing so
very extraordinary as to be almost incredible, I would keep it to myself,
rather than, by telling it, give any one body room to doubt for one minute of
my veracity. It is most certain, that the reputation of chastity is not so
necessary for a woman, as that of veracity is for a man: and with reason; for
it is possible for a woman to be virtuous, though not strictly chaste: but it
is not possible for a man to be virtuous without strict veracity. The slips of
the poor woman are sometimes mere bodily frailties: but a lie in a man is a
vice of the mind, and of the heart.

Nothing but truth can carry us through the world, with either our conscience
or our honor unwounded. It is not only our duty, but our interest; as a proof
of which, it may be observed, that the greatest fools are the greatest liars.
We may safely judge of a man's truth by his degree of understanding.

DIGNITY OF MANNERS.
A CERTAIN dignity of manners is absolutely necessary, to make even the most
valuable character either respected or respectable in the world.

Horse-play, romping, frequent and loud fits of laughter, jokes, waggery, and
indiscriminate familiarity, will sink both merit and knowledge into a degree of
contempt. They compose at most a merry fellow, and a merry fellow was never yet
a respectable man. Indiscriminate familiarity either offends your superiors, or
else dubbs you their dependent, and led captain. It gives your inferiors just,
but troublesome and improper claims of equality. A joker is near akin to a
buffoon; and neither of them is the least related to wit. Whoever is admitted
or sought for, in company, upon any other account than that of his merit and
manners, is never respected there, but only made use of. We will have such a
one, for he sings prettily; we will invite such a one to a ball, for he dances
well; we will have such a one to supper, for he is always joking and laughing;
we will ask another, because he plays deep at all games, or because he can
drink a great deal. These are all vilifying distinctions, mortifying
preferences, and exclude all ideas of esteem and regard. Whoever is had (as it
is called (in company, for the sake of any one thing singly, is singly that
thing, and will never be considered in any other light; and consequently never
respected, let his merits be what they will.

Dignity of manners is not only as different from pride, as true courage is
from blustering, or true wit from joking; but is absolutely inconsistent with
it; for nothing vilifies and degrades more than pride. The pretensions of the
poor man are oftener treated with sheer and contempt, than with indignation; as
we offer ridiculously too little to a tradesman, who asks ridiculously too much
for his goods: but we do not haggle with one who only asks a just and
reasonable price.

Abject flattery and indiscriminate assentation degrade, as much as
indiscriminate contradiction and noisy debate disgust. But a modest assertion
of one's own opinion, and a complaisant acquiescence to other people's,
preserve dignity.

Vulgar, low expressions, awkward motions and address, vilify as they imply
either a very low turn of mind, or low education and low company.

Frivolous curiosity about trifles, and a laborious attention to little
objects, which neither require nor deserve a moment's thought, lower a man; who
from thence is thought (and not unjustly) incapable of greater matters.
Car^^inal de Reta very sagaciously marked out Cardinal Chig^ for a little mind,
from the moment that he told him he had wrote three years with the same pen,
and that it was an excellent good one still.

A certain degree of exterior seriousness in looks and motions, gives dignity
without excluding it and decent cheerfulness, which are always serious
themselves. A constant smirk upon the face, and a whiffling activity of the
body, are strong indications of futility. Whoever is in a hurry, shows that the
thing he is about is too big for him. Haste and hurry are very different things.

To conclude: A man who has patiently been kicked, may as well pretend to
courage, as a man, blasted by vices and crimes, may to dignity of any kind. But
an exterior decency and dignity of manners, will even keep such a man longer
from sinking, than otherwise he would be. Of such consequence is DECORUM, even
though affected and put on.

GENTLENESS of MANNERS, with FIRMNESS, or RESOLUTION of MIND.
I DO not know any one rule so unexceptionably useful and necessary in every
part of life, as to unite Gentleness of Manners with Firmness of Mind. The
first alone would degenerate and sink into a mean timid complaisance and
passiveness, if not supported and dignified by the latter, which would also
deviate into impetuosity and brutality, if not tempered and softened by the
other; however they are seldom united. The warm, choleric man, with strong
animal spirits, despises the first, and thinks to carry all before him by the
last. He may, possibly, by great accident, now and then succeed, when he has
only weak and timid to deal with; but his general fate will be, to shock,
offend, be hated, and fall. On the other hand, the cunning, crafty man, thinks
to gain all his ends by gentleness of manners only: he becomes all things to
all men: he seems to have no opinion of his own, and servilely adopts the
present opinion of the present person; he insinuates himself only into the
esteem of fools, but is soon detected, and surely despised by every body else.
The wise man (who differs as much from the cunning, as from the choleric man)
alone joins foftness of manners with firmness of mind.

The advantages arising from an union of these quali^ies, are equally striking
and obvious. For example: If you are in authority, and have a right to command,
your commands delivered with mildness and gentleness, will be willingly,
cheerfully, and consequently well obeyed: whereas, if given brutally, they will
rather be interpreted than executed. For a cool steady resolution should show,
that where you have a right to command, you will be obeyed; but at the same
time, a gentleness in the manner of enforcing that obedience, should make it a
cheerful one, and soften, as much as possible, the mortifying consciousness of
inferiority.

If you are to ask a favor, or even to solicit your due, you must do it with a
GRACE, or you will give those, who have a mind to refuse you either, a pretense
to do it, by resenting the manner; but on the other hand, you must, by a steady
perseverance and decent tenaciousness show firmness and resolution. The right
motives are seldom the true ones of men's actions, especially of people in high
stations; who often give to importunity and fear, what they would refuse to
justice or to merit. By gentleness and softness engage their hearts if you can;
at least, prevent the pretense of offense; but take care to show resolution and
firmness enough to extort from their love of ease, or their fear, what you
might in vain hope for from their justice or goodnature. People in high life
are hardened to the wants and distres^es of mankind as surgeons are to their
bodily pains; they see (...) hear of them all day long, and even of so many
simulated ones, that they do not know which are real, and which not. Other
sentiments are therefore to be applied to, than those of mere justice and
humanity; their favor must be captivated by the graces; their love of ease
disturbed by unwearied importunity, or their fears wrought upon by a decent
intimation of implacable, cool resentment. This precept is the only way I know
in the world, of being loved without being despised, and feared without being
hated. It constitutes the dignity of character, which every wise man must
endeavor to establish.

To conclude: If you find that you have a hastiness in your temper, which
unguardedly breaks out into indiscreet sallies, or rough expressions, to either
your superiors, your equals, or your inferiors, watch it narrowly, check it
carefully, and call the Graces to your assistance: at the first impulse of
passion, be silent, till you can be soft. Labor even to get the command of
your countenance so well, that those emotions may not be read in it: a most
unspeakable advantage in bufiness! On the other hand, let no complaisance, no
gentleness of temper, no weak defire of pleasing on your part, no wheedling,
coaxing, nor flattery, on other people's, make you recede one jo^ from any
point that reason and prudence have bid you pursue; but return to the charge,
persist, persevere, and you will find most things attainable that are possible.
A yielding timid meekness is always abused and insulted by the unjust and
unfeeling; but when sustained by firmness and resolution, is always respected,
commonly successful.

In your friendships and connections, as well as in your enmities, this rule is
particularly useful; let your firmness and vigor preserve and invite
attachments to you; but at the same time, let your manner hinder the enemies of
your friends and dependants from becoming yours: let your enemies be disarmed
by the gentleness of your manner; but let them feel, at the same time, the
steadiness of your just resentment; for there is great difference between
bearing malice, which is always ungenerous, and a resolute self-defence, which
is always prudent and justifiable.

Some people cannot gain upon themselves to be easy and civil to those who are
either their rivals, competitors, or opposers, though, independently of those
accidental circumstances, they would like and esteem them. They betray a
shyness and an awkwardness in company with them, and catch at any little thing
to expose them; and so, from temporary and only occasional opponents, make them
their personal enemies. This is exceedingly weak and detrimental, as indeed, is
all humor in business; which can only be carried on successfully by
unadulterated good po^^cy and right reasoning. In such situations I would be
more particularly civil, easy, and frank, with the man whose designs I
traversed; this is commonly called generosity and magnanimity, but is in truth
good sense and policy. The manner is often as important as the matter,
somet^^es more so; a favor may make an enemy, and an injury may make a friend,
according to the different manner in which they are severally done. In fine,
gentleness of manners, with firmness of mind, is a short, but full description
of human perfection on this side of religious and moral duties.

MORAL CHARACTER.
THE Moral Character of a man should be not only pure, but, like Caesar's wi^e,
unsuspected. The least speck, or blemish, upon it, is fatal. Nothing degrades
and vilifies more, for it excites and unites detestation and contempt. There
are, however, wretches in the world profligate enough to explode all notions of
moral good and evil; to maintain that they are merely local, and depend
entirely upon the customs and fashions of different countries: nay, there are
still, if possible, more unaccountable wretches; I mean those who affect to
preach and propagate such absurd and infamous notions, without believing them
themselves. (...) much as possible, the company of (...) ple, who reflect a
degree of discredit (...) famy upon all who converse with them. (...) you may
sometimes, by accident, fall into (...) a company, take great care that no
compla^sance, no good humor, no warmth of festal mirth, ever make you seem
even to acquiesce, much less approve or applaud, such infamous doctrines. On
the other hand, do not debate, nor enter into serious argument, upon a subject
so much below it: but content yourself with telling them, that you know they
are not serious; that you have a much better opinion of them, than they would
have you have; and that you are very sure they would not practice the doctrine
they preach. But put your private mark upon them, and shun them for ever
afterward.

There is nothing so delicate as a man's moral character, and nothing which it
is his interest so much to preserve pure. Should he be suspected of injustice,
malignity, persidy, lying, etc. all the parts and knowledge in the world will
never procure him esteem, friendship, or respect. I, therefore, recommend to
you a most scrupulous tenderness for your moral character, and the utmost care
not to say or do the least thing that may, ever so slightly, taint it. Show
yourself, upon all occasions, the friend, but not the bully,

COMMONPLACE OBSERVATIONS.
her husband. Whereas I presume, that men and their wives neither love nor hate
each other the more, upon account of the form of matrimony which has been said
over them. The cohabitation, indeed, which is the consequence of matrimony,
makes them either love or hate more, accordingly as they respectively deserve
it; but that would be exactly the same, between any man and woman who lived
together without being married.

It is also a trite, commonplace observation, that courts are the seats of
falsehood and dissimulation. That, like many, I might say, most commonplace
observations, is false. Falsehood and dissimulation are certainly to be found
at courts; but where are they not to be found? Cottages have them, as well as
courts; only with worse manners. A couple of neighboring farmers, in a
village, will contrive and practice as many tricks, to overreach each other at
the next market, or to supplant each other in the favor of the 'squire, as any
two courtiers can do to supplant each other in the favor of the prince.
Whatever poets may write, or fools believe, of rural innocence and truth, and
of the perfidy of courts, this is undoubtedly true -- That shepherds and
ministers are both men^ their nature and passions the same, the modes of them
only different.

These, and many other commonplace reflections upon nations, or professions,
in general (which are at least as often false as true) are the poor refuge of
people who have neither wit nor invention of their own, but endeavor to shine
in company by second-hand finery. I always put these pert jackanapes's out of
countenance, by looking extremely grave, when they expect that I should laugh
at their pleasantries; and by saying, Well, and so; as if they had not done,
and that the sting were still to come. This disconcerts them; as they have no
resources in themselves, and have but one set of jokes to live upon. Men of
parts are not reduced to these shifts, and have the utmost contempt for them:
they find proper subjects enough for either useful or lively conversati^ns,
they can be witty without satire or commonplace, and serious without being
dull.

ORATORY.
ORATORY, or the art of speaking well, is useful in every situation of life,
and absolutely necessary in most. A man cannot distinguish himself without it,
in parliament, in the pulpit, or at the bar; and even in common conversation,
he who has acquired an easy and habitual eloquence, and who speaks with
propriety and accuracy, will have a great advantage over those who speak
inelegantly and incorrectly. The business of oratory is to persuade; and to
please, is the most effectual step toward persuading. It is very advantageous
for a man who speaks in public, to please his hearers so much as to gain their
attention; which he cannot possibly do, without the assistance of pratory.

It is certain, that by study and application, every man may make himself a
tolerable good orator, eloquence depending upon observation and care. Every man
may, if he pleases, make choice of good instead of bad words and phrases, may
speak with propriety instead of impropriety, and may be clear and perspicuous
in his recitals, instead of dark and unintelligible: he may have grace instead
of awkwardness in his gestures and deportment. In short, it is in the power of
every man, with pains and application, to be a very agreeable, instead of a
very disagreeable speaker; and it is well worth the labor to excel other men
in that particular article in which they excel beasts.

Demosthenes thought it so essentially necessary to speak well, that though he
naturally stuttered, and had weak lungs, he resolved, by application, to
overcome those disadvantages. He cured his stammering, by putting small pebbles
in his mouth, and gradually strengthened his lungs, by daily using himself to
speak loudly and di^ctly for a considerable time. In stormy weather he often
visited the sea shore, where he spoke as loud as he could, in order to prepare
himself for the noise and murmurs of the popular assemblies of the Athenians,
before whom he was to speak. By this extraordinary care and attention, and the
constant study of the best authors, he became the greatest orator that his own,
or any other age or country have produced.

Whatever language a person uses, he should speak it in its greatest purity,
and according to the rules of grammar: nor is it sufficient that we do not
speak a language ill, we must endeavor to speak it well; for which purpose, we
should read the best authors with attention, and observe how people of fashion
and education speak. Common people, in general, speak ill; they make use of
inelegant and vulgar expressions, which people of rank never do. In numbers
they frequently join the singular and the plural together, and confound the
masculine with the feminine gender, and seldom make choice of the proper tense.
To avoid all these faults we should read with attention, and observe the turn
and expressions of the best authors; nor should we pass over a word that we do
not perfectly understand, without searching or enquiring for the exact meaning
of it.

It is said, That a man must be born a poet; but it is in his power to make
himself an orator; for to be a poet requires a certain degree of strength and
vivacity of mind; but that attention, reading and labor, are sufficient to
form an orator.

PEDANTRY.
EVERY excellency, and every virtue, has its kindred vice or weakness; and, if
carried beyond certain bounds, sinks into the one or the other. Generosity
often runs into profusion, economy into avarice, courage into rashness, caution
into timidity, and so on: insomuch that I believe, there is more judgment
required, for the proper ^onduct of our virtues, than for avoiding their
opposite vices. Vice in its true light, is so deformed, that it shocks us at
first sight; and would hardly ever seduce us, if it did not, at first, wear the
mask of some virtue. But virtue is, in itself, so beautiful, that it charms us
at first sight; engages us more and more, upon further acquaintance; and, as
with other beauties, we think excess impossible; it is here that judgment is
necessary, to moderate and direct the effects of an excellent cause. In the
same manner, great learning, if not accompanied with sound judgment, frequently
carries us into error, pride, and pedantry.

Some learned men, proud of their knowledge, only speak to decide, and give
judgment without appeal. The consequence of which is, that mankind, provoked by
the insult, and injured by the oppression, revolt^ and, in order to shake off
the tyranny, even call the lawful authority in question. The more you know the
modester you should be: and that modesty is the surest way of gratifying your
vanity. Even where you are sure, seem rather doubtful: represent, but do not
pronounce: and, if you would convince others, seem open to conviction yourself.

Others, to show their learning, or often from the prejudices of a school
education, where they hear of nothing else, are always talking of the Ancients
as something more than men, and of the Moderns as something less. They are
never without a classic or two in their pockets; they stick to the old good
sense; they read none of the modern trash; and will show you plainly, that no
improvement has been made, in any one art or science, these last seventeen
hundred years. I would by no means have you disown your acquaintance with the
Ancients; but still less would I have you brag of an exclusive intimacy with
them. Speak of the Moderns without contempt, and of the Ancients without
idolatry judge them all by their merits, but not by their ages; and if you
happen to have an Elzevir classic in your pocket, neither show it nor mention
it.

Some great scholars, most absurdly draw all their maxims, both for public and
private life, from what they call parallel cases in the ancient authors;
without considering, that, in the first place, there never were, since the
Creation of the World, two cases exactly parallel: and, in the next place, that
there never was a case stated, or even known, by any historian with every one
of its circumstances, which, however, ought to be known in order to be reasoned
from. Reason upon the case itself, and the several circumstances that attend
it, and act accordingly; but not from the authority of ancient poets or
historians. Take into your consideration, if you please, cases seemingly
analogous; but take them as helps only, not as guides.

There is another species of learned men, who, though less dogmatical and
supercilious, are not less impertinent. These are the communicative and shining
pedants, who adorn their conversation, even with women, by happy quotations of
Greek and Latin, and who have contracted such a familiarity with the Greek and
Roman authors, that they call them by certain names or epithets denoting
intimacy. As old Homer; that sly rogue Horace; Maro, instead of Virgil; and
Naso, instead of Ovid. These are often imitated by coxcombs, who have no
learning at all; but who have got some names, and some scraps of ancient
authors by heart, which they improperly and impertinently retail in all
companies, in hopes of passing for scholars. If, therefore, you would avoid the
accusation of pedantry, on one hand, or the suspicion of ignorance, on the
other, abstain from learned ostentation. Speak the language of the company that
you are in; speak it purely, and unlarded with any other. Never seem wiser, nor
more learned, than the people you are with. Wear your learning, like your
watch, in a private pocket; and do not pull it out, and strike it, merely to
show that you have one. If you are asked what o'clock it is, tell it; but do
not proclaim it hourly and unasked, like the watchman.

PLEASURE.
MANY young people adopt pleasures, for which they have not the least taste,
only because they are called by that name. They often mistake so totally, as to
imagine, that debauchery is pleasure. Drunkenness, which is equally destructive
to body and mind, is certainly a fine pleasure! Gaming, which draws us into a
thousand scrapes, leaves us pennyless, and gives us the air and manners of an
outrageous madman, is another most exquisite pleasure.

Pleasure is the rock which most young people split upon: they launch out with
crowded sails in quest of it, but without a compass to direct their course, or
reason sufficient to steer the vessel; therefore pain and shame, instead of
pleasure, are the returns of their voyage.

A man of pleasure, in the vulgar acceptance of that phrase, means only a
beastly drunkard, an abandoned rake, a profligate swearer: we should weigh the
present enjoyment of our pleasures against the unavoidable consequences of
them, and then let our common sense-determine the choice.

We may enjoy the pleasures of the table and wine, but stop short of the pains
inseparably annexed to an excess in either. We may let other people do as they
will, without formally and sententiously rebuking them for it: but we must be
firmly resolved not to destroy our own faculties and constitution, in
compliance to those who have no regard to their own. We may play to give us
pleasure, but not to give us pain: we may play for trifles in mixed companies,
to amuse ourselves, and conform to custom. Good company are not fond of having
a man reeling drunk among (...) ^or is it agreeable to see another ^earing his
hair, and blaspheming, for having lost at play, more than he is able to pay; or
a rake with half a nose, crippled by coarse and infamous debauches. Those who
practice, and brag of these things, make no part of good company; and are most
unwillingly, if ever, admitted into it. A real man of fashion and pleasure
observes decency; at least, he neither borrows nor affects vices: and if he is
so unfortunate as to have any, he gratifies them with choice, delicacy, and
secrecy.

We should be as attentive to our pleasures as to our studies. In the latter,
we should observe and reflect upon all we read, and in the former, be watchful
and attentive to every thing we see and hear; and let us never have it to say,
as fools do of things that were said and done before their faces, That indeed
they did not mind them, because they were thinking of something else. Why were
they thinking of something else? And if they were, why did they come there?
Wherever we are we should (as it is vulgarly expressed) have our ears and our
eyes about us. We should listen to every thing that is done. Let us observe,
without being thought observers; for otherwise, people will be upon their guard
before us.

All gaming, field sports, and such sort of amusements where neither the
understanding or the senses have the least share, are frivolous, and the
resource of little minds, who either do not think, or do not love to think. But
the pleasures of a man of parts either flatter the senses, or improve the mind.

There are liberal and illiberal pleasures, as well as liberal and illiberal
arts. Sottish drunkenness, indiscriminate gluttony, driving coaches, rustic
sports, ^ch as sox chases, horse-races, etc. are infinitely below the honest
and industrious professions of a tailor and a shoemaker.

The more we apply to business, the more we relish our pleasures: the exercise
of the mind in the morning, by study, whets the appetite for the pleasures of
the evening, as the exercise of the body whets the appetite for dinner.
Business and pleasure, rightly understood, mutually assist each other; instead
of being enemies, as foolish or dull people often think them. We cannot taste
pleasures truly, unless we earn them by previous business; and few people do
business well, who do nothing else. But when I speak of pleasures I always mean
the elegant pleasures of a rational being, and not the brutal ones of a swine.

PREJUDICES.
NEVER adopt the notions of any books you may read, or of any company you may
keep, without examining whether they are just or not, as you will otherwise be
liable to be hurried away by prejudices, instead of being guided by reason; and
quietly cherish error, instead of seeking for truth.

Use and assert your own reason; reflect, examine, and analyze every thing, in
order to form a sound and mature judgment; let no ipse dixit impose upon your
understanding, mislead your actions, or dictate your conversation. Be early,
what, if you are not, you will, when too late, wish you had been. Consult your
reason betimes: I do not say, that it will always prove an unerring guide; for
human reason is not infallible: but it will prove the least erring guide that
you can follow. Books and conversation may assist it; but adopt neither,
blindly and implicitly; try both by that best rule, which God has given to
direct us, Reason. Of all the troubles, do not decline, as many people do, that
of thinking. The herd of mankind can hardly be said to think; their notions are
almost all adoptive; and, in general, I believe it is better that it should be
so; as such common prejudices contribute more to order and quiet, than their
own separate reasonings would do, uncultivated and unimproved as they are.

Local prejudices prevail only with the herd of mankind; and do not impose upon
cultivated, informed, and reflecting minds: but then there are notions equally
false, though not so glaringly absurd, which are entertained by people of
superior and improved understandings, merely for want of the necessary pains to
investigate, the proper attention to examine, and the penetration requisite to
determine the truth. Those are the prejudices which I would have you guard
against, by a manly exertion and attention of your reasoning faculty.

RELIGION.
ERRORS and mistakes, however gross, in matters of opinion, if they are
sincere, are to be pitied; but not punished, nor laughed at. The blindness of
the understanding is as much to be pitied, as the blindness of the eyes: and it
is neither laughable nor criminal for a man to lose his way in either case.
Charity bids us endeavor to set him right, by arguments and persuasions; but
charity, at the same time, forbids us either to punish or ridicule his
misfortune. fortune. Every man seeks for truth, but God only knows who has
found it. It is unjust to persecute, and absurd to ridicule people for their
several opinions, which they cannot help entertaining upon the conviction of
their reason. It is he who tells, or acts a ^e, that is guilty, and not he who
honestly and sincerely believes the lie.

The object of all public worships in the world is the same; it is that great
eternal Being who created every thing. The different manner, of worship are by
no means subjects of ridicule. Each sect thinks his own the best; and I know no
infallible judge in this world, to decide which is the best.

EMPLOYMENT OF TIME.
HOW little do we reflect on the use and value of time! It is in every body's
mouth, but in few people's practice. Every fool, who slatterns away his whole
time in nothings, frequently utters some trite commonplace sentence to prove,
at once, the value and the fleetness of time. The sun dials, all over Europe,
have some ingenious inscription to that effect: so that nobody squanders away
their time without frequently hearing and seeing how necessary it is to employ
it well; and how irrecoverable it is if lost. Young people are apt to think
they have so much time before them, that they may squander what they please of
it, and yet have enough left; as great fortunes have frequently seduced people
to a ruinous profusion. But all these admonitions are useless, where there is
not a fund of good sense, and reason to suggest rather than receive them.

Time is precious, life short, and consequently not a single moment should be
lost. Sensible men know how to make the most of time, and put out their whole
sum either to interest or pleasure: they are never idle, but continually
employed either in amusements or study. It is a universal maxim, That idleness
is the mother of vice. It is, however, certain, that laziness is the
inheritance of fools, and nothing can be so despicable as a sluggard. Cato the
Censor, a wise and virtuous Roman, used to say, there were but three actions of
his life that he regretted. The first was, the having revealed a secret to his
wife; the second, that he had once gone by sea when he might have gone by land;
and the third, the having passed one day without doing any good.

Take care of the pence, for the pounds will take care of themselves. was a
very just and sensible reflection of old Mr. Lowndes, the famous Secretary of
the Treasury, under William III. Anne, and George I. I therefore recommed to
you to take care of minutes, for hours will take care of themselves. Be doing
something or other all day long; and not neglect half-hours and quarters of
hours, which, at the year's end, amount to a great sum. For instance: There are
many short intervals in the day, between studies and pleasures; instead of
sitting idle and yawning, in those intervals, snatch up some valuable book, and
continue the reading of that book till you have got through it; never burden
your mind with more than one thing at a time: and, in reading this book, do not
run over it superficially, but read every passage twice over, at least do not
pass on to a second, till you thoroughly understand the first, nor quit the
book till you are master of the subject; for unless you do this, you may read
it through, and not remember the contents of it for a week. The books I would
particularly recommend, among others, are the Marchioness Lambert's advice to
her son and daughter, Cardinal Retz's Maxims, Rochfoucault's Moral Reflections,
Bruyere's Characters, Fontenelle's Plurality of Worlds, Sir Josiah Child on
Trade, Bolingbroke's Works; for style, his Remarks on the History of England,
under the name of Sir John Oldcastle; Puffendorff's Jus Gentium, and Grotius de
Jure Belli et Pacis: the last two are well translated by Barberac. For
occasional half-hours or less, read works of invention, wit and humor; but
never waste your minutes on trifling authors, either ancient or modern.

Nor are pleasure, idleness, or time lost, provided they are the pleasures of a
rational being; on the contrary, a certain portion of time employed in those
pleasures, is very usefully employed.

Whatever business you have, do it the first moment you can; never by halves
but finish it without interruption, if possible. Business must not be sauntered
and trifled with; and you must not say to it as Felix did to Paul, "at a more
convenient season I will speak to thee." The most convenient season for
business is the first; but study and business in some measure, point out their
own times, to a man of sense; time is much oftener squandered away in the wrong
choice and improper methods of amusement and pleasures.

Dispatch is the soul of business; and nothing contributes more to dispatch
than method. Lay down a method for every thing, and stick to it inviolable, as
far as unexpected incidents may allow. Fix one certain hour and day in the week
for your accounts, and keep them together in their proper order; by which means
they will require very little time, and you can never be much cheated. Whatever
letters and papers you keep, docket and tie them up in their respective
classes, so that you may instantly have recourse to any one. Lay down a method
also for your reading, for which you allot a certain share of your mornings;
let it be a consistent and consecutive course, and not in that desultory and
immethodical manner, in which many people read scraps of different authors upon
different subjects. Keep a useful and short common place book of what you read,
to help your memory only, and not for pedantic quotations. Never read History
without having maps, and a chronological book, or tables, lying by you, and
constantly recurred to; without which, History is only a confused heap of facts.

You will say, it may be, as many young people would, that all this order and
method is very troublesome, only fit for dull people, and a disagreeable
restraint upon the noble fire of Youth. I deny it; and assert on the contrary,
that it will procure you both more time and more taste for your pleasures; and,
so far from being troublesome to you, that, after you have pursued it a month,
it would be troublesome to you to lay it aside. Business whets the appetite,
and gives a taste to pleasures, as exercise does to food: and business can
never be done without method: it raises the spirits for pleasures; and a
spectacle, a ball, an assembly, will much more sensibly affect a man who has
employed, than a man who has lost the preceding part of the day; nay, I will
venture to say, that a fine lady will seem to have more charms to a man of
study or business, than to a saunterer. The same listlessness runs through his
whole conduct, and he is as insipid in his pleasures, as inefficient in every
thing else

I hope you earn your pleasures, and consequently taste them: for by the way, I
know a great many men who call themselves Men of pleasure, but who, in truth,
have none. They adopt other people's indiscriminately, but without any taste of
their own. I have known them often inflict excesses upon themselves, because
they thought them genteel; though they sat as aukwardly upon them as other
people's clothes would have done. Have no pleasures but your own, and then you
will shine in them.

Many people think that they are in pleasures, provided they are neither in
study nor in business. Nothing like it: they are doing nothing, and might just
as well be asleep. They contract habitudes from laziness, and they only
frequent those places where they are free from all restraints and attentions.
Be upon your guard against this idle profusion of time; and let every place you
go to be either the scene of quick and lively pleasures, or the school of your
improvements: let every company you go into, either gratify your senses, extend
your knowledge, or refine your manners.

If, by accident, two or three hours are sometimes wanting for some useful
purpose, borrow them from your sleep. Six or at most seven hours sleep is, for
a constancy, as much as you or any body can want: more is only laziness and
dozing; and is both unwholesome and stupifying. If, by chance, your business or
your pleasures, should keep you up till four or five o'clock in the morning
rise exactly at your usual time, that you may not lose the precious morning
hours; and that the want of sleep may force you to go to bed earlier the next
night.

Above all things, guard against frivolousness. The frivolous mind is always
busied but to little purpose; it takes little objects for great ones, and
throws away upon trifles that time and attention which only important things
deserve. Nicknacks, butterflies, shells, insects, etc. are the objects of their
most series researches. They contemplate the dress, not the characters, of the
company they keep. They attend more to the decorations of a play, than to the
sense of it; and to the ceremonies of a court, more than to its politics. Such
an employment of time is absolute loss of it.

To conclude this subject: Sloth, indolence, and effeminacy, are pernicious and
unbecoming a young fellow; let them be your resource forty years hence at
soonest. Determine at all events, and however disagreeable it may be to you in
some respects, and for some time, to keep the most distinguished and
fashionable company of the place you are at, either for their rank, or for
their learning, or le bell esprit et le gout. This gives you credentials to the
best companies, wherever you go afterward.

Know the true value of time; snatch, seize, and enjoy every moment of it. No
idleness, no laziness, no procrastination; never put off till tomorrow what
you can do today. That was the rule of the famous and unfortunate Pensionary
De Wit; who, by strictly following it, found time not only to do the whole
business of the Republic, but to pass his evenings at assemblies and suppers,
as if he had had nothing else to do or think of.

VANITY.
BE extremely on your guard against vanity, the common failing of inexperienced
youth; but particularly against that kind of vanity that dubbs a man a coxcomb;
a character which once acquired, is more indelible than that of the priesthood.
It is not to be imagined by how many different ways vanity defeats its own
purposes. One man decides peremptorily upon every subject, betrays his
ignorance upon many, and shows a disgusting presumption upon the rest: another
desires to appear successful among the women; he hints at the encouragement he
has received from those of the most distinguished rank and beauty, and
intimates a particular connection with some one: if it is true, it is
ungenerous; if false, it is infamous: but in either case he destroys the
reputation he wants to get. Some flatter their vanity, by little extraneous
objects, which have not the least relation to themselves; such as being
descended from, related to, or acquainted with people of distinguished merit,
and eminent characters. They talk perpetually of their grandfather such a-one,
their uncle, and their intimate friend, Mr. such-a one, whom possibly, they are
hardly acquainted with. But admitting it a^l to be as they would have it, what
then? Have they the more merit for those accidents? Certainly not. On the
contrary* their taking up adventitious, proves want of intrinsic merit; a rich
man never borrows. Take this rule for granted, as a never falling one, That you
must never seem to affect the character in which you have a mind to shine.
Modesty is the only sure bait, when you angle for praise. The affectation of
courage will make even a brave man pass only for a bully; as the affectation of
wit will make a man of parts pass for a coxcomb. By this modesty I do not mean
timidity, but awkward bashfulness. On the contrary, be inwardly firm and
steady, know your own value, whatever it may be, and act upon that principle;
but take great care to let nobody discover that you do know your own value.
Whatever real merit you have, other people will discover; and people always
magnify their own discoveries, as they lessen those of others.

VIRTUE.
VIRTUE is a subject which deserves your and every man's attention. It consists
in doing good, and in speaking truth; the effects of it therefore, are
advantageous to all mankind, and to one's self in particular; virtue makes us
pity and relieve the misfortunes of mankind; it makes us promote justice and
good order in society; and, in general, contributes to whatever tends to the
real good of mankind. To ourselves it gives inward comfort and satisfaction,
which nothing else can do, and which nothing can rob us of. All other
advantages depend upon others, as much as upon ourselves. Riches, power, and
greatness, may be taken away from us, by the violence and injustice of others,
or by inevitable accidents; but virtue depends only upon ourselves, and nobody
can take it away from us. Sickness may deprive us of all the pleasures of the
body; but it cannot deprive us of our virtue, nor of the satisfaction which we
feel from it. A virtuous man, under all the misfortunes of life, still finds
inward comfort and satisfaction, which makes him happier, than any wicked man
can be with all the other advantages of life. If a man has acquired great power
and riches by falsehood, injustice, and oppression, he cannot enjoy them,
because his conscience will torment him, and constantly reproach him with the
means by which he got them. The stings of his conscience will not even let him
sleep quietly; but he will dream of his crimes: and in the daytime, when
alone, and when he has time to think, he will be uneasy and melancholy. He is
afraid of every thing; for, as he knows mankind must hate him, he has reason to
think they will hurt him if they can. Whereas if a virtuous man be ever so poor
or unfortunate in the world, still his virtue is its own reward, and will
comfort him under all afflictions. The quiet and satisfaction of his conscience
make him cheerful by day, and sleep sound by nights; he can be alone with
pleasure, and is not afraid of his own thoughts. Virtue forces her way, and
shines through the obscurity of a retired life; and, sooner or later, it always
is rewarded.

To conclude: -- Lord Shaftsbury says, that he would be virtuous for his own
sake, though nobody were to know it; as he would be clean for his own sake,
though nobody were to see him.

USEFUL MISCELLANEOUS OBSERVATIONS ON MEN AND MANNERS.
Selected from Lord Chesterfield's LETTERS.
A MAN who does not solidly establish, and really deserve, a character of
truth, probity, good manners, and good morals, at his first setting out in the
world, may impose, and shine like a meteor for a very short time, but will very
soon vanish, and be extinguished with contempt. People easily pardon, in young
men, the common irregularities of the senses; but they do not forgive the least
vice of the heart.

The greatest favors may be done so awkwardly and bunglingly as to offend; and
disagreeable things may be done so disagreeably as almost to oblige.

There are very few Captains of foot, who are not much better company than ever
Descartes or Sir Isaac Newton were. I honor and respect such superior
geniuses; but I desire to converse with people of this world, who bring into
company their share, at least, of cheerfulness, good-breeding, and knowledge of
mankind. In common life, one much oftener wants small money, and silver, than
gold. Give me a man who has ready cash about him for present expenses;
sixpences, shillings, half-crowns, and crowns, which circulate easily: but a
man who has only an ingot of gold about him, is much above common purposes, and
his riches are not handy nor convenient. Have as much gold as you please in one
pocket, but take care always to keep change in the other: for you will much
oftener have occasion for a shilling than a guinea.

Advice is seldom welcome, and those who want it the most, always like it the
least.

Envy is one of the meanest and most tormenting of all passions, as there is
hardly a person existing that has not given uneasiness to an envious breast;
for the envious man cannot be happy, while he beholds others so.

A great action will always meet with the approbation of mankind, and the
inward pleasure which it produces, is not to be expressed.

Humanity is the particular characteristic of great minds; little vicious minds
abound with anger and revenge, and are incapable of feeling the exalted
pleasure of forgiving their enemies.

The ignorant and the weak only are idle, those who have acquired a good stock
of knowledge, always desire to increase it. Knowledge is like power in this
respect, that those who have the most, are most desirous of having more.
Idleness is only the refuge of weak minds, and the holiday of fools.

Every man has a natural right to his liberty; and whoever endeavors to ravish
it from him, deserves death more than the robber who attacks us for our money
on the highway.

Modesty is a commendable quality, and generally accompanies true merit; it
engages and captivates the minds of people; for nothing is more shocking and
disgustful than presumption and impudence. A man is despised who is always
commending himself, and who is the hero of his own story.

Not to perform our promise is a folly, a dishonor, and a crime. It is a
folly, because no one will rely on us afterward; and it is a dishonor, and a
crime, because truth is the first duty of religion and morality; and whoever is
not possessed of truth, cannot be supposed to have any one good quality, and
must be held in detestation by all good men.

Wit may create many admirers, but makes few friends. It shines and dazzles
like the noonday sun, but, like that too, is very apt to scorch; and therefore
is always feared. The milder morning and evening light and heat of that planet,
soothe and calm our minds. Never seek for wit: if it presents itself, well and
good; but even in that case, let your judgment interpose: and take care that it
be not at the expense of any body. POPE says very truly, "There are whom Heaven
has blessed with store of wit,
"Yet want as much again to govern it."


And in another place, I doubt with too much truth, "For wit and judgment ever
are at strife,
"Though meant each other's aid, like man and wife."


A proper secrecy is the only mystery of able men; mystery is the only secrecy
of weak and cunning ones.

To tell my friend, wife, or mistress, any secret with which they have nothing
to do, is discovering to them such an unretentive weakness, as must convince
them that you will tell it to twenty others, and consequently that they may
reveal it without the risk of being discovered. But a secret properly
communicated, only to those who are to be concerned in the question, will
probably be kept by them, though they should be a good many. Little secrets are
commonly told again, but great ones generally kept.

A man who tells nothing, or who tells all, will equally have nothing told him.

If a fool knows a secret, he tells it because he is a fool: if a knave knows
one, he tells it wherever it is his interest to tell it. But women, and young
men, are very apt to tell what secret they know, from the vanity of having
been trusted. Trust none of these, wherever you can help it.

In your friendships, and in your enmities, let your confidence and your
hostilities have certain bounds: make not the former dangerous, nor the latter
irreconcilable. There are strange vicissitudes in business.

Smooth your way to the head through the heart. The way of reason is a good
one: but it is commonly something longer, and perhaps not so sure.

Spirit is now a very fashionable word: to act with spirit, means only, to act
rashly, and to talk indiscreetly. An able man shows his spirit, by gentle words
and resolute actions: he is neither hot nor timid.

Patience is a most necessary qualification for business: Many a man would
rather you heard his story, than granted his request. One must seem to hear the
unreasonable demands of the petulant, unmoved; and the tedious details of the
dull, untired. That is, the least price that a man must pay for a high station.

It is always right to detect a fraud, and to perceive a folly; but it is often
very wrong to expose either. A man of business should always have his eyes
open, but must often seem to have them shut.

In courts (and every where else) bashfulness and timidity are as prejudicial
on one hand, as impudence and rashness are on the other. A steady assurance and
a cool intrepidity, with an exterior modesty, are the true and necessary medium.

Never apply for what you see very little probability of obtaining; for you
will, by asking improper and unattainable things, accustom the ministers to
refuse you so often, that they will find it easy to refuse you the properest
and most reasonable ones. It is a common, but a most mistaken rule at court, to
ask for every thing in order to get something: you do get something by it, it
is true; but that something is refusals and ridicule. -- This maxim, like the
former, is of general application.

A cheerful easy countenance and behavior are very useful: they make fools
think you a good-natured man; and they make designing men think you an
undesigning one.

There are some occasions in which a man must tell half his secret, in order to
conceal the rest; but there is seldom one in which a man should tell it all.
Great skill is necessary to know how far to go, and where to stop.

Ceremony is necessary, as the out work and defense of manners.

A man's own good-breeding is his best security against other people's ill
manners.

Good-breeding carries along with it a dignity, that is respected by the most
petulant. Ill breeding invites and authorizes the familiarity of the most
timid. No man ever said a pert thing to the Duke of Marlborough. No man ever
said a civil one (though many a flattering one) to Sir Robert Walpole.

Knowledge may give weight, but accomplishments only give luster; and many more
people see than weigh.

Most arts require long study and application; but the most useful art of all,
that of pleasing, requires only the desire.

It is to be presumed that a man of common sense, who does not desire to
please, desires nothing at all; since he must know that he cannot obtain any
thing without it.

A skilful negociator will most carefully distinguish between the little and
the great objects of his business, and will be as frank and open in the former,
as he will be secret and pertinacious in the latter -- This maxim holds equally
true in common life.

The Duc de Sully observes very justly, in his Memoirs, that nothing
contributed more to his rise than that prudent economy which he had observed
from his youth; and by which he had always a sum of money before hand, in case
of emergencies.

It is very difficult to fix the particular point of economy: the best error of
the two, is on the parsimonious side. That may be corrected, the other cannot.

The reputation of generosity is to be purchased pretty cheap; it does not
depend so much upon a man's general expense, as it does upon his giving
handsomely where it is proper to give at all. A man, for instance, who should
give a servant four shillings, would pass for covetous* while he who gave him a
crown would be reckoned generous; so that the difference of those two opposite
characters turns upon one shilling. A man's character, in that particular
depends a great deal upon the report of his own servants; a mere trifle above
common wages makes their report savourable.

Take care always to form your establishment so much within your income, as to
leave a sufficient fund for unexpected contingencies, and a prudent liberality.
There is hardly a year, in any man's life, in which a small sum of ready money
may not be employed to great advantage.

FINIS.
PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION.
THE POLITE PHILOSOPHER was printed originally at Edinburgh In the year 1734.
, and part of the edition sent up to London. The novelty of the title, and, to
say truth, of the performance itself, for it is written in a manner never
before made use of in our language, recommended it to some, and prejudiced it
in the opinion of others. But Time, which is the touchstone of such
productions, did justice to this work, and at last procured it an esteem, not
only here, but abroad. This, together with my great esteem for its ingenious
AUTHOR, who is now in Italy, and who is allowed by all who knew him to be truly
a POL^TE PHILOSOPHER, occasioned my sending this second edition into the world.

The intent of the author (for I very well knew his intent) was, to make men
ashamed of their vices, by showing them how ridiculous they were made by them,
and how impossible it was for a bad man to be polite. It may be, graver books
have been written on this subject, but few more to the point; its author being
equally skilled in books and in men, in the dead languages and the living: I
presume, therefore, that his ^bservations will be generally found true, and his
maxims just.

At first sight, it may seem that this book is calculated only for a few; but I
beg leave to observe, that in truth there are but few to whom it may not be
useful. As every man in his station ought to be honest, so every man in his
behavior may be polite; nay, he ought to be so, because he will be sure to
find his account in it; since it is a quality easier discerned, and of
consequence sooner rewarded, than the former. We must know and converse with a
man, to be convinced of his probity; whereas we perceive at first sight whether
he has good manners; by this we are prejudiced in his favor: and who then
would not strive to learn an art at once so easy, and so extensive in its use?

But, if it be beneficial to all, it is peculiarly necessary to YOUTH. It is at
once a remedy for bashfulness, and a preservative against the contrary vice. A
polite person stands in the middle, between a sheepish modesty and a
distasteful boldness It is the habit which adds the last polish to education,
brightens the man of letters, and spreads a gloss over that sort of learning
which would otherwise appear pedantic. The polite man may not only understand
Latin and Greek, but may also introduce them into discourse, provided it be
before proper company, and on a proper occasion. The unpolished scholar lugs
them in whenever they occur; quotes OVID to his mistress, and repeats a passage
from POLYAENEUS to a captain of the guards. To your youth therefore I beg leave
to recommend thi^ concise manual, which will cost them but little time to read,
and no great pains to practice.


