THE SEED OF THE WOMAN Bruising the Serpent's Head. A DISCOURSE DELIVERED AT
THE Baptist Meeting House, IN Philadelphia, Sunday April 22, 1781. By ELHANAN
WINCHESTER. PUBLISHED by REQUEST.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed in the Year 1781.

The SEED of the WOMAN Bruising the SERPENT's HEAD, etc.
GENESIS iii. 15. And I will put Enmity betwe^n thee and the Woman, and between
thy Seed and her Seed: It shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise his Heel.


THESE Words contain the first Opening of the glorious Gospel Day to poor lost
Man.

Here is the first Promise revealed by the glorious Deity, and the Foundation
of all the rest; which began in that Moment to be fulfilled, and will continue
to bring forth its glorious Effects, throughout the periodical Eternities, or
Ages of Ages, till all Things shall be restored to their pristine Perfection;
and Sin and Sinners have no more a Name among the Creatures of God.

In order to have proper Ideas of the glorious Deity, we must consider him as a
Being possessed of Infinite Wisdom, Power, and Goodness; that he can only have
one Will toward all his Creatures, which always continues the same and alters
not through the Fall of any of them; but continually manifests itself as a Will
of Infinite Goodness toward them all, according to their various
Circumstances; seeking their Recovery, and complete Restoration.

Fury, Wrath, or Anger, can never dwell in the Fountain of Love, but are only
to be found in fallen Nature, separated from the Life of God.

If Fury was in the glorious Jehovah, it must have been an eternal, immutable,
unbounded Wrath, that never could be extinguished; and viewed in that Light, he
must have forever been the most unhappy of all Beings; for wherever Fury is
found, Selfishness, Envy, and Pride are joined therewith: These are the four
Elements of Hell or fallen Nature, and mutually generate each other.

But blessed be the Name of the Triune God, he has informed us that "He is
Love" essentially, and must therefore be so communicatively to all his
Creatures.

The glorious Theme into which I am now about to enter, far exceeds what any
human Heart can conceive, Tongue declare, or Pen describe! O the Grandeur, the
Beauty of this wonderful Passage! Could I speak* with the Tongue of an Angel I
should fall short, far short of the Glories it contains! How then shall my
feeble faultering unclean Lips attempt to utter the boundless Love! or proclaim
the joyful News here revealed to perishing Creatures!

Expect not, my Brethren, that I shall be able to fathom this Ocean of Love;
there is enough contained here to employ my Tongue forever; but I hope to bring
forth some refreshing Drops at this Time, by which you may have a small Taste
of its Sweetness. When the glorious Jehovah or Elohim created Nature at first,
it was pure, transparent, heavenly Substantiality, described as "a Sea of Glass
mingled with Fire;" into which all Matter must finally return, through various
Processes of Refinement. Out of this Nature God created Hosts of Angels,
finite, and consequently mutable Beings; as it was impossible they should be
otherwise, and retain their Freedom of Will.

They were glorious Images and Resemblances of the Deity; and stood in the
Life, Light, and Love, of the Triune God; manifested in Nature, by the
threefold Properties of Fire, Light, and Spirit.

But Luci^er, the Son of the Morning, seeking to enter into the first
Properties of Life, and turning his strong Will and Desire toward them,
awakened Wrath in Nature; and found himself shut up in his own chains of
Darkness, together with all his Legions, who joined with him in his Rebellion;
and thus one third Part of the Stars of Heaven fell into the dark Center of
Nature, and became incapable of bringing forth any Thing but Darkness, and
Disorder around them.

Thus we can account for the "Earth being without Form, and void; and Darkness
covering the deep:" A State which had no Possibility of Existence, till the
Fall of Angels had introduced it into their Kingdom.

Now while the Good and Evil were at Strife with each other, the glorious God
stopped the Progress of the Evil, by joining his Power to the first Property of
the Desire, which became the Almighty Fiat; by which he congealed the whole
together into solid Bodies; and thereby prevented the Angels from introducing
any more Wrath and Darkness into Nature.

Then the Spirit of God "brooded upon the Face of the Deep;" baptizing the same
with Light, that the heavenly Properties might be awakened or stirred up; that
so Paradise might cover the Earth, hide the Curse, and bring forth its own
proper Fruit.

After the Formation of all other Things, God said "Let us make Man in our own
Image after our Likeness; etc." "So God created Man in his own Image," forming
him out of the three Principles, viz. the Fire, which is the Root of all Life,
the Water, or Meekness necessary to qualify it, and the Principle called the
third, viz. of this outward World, or Nature; which it was necessary should be
in him, in order that he might rule over the whole lower Creation, a^^ ^^ing
forth the Wonders of God therein; till it should ret^^^ ^ain into the heavenly
Substantiality, from which it was separated.

Thus was Adam created in the Image of God; having in himself a Birth of Life
from the Father, Son, and Spirit. He had also the whole human Nature undivided
in him; for he was both Male and Female in one.

He had Power over all the Elements, and over all the Creatures: Fire could not
burn, nor Water drown him, neither could the Air suffocate him, nor the Earth
hinder his Course: All the Creatures obeyed him; he knew all their Natures, in
an angelical Manner; and was able to bring forth the Wonders of God in this
World, without feeling, knowing, or seeing the Good, or Evil hid therein. He
was joined with the pure Virgin of the Wisdom of God, that was the Wife of his
Youth, from whom by his Fall he was separated.

As his Soul was pure, so was his Body; quite different from our dead, dark,
gross, corrupted Bodies: His was luminous, aegile, spiritual, as the
Resurrection Bodies shall be.

Now we may see the true Nature of his Trial; it was not arbitrarily imposed
upon him by God; neither was the Tree of Knowledge planted in the Garden on
Purpose to tempt him, as is commonly supposed.

Understand the Matter thus:

Adam had in him the three Principles as mentioned before; now each of these
sought to bring forth its Wonders in him, and to one or the other his Will must
of Necessity incline.

The Root of Fire attracted him; the Meekness of the Light waited for him; and
the Principle of the great World also drew him. Now his Eyes were shut as to
the beastly Life, he knew not the Good and Evil which it contained; he was to
rule the Elements, and Creatures, by Virtue of the Connection he had with them
in the third Principle; but he was to take Care not to awaken their life in
himself, nor fall (...) ^ubjection to them; but to draw the whole temporary
(...) back again from whence it had fallen.

(...) ^^^ld have set his Will entirely toward the divine (...) not have
lusted after the animal Life.

(...) was the Beginning of his Defection* he desired (...) Good and Evil there
was in the Creation: This (...) him a strong Lusting, which, by Virtue of the
(...) had over the Earth, stirred the Wrath that (...) ^erein; which sprung up
and brought forth its (...), in theTree of Death.

(...) ^^d this Tree sprung up, but the merciful GOD (...) ^^ing of it,
charging him not to touch it, assuring (...) ^^at Death would be the immediate
Consequence; because ^^ting of that Tree would open in him the beastly Life,
and would extinguish the Life of Heaven in which he stood This Precaution was
given before the Woman was formed, so proves infallibly, that the forbidden
Fruit was not the Knowledge of each other, as some vainly assert; without
knowing any thing of the Ground of Nature.
.

But as his Lust had conceived, and the fatal Tree was brought forth, the
Drawing became stronger than before; so that his Fall became almost inevitable,
or at least his Trial was harder than before, according to the Nature of the
Power of Attraction, as the Desire began to be awakened.

Thus he sunk down into Sleep through the Power of Longing, by which he began
to be captivated.

Then GOD said, IT is not good for Man to be alone, etc. This shows the
Defection was begun; because at his first Creation it was good, and very good;
pronounced thus by GOD himself.

Therefore to prevert (if possible) his falling into the beastial Life, or in
case of the Completion of his Fall, to provide a Remedy, GOD separated the
Female Part from him, formed a Woman, on whom he might place his Delight, and
still remain ignorant of the animal Life.

But now the Drawing was grown so powerful that our Parents could no longer
resist, but took the Fruit, eat of the same, and immediately their Eyes were
opened; the Life of this World rose up in them, and the divine Life was as soon
extinguished.

Their Souls lost the Perfection of Christ, the divine Righteousness, the white
Garment; and were shut up in Selfishness, Envy, Pride and Wrath; and their
Bodies no longer luminous, became gross, dark, and beastial, filled with all
Kinds of Lusts, and vicious Appetites: They were now fallen home to the World,
had lost all Dominion over the Creatures and Elements, and had the
Mortification to find themselves Slaves, where before they had been Lords.

This their Fall was more deplorable than any Words can express; Paradise was
now hid from them; their Bodies became like Beasts, and their Souls like fallen
Angels. In this forlorn Condition they lay, without any Power at all to raise
themselves up, any more than Lucifer had to regain his lost Glory.

Now then let us see whether there was Fury in GOD; or any Alteration produced
in the Deity by the Fall of Man.

He came in the "Cool of the Day;" and after setting before them the State into
which they had fallen, and the Consequences of the same, which were inevitable,
and not arbitrarily denounced; he proceeded to this Threatening, containing the
Day break of the Gossel, "And I will put Enmity between thee and the Woman, and
between thy Seed and her Seed, it shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise
his Heel."

As if God had said, "O thou envious Destroyer, do thou now imagine thou have
overthrown my Purpose, and disappointed all my Designs? I will cause thy Malice
to return into thine own Bosom, and will manifest my Power in the Destruction
of thy Dominion; I will plant the Seed of the Woman where thou have planted
thine; and however long and severe the Contest may be between the two Kingdoms,
thin^ shall be finally overthrown, thy Power shall be entirely broken; all thy
Captives taken from thee, and all the Evil thou have introduced into Nature,
shall be entirely destroyed; to my eternal Honor, and thine everlasting Shame."

This was a Promise full of the most important Realities and glorious Truths,
upon the Supposition of the universal Restoration; but upon the common Systems,
almost without any Meaning at all; for if but a few shall ever be made free
from the Power of Sin, in what Sense can it be said, with Truth, that the
Serpent's Head is bruised, or his Power destroyed?

This Promise was attended with the same divine Power, as when God said to the
dark Chaos of fallen Nature, "Let there be Light," Light immediately came; so
GOD no sooner promised the Seed of the Woman as a Bruiser of the Serpent, to
the Parents of Mankind, but it was planted in their Breasts, as a Spark of the
divine Life: from which Moment Christ's Incarnation, and Man's Restoration was
begun.

Now every Man that comes into the World, feels in himself the Truth of his
fallen, and Beginning of his restored State.

All that Selfishness, Envy, Pride and Wrath that we feel, proves that we have
the Nature of the Devil; and all those Lusts, and sensual Appetites that
tyrannize over us, prove to a Demonstration that we have the Image and Life of
the Beast; so also that something which speaks within, checks us for our Sins,
seeks to turn us to God, call it what you will, Conscience, or the Law written
in the Heart, or Light of Nature, or whatever, it is the inspoken Seed of the
Woman, and the Effect of that Promise, as really as all the Dispositions we
feel to sin against God proceed from our fallen State.

This is "the true Light that lightens every Man that comes into the World."
This is that immortal, "incorruptible Seed," of which we must be born, before
we can enter into the Kingdom of Heaven.

For as we have lost the Life of the Son, and Spirit of God, so nothing can
bring us again into a State of Happiness, but a Birth of the same raised up in
us; by which we are created anew, and made the Sons of GOD, by having Christ
formed in our Hearts, by the Holy Ghost.

We have this Rule given us in Scripture to know Spirits, and Teachers by,
"Every Spirit that confesses that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh is of God:
And every Spirit that confesses not that Jesus Christ is come in the Flesh is
not of God." 1 John 4.2, 3.

They that cry, "Lo here is Christ, or "lo there," are not to be regarded.

All Deceivers of Mankind take this Way, they will endeavor to persuade you,
that you can have no Salvation, but by attending to their Instructions,
adhering to their Se^^iments, joining with their Party, following their Modes,
etc. whereas Christ and his Ministers direct Man to that Seed of the Woman
which is within; they seek to raise, or stir up that which is hidden there in
Darkness. Thus when Christ was demanded of the Pharisees, when the Kingdom of
God should come; he answered them and said, The Kingdom of God comes not with
Observation. Neither shall they say, Lo here, or lo there; for behold the
Kingdom of God is within you. Luke xvii. 20, 21.

Here Christ himself called the Pharisees to behold that the Kingdom of God was
within them; and if within those who are elsewhere called "Serpents and
Vipers," and threatened with "the Damnation of Hell," then certainly in all
Mankind.

This divine Seed is the only Beginning and Possibility of a new Life; and
unless the Means of Grace can reach that hidden Spark, they can do us no Good.
And it is also certain, that unless there was a Seed hidden in our Souls,
capable of being raised up by the Power and Attraction of Christ, nothing from
without could take any Effect upon us, or raise up the divine Life in us, any
more than the Sun, Air, and Water of this World, could cause a Flint to
vegetate, like a Corn of Wheat, or any other Seed. For as Vegetation is
produced by the Power of the Elements attracting the Seed, which has their
Nature shut up in it, and which longs to break forth out of a State of
Confinement, so Christ raises up the divine Life, by attracting that in us
which is an Emanation from him, and longs for his coming, as the imprisoned
Seed, shut up in Death and Darkness, longs for the Influences of the Heavens to
raise it up to Life.

Here we see there is nothing arbitrary; all is natural throughout the whole
Process; nothing can rise up but according to the Possibilities of Nature. If
the best of Seed was sown, and you should cover it over with Stones, or hard
Bod^es, and then blame the Sun, because it did not cause the same to spring up
and grow; it would be a faint Picture of the Impiety of those who blame the
blessed Jesus, that Salvation does not come to them; for all that hinders the
divine Life from springing up in every Heart, is the Oppositions that are made
to it, the Obstructions that hinder it.

Now as it is impossible for the Sun, Water, and Air, to raise up the best of
Seed, if covered over with Mountains of Rocks, till they are removed or
dissolved; so we may account why all are not brought alike soon and easily to
the State of divine Life in Christ; it is because of different Obstructions
that hinder. As in one Place Christ could not do many mighty Works because of
their Unbelief; and at another Time said, "How hardly shall they that have
Riches enter into the Kingdom of God!"

"It is easier for a Camel to go through the Eye of a Needle, than for a rich
Man to enter into the Kingdom of God."

Surely this implied more than common Difficulty, more than common Obstacles to
be removed!

Herein stands the whole Foundation of the Gospel; we have lost the divine
Life, and have raised up in ourselves the Life of this World, by falling into
the Spirit of the same.

Now could GOD by an arbitrary Act have raised us up, he would have done it; he
wanted not Love; but we had died to that Life, which we had from the Son of
GOD, and opened in ourselves the Life of the Beast; which of Necessity must be
sacrificed, destroyed, and slain, in order that the former should rise up in
its primitive Perfection, and bring forth a Birth of itself within us. And thus
we find and see the Necessity of the Son of GOD's being an inspoken Seed, and
becoming Man, going through all the Stages of our Life, from his Birth to his
Death. It was that he might destroy the Nature of the old Man in us, that he
might raise up the new Man, or give us a Principle of Life divine, and thereby
become as truly, and in as proper a Sense our Father as Adam was.

That as we received a fallen corrupt Nature from Adam, so we might be made
Partakers of a divine Nature from Christ.

Therefore all the Dispensations of GOD under the Law, Prophets, or Gospel,
were calculated for the same Purposes; viz. that Sin might be manifested and
destroyed, and the Life, or Righteousness of Christ, might be revealed and
restored.

Thus we read, "Moreover the Law entered that the Offense might abound;" that
"it was added, because of Transgressions, till the Seed should come, to whom
the Promise was made." etc. Romans v. 20. GaL iii. 19.

All the Sacrifices slain, offered, consumed and eaten, pointed out the
Necessity of Christ's taking our Nature upon him, and sacrificing that Life
which belonged to this World, which he overcame; and giving his spiritual Flesh
and Blood to become in us a new Life, and the Support of it, as really as we
had derived an earthly beastial Life from Adam, which was supported with the
Food produced by these Elements.

The Blood of Christ was shed for us, to destroy, by its powerful Efficacy, all
the Evil in fallen Nature; a glorious Presage of which was seen when it was
poured out; it caused the Rocks to split, the Vail to be rent in twain, the
Earth to quake, the Graves to open. Its Power over fallen Nature is increasing
every Day; this causes such universal Commotions, and it will shake, and remove
all Things that can be shaken, till all Nature shall be subject to Christ, and
Evil be no more.

Now we see the Necessity of the whole Process of Christ, agreeable to the
Scriptures, that "Forasmuch as that Children are Partakers of Flesh and Blood,
he also himself likewise took Part of the same, that through Death he might
destroy him that had the Power of Death, that is the Devil." Heb. ii. 14.

He went through every Stage of our Lives, overcame all the Evil in Nature in
his own Body, that we through him might overcome all; he passed through Death,
died out of the World into Paradise, as Adam died out of Paradise into the
World; he poured out his Blood in the Gate of the second Death, to break the
Power of the same, that he might set the Prisoners free; and thus exactly
reversed all that the first Adam had done; that he might become the Fountain
and Father of all his wretched Progeny, and restore to us all that we have lost.

Now the whole Process of Christ, from his becoming the inspoken Word, or Seed
of the Woman, till he shall resign the Kingdom to the Father, is, and will be
of Use to us, in these two Respects:

First, to destroy that Life of Flesh and Blood, which cannot enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven; and secondly, to raise up in us that divine Image,
Righteousness, or Life, that may sit us to stand in his Presence. The whole of
Religion is contained here; the one Thing needful is, to have the Process of
Christ carried on in us, till we stand complete in that divine Nature which we
derive from him. Here let us be willing to have the Flesh of the natural Man
poured out like D^ng, and his Blood like Dust, that we may be clothed with that
Righteousness of Christ, in which alone we can stand in the Presence of the
Lord.

This, whether it be called the wedding Garment, the House from Heaven, the
fine Linen, the Righteousness of Saints, the Righteousness of Christ,
Justification, or any other Name, is the same Thing; and is, when complete, the
whole we need to make us happy; for though it is called by various Names, it no
more intends different Things, than Christ is different from Jesus, or the Lamb
of GOD, or the Bread of Life, or the Foundation Stone, or Savior of the World;
for all these Expressions are used of him, not to divide his Perfections, but
to show his Suitableness to our Needs.

It would be well for Mankind if they would lay aside all Strife about Words
and Names, and attend wholly to this "one Thing needful," to have "Christ
formed in them, the Hope of Glory." Perhaps some may think we set up something
within, in the Room of Christ, as distinct from the Son of GOD, born of Mary;
but that is as false a Supposition, as though any should assert, that when I
say, the Sun is in the House, I mean something distinct from the Sun in the
Firmament; when they must know that I mean the Rays of that one Body that
enlightens the whole World, is the same in all Parts of it, the Whole to every
Man, yet is but the same to all, in all, and for all; that shine every where
freely, where it meets with no Obstruction.

Or if I was to say, There must be the Nature of Fire, Water and Air, in a
Seed, in order to produce Vegetation or Growth; they should imagine that I set
up the Elements within, as distinct from those without it, when it would easily
appear that I intended a Birth of the same.

For if there was not the Nature of the Sun in the Grain, the Sun could not
draw it up out of the earthly Part, leaving the Husk to die in the Ground: Yet
was not the Sun to shine so as to reach it with his Beams, it never could rise
up to Life.

This shows plainly the Necessity of Christ's coming into the World, in order
to raise up that Life which was lost; by calling forth through his divine
Influences, that Seed which he had planted in Man, which was an Emanation from
himself.

So we may consider the Seed of the Woman as Christ himself, whether as
inspoken to Adam, manifested to Abraham, revealed to Moses and the Prophets, or
born of Mary: In his Birth, Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, Session at
GOD's right Hand, and Intercession there, he is carrying on the same work which
he begun in Adam; and only differs from it, as the several Manifestations of
the Sun, until it comes to the Meridian, differs from the first Break of Day.
Therefore the Light of Christ in Man is not something distinct from divine
Revelation, much less in Opposition to it; but is the Beginning of it, and
stands in the same Need of farther Manifestations as the Breaking of Day does
of the Rising of the Sun.

Thus have I endeavored to make this Matter as plain as I can, that you may see
the Beauty of the glorious Mysteries of our Redemption; and be led most
earnestly to desire, that Christ might rise up within you as the Hope of Glory;
raise up in you the lost Image of GOD; destroy Sin out of your Souls, by
bruising the Serpent's Head; and give you that Knowledge which is Life eternal.

We find it is expressly asserted in the Text, "That the Seed of the Woman
shall bruise the Serpent's Head." Now as the Serpent's Head, or Power, is found
in every Man, so it must be bruised in every Man, if ever these Words are
perfectly fulfilled.

From hence follows the Doctrine of the final Restitution of all Things, which
deserves a particular Consideration, as it has been for a long Time greatly
clouded over with Antichristian Darkness. Now to demonstrate this Truth, we
need only inquire what the Design of God in creating finite Intelligences ^^s?
Even the Assembly of Divines were so sensible that GOD's Design in creating
finite Intelligences, could only be to make them eternally happy in the
Enjoyment of himself; tha^ in Answer to their first Question, "What is the
chief End of Man?" they say, "Man's chief End is to glorify God, and enjoy him
for ever." A glorious End this; but which, according to them, is to be
eternally frustrated, and never accomplished, except in a very few of the human
Race. I shall therefore, for the Satisfaction of all serious Inquirers, treat a
little of the final Subjection of all rebellious Beings; and of Consequence,
final Restoration of all lapsed Creatures. This Doctrine I shall prove from
plain Scripture Arguments. GOD says, Isaiah xlv. 23. "I have sworn by myself,
the Word is gone out of my Mouth in Righteousness, and shall not return, that
unto me every Knee shall bow, and every Tongue shall swear."

If we observe the Words, we shall find that GOD here promises to bring all
Creatures to return again to their Allegiance; not one shall to all endless
Eternity remain in Rebellion against him; for swearing to him plainly supposes
a hearty returning.

Therefore if every Knee shall bow, and every Tongue shall swear, then not one
shall remain to all Eternity in Opposition to GOD.

But the first is true, therefore also the last.

Thus as long as Rebellion against GOD lasts, Misery must last also.

But Rebellion against GOD will not last to all Eternity.

Neither then will Misery last to all Eternity. Isaiah, lvii. 16, "For I will
not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth; for the Spirit should
fail before me, and the Souls which I have made." If GOD will not contend for
ever, the Time must come when none shall stand in Opposition to him.

But the first is true, therefore also the last.

GOD gives this Reason why he will not be always wroth, because he is the
"Father of Spirits and the Creator of Souls." This Reason is universal without
Exception, and equally regards all intelligent Beings; and unless some can be
found that are not created by GOD, none can be found that will be to all
Eternity miserable.

But none can be found that are not the Creatures of GOD; therefore none can be
eternally miserable.

St. Paul assure us in Philippians ii. 9, 10, 11. that God because of the
Savior's Sufferings, "has given him a Name which is above every Name; that at
the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow, of Things in Heaven, Things in Earth,
and Things under the Earth: And that every Tongue should confess that Jesus
Christ is Lord to the glory and Praise of God the Father."

And whoever will consider, that all in Heaven, on Earth, and under the Earth,
shall bow and confess in the same Manner, and for the same Purpose, must I
think be convinced of the Truth of the Doctrine.

In Colossians i. 20. We read, "And having made peace through the Blood of his
Cross, by him to reconcile all Things unto himself, by him I say whether they
be things in Earth or Things in Heaven.

Here we find all Things shall be reconciled to GOD again, by the Blood of
Christ. Can any one doubt of this who has ever been reconciled himself? Then
"every Creature which is in Heaven, and on the Earth, and under the Earth, and
such as are in the Sea, and all that are in them, shall say Blessing, and
Honor, and Glory, and Power, be unto him that sits on the Throne, and unto
the Lamb, forever and ever." Rev. v. 13.

Here is no Exception of any one of the whole Creation; all join the universal
Chorus, to praise GOD, and the Lamb. This is enough to convince any one that
believes the Scriptures, of the Truth of the universal Restoration of all
Things. There are a Number of Passages which show that there will be a Time
when Death shall be destroyed, swallowed up in Victory, lose his Sting, etc.
such are Isaih, xxv. 3. Hosea, xiii. 14. I. Cor. xv. 22 -- 29, 54, 55, 56. Rev.
xxi. 4, 5. These five strong and plain Passages prove that even Death, the last
Enemy, shall be destroyed.

Now if the last Enemy shall be destroyed* there shall not be one left.

But the first is true, therefore also the last.

It would be very absurd to say, "The last Enemy is destroyed, but many
Millions shall remain to all Eternity."

Now while Creatures are unreconciled to GOD, they are his Enemies; but the
Time will come when he shall not have one Enemy remaining. Therefore all
Creatures shall be reconciled.

If all Creatures shall be finally reconciled, all shall be finally restored.

But the first is true, therefore also the last.

While Sin remains in Being, Death will be able to show his Sting; but the Time
will come when Death shall have no Sting to boast of.

Therefore Sin shall be destroyed.

And to this agree the Words of Scripture, as it is written, 1 John iii. 8.
"For this Purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy the
Works of the Devil," Unless Christ finally destroys the Works of the Devil,
even all Sin out of the Universe, his Purpose must be eternally frustrated:

But the last can never be: Therefore the first is true.

We read Romans v. 20. "But where Sin abounded, Grace did much more abound,"
l^is evident that Sin has abounded to the Destruction of all Men: Now if Grace
abounds more, it is evident that all must be at last restored thereby;
otherwise there is no Shadow of Truth in the Words.

Therefore if Grace shall abound more than Sin, it must be as extensive, and
more powerful:

But the first is true, therefore the last also.

Now if all are not restored, it must be owing either to the Want of Will, or
Power, in the Deity to restore them; but none can deny his Will without
contradicting St. Paul, i. Timothy ii. 1 to 7. and many other plain Passages:
And who ^are say, that his Power and Wisdom are not sufficient to fulfill his
Purposes? Some Christians indeed say, GOD is able, but it is not his Will;
others suppose, nay affirm, that he is willing, yea wills the Restoration of
all; and yet it never shall be accomplished.

Both these Ideas of the Deity are highly dishonoring to GOD; both pave the Way
to Infidelity, and Atheism; nor is it to be wondered at, that so many renounce
Religion altogether, when they hear such contradictory Accounts of it, from its
professed Friends and Advocates.

But blessed be GOD, there is no Contradiction in the Gospel of Christ, it is
his Will to restore all again to himself, and he has Power to effect it:

Therefore it shall be done.

I have the Pleasure to find that Writers, and Disputers against Christianity.
have never entered into the Grounds of it; and consequently have never
understood it. They have only fought in general against a GOD in whom Fury was
to be found, and who made his Creatures with a determinate Purpose to damn them
to all Eternal Ages; and therefore decreed their evil Actions, that he might
have a Color of Right to condemn them.

They have fought against Original Sin, because they never understood any Thing
more about it than that Adam's Sin was imputed to all his Children; and they
condemned for it* as though they had been the real Actors. As for Punishment,
they have never understood it in any other Light than an arbitrary Infliction
upon the Sinner, by the Deity; instead of being as natural a Consequence of
Sin, as Pain is of broken Bones.

The Atonement of Christ they have rejected, without understanding the least of
its Design: Oh, would they but consider that the Scripture never represents it
as intended to quench, or put out, a Wrath that was risen in the Deity; but to
break the Power of Death in us, and overcome the Wrath of fallen Nature; to
raise a new Life in our Souls, and bring both fallen Nature and Creatures back
into their first State of Purity and Perfection! If they understood the Matter
thus, they could never fight against the glorious Doctrine of Atonement by the
precious Blood of Christ, without which we never could have been raised to GOD,
any more than a Rock, while its Hardness remains, can rise into Ether. The
same Reason that a hard Rock cannot expand itself, because it is shut up in its
own Darkness, Grossness, and Hardness, until it is melted or dissolved, may be
given why our Souls, filled with Sin, and shut up in Death and Darkness, are by
no Means able to rise to GOD, until that State of Death in which we are shut
up, is dissolved. Now the Blood of Christ is able, and will finally dissolve
all Hardness in Nature; and quench all Wrath in Creatures. It was evident when
the Savior died, that his Blood had a physical Power over Nature, by the
Effects it produced, in causing the Earth to shake, the Rocks to rend, and the
Graves to open. This physical Virtue of the Blood of Christ, prevails more and
more, and will prevail through the Ages of Ages, until all tormenting Envy,
selfish Wills, stuborn Pride, fiery Wrath, Darkness, Grossness, Death, and
Hardness, shall be no more.

Oh, that all the Deists would attend to what is within their own Breasts!
There lies the Truth of all I have advanced. There they might feel their own
undone State, and there they might find the Seed of the Woman.

I would no more advise them to read over all that has been written on both
Sides, in Order to be convinced of the Truth of the Reality of Religion, than I
would advise them to go on a Pilgrimage to Jerusalem: I would advise them to be
willing to feel their Want and Misery, and to hunger and thirst after that
Deliverance which the Gospel brings.

The Righteousness of Faith says, "Say not in thine Heart, who shall ascend
into Heaven? That is to bring down Christ from above. Or who shall descend into
the Deep? That is to bring up Christ again from the Dead. But what says it?
The Word is nigh thee even in thy Mouth, and in thy Heart, that is the Word of
Faith which we preach." According to this glorious Plan, we may call Sinners,
in the Name of Jesus, to turn to GOD; but according to the common Plan, the
Good News which Christ commanded to be preached to every Creature, is Mockery,
Insult, and Insincerity. It is as if I should say to a Thousand Criminals under
Sentence of Death, "I have the most charming News to proclaim to you all; Which
is, that ten of you are to be reprieved, and all the rest are to suffer,
without the least Chance of Remedy, or Release." I only ask what they might be
supposed to think of me and my insulting Declaration? Would they not judge that
I came on purpose to aggravate their Misery, by first raising their
Expectations with a Falsehood, and then destroying all their Hopes by the Truth?
In such a Case, an insulting Liar, would be the best Name I could deserve. Now,
suppose Christ did not die for all Men; can any Person tell me what "Good News"
can possibly be proclaimed to every one, without they will call endless
Damnation "Good News!" For this must be all the good News, and glad Tidings of
great Joy, that can be published to them for whom the Savior did not die!

But blessed be the Lord, we are assured the Death of Christ was for all
without Exception.

And indeed whoever considers a Moment, that Christ could die for all, as
easily as for one, must think that he did not limit his Death to one in a
Thousand, or a small Part of his Creatures.

Let every one therefore "seek the Lord while he may be found, and call upon
him while he is near;" and seriously apply to him. "who is able to save to the
uttermost all that come to GOD through him;" "who will have all Men to be
restored, and come to the Knowledge of the Truth: For there is one GOD, and one
Mediator between GOD and Man, the Man Christ Jesus; who gave himself a Ransom
for all, to be testified in due Time."

I have not at this Time entered largely into the Arguments for the universal
Restoration, having several Times treated professedly upon the Subject: Neither
have I here attempted to answer the Objections commonly made to it, having
answered them in a former Discourse.

The Glorious Doctrine is built upon the following Propositions, which must be
proved to be false, before it can be overthrown:

I. GOD is Love, essentially, and communicatively, and loves all the Beings he
has made, considered as his Creatures, and is constantly seeking to do them
Good.

II. GOD's Design in creating intelligent Beings, was to make them happy in the
Knowledge and Love of his Glorious Perfections.

III. GOD's absolute ultimate Designs cannot be eternally frustrated.

IV. Christ died for all; and died not in vain.

V. Christ came to destroy the evil Principle, or Sin out of the Universe,
which he will finally effect; and then Misery shall be no more.

Here are the Merits of the Cause; these Propositions are some of them self
evident, and the others admit of the fullest Demonstration, or Scripture Proof:
and till these the Foundation Principles are overthrown, all Attempts against
the Doctrine are vain.

Glory to GOD in the highest, we believe the Time will come when Christ "shall
see of the Travel of his Soul and be satisfied;" when the Serpent's Head shall
be bruised;" "all Things put under the Feet of the Mediator;" and finally, "the
Kingdom delivered up to the Father, that GOD may be ALL IN ALL." "For of HIM,
and through HIM, and to HIM, are ALL THINGS. To whom be GLORY for ever. AMEN."

ERRATUM.
P. 4, line 16, for created r. manifested.

An Attempt to collect the Scripture Passages in Favor of the Doctrine of
Universal Redemption and Final Restitution of all Things.
Search the Scriptures.
IT is a just Observation, that if the Passages of Scripture brought to support
any Doctrine, do not amount to a Proof in themselves of its Truth, no Comments
upon them can prove it. Therefore, for the Satisfaction of all, I shall set
down such Passages as the Friends of the Universal Restoration generally bring
to prove the same, without any Exposition; leaving every one to judge of the
Matter for themselves.

N. B. The Italick Characters do not express the emphatical Parts of the
Sentences, but stand as they do in the English Bible, those Words being printed
in them, which are added by the Translators to complete the Sense.

Scripture Passages.
Genesis iii. 15. AND I will put Enmity between thee and the Woman, and between
thy Seed and her Seed: it shall bruise thy Head, and thou shall bruise his Heel.

Psalms ii. 8. Ask of me, and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine
Inheritance, and the uttermost Parts of the Earth for thy Possession.

xxii. 27. All the Ends of the World shall remember and turn unto the LORD; and
all the Kindreds of the Nations shall worship before thee.

lxv. 2. O thou that hear Prayer, unto thee shall all Flesh come.

lxviii. 18. Thou have ascended on high, thou have led Captivity captive; thou
have received Gifts for men; yea, for the Rebellious also, that the LORD God
might dwell among them.

20. And unto God the LORD belong the Issues from Death.

ciii. 8. The LORD is merciful and gracious, slow to Anger, and plenteous in
Mercy.

9. He will not always chide; neither will he keep his Anger for ever.

cvii. 10. Such as sit in Darkness, and in the Shadow of Death, being bound in
Affliction and Iron:

11. Because they rebelled against the Words of God and contemned the Counsel
of the most High:

12. Therefore he brought down their Heart with Labor; they fell down, and
there was none to help.

13. Then they cried unto the LORD in their Trouble and he saved them out of
their Distresses.

14. He brought them out of Darkness, and the Shadow of Death, and brake their
Bands in sunder.

15. Oh, that Men would praise the LORD for his Goodness, and for his wonderful
Works to the Children of Men!

16. For he has broken the Gates of Brass, and cut the Bars of Iron in sunder.

42. The Righteous shall see it, and rejoice; and all Iniquity shall stop her
Mouth.

43. Whosoever is wise, and will observe these Things, even they shall understand
the ^^ving Kindness of the LORD.

cx. 1. The LORD said unto my Lord, Sit thou at my right Hand, until I make
thine Enemies thy Footstool.

cxlv. 8. The LORD is gracious, and full of Compassion; slow to Anger, and of
great Mercy.

9. The LORD is good to all; and his tender Mercies are over all his Works.

10. All thy Works shall praise thee, O LORD; and thy Saints shall bless thee.

cl. 6. Let every Thing that has Breath, praise the Lord, Hallelujah.

Prove viii. 31. Rejoicing in the habitable Part of his Earth, and my D^^^ghts
were with the Sons of Men.

Isaiah xix. 25. Blessed be Egypt my People, and Assyria the Work of my Hands,
and Israel mine Inheritance.

xxii. ^4. And it was revealed in mine Ears by the LORD of Hosts, Surely this
Iniquity shall not be purged from you, till ye die, says the Lord GOD of Hosts.

xxiv. 21. And it shall come to pass in that Day, that the LORD shall punish
the Host of the high Ones that are on high, and the Kings of the Earth upon the
Earth.

22. And they shall be gathered together as Prisoners are gathered in the P^^,
and shall be shut up in the Prison, and after many days shall they be visited.

xx^. 6. And in this Mountain shall the LORD of Hosts make unto all People a
Feast of fat Things, a Feast of Wines on the Lees; of fat Things full of
Marrow, of Wines on the Lees well refined.

7. And he will destroy in this Mountain the Face of the Covering, cast over
all People, and the Vail that is spread over all Nations.

8. He will swallow up Death in Victory; and the Lord GOD will wipe away Tears
from off all Faces.

xxvii. 4. Fury is not in me.

xl. 5. And the Glory of the LORD shall be revealed, and all Flesh shall see it
together; for the Mouth of the LORD has spoken it.

xlv. 22. Look unto me, and be ye saved, all the Ends of the Earth: for I am
God, and there is none else.

23. I have sworn by myself, the Word is gone out of my Mouth in Righteousness,
and shall not return, that unto me every Knee shall bow, every Tongue shall
swear.

xlix. 6. And he said, It is a light thing that thou should be my Servant to
raise up the Tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel: I will
also give thee for a Light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my Salvation
unto the End of the Earth.

9. That thou may say to the Prisoners, Go forth, to them that are in
Darkness, Show yourselves.

10. They shall not hunger, nor thirst; neither shall the Heat nor Sun smite
them; for he that has Mercy on them shall lead them, even by the Springs of
Water shall he guide them.

24. Shall the Prey be taken from the Mighty, or the lawful Captive delivered?

25. But thus says the LORD, Even the Captives of the Mighty shall be taken
away, and the Prey of the Terrible shall be delivered.

liii. 6. All we like Sheep have gone astray, we have turned every one his own
Way: And the LORD has laid upon him the Iniquity of us all.

11. He shall see of the Travel of his Soul, and shall be satisfied.

lv. 8, 9. For my Thoughts are not your Thought, neither are your Ways my Ways,
says the LORD.

9. For as the Heavens are higher than the Earth, so are any Ways higher than
your Ways, and my Thoughts than your Thoughts.

lvii. 16. For I will not contend forever, neither will I be always wroth; for
the Spirit should fail before me, and the Souls which I have made.

Jer. iii. 12 For I am merciful says the LORD, and I will not keep Anger for
ever.

xlviii. 47. Yet will I bring again the Captivity of M^ab in the latter Days,
says the LORD.

xlix. 6. And afterward I will bring again the Captivity of the Children of
Ammon, says the LORD.

39. But it shall come to pass in the latter Days, that I will bring again the
Captivity of Elam, says the LORD.

l. 20. In those Days and in that Time, says the LORD, the Iniquity of Israel
shall be sought for, and there shall be none; and the Sins of Judah, and they
shall not be found; for I will pardon them whom I reserve.

Lam. iii. 31, ^2, 33. For the LORD will not cast off for ever.

But though be cause Grief, yet will he have Compassion according to the
Multitude of his Mercies.

For he does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of Men,

Ezekiel. xvi. 53, 55. When I shall bring again their Captivity, the Captivity of
Sodom and her Daughters, and the Captivity of Samaria and her Daughters, then
will I bring again the Captivity of thy Captives in the midst of them: When thy
Sisters, Sodom and her Daughters, shall return to their former Estate, and
Samaria and her Daughters shall return to their former Estate, then thou and
thy Daughters shall return to your former Estate.

59. For thus says the Lord GOD: I will even deal with thee as thou have done,
which have despised the Oath in breaking the Covenant.

60. Nevertheless, I will remember my Covenant with thee in the Days of thy
Youth, and I will establish unto thee an everlasting Covenant.

61. Then thou shall remember thy Ways, and be ashamed, when thou shall receive
thy Sisters, thine elder and thy younger; and I will give them unto thee for
Daughters, but not by thy Covenant.

62. And I will establish my Covenant with thee, and thou shall know that I am
the LORD.

63. That thou may remember and be confounded, and never open thy mouth any
more because of thy Shame, when I am pacified toward thee for all that thou
have done, says the Lord GOD.

xviii. 23, 32. Have any Pleasure at all that the wicked should die? says the
LORD GOD; and not that he should return from his Ways and live!

For I have no Pleasure in the Death of him that dies, says the LORD GOD.

xxxiii. 11. Say unto them, As I live, says the Lord GOD, I have no Pleasure
in the Death of the Wicked; but that the Wicked turn from his Way, and live.

Hosea. xiii. 9, 1^. O Israel, thou have destroyed thyself, but in me is thine
Help. I will ransom them from the Power of the Grave; I will redeem them from
Death: O Death, I will be thy Plagues; O Grave, I will be thy Destruction:
Repentance shall be hid from mine Eyes.

Micah. vii. 18, 19. Who is a God like unto thee, that pardons Iniquity, and
passes by the Transgression of the Remnant of his Heritage? He retains not
his Anger for ever, because he delights in Mercy. He will turn again, he will
have Compassion upon us; he will subdue our Iniquities; and thou will cast all
their Sins into the Depths of the Sea.

Zech. ix. 11. As for thee also, by the Blood of thy Covenant I have sent forth
thy Prisoners out of the Pit wherein ^s no Water.

Mal. ii. 10. Have we not all one Father? Has not one God created us?

iii. 6. For I am the LORD, I change not; therefore, ye Sons of Jacob are not
consumed.

Matt. i. 2l. And she shall bring forth a Son, and thou shall call his Name
JESUS; for he shall save his People from their Sins.

v. 25, 26. Agree with thine Adversary quickly, whiles thou art in the Way with
him; ^est at any Time the Adversary deliver thee to the Judge, and the Judge
deliver thee to the Officer, and thou be cast into Prison. Verily I say unto
thee, Thou shall by no Means come out thence, till thou have paid the uttermost
Farthing.

xi. 27. All Things are delivered unto me of my Father.

xiii. 42, 50. And shall cast them into the Furnace of Fire; there shall be
Wailing and Gnashing of Teeth.

xviii. 11. For the So^ of Man is come to save that which was lost.

14. Even so it is not ^e Will of your Father, which is in Heaven, that one of
these little ones should perish.

34, 35. And his Lord was wroth, and delivered him to the Tormenters, till he
should pay all that was due unto him. So likewise shall my heavenly Father do
also unto you, if ye from your Hearts forgive not every one his Brother their
Trespasses.

xxii. 44. Mark, 36. Luke, xx. 42, 43. The LORD said unto my Lord, Sit thou on
my right Hand, till I make thine Enemies thy Footstool.

xxiii. 39. For I say unto you, ye shall not see me henceforth, till ye shall
say, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the LORD.

xxviii. 18. All Power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth.

Mark ix. 49 For every one shall be salted with Fire, and every Sacrifice shall
be salted with Salt.

xvi. 15. Go ye into all the World, and preach the Gospel to every Creature.

Luke ii. 10. And the Angel said unto them, Fear not; for behold I bring you
good Tidings of great Joy, which shall be to all People.

30, 31, For mine Eyes have seen thy Salvation: Which thou have prepared before
the Face of all People.

iii. 6. And al^ Flesh shall see the Sa^vado^ of God.

xii. 47, 48. And that Servants which knew his Lord's Will, and prepared not
himself, neither did according to his Will, shall be beaten with many Stripes.
But he that knew not, and did commit Things worthy of Stripes, shall be beaten
with few Stripes.

58. When thou go with thine Adversary to the Magistrate, as thou art in the
Way, give Diligence that thou may be delivered from him; left he hale thee
to the Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the Officer, and the Officer cast
thee into Prison.

59. I tell thee, Thou shall not depart thence, till thou have paid the very
last Mite.

xiii. 35. And verily I say unto you, Ye shall not see me, until the Time come
when ye shall say, Blessed it he that comes in the Name of the Lord.

xv. 7. I say unto you. That likewise Joy shall be in Heaven over one Sinner
that repents, more than over ninety and nine just Persons, which need no
Repentance.

10. Likewise I say unto you. There is Joy in the Presence of the Angels of
God, over one Sinner that repents.

xix. 10 For the Son of Man is come to seek and to save that which was lost.

xxii^. 34. Then said Jesus, Father, forgive them; for they know not what they
do.

John xi. 41. Father, I thank thee that thou have heard me.

42. And I knew that thou hear me always.

1.4. In him was Life, and the Life was the Light of Men.

7. That all Men through him might believe.

9. That was the true Light, which lights every Man that comes into the
World.

29. Behold the Lamb of God, which takes away the Sin of the World.

iii. 16. For God so loved the World, that he gave his only begotten Son, that
whosoever believes in him should not perish, but have everlasting Life.

17. For God sent not his Son into the World to condemn the World; but that the
World through him might be saved.

35. The Father loves the Son, and has given all Things into his Hand.

iv. 42. For we have heard him ourselves, and know that this is indeed the
Christ, the Savior of the World.

v. 34. But these Things I say, that ye might be saved.

vi. 33. For the Bread of God is he which comes down from heaven, and gives
Life unto the World.

37. All that the Father gives me, shall come to me: and him that comes to
me, I will in no wi^e cast out.

39. And this is the Father's Will which has sent me, that of all which he
has given me. I should lose nothing, but should raise it up again at the last
Day.

51. And the Bread that I will give, is my Flesh, which I will give for the
Life of the World.

viii. 12 I am the Light of the World.

ix. 5. As long as I am in the World, I am the Light of the World.

x. 16. And other Sheep I have, which are not of this Fold: them also I must
bring, and they shall hear my Voice; and there shall be one Fold, and one
Shepherd.

xii. 32. And I, if I be lifted up from the Earth, will draw all Men unto me.

47. For I came not to judge the World, but to save the World.

xiii. 3. Jesus knowing that the Father had given all Things into his Hands,
and that he was come from God, and went to God.

xvi. 8. And when he is come he will reprove the World of Sin, and of
Righteousness and of Judgment.

xvii. 2. As thou have given him Power over all Flesh that he should give
eternal Life to as many as thou have given him,

3. And this is Life eternal, that they might know thee, the only true God, and
Jesus Christ whom thou have sent.

21. That the World may believe that thou have sent me.

23. And that the World may know that thou have sent me, and have loved them,
as thou have loved me.

Acts iii. 21. Whom the Heaven must receive, until the Time of Restitution of
all Things, which God has spoken by the Mouth of all his holy Prophets since
the World began.

x. 34 Of a Truth I perceive that God is no Respecter of Persons:

35. But in every Nation he that fears him, and works Righteousness, is
accepted with him.

36. Jesus Christ, he is Lord of all.

Romans v. 6. For when we were yet without Strength, in due Time (...) died for
the Ungodly.

7. For scarcely for a Righteous Man will one die: yet peradventure for a good
Man some would even dare to die.

8. But God commends his Love toward us, in that while we were yet Sinners,
Christ died for us.

10. For if when we were Enemies, we were reconciled to God by the Death of his
Son, much more being reconciled, we shall be saved by his Life.

15. For if through the Offense of one many be dead; much m^re the Grace of
God, and the Gift by Grace, which is b^ one Man Jesus Christ has abounded unto
many.

18 Therefore as by the Offense of one Judgment came upon all Men to
Condemnation, even so by the Righteousness of one, the free Gift came upon all
Men unto Justification of Life.

19. For as by one Man's Disobedience many were made Sinners: so by the
Obedience of one shall many be made R^ghteous.

20. Moreover the Law entered, that the Offense might abound: But where Sin
abounded, Grace did MUCH MORE abound:

21. That as Sin has reigned unto Death, even so might Grace reign through
Righteousness, unto eternal Life by Jesus Christ our Lord.

viii. 19. For the earnest Expectation of the Creature waits for the
Manifestation of the Sons of God.

20. For the Creature was made subject to Vanity, not willingly, but by Reason
of him who has subjected the same in Hope:

21. Because the Creature itself also shall be delivered from the B^ndage of
Corruption into the glorious Liberty of the Children of God.

22. For we know that the whole Creation groaneth and travaneth in Pain
together until now:

23. And not only they but ourselves also which have the first Fruits of the
Spirit, even we ourselves groan within ourselves, waiting for the Adoption, to
wit, the Redemption of our Body.

32. He that spared not his own Son, but delivered him up for us ALL, how shall
he not with him also freely give us all Things?

xi. 32. For God has concluded them all in Unbelief, that he might have Mercy
upon all.

33. O the Depth of the Riches, both of the Wisdom and Knowledge of God! How
unsearchable are his Judgments, and his Ways past finding out!

34. For who has known the Mind of the Lord? Or who has been his Counselor?

35. Or who has first given to him, and it shall be recompensed to him again?

36. For of him, and through him, and to him are ALL THINGS: to whom be Glory
for ever. Amen.

xiv. 9. For to this End Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might
be Lord both of the Dead and Living.

11. For it is written. As I live says the Lord, every Knee shall bow to me,
and every Tongue shall confess to God.

I. Cor. iii. 13. Every Man's Work shall be made manifest. For the Day shall
declare it, because it shall be revealed by Fire; and the Fire shall try every
Man's Work of what Sort it is.

14. If any Man's Work abide which he has built thereupon, he shall receive a
Reward.

15. If any Man's Work shall be burned, he shall suffer Loss: But he himself
shall be saved; yet so, as by Fire.

xv. 22. For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive.

23. But every Man in his own Order; Christ the first Fruits; afterward they
that are Christ's at his Coming.

24. Then comes the End, when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to God,
even the Father; when he shall have put down all Rule, and all Authority, and
Power.

25. For he must reign till he has put all Enemies under his Feet.

26. The last Enemy that shall be destroyed is Death.

27. For he has put all Things under his Feet. But when he says, All Things
are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted which did put all Things
under him.

28. And when all Things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son also
himself be subject unto him that put all Things under him, that God may be ALL
IN ALL.

54. So when this Corruptible shall have put on Incorruption, and this Mortal
shall have put on Immortality, then shall be brought to pass the Saying that is
written, Death is swallowed up in Victory.

55. O Death, where is thy Sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory?

56. The Sting of Death is Sin, and the Strength of Sin is the Law.

II. Cor. v. 14. For the Love of Christ constrains us, because we thus judge,
that if one died for all, then were all dead:

15. And that he died for all, that they which live should not henceforth live
unto themselves, but unto him which died for them and rose again.

18. And all Things are of God, who has reconciled us to himself by Jesus
Christ, and has given to us the Ministry of Reconciliation:

19. To wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the World unto himself, not
imputing their Trespasses unto them; and has committed unto us the Word of
Reconciliation.

Gal. iii. 8. And the Scripture, foreseeing that God would justify the Heathen
through Faith, preached before the Gospel unto Abraham, saying in thee shall
all Nations be blessed.

22. But the Scripture has concluded all under Sin, that the Promise by Faith
of Jesus Christ might be given to them that believe.

Ephesians i. 9. Having made known unto us the Mystery of his Will according to
his good Pleasure, which he has purposed in himself:

10. That in the Dispensation* of the Fullness of Times, he might gather
together in one all Things in Christ, both which are in Heaven, and which are
on Earth, even in him.

21. Far above all Principality, and Power, and Might, and Dominion, and every
Name that is named, not only in this World, but also in that which is to come:

22. And pu^ all things under his Feet, and (...) gave him to be the Head over
all Things to the Church,

23. Which is his Body, the Fullness of him that fills all in all.

iii: 15. Of whom the whole Family in Heaven and Earth is named.

17. That Christ may dwell in your Hearts by Faith; that ye being rooted and
grounded in Love,

18. May be able to comprehend with all Saints, what is the Breadth, and
Length, and Depth, and Height;

19. And to know the Love of Christ, which passes Knowledge, that ye may be
filled with all the Fullness of God.

20. Now unto him that is able to do exceeding abundantly above all that we ask
or think, according to the Power that works in us.

21. Unto him be Glory in the Church by Christ Jesus, throughout all Ages,
World without End. Amen.

iv. 8. Wherefore he says, When he ascended up on high, he led Captivity
captive, and gave Gifts unto Men.

9. Now that he ascended, what is it but that he also descended first into the
lower Parts of the Earth?

10. He that descended, is the same also that ascended up far above all
Heavens, that he might fill all Things.

Phil. ii. 9. Wherefore God has also highly exalted him, and given him a Name
which is above every Name;

10. That at the Name of Jesus every Knee should bow, of Things in Heaven, and
Things in Earth, and Things under the Earth.

11. And that every Tongue should confess, that Jesus Christ is Lord, to the
Glory of G^d the Father.

iii. 21. According to the Working whereby he is able even to subdue all Things
unto himself.

Col. i. 15. Who is the Image of the invisible God, the first born of every
Creature.

16. For by him were all Things created that are in Heaven, and that are in
Earth, visible and invisible, whether they be Thrones or Dominions, or
Principalities or Powers; all Things were created by him, and for him:

17. And he is before all Things, and by him all Things consist,

18. And he is the head of the Body, the Church: who is the Beginning, the
first born from the Dead; that in all Things he might have the Pre-eminence.

19. For it pleased the Father that in him should all Fullness dwell;

20. And (having made Peace through the Blood of his Cross,) by (...) to
reconcile all Things unto himself, by him, I say, whether they be Things in
Earth or Things in Heaven.

21. And you that were sometime alienated and Enemies in your Mind by wicked
Works, yet now has he reconciled,

22. In the Body of his Flesh, through Death, to present you holy and
unblameable, and unreprovab^e in his Sight.

23. If ye continue in the Faith grounded and settled, and be not moved away
from the Hope of the Gospel, which ye have heard, and which was preached to
every Creature which is under Heaven.

27. To whom God would make known what is the Riches of the Glory of this
Mystery among the Gentiles; which is Christ in you the Hope of Glory:

28. Whom we preach, warning every Man, and teaching every Man in all Wisdom;
that we may present every Man perfect in Christ Jesus.

ii. 9. For in him dwells ail the Fullness of the Godhead bodily.

10. And ye are complete in him, which is the Head of all Principality and
Power.

15. And having spoiled Principalities and Powers, he made a Show of them
openly, triumphing over them in it.

I. Tim. ii. 1. I exort therefore that first of all, Supplications, Prayers,
Intercessions, and giving of Thanks be made for all Men;

2. For Kings, and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and
peaceable Life, in all Godliness and Honesty.

3. For this is good and acceptable in the Sight of God our Savior:

4. Who will have all Men to be saved, and to come unto the Knowledge of the
Truth.

5. For there is one God, and one Mediator between God and Men, the Man Christ
Jesus;

6. Who gave himself a Ransom for all, to be testified in due Time.

iv. 10. For therefore we both labor, and suffer Reproach, because we trust in
the living God, who is the Savior of all Men, spe^ially of those that believe.

II. Tim. i. 10. But is now made manifest by the appearing of our Savior Jesus
Christ, who has abolished Death, and has brought Life and Immortality to
Light through the Gospel.

Tit. ii. 11. For the Grace of God that brings Salvation, has appeared to
all Men.

Heb. ii. 8. Thou have put all Things in Subjection under his Feet. For in that
he put all in Subjection under him, he left nothing that is not put under him.
But now we see not yet all Things put under him.

9. But we see Jesus, who was made a little lower that the Angels, for the
Suff^ring of Death, crowned with Glory and Honor; that he by the Grace of God
should taste Death for every Man.

14. Forasmuch then as the Children are Partakers of Flesh and Blood, he also
himself likewise took Part of the same: That through Death he might destroy him
that had the Power of Death, that is, the Devil;

15. And deliver them who through Fear of Death were all their Life Time
subject to Bondage.

vii. 25. Wherefore he is able also to save them to the uttermost, that come
unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make Intercession for them.

ix. 15. And for this Cause he is the Mediator of the New Testament, that by
means of Death, for the Redemption of the Transgressions that were under the
first Testament, they which are called might receive the Promise of eternal
Inheritance.

x. 12. But this Man after he had offered one Sacrifice for Sins, forever sat
down on the right Hand of God;

13. From henceforth expecting till his Enemies be made his Footstool.

James i. 16. Do not err my beloved Brethren.

17. Every good Gift, and every perfect Gift is from above, and comes down
from the Father of Lights, with whom is no Variableness, neither Shadow of
turning.

18. Of his own Will begat he us with the Word of Truth, that we should be a
kind of first Fruits of his Creatures.

I. Pet. iii. 18. For Christ also has once suffered for Sins, the Just for the
Unjust (that he might bring us to God) being put to Death in the Flesh, but
quickened by the Spirit:

19. By which also he went and preached unto the Spirits in Prison;

20. Which sometime were disobedient, when once the long Suffering of God
waited in the Days of Noah, while the Ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is
eight Souls, were saved by Water.

iv. 5. Who shall give Account to him that is ready to judge the Quick and the
Dead.

6. For, for this Cause was the Gospel preached also to them that are Dead,
that they might be judged according to Men in the Flesh, but live according to
God in the Spirit.

II. Pet. ii. 1. But there were false Prophets among the People, even as there
shall be false Teachers among you, who privily shall bring in dameable
Heresies, even denying THE LORD THAT BOUGH THEM, and bring upon themselves
swift Destruction.

iii. 9. The Lord is not slack concerning his Promise (as some Men count
Slackness) but is long suffering to usward, not willing that any should
perish, but that all should come to Repentance:

I. John, ii. 1. And if any Man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus
Christ the Righteous.

2. And he is the Propitiation for our Sins: and not for our's only, but also
for the Sins of the whole World.

iii. 8. For this Purpose the Son of God was manifested, that he might destroy
the Works of the Devil.

iv. 8. He that loves not, knows not God, for God is Love.

14. And we have seen and do testify, that the Father sent the Son to be the
Savior of the World.

16. And we have known and believed the Love that God has to us. God is Love;
and he that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him.

Rev. i. 8. I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the Ending, says the Lord,
which is, and which was, and which is to come, the ALMIGHTY.

11. I am Alpha and Omega, the first and the last:

18. I am he that lives, and was dead; and behold I am alive forevermore,
Amen; and have the Keys of Hell and of Death.

iv. 11. Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive Glory, and Honor, and Power; for
thou have created all Things, and for thy Pleasure they are and were created.

v. 13. And EVERY CREATURE which is in HEAVEN, and on the EARTH, and under the
EARTH, and such as are in the SEA, and ALL that are in them, heard I, saying,
Blessing, and Honor, and Glory, and Power be unto him that sits upon the
Throne, and unto the Lamb for ever, and ever.

vii. 9. After this I beheld, and lo a great Multitude which no Man could
number of ALL NATIONS, and KINDREDS, and PEOPLE, and TONGUES, stood before the
Throne, and before the Lamb, clothed with white Robes, and Palms in their Hands;

10. And cried with a loud Voice, saying, Salvation to our God which sits
upon the Throne, and unto the Lamb.

13. And one of the Elders answered, saying unto me, that are these which are
arrayed in white Robes? And whence came they?

14. And I said unto him, Sir, thou know. And he said unto me, These are
they which came out of great Tribulation, and have washed their Robes, and made
them white in the Blood of the Lamb.

15. Therefore are they before the Throne of God, and serve him Day and Night
in his Temple: and he that sits on the Throne shall dwell among them.

16. They shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the Sun
light on them, nor any Heat.

17. For the Lamb which is in the midst of the Throne shall feed them, and
shall lead them unto living Fountains of Waters: and God shall wipe away all
Tears from their Eyes.

xiv. 1. And I looked, and lo a Lamb stood on the Mount Sion, and with him an
hundred forty and four thousand, having his Father's Name written in their
Foreheads.

2. And I heard a Voice from Heaven, as the Voice of many Waters, and as the
Voice of a great Thunder: and I heard the Voice of Harpers harping with their
Harps:

3. And they sung as it were a new Song before the Throne, and before the four
Beasts, and the Elders: and no Man could learn that Song, but the hundred and
forty and four thousand, which were redeemed from the Earth.

4. These are they which were not defiled with Women; for they are Virgins:
these are they which follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes: these were
redeemed from among Men, being the FIRST FRUITS unto God and to the Lamb.

5. And in their Mouth was found no Guile: for they are without Fault before
the Throne of God.

6. And I saw another Angel fly in the Midst of Heaven, having the everlasting
Gospel to preach unto them that d^^^d on the Earth, and to every Nation, and
Kindred, and Tongue, and People.

xxi. 3. And I heard a great Voice out of Heaven, saying, Behold the Tabernacle
of God is with Men, and he will dwell with them, and they shall be his People,
and God himself shall be with them, and be their God.

4. And God shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes: and there shall be NO
MORE DEATH, neither Sorrow, nor Crying, neither shall there be ANY MORE PAIN:
for the former Things are passed away.

5. And be that sat upon the Throne, said, Behold I make ALL THINGS NEW. And he
said unto me, Write; for these Words are true and faithful.

6. And he said unto me, It is done. I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and
the End: I will give un^o him that is athi^st, of the Fountain of the Water of
Life ^reely.

xxii. 1. And he showed me a pure River of Water of Life, clear as Crystal,
proceeding out of the Throne of God, and of the Lamb.

2. In the Midst of the Street of it, and on either Side of the River was there
the Tree of Life, which bare twelve Manner of Fruits, and yielded her Fruit
every M^nth: and the Leaves of the Tree were for the healing of the Nations.

3. And there shall be no m^re Curse; but the Throne of God and of the Lamb
shall be in it; and his Servants shall serve him.

13. I am Alpha and Omega, the Beginning and the End, the First and the Last.

17. And the Spirit and the Bride say, Come. And let him that hears, say,
Come. And let him that is athirst, Come; and whosoever will, let him take the
Water of Life freely.

18. For I testify unto every Man that hears the Words of the Prophesy of
this Book, If any Man shall add unto these Things, God shall add unto him the
Plagues that are written in this Book:

19. And if any Man shall take away from the Words of the Book of this
Prophesy, God shall take away his Part out of the Book o^ Life, and out of the
holy City, and from the Things which are written in this Book.

20. He which testifies these Things, says, Surely I come quickly. Amen. Even
so, come Lord Jesus.

21. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all. AMEN.

Here follows a Repetition of some Passages connected together, showing that
"all Things are given to Christ," and "shall finally come to him;" proving to a
Demonstration the Doctrine of the Restitution of all Things to their first
State of Perfection.
John vii. 37. ALL that the Father gives me, shall come to me; and him that
comes to me, I will in no wise cast out.

39. And this is the Father's Will which has sent me, that of all which he
has given me, I should lose Nothing, but should raise it up again at the last
Day.

Matt. xi. 27. All Things are delivered unto me of my Father.

xxviii. 18. All Power is given unto me in Heaven and in Earth.

Luke x. 22. All Things are delivered to me of my Father.

John iii. 35. The Father loves the Son, and has given all Things into his
Hand.

xiii. 3. Jesus knowing that the Father had given all Things into his Hands,
and that he was come from God, and went to God, etc.

xvii. 2. As thou have given him Power over all Flesh, that he should give
eternal Life to as many as thou have given him.

Psalm, ii. 8. Ask of me and I shall give thee the Heathen for thine
Inheritance, and the uttermost Parts of the Earth for thy Possession*

The Objections usually brought from the Scriptures, against the Doctrine of
the Restitution of all Things, answered, for the Satisfaction of all serious
Inquirers.
THERE are a Number of Objections made to the glorious Doctrine of the
Restoration of all Things, which I shall endeavor to answer, in the Fear of
the Lord, according to the Scriptures.

The first, and one of the most principal Objections, is taken from the Words
everlasting and eternal being used as well for the Misery of the Wicked as for
the Happiness of the Righteous; as in the following Passages:

Isaiah, xxxiii. 14. The Sinners in Zion are afraid, Fearfulness has surprised
the Hypocrites. Who among us shall dwell with the devouring Fire? Who among us
shall dwell with everlasting Burnings?

Daniel, xii. 2. And many of them that sleep in the Dust of the Earth shall
awake, some to everlasting Life, and some to Shame and everlasting Contempt.

Matthew, xviii 8. Wherefore, if thy Hand or thy Foot offend thee cut them off,
and cast them from thee: it is better for thee to enter into Life halt or
maimed, rather than having two Hands or two Feet, to be cast into everlasting
Fire.

xxv. 41. Then shall he say also unto them on the left Hand, Depart from me, ye
cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

46. And these shall go away into everlasting Punishment, but the Righteous
into Life eternal.

Mark, iii. 29. But he that shall blaspheme against the Holy Ghost has never
Forgiveness, but is in Danger of eternal Damnation.

II. These. i. 9. where St. Paul, speaking of them who "know not God, and obey
not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ," says, "Who shall be punished with
everlasting Destruction from the Presence of the Lord, and from the Glory of
his Power."

Jude, 6, 7. And the Angels which kept not their first Estate, but left their
own Habitation, he has reserved in everlasting Chains under Darkness unto the
Judgment of the great Day. Even as Sodom, and Gomorrha, and the Cities about
them in like Manner giving themselves over to Fornication, and going after
strange Flesh, are set forth for an Example, suffering the Vengeance of eternal
Fire.

These eight Passages are all that I remember where the Word everlasting or
eternal is used for the Continuance of the Misery of fallen Creatures.

Now I shall not cavil as some do, pretending that Sins, and not Persons, are
intended by the wicked ones; nor as others, who would insinuate, that
everlasting or eternal only sets forth the Nature of the Fire, and not the
Continuance of Misery. Both these Notions are mere Subterfuges, not worthy of
any Attention. I shall therefore answer the Objection taken from these
Passages, by an equal Number, where the Word is used for Times and Things which
are not to endure to all Eternity.

Genesis, xvii. 7. And I will establish my Covenant between thee and me, and
thy Seed after thee, in their Generations, for an everlasting Covenant; to be a
God unto thee, and to thy Seed after thee.

8. And I will give unto thee, and to thy Seed after thee, the Land wherein
thou art a Stranger, all the Land of Canaan, for an everlasting Possession; and
I will be their God.

xlviii. 4. Behold I will make thee fruitful, and multiply thee, and I will
make of thee a Multitude of People; and will give this Land to thy Seed after
thee, for an everlasting Possession.

xlix 26. The Blessings of thy Father have prevailed above the Blessings of my
Progenitors, unto the utmost Bound of the everlasting Hills.

Exodus xi. 15. And thou shall anoint them (Aaron's Sons) as thou did anoint
their Father, that they may minister unto me in the Priest's Office: for their
Anointing shall surely be an everlasting Priesthood throughout their
Generations.

Lev. xvi. 34. And this shall be an everlasting Statute unto you, to make an
Atonement for the Children of Israel, for all their Sins, once a Year.

Number. xxv. 13. And he (Phinehas) shall have it, and his Seed after him, even
the Covenant of an everlasting Priesthood; because he was zealous for his God,
and made an Atonement for the Children of Israel.

Hab. iii. 6. And the everlasting Mountain were scattered, and the perpetual
Hills did bow: his Ways are everlasting.

Rev. xiv. 6. And I saw another Angel fly in the Mi^st of Heaven, having the
everlasting Gospel to preach unto them that dwell on the Earth, and to every
Nation, and Kindred, and Tongue, and People.

Whoever considers that, these Passages are as many in Number, and full as
strongly expressed, as those which speak of the Punishment of the Wicked (the
Point in Dispute) must ^^e that the Word is equivocal, and that Nothing can be
concluded therefrom in Favor of an endles^ Damnation.

Every one who reads the Scripture must know that the Word forever intends an
Age, Period, or Eternity, as may be seen by the following Passages; which let
any one take the Bible and read, and they will see it as plain as the Sun.

Genesis xiii. 15. xliii. 9. -- Exodus xii. 14, 17. xxi. 6. xxvii. 21. xxviii.
43. xxix. 28. xxx. 21. xxxii. 13. Lev. vi. 13, 18, 22. vii. 34, 36, x. 9, 15.
xvi. 29, 31. xvii. 7. xxiii. 14, 21, 31, 41. xx^v. 3. xxv. 30, 46. -- Number. x.
8. xv. 15. xviii. 8, 11, 19, 23. -- Deuteronomy. iv. 40. xv. 17. xviii. 5. -- Josh.
iv. 7. xiv. 9. -- I. Sam. i. 22. ii. 30, 35. xx. 15. xxvii. 12. xxviii. 2. --
II. Sam. ii. 26. vii. 13, 16. -- I. Kings viii. 13 ix. 3. -- II. Kings v. 27.
-- I. Chron. xxiii. 13. -- ^I. Chron. vii. 16. xxx. 8. xxxiii. 4. -- Job xix.
24. xxxvi. 7 -- Isaiah xxxiv. 10, 17. -- Jer. xvii. 25. xxx^. 40. -- Joel iii.
20. -- Amos i. 11. -- Jonah 11.6. -- Philemon 15.

These Passages show that nothing can be concluded from the Word forever in
Favor of endless Torments, since here are more than threescore Passages where
it is used for a limited Time, beyond Contradiction; and many more might be
added, if necessary. This obviates a second Objection taken from the Words
forever and ever, which are used in several Places for the Continuance of the
Torments of the Damned.

As in Rev xiv. 11. And the Smoke of their Torment ascends up forever and
ever; and they have no Rest Day nor Night, who worship the Beast and his Image,
etc.

xix. 3. And her Smoke rose up forever and ever.

xx. 10 And the Devil that deceived them, was cast into the Lake ^f Fire and
Brimstone, where the Beast and the false Prophet are, and shall be tormented
Day and Night, forever and ever.

Now these Words do by no Means prove Damnation without End; for I am able to
produce an equal Number of Passages where the same Expressions are used for
Periods, which must have an End.

As in Psalm cxlviii. 6. He has also established them forever and ever; he
has made a Decree which shall not pass.

Isaiah xxx. 8. Now go, write it before them in a Table, and note it in a Book,
that it may be for the Time to come forever and ever.

Forever and ever it might endure; but not to all eternal Ages.

Jerem. vii. 7. Then will I cause you to dwell in this Place, in the Land that
I gave to your Fathers, forever and ever.

But not surely to all Eternity, or while God himself endure^! Therefore if
forever means a Period, Age, or Eternity, as has been shown by more than sixty
Passages, then forever and ever must mean Ages, Periods, Eternities, or Ages of
Ages; as is clearly shown by the forecited Texts.

Thus if any would suppose that the Words forever and ever mean any more than
the simple Word forever, it is readily gran^^d; but then that overthrows the
Notion of their intending infinite Duration; for if forever and ever contain
more than forever, then surely more in some Proportion, and if in any
Proportion, then both intend limited Duration: th^ugh both forever and forever
and ever are sometimes applied to Things which being unchangeable in their own
Nature can have no End, as the Being and Perfections of God; yet their being
sometimes applied to those Things which by a Necessity or Nature must endure to
all Eternity, does by no Means alter the proper Signification of those Words.

Therefore it must be very absurd to suppose that when the Words forever and
ever are used in some Places of Scripture, respecting Times and Things which
other Passages assure us must end, that the bare Use of those Words alters the
Nature of Things, and contradicts the other Scriptures.

Now though the Passages before mentioned, intimate that Pain, Sorrow, and the
second Death shall last forever and ever, yet there are many other Places in
Scripture that declare that the Time shall come when these shall be no more.

As Isaiah xxv. 8. He will swallow up Death in V^ctory; and the Lord GOD will
wipe away Tears from off all Faces.

Hosea xiii. 14. I will ransom them from the Power of the Grave; I will redeem
from Death: O Death, I will be thy Plagues; O Grave, I will be thy Destruction:
Repentance shall be hid from mine Eyes.

I Cor. xv. 26. The last Enemy that shall be destroyed, is Death.

54* Then shall be brought to pass the Saying that is written, Death is
swallowed up in Victory.

55. O Death where is thy Sting? O Grave (or Hell) where is thy Victory.

56. The Sting of Death is Sin.

Heb. ii. 14. Forasmuch then as the Children are partakers of Flesh and Blood,
he also himself likewise took Part of the same; that through Death he might
destroy him that had the Power of Death, that is the Devil.

Rev. xxi. 4. And God shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes; and there
shall be no more Death, neither Sorrow, nor Crying; neither shall there be any
more Pain: for the former Things are passed away.

From all these Passages, and many others, it is plain that all that bears the
Name of Death shall be no more.

Therefore, in order to make these Scriptures consistent one with another, we
must allow the Words forever and ever to intend certain Periods, or Ages of
Ages, which must have an End.

A third Objection is taken from those Words of our Savior.

Matt. xii. 31. Wherefore I say unto you, All Manner of Sin and Blasphemy shall
be forgiven unto Men; but the Blasphemy against the Holy Ghost shall not be
forgiven unto Men.

32. And whosoever speaks against ^he Son of Man, it shall be forgiven him:
but whosoever speaks against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him,
neither in this World, (Age or Period) neither in the World to come.

Here the Enemies of the glorious Restoration pretend to triumph; but with how
little Reason shall be left to the candid Reader.

It is plain and evident that our Savior meant to set forth that Sin as more
terrible in its Consequences than any other. But according to the common
Opinion, that all who die in Sin, even the Heathen, shall be punished to all
Eternity, without a Possibility of Release, there is Nothing more to be feared
from dying in that Sin than any other.

All Writers acknowledge that the Loss of GOD is the greatest Part of Hell
Torments; but this all must suffer who are banished from the Presence of the
Lord alike (according to the common Systems); and if this is to continue to all
Eternity, it reduces this Sin, and the Misery attending it, to a Level with the
Sin of an idle Word; which destroys all Equity and Justice, and makes Nonsense
of the terrible Doom the dear Redeemer denounces against those who sin the Sin
unto Death.

This Passage, upon a Supposition that it contradicts the Universal
Restoration, proves more than the Objectors are willing to acknowledge; for it
declares a Possibility, a Probability, if not a Certainty, that all other Sins
may and shall be forgiven, either in this World, or Age, or in the World, or
Age to come; or else why is the World (or Age) to come mentioned?

If we compare the several Passages which speak of this dreadful Sin together,
such as Matt. xii. 31, 32. Mark iii. 28, 29, 30. Luke xii. 10. Heb. vi. 4, 5,
6. x. 26, -- to 31.

II. Pet. ii. 1. -- I. John v. 16. We shall find that it is a different Sin
from all others; being a direct, wilful, malicious, contumacious, continued
Opposition to divine Love, and to all the Methods of Restoration which in the
present World can be used: and of Consequence such must know by sad Experience,
what it is to have their Part with the Devil, and his Angels, the Beast, and
false Prophet, in the Lake that burns with Fire and Brimstone; which is the
second Death.

And this will not only last while the World to come, or Millennium lasts, but
even after that, for an Age of Ages, or Ages of Ages (for such our Savior has
declared, are in Danger of eternal Damnation). Not because the Lord is not
willing to restore them sooner, but because they have gone so deep into Sin,
that it will require a long and severe Process to reclaim them.

But as the Time must come when all shall be subject to Christ, and he shall
destroy Death the last Enemy, by destroying Sin, which is the Sting of Death;
so this Sin as well as Others shall be no more. For if this was not to be the
Case it never could be true that "where Sin abounded Grace did much more
abound;" for it never would abound quite so much. Neither would Death and Hell
be silent when God shall ask the grand Question. "O Death where is thy Sting? O
Grave (or Hell) where is thy Victory?" For Death could say, "Here is my Sting,
that Sin against the Holy Ghost, which must endure to all Eternity, and which
even divine Grace shall never destroy; I have therefore the Victory and
Dominion over these, and will hold it, while God himself remains."

Then Death could never be destroyed, nor swallowed up in Victory: neither
would Sorrow, crying, and Pain cease: neither could God ever be All in all; in
any other Sense with respect to them than he is now: nor would every Tongue
swear: neither all Things ever be made new: The Universal Chorus of Praise
could never be sung by every Creature in Heaven, on Earth, and under the Earth:
And finally the Scriptures would never be entirely fulfilled.

These are the Consequences that follow, only from the Supposition that some
shall remain God's Enemies to all Eternity; what dreadful Consequences must
then be drawn from that Doctrine, that teaches that almost all the human Race
will remain in Opposition to God, under the Power of Sin and Death while God
himself endures?

Either God created his Creatures to be miserable to all Eternity; or will be
frustrated eternally in his Designs; or all must be at last restored, and made
happy by Love, and free Love.

The first is blasphemous, the second is dishonorable to God; therefore the
third must be true: for a fourth Conclusion cannot be thought upon.

A fourth Objection is taken from the Words of our Savior concerning Judas,
Matt. xxvi. 24. Mark xiv. 21.

"The Son of Man indeed goes as it is written of him; but Woe to that Man by
whom the Son of Man is betrayed! good were it for that Man if he had never been
born."

The Argument from these Words is framed after this Manner:

"If Judas was not to be damned to all Eternity, how could the Savior say,
Good were it for that Man if he had never been born?"

This is at best but a weak Argument, however as I never mean to evade any
Thing that has a Color of Reason, I shall answer it from the Scriptures of
Truth. Note, A Man may have a Being, and be happy, th^ugh he dies in ^he Womb,
and is never born. see Job ii. 11, 12, 13, 16, 17. etc.

We have a Number of Instances in the Scripture where light Afflictions
(compared with the Damnation of Hell) caused ever good Men to wish they had
never been born. Job is noted for the most patient Man; and yet he not only
cursed she Day in which he was born, but the Night in which it was said, "There
is a Man Child conceived." And yet great as his Afflictions were, they were
trifling to the Torments of the Damned. He wishes over and over again that he
had never been born. Read the whole of the Second Chapter, and see how far he
exceeds the Expressions of Christ respecting Judas; also Chap. x. 18, 19. and
if you are not determined to remain ignorant, you will see that Job thought
that (...) would have been better, far better, for him if he had never been
born; and yet he never had the Damnation of Judas.

Another Instance is that of the good Prophet Jeremiah; who when he met with a
little outward Trouble ^aments and says, "Woe is me, my Mother; that thou have
borne me a Man of Strife, and a Man of Contention to the whole Earth! I have
neither lent on Usury, no^ Men have lent to me on Usury, yet every one of them
does curse me. Cursed be the Day wherein I was born: let not the Day wherein my
Mother bare me be blessed. Cursed be the Man who brought Tidings to my Father,
saying, A Man Child is born unto thee, making him very glad. And let that Man
be as the Cities which the LORD overthrew, and repented not: and let him hear
the Cry in the Morning and the Shouting at Noon Tide; because he slew me not
from the Womb; or that my Mother might have been my Grave, and her Womb to be
always great with me. Wherefore came I forth out of the Womb to see Labor and
Sorrow, that my Days should be consumed with Shame?" (See Jer. xv. 10, and xx.
14, to the End of the Chapter.) Here we may see by these two Instances, that
Men of the best of Characters, when in outward Trouble, said much more of
themselves than our Savior said of Judas; they cursed the Day of their Birth,
in the bitterest Manner: And Jeremiah even cursed the Man who brought Tidings
of the same to his Father. While Jesus only said, "Good were it for that Man if
he had never been born." And who does not see that Christ spoke with great
Propriety, and Compassion too, concerning Judas? Thus Nothing can be concluded
from our Savior's Words, on that melancholy Occasion, in Favor of endless
Torments.

For who among Men would not choose rather never to have been born, than to have
betrayed the dear Redeemer? And if both Job and Jeremiah wished they had never
been born, because they met with a little Sorrow and Trouble, with how much
greater Propriety did Jesus speak when he said, "Good were it for that Man if
he had never been born!"

But I am aware that some will say, "Though Job and Jeremiah cursed the Days of
their Birth, yet that is no real Proof that any Thing less than Damnation
without End is a sufficient Reason for any to choose rather never to have been
born than to suffer it; and though they in their Anger said, they would they
had died in the Womb, yet that an untimely Birth upon the whole cannot be
preferable ^o any State except that of endless Misery." To which I answer,
Solomon, the wisest of Mortals, and one under the immediate Inspiration of the
Holy Ghost, was of a very different Mind, for he says, Ecclesiastes, vi. 3 --
6, "If a Man beget an hundred Children, and live many Years, so that the Days
of his Years be many, and his Soul be not filled with Good, and also that he
have no Burial; I say that an untimely Birth is better than he: For he (the
untimely Birth) comes in with Vanity, and departs in Darkness, and his Name
shall be covered with Darkness. Moreover he has not seen the Sun, nor known
any Thing: this has more Rest than the other. Yea though he live a thousand
Years twice told, yet has he seen no Good."

Here is a State infinitely better than that of Hell Torments (though limited
by certain Periods) to which an untimely Birth is preferred.

Here it is supposed, nay affirmed, that if a Man lived two thousand Years, and
begat an hundred Children, and yet had not his Soul filled with Good, and
especially had no Honor in his Death, being denied a Burial, that it would have
been better for him never t^ have been born. From this it appears as plain as
possible, that a State far happier than endless (or even limited) Damnation is
worse than not to be born at all. So had Judas never been born, he would have
been at Rest; even with Kings and Counselors of the Earth, etc. where the
wicked cease from troubling, and where the weary are at Rest. See Job, ii. 13,
14, 17.

This is therefore fully answe^ed, from the sacred Scriptures. And let none be
wiser than the Spirit of Truth. Nothing therefore can be concluded against the
Universal Restoration from those Words of the Savior respecting Judas.

The next Objection is taken from the Words of Christ^ "Mark ix. 43 -- 49. And
if thy Hand offend thee, cut it off; it is better for thee to enter into Life
maimed, than having two Hands to go into Hell, into the Fire that never shall
be quenched: Where their Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched."

"And if thy Foot offend thee, cut it off; it is better for thee to enter halt
into Life, ^han having two Feet to be cast into Hell, into the Fire that never
shall be quenched: Where their Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched.
And if thine Eye offend thee, pluck it out: it is better for thee to enter into
the Kingdom of God with one Eye, than having two Eyes, to be cast into Hell
Fire: Where their Worm dies not, and the Fire is not quenched." See also Matt.
v. 29, 30. xviii. 8, 9. Isaiah, lxvi. 24.

The Objection from these Words is thus formed, "If the Worm dies not, and the
Fire be never quenched, then the Misery of the Wicked shall endure to all
Eternity." To which I answer, that the Expressions of the Fire that never shall
be quenched, suppose that it burns perpetually, without Intermission, or
Cessation, the whole of the Age or Period for which it lasts, or until it has
consumed all that is in Opposition to it, but by no Means to all Eternity;
since there may be produced a Number of Texts where the same Expressions are
used of Fires that have gone out long ago. And indeed the very Nature of Things
teaches, that Fire can give Pain no longer than it meets with Contrariety, nor
burn any more when all Combustibles are consumed. So that when these Words
occur, "the Fire shall never be quenched" we may understand, that it ceases not
during the Period assigned for it, or that it shall accomplish the Design for
which it is kindled. Thus we read in Lev. vi. 13. "The Fire shall ever be
burning upon the Altar: it shall never go out." Now this is expressed much
stronger than though it had been said, "It never shall be quenched," for it is
declared," it never shall go out." Yet will any one say that it is burning
still, when the Altar and Sacrifices are long ago abolished? Or can we suppose
that God meant to command the Children of Israel to keep the Fire burning on
the Altar to all Eternity, or only while the ceremonial Dispensation lasted?

In the 34^h Chapter of Isaiah, we find the same Form of speaking used of the
utter Destruction of the Country of Bozrah, or Land of Idumea In the ninth and
following Verses it is said, "And the Streams thereof shall be turned into
Pitch, and the Dust thereof into Brimstone, and the Land thereof shall become
burning Pitch. It shall not be quenched Night nor Day; the Smoke thereof shall
go up forever: from Generation to Generation it shall lie waste; none shall
pass through it forever and ever. But the Cormorant and the Bittern shall
possess it; the Ow^ also and the Raven shall dwell in it." Birds that cannot
live in Fire, Pitch, and Brimstone, any better than M^n. Now both these Parts
of the P^ophesy (through imp^ssible to be fulfilled together) are true, and
must have their Accomplishment; therefore the Fire must cease to burn, that
forever must end, before the Birds above mentioned can inhabit the Land.

"And Thorns shall come up in her Palaces, Nettles and Brambles in the
Fortresses thereof; and it shall be an Habitation of Dragons, and a Court for
Owls. The wild Beasts of the Desert shall also meet with the wild Beasts of the
Island, and the Satyr shall cry to his fellow; the scriech Owl also shall rest
there, and find for herself a Place of Rest. There shall the great Owl make her
Nest, and lay, and hatch, and gather under her Shadow; there shall the Vultures
also be gathered every one with her Mate. They shall possess it forever, from
Generation to Generation shall they dwell there^^."

Now it is impossible for all these Even ^s to happen together, (without a
Miracle as great as was wrought for the three Children; which we do not expect
will be wr^ught in Favor of Owls, Ravens, B^^e^s, Thorns, and^.) therefore the
two forevers mentioned in the 10^h and 17^h Ve^se, are not the same, the first
must end to make way for ^he last; the Fire must go out, or cease to burn, and
the Sm^ke must creat^ to go up, before Birds and Beasts can rest there, or
Thorns and Nettles come up and grow.

There are other Texts also to the same Purpose, to show that a Fire that shall
not be quenched, may go out, when it can find nothing more to burn: out as this
Exposition of the Passage is so easy and natural, Nothing more need be added on
that Part of it concerning the "Fire being never quenched."

As for "the Worm that dies no," we may understand by it the Soul in its lost
Estate, which is a tormenting Hunger, that cannot die, and which Nothing buy
the God that made it can ever satisfy. It must be therefore miserab^e till it
comes to feed upon the Tree of Life, and drink freely of the Fountain of living
Water; and be again united to the glorious Ocean of all Happiness.

Read the 7th Chap^er of Rev. from the 9th verse to the End, and there y^u
shall find an Account of "A great Multitude which no Man could number, of all
Nations and Kindreds and People and Tongues, clothed with white Robes, and
Palms in their Hands;" their S^ng was "Salvation to our God which sits upon
the Throne, and to the Lamb."

Here note, these were not the hundred forty and four thousand, which were
sealed, nor the first Fruits unto G^d and the Lamb; neither was their Song that
which "no Man could learn but the hundred for^y and four thousand, which were
redeemed from the Earth." See Chap. xiv. 3. compared with Chap. v. 9, 10.

These were not ^he Saints and Martyrs, but quite another Company, of all
Nations, etc. not the few, but the great Multitude, which no Man could number;
not those whose Afflictions were light and momentary: such as the Apostle
speaks of II. Cor. iv. 17, but who came out (not only of much but) of "great
^^ipulation, yet washed their Robes, and made them white in the Blood of the
Lamb. These shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more; neither shall the
Sun light on them, nor any Heat. For the Lamb which is in the Midst of the
Throne shall feed them, and shall lead them unto living Fountains of Waters;
and God shall wipe away all Tears from their Eyes."

If this Description be carefully attended to, I think it will evidently
appear, that these are such as are redeemed, not from the Earth, nor from among
Men, but from the Pit wherein is no Water, not even one Drop to cool the Tongue
withal. Now such a Pit is not to be found in this State; there is here a
Mixtu^e of Judgment, and Mercy together; but in the World have come "those
shall have judgment without Mercy, who have showed no M^rcy:" but "after many
Days shall they be visited" with Salvation. See Isai. xxiv. 22.

Another Objection is taken from our Savior's Words to the Jews, John vii. 34,
and viii. 21. "Ye shall seek me, and shall not find me: and where I am thither
ye cannot come. -- Then said Jesus again unto them, I go my Way, and ye shall
seek m^, and shall die in your Sins: whither I go, ye cannot come."

I have heard this used as an unanswerable Objection, but let it be remembered,
that Christ used the same Words to his Apostles as he did to the Jews; and
certainly meant the same Thing, viz. That neither could the Jews, nor the
Disciples at that Time nor till they were prepared, go where Jesus went. See
Chap. xiii. 33. "Little Children, yet a little While I am with you. Ye shall
seek me: and as I said unto the Jews, Whither I go ye cannot come, so now I say
unto you." You may observe that Christ refers to the very Words which he said
to the Jews, and then began a different Discourse; neither does it appear that
he would have given any Explanation of his Words, had not Peter said, "Lord,
whither go thou? Jesus answered him, Whither I go thou can not follow me
now: but thou shall follow me afterward." ver. 36. And the same will fully
explain Christ's Words to the Jews; they shall see him again, but not '^ill
they shall say, Blessed is he that comes in the Name of the Lord.' Matt.
xxiii. 39. Luke xiii. 35. No more need be added upon this.

Another Objection (though a very sl^ght one) is taken from Eccles. ix. 10.
"Whatsoever thy Hand finds to do, do it with thy M^gh^: for there is no Work,
nor Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom, in the G^ave whither thou go." To
which some add, "There is no Repentance in the Grave." A Passage no where to be
found to the Bible, and which, if it could be found, would be Nothing to the
Purpose. If the Text quoted proves any Thing against the Restoration, it proves
as much against the Immortality of the Soul; for if there is "no Knowledge, nor
Wisdom," among the Souls departed, there can neither be Happiness nor Misery;
and consequently the Soul dies with the Body.

Solomon also says (Ver. 5. of this same Chapter) "The Dead know not any Thing;
neither have they any more a Reward; for the Memory of them is forgotten." What
Work should we be obliged to make of the Rest of the Bible, if we were to
explain this of the State of Souls departed? We must deny their Sensibility,
and all Rewards, and Punishments, as well as the Day of Judgment. But explain
it of the State of the Body, and all appears easy; and then it will be
manifest, that it militates nothing against the Restoration.

Another Objection (still weaker than the former) is taken from chap. xi. 3,
"And if the Tree fall toward the South, or toward the North; in the Place where
the Tree falls, there it shall be."

To which many add "As Death leaves, so Judgment finds." A Sentence not to be
found in all the sacred Writings, and if these Words were to be found, they
would prove Nothing against the Restoration. It is indeed very surprising that
People will hang on such slender Things! I have heard People as positive as of
their Being that they could find these Expressions in the Word of God, "There
is no Repentance in the Grave; as Death leaves us, so Judgment will find us:"
and many other Passages which cannot be found, and if they could, would not
answer their Purpose.

As for that Text, "And if the Tree fall, etc." it belongs not at all to the
Matter in Hand, neither one Way nor the other; but if it did, it would be so
far from being a Proof against the Restoration, that it would be in Favor of
it; for a Tree lies not long as it falls; but is either cut up and framed for
Use, or burned in the Fire, and turned again to the Elements whence it sprung,
or soon moulders away, and comes to its first Matter again, and will, with the
Rest of the Earth be brought back into the crystal Sea before the Throne. I
should not have said so much upon these Passages, as they are nothing to the
Purpose, if they were not continually urged as Objections to the Restoration;
though without any Reason.

Another (and something of a plausible) Objection is taken from Job. xxxvi. 18,
"Because there is Wrath, beware lest he take thee away with his Stroke; then a
great Ransom cannot deliver thee."

But surely the Objectors do not mean by this to insinuate that the B^ood of
the Savior, that precious Blood, is not able to deliver Souls out of Hell:
Since we read, Zech. ix. 11. "As for thee also, by the Blood of the Covenant I
have sent forth thy Prisoners out of the Pit wherein is no Water." We believe
that the Blood of Christ is able to save to the uttermost; and is strong enough
to break the Power of Sin, Death, and Hell.

By the Ransom spoken of in the Text, we may understand Strength, Riches,
Wisdom, etc. as it is explained in the 19^h Verse; "Will he esteem thy Riches?
No, not Gold not all the Forces of Strength." As also in Psa^m xlix. 6, 7, 8,
9. "They that trust in their Wealth, and boast themselves in the Multitude of
their Riches; none of them can by any M^ans redeem his Brother, nor give to God
a Ransom for him (for the Redemption of their Soul is precious, add it cease
for ever). That he should still live for ever, and see Corruption." From all
which, carefully compared with the Rest of Scripture, we find the meaning of
the Words to be, that a great Sum, or Ransom, cannot deliver from the Stroke of
Death. This we know to be true; but nothing in this Passage tends to depreciate
the Blood of Christ, nor to show that it cannot be effectual to lost Souls.

The Case of the rich Man is frequently brought to prove that Misery will
endure to all Eternity. It is said by some, that "as he was denied a Drop of
Water, it cannot be expected that his Sufferings will ever have an End." To
this it may be answered, that it was necessary and right that he should have
"Judgment without Mercy, who showed no Mercy, James ii. 13." and be deprived of
every Sense of Comfort, in Order that be might come to feel his Misery, and
submit to the Savior: but Nothing can be concluded from hence against the
Restoration, since it is said, Zech. iv. 11, "As for thee also, by the Blood of
thy Covenant I have sent forth thy Prisoners out of the Pit wherein is no
Water."

Now there cannot be such a Place in this Life or World; there is always some
Cordial in the most bitter Cup; therefore the Pit where no Water is, must be
Hell itself.

Christ calls Hell "A Furnace of Fire," Matt. xiii. 42, 50. Golden Ore is
thrown into the Furnace to be melted, and refined, not destroyed or
annihilated; as it is cast there to be purified by Fire, it is well known that
no Water must come to it during the Season of its Refinement, even though it
should be intended finally to make Vessels to hold Water; for if one was to
quench or mitigate the Fire, it would tend to frustrate the Intention of the
same, which is to purge the Gold from the Dross; which when it is once done,
the Fire ^^th no Power over it at all; it can never lose any Thing more.

The m^st plausible Objection in the Instance of the rich Man is taken from
those Words, Luke xvi. 26, "And befines all this, between us and you there is a
great Gulf fixed; so that they which would pass from hence to you cannot:
neither can they pass to us that would come from thence."

This Gulf is Sin, or the Want of the New Birth, without which no Man can
enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. It is evident therefore that there was a
whole Birth between them, and as it is impossible for any to go into Misery or
Pain that are perfectly holy, so also for any to enter into Happiness until
they are free from Sin, and become as pure as Light itself.

This concludes Nothing against the final Restoration, but shows it must be
effected by a new Birth of the divine Life produced in every one.

The rich Man seems not to have lost the Spark of the divine Life, nor the
immortal Seed, since he earnestly desired that "his Brethren might not come
into the Place of Torment where he was." This shows him not to have been so
lost to Virtue as Satan, since the Devil and his Angels, though miserable
themselves, seek to make all Men so too, notwithstanding it increases their
Torment. Add to all this, that Abraham calls the rich Man "Son," and puts him
in Mind of the Difference between him and Lazarus in their Lives, and the
Reasonableness of the present different States they were in, and I think it
will appear that Nothing can be concluded from his Case in Favor of Damnation
without End. For in Case that he was to be punished to all eternal Ages, there
could be no Kind of Proportion between the Sufferings, Torments, and evil
Things of Lazarus, and those Things which he endured; whereas it is intimated,
that all are dete^mined by exact Weight, Number, and Measure. Let us hear what
our Lord says on this Matter, Luke xii. 47, 48. "And that Servant which knew
his Lord's Will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his Will,
shall be beaten with MANY Stripes. But he that knew not, and did commit Things
wor^^y of Stripes, shall be beaten with FEW." But what Difference so much to be
noticed could there be, if both were to be beaten to all Eternity? Or how could
either be said to have FEW, if there was never to be an End? Impossible! Rev.
xviii. 7. "How much she (Babylon) has glorified herself, and lived
deliciously, so much Torment and Sorrow give her." All here appears equal and
just; but to suppose a poor ignorant Heathen, or a Child of fourteen, dying in
his Sins, will be in Misery as long as the most wicked persecuting Tyrant, or
Apostate Christian, contradicts all the Ideas we have of Justice, Goodness, or
Equity; and tends directly to Infidelity. For who can suppose, in this Case,
that every Man is rewarded according to his Works?

Christ says, Matt. xix. 24, Mark x. 25, Luke xviii. 25, "It is easier for a
Camel to go through the Eye of a Needle than for a rich Man to enter into the
Kingdom of God."

This implies the greatest Difficulty imaginable, nay with Men an utter
Impossibility; yet we are expressly assured "it is possible with God, to whom
all Things are possible." Now did any of us ever know a Man that passed through
greater Difficulty here than it would be for a Camel to go through the Eye of a
Needle? Which yet a rich Man must pass through before be can enter into the
Kingdom of God. He is therefore made to pass through it, either here, or
hereafter; and this, though impossible to Men, is possible with God. Thus
though it was as impossible for the rich Man to pass from Pain to Bliss, from
Torment to Paradise, as for a Camel to go through the Eye of a Needle, yet it
is by no Means impossible for God to deliver him, and make good that Promise to
him in due Time; "I will give unto him that is athirst of the Fountain of the
Water of Life freely." Rev. xxi. 6.

Then, when he and those like him "come out of great Tribulation," even the
second Death, "they shall hunger no more, neither thirst any more: -- For the
Lamb which is in the Midst of the Throne shall feed them, and shall lead them
unto living Fountains of Waters: and God shall wipe away all Tears from their
Eyes." Rev. vii 14, 16, 17.

When Sin is destroyed, the Gulf shall be no more; so while the Gulf remains
it is impassab^e; that is, while any continue in their Sins, and in Opposition
to God, there can be no Connection between the blessed Spirits and them; but
Sin cannot remain to all Eternity; Christ will at last "draw all unto him;
Death shall be destroyed;" and then certainly Sin, which is the "Sting of
Death," shall have no more a Being in any of the Creatures of God.

Another Objection is taken from those Passages of Scripture, where God is
represented as swearing in his Wrath, that the Unbelievers shall not enter into
his Rest. Such as Psalm xcv. 11. Heb. iii. 11, 18, 19. Chap. iv. 3, 6. Compared
with the 14th Chapter of Numbers.

By the Rest that was promised to the Children of Israel, which they forfeited
by their Unbelief, we must understand the Land of Canaan, and not future
Happiness. For who can suppose that out of six hundred thousand Men, besides
Women, only two entered into Paradise at Death! Then, were but two who entered
into Canaan, Caleb and Joshua, who fallowed the Lord fully: and even Moses and
Aaron were denied that Favor; but who will suppose that they did not enter
into Paradise? The Land of Canaan was a Type of the milennial Kingdom of
Christ, in which they who are Over-comers shall reign with him on his Throne.
"There remains therefore a Rest (or keeping of Sabbath) to the People of
God." Heb. iv. 9. This Sabbath (pointed out by the seventh Day Sabbath) intends
the "thousand Years that Satan shall be bound, and the Kingdoms of the World
shall become the kingdoms of the Lord, and of his Christ." Into this Kingdom
none shall enter who are fearful, and unbelieving; but such as follow the Lord
fully.

But as this Matter is very plain, I shall not add any more at present upon it.

Another Objection is taken from our Savior's Words John ix. 4. "I must work
the Works of him that sent me while it is Day: the Night comes when no Man can
work."

But I cannot see how this affects the Controversy at all, and without it can
be shown wherein it is to the Purpose, no Answer need be given. It is readily
granted, that Bodies in the Grave are incapable of Action; but this by no Means
affects the State of Souls departed, who are capable of Thought, Volition and
Action. None can suppose our Savior's Soul lay senseless while his Body was
dead; but this must be proved, before the Passage will appear to be any Thing
to the Purpose it is brought for.

It is certain that there are many Works which we may do while we live, that we
cannot after Death; such as feeding the Hungry, clothing the Naked, relieving
the Poor, Strangers, Fatherless, Widows, etc. Wherefore Solomon says,
Ecclesiastes ix. 10, "Whats^ever thine Pland fi^d^th to do, do it with thy
Might: for there is no Work nor Device, nor Knowledge, nor Wisdom, in the Grave
whither thou go." This is certain, and points out the Condition of dead
Bodies, but militates nothing against the Restoration of lost Soul^, nor the
Resurrection of the Dead.

It is insinuated by some, that this Doctrine is the same that Satan taught
Eve, Genesis iii. 4. "And the Serpent said unto the Woman, ye shall not surely
die." I can hardly think that those who make this Objection think it is any
Thing to the Purpose. All who have ever examined our Principles, or the
Sentiments of the Mystic Writers, know that we hold, that Death came
immediately upon our first Parents, when they eat of the forbidden Fruit, as
the necessary Consequence of Sin. It came instantly, not nine hundred Years
afterward, as some suppose, and thereby in Part approve of the Serpent's
Words, since they hold they did not die exactly according to the Word of God,
on the same Day that they sinned.

The Death they died consisted in a total Loss of the Life of God, the divine
Image; or the while Garment. They awakened the animal Life in themselves, which
is their State of Death, and Corruption. From this miserable Estate we believe
Christ came to redeem us, and all Mankind. According to the following
Scriptures.

Romans v. 18. "Therefore as by the Offense of one, Judgment came upon all Men
to Condemnation, even so by the Righteousness of one, the free Gift came upon
all Men unto Justification of Life. V^^^e 20. Where Sin abounded, Grace did
much more abound. 21. That as Sin has reigned unto Death, even so might Grace
reign through Righteousness unto eternal Life, by Jesus Christ our Lord."

I. Cor. xv. 22. "For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made
alive." Some will say that this intends only a Resurrection of Bodies; but
remember, that we died a Death of Souls in Adam; and must therefore have a
spiritual Life in Christ, or there is no Likeness at all between what we lost
in one, and gain in the other. And it is easy to see that both Expressions are
alike universal, and certain. As sure as all die in Adam, so sure shall all be
made alive in Christ. Other Texts might be added, but these are sufficient. Now
judge if the glorious Doctrine of the Restoration is the same, or any Thing
like that which the Serpent preached to Eve.

"The Serpent said, Ye shall not surely die." But we say that all have died,
and that Death is the constant Attendant of Sin, and must abide while Sin
remains. "For the Soul that sins shall" as surely "die," as a Man that
breaks his Bones shall feel Pain: but we declare also, that Christ will destroy
Sin, Death, Hell and the Grave, and raise up the whole Creation into its
primeval State of Glory: According to these Scriptures following; Isaiah xxv.
8. Hosea xiii. 14. I. Cor. xv. 22, to 20.54, to 57. Heb. ii. 1^. 15. I. John
iii. 8. Rev. v. 13. xxi. 4, 5. and many other Passages. The Serpent
contradicted the Word of God, in saving, "Ye shall not surely die," so do those
equally contradict it, who say, that Christ will never "swallow up Death in
Victory," will never "ransom" his Creatures from its "Power," nor "redeem them
from Hell;" will never "destroy the Works of the Devil." nor "make all Things
new." Now let the candid unbiassed Reader judge who most imitates the Serpent,
those who believe and teach that all the Promises of God shall be fulfilled as
they are spoken; or those who explain away almost all their apparent Meaning!

I have heard it boldly asserted, that the Doctrine of the Restoration could
not be true, because the Scripture in various Places declares, that "The
Expectation and Hope of the Wicked shall perish." See Proverbs x. 28. xi. 7.
Job viii. 13, 14. xi 20. xviii. 14. xxvii. 8. Now it should be enquired what
their Hope and Exp^ctation i^? The Scripture says Prove. xi. 23. "The
Expectation of the wicked is Wrath." And i^ Wrath perishes, Misery must end. If
it is said, The wicked hope to go to Heaven in their Sins; it may be answered,
that all such Hopes must perish before they can be restored. And will be
rejected, that have not a Wedding Garment; Nothing can enter into the Kingdom
till it is pure, without Spot or Wrinkle, or any such Thing.

If the Hopes of the Wicked are bad, and sinful; then they must perish, before
any Good can come to them. Even a Soul in this World, under the Operation of
the Spirit of God, must have all his false Hopes perish, and be taken away, his
vain Confidence entirely o^^ ^oyed, before he can be truly builded upon the
Rock of Ages. So that the Hope of the Wicked being destroyed, is so far from
being against their Restoration, that it makes greatly in Favor of it; since
without the Destruction of every Thing that is evil, the Good can never
perfectly prevail.

We readily allow, that all the Wicked (as well as their Hopes, Desires,
Thoughts, Ways, and Expectations) shall perish; but this is no Argument at all
against their Restoration, but the very Way to bring it about.

We read in Isaiah lvii. 1. "The Righteous perishes," and in Micah vii. 2.
"The good Man is perished out of the Earth:" yet these Scriptures will by no
Means prove that they are lost, since other Passages assure us, that they shall
be raised up again.

In the fourteenth Chap. of Job, we find the Case of Man cut down by Death,
represented as more helpless than that of a Tree cut down; yet who would use it
as an Argument against the Resurrection, and future State? which Truths are
declared in many other Places. So though great Numbers of Scriptures intimate
that Destruction shall come to the Wicked; yet many others declare that all
shall finally submit, and be restored. Now all these are true, all must be
accomplished: Therefore their Destruction, and Restoration, are perfectly
consistent with each other. Their Destruction is wholly from themselves, and
Sin, but their Restoration, from first to last, is entirely from God, by free
Grace, through the Blood of Jesus Christ.

The Author of this Objection which I have just answered, once said in my
hearing, "If it were not for Hopes the Heart would break; and as soon as all
Hopes are gone, the Heart breaks at once." This is true; then it is no Matter
how soon the Hopes of the Wicked perish, in order that their stubborn Hearts
may break. When that is once the case, then they will find, that, "The
Sacrifices of God are a broken Spirit: a broken and contrite Heart God will not
despise. Psalm li. 17. Isaiah lvii. 15. and lxvi. 2.

I shall conclude this Answer, with the Words of the proudest M^narch that ever
lived; spoken after he was humbled, "Those that wa^k in Pride he is able to
abase." Dan. iv. 37.

It is frequently urged as an unanswerable Objection against the Doctrine of
Universal Restoration, that Christ did not pray for all, and therefore did not
die for all, and of Consequence all shall never be restored. This is taken from
John xvii. 9. "I pray for them: I pray not for the World, but for them which
thou have given me, for they are thine." In the first Part of the Chapter, from
the 9^h to the 20th Verse, it is evident that our Lord prays for his chosen
Disciples or Apostles, and for them only, as will appear to any one who reads
with Attention; but in the 20^h Verse he extends much further in these Words,
"Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe on me
through their Word."

Now it is evident, that our Lord did not pray for all in the ninth Verse for
whom he died; for had that been the Case, he would not have enlarged his Prayer
in the twentieth Verse, which he has done; and in ^he 21st and 23d Verses, he
has prayed for the whole World, that the whole World might have that Faith and
Knowledge which is Life eternal; Verse 3, "And this is Life eternal, that they
might know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ whom thou have sent." He
prays, "That they all way be one, as thou, Father, art in me* and I in thee,
that they also may be one in us; that the WORLD may BELIEVE that thou have sent
me; I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made perfect in one, and that
the WORLD may KNOW that thou have s^nt me, and have loved them as thou have
loved me." Here the ultimate Design of Christ's praying for the Unity of the
true Believers seems to be the Salvation of the World. So that it is evident
enough that Nothing can be concluded from this Chapter, or Prayer, against the
Restoration; but much is here said in its Favor, as Christ has evidently
prayed for all.

First, for his Apostles, Verse 9 to 20 Secondly, for them also that should
believe on him through their Word, Ver. 20. Thirdly, for the World in general,
Verses 21 and 23. This is a sufficient Answer.

I have heard two contrary Extremes given as the Meaning of the ninth Verse,
both equally contrary to Sense, Reason, and Scripture. The first is, that
Christ prayed for all that ever shall be saved in those Words; "I pray for
them: I pray not for the World, but for them which thou have given me, etc."
Now if the whole for whom the Savior died were intended in that Verse, why did
he say, "Nei her pray I for these alone, but for them also which shall believe
on me through their Word? And that the World may know that thou have sent me?"

The other nonsensical Opinion that I have heard advanced, is, that Christ
prayed in the ninth Verse for the whole World of Men, but not for the World of
Sin. But according to that Notion, he prayed in the twentieth Verse not only
for all Men, but for all Sin that should believe on him through the Word of all
Men; and finally for all the World of Sin; that it might come to know and
believe that GOD had sent Christ.

It has been objected by some, that as the Scripture says, Rev. xxii. 11, "He
that is unjust, let him be unjust still; and he that is filthy, let him be
filthy still;" there never can be an Universal Restoration, nor any Alteration
in the States of those who shall be found in their Sins, when Christ shall come
to judge the World. This is thought to be the stronger, as it is found in the
last Chapter of the Rev. and is soon after followed by a Description of those
that shall have no Part in the holy City. Verse 15th. "For without are Dogs,
and Sorcerers, and Whoremongers, and Murderers, and Idolaters, and whosoever
loves and makes a Lie."

Chap. xxi. 8. "But the Fearful and Unbelieving, and the Abominable, and
Murderers, and Whoremongers, and Sorcerers, and Idolaters, and all Liars shall
have their Part in the Lake which burns with Fire and Brimstone: which is the
second Death."

Nothing unclean can enter into the holy City. "And there shall in no wise
enter into it any Thing that defiles, neither whatsoever works Abomination,
or makes a Lie: but they which are written in the Lamb's Book of Life." Verse
27.

As those that are found unjust, and filthy, when Christ shall come, cannot
enter into his Kingdom, they must have their Part in the Lake that burns with
Fire and Brimstone; their Portion must be with Unbelievers, where there is
Weeping, and Gnashing of Teeth: they must be filthy, and unjust still,
notwithstanding Christ's Coming; i. e. they must remain so, till they are
purified by gradual Processes; for Nothing of this Kind is performed in an
arbitrary Manner.

But this can by no means intend that they shall remain unjust, and filthy to
all Eternity; since that would contradict many plain Passages of Scripture, and
defeat God's Design of making "all Things new." All therefore that can be
fairly drawn from the Text is, that many shall be found unjust and filthy when
Christ shall come, and shall remain so, and not be immediately cleansed. Too
many vainly imagine, that though they live in wilful Sins, yet when Christ shall
come, whether by Death, or Judgment, they shall be instantly cleansed.

But such will find their great Mistake; they will find the Truth of these
Words. "He that is unjust, let him be unjust still; and he that is filthy, let
him be filthy still;" to their Sorrow. Wherefore it behooves all to seek here in
this Life for a true Cleansing in the Blood of Christ; and not dare to live in
Sin, as many do, and vainly hope for an instantaneous Sanctification in the
last Moments of Life; for no such is to be expected.

As for this Passage being the greater Objection, on the Account of it is
standing in the last Chapter of the Revelations, I see no Force at all in that,
as the Scripture is not written in the Form of a System, but the several Truths
of the Gospel are dispersed about through the Whole. But if any will contend
for the Order in this Chapter, they may find an Invitation, given in the most
free and universal Manner, without any Exception, in the 17 Verse, in these
Words, "And let him that is athirst, come; and whosoever will, let him take the
Water of Life freely."

None can be ever happy till they have a Desire after the Fountain of Life; and
whenever this is the Case, they shall be admitted to it freely.

The Bible ends with a Blessing, after all the Curses; "The Grace of our Lord
Jesus Christ be with you all. Amen.

As Christ is Alpha, so will he be Omega. He is the Beginning, and he will be
the End; He is the First, and he will be the Last. See Rev. i. 8, 11. xxi. 6.
xxii. 13.

Christ must reign till all his Foes are conquered, till all shall own him
Lord, and all become his willing and obedient Subjects; then (and not till
then) shall he deliver up the Kingdom to God, even the Father, and be subject
to him, that put all Things under him, that God may be ALL IN ALL.

Thus I have endeavored (I trust) in the Spirit of Meekness, to answer all the
Objections usually brought from the Scripture against the Restoration of all
Things. How well I have succeeded, I leave to the Reader to judge.

I have aimed at the Glory of God, and the Welfare of Mankind; and I trust,
this Testimony of my Conscience will support me, under all the Reproach,
Opposition, and Contempt, I may meet with on the Account of my Sentiments.

I shall conclude all with the following Lines, taken from Mr. Pope's universal
Prayer, If I am right, thy Grace impart,
Still in the Right to stay;
If I am wrong, oh teach my Heart
To find that better Way!



