Salvation for all Men, illustrated and vindicated AS A Scripture Doctrine, IN
Numerous Extracts from a Variety of Pious and Learned Men, who have purposely
writ upon the subject. TOGETHER With their answer to the objections urged
against it.

By One who wishes well to all Mankind.

Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to All People.

Angel at the birth of Christ. BOSTON: Printed and sold by T. and J. FLEET at
the Bible and Heart in Cornhill, 1782.

PREFACE.
THAT Mankind Universally shall, in the final issue of the Gospel plan of
mercy, be delivered from the bondage of corruption, and be admitted to the
felicity of the sons of God, is no novel doctrine, as many may be ready to
imagine. It was (as some writers upon this subject have observed) received as a
revealed truth by Origin and Clement of Alexandria, who both lived in the
latter end of the Second Century, And it appears from Augustine, Jerome, and
other celebrated writers, in their day, that it was not then either a new or
uncommon tenet. And, in later times, a variety of books have been published in
favor of it, in the French, High Dutch, Low Dutch and English languages. There
is also an ingenious piece* written in French by a noble minister of the court
of the king of Prussia, styled A Treatise on the Universal Restitution of the
Creation. A considerable number of other books, upon the same subject, are now
extant in English. I shall only mention one or two out of many others. Jeremiah
White, chaplain to Oliver Cromwell, and an eminently pious, good man, has writ a
large book, in Vindication of God's goodness to be manifested, at last, in the
recovery of the whole lower creation from the fall. From this book many of the
following extracts are made: Dr. David Hartley, in his observations upon man,
has several chapters upon salvation for all men; from which I may collect some
thoughts in the following work. I shall say of him, he was a man of known
serious piety, a disciple of Mr. John Wesley, and in common with him and all
his followers, a believer in the Restoration of all mankind, in God's time and
way, to final happiness.

It may not be unseasonable to add here, that it is freely and fully
acknowledged, by all the above writers, that many, among the sons and daughters
of Adam, will pass through a state of unutterable misery; before they will be
prepared for, and admitted to the joys of God's presence, in the heavenly world.

This I judge proper to mention, because the doctrine of Universal Salvation
has in this, and some other towns, been held forth by a stranger, who has, of
himself, assumed the character of a preacher, in direct contradiction not only
to all the before mentioned writers, but to the whole tenor of the
New-Testament-books, from their beginning to their end. According to this
preacher, a man may go to heaven, notwithstanding all the sins he has been
guilty of in the course of his life. Such a doctrine looks very like an
encouragement to Libertinism, and falls in with the scheme of too many in this
degenerate age, who, under pretense of promoting religion, undermine it at the
very root. It is certainly fitted to this end, and has already had this effect
upon many, especially of our younger people, who, by means of it, have lost all
sense of religion, and given themselves up to the most criminal excesses! If
this kind of preaching is encouraged, it may prove as hurtful to civil society
as to religion.

Would to God it might be realized as an undoubted truth, that there is the
same reason, from scripture, to believe there is a HELL as a HEAVEN. And those
who are infidels as to the former, would do well to take care lest they should
know, from their own experience, the horrors of that dreadful place.

The doctrine held forth, in the following extracts is capable (as is the truth
with every other doctrine) of being perverted and abused. If any should be so
disingenuous, as to turn this grace into wantonness, they can reflect the blame
no where but on themselves, if they are made to suffer, God only knows how
long, or to what an awful degree, in the future state.

T. W.
Boston, August 1782.
Salvation for all Men.
AFTER some pertinent observations, the pious and ingenious Mr. White proceeds
in the following manner. -- "And here I do, in the fear of God, most humbly
prostrate myself before his divine majesty, and in the deepest sense of my own
darkness and distance from him, do, with all my might, beg of that infinite
goodness I am endeavoring to represent to others, that if something like to
this platform and prospect of things be not agreeable to that revealed and
natural light he has given to us, that my undertaking may be interrupted; my
design fall; and that the Lord would pardon my attempt. And I know he will do
so, for he has given me to have no further concern in this matter, than as I
apprehend it to be a most glorious truth, witnessed to both by the scriptures
of truth, and by the most essential principles of our own reason, and which
will be found so at the last opening of the gospel, to recover, in that
opening, a degenerate world. But if this be a true representation of the
glorious design of the ever blessed goodness of the great God, who is goodness
itself; and if the holy scriptures and right reason do bear witness unto it,
how clear, how fair, how open lies the way before us to justify the sovereign
power, and dispose of God, which he exercises by Election and Reprobation too,
with all the methods he uses in his holy and glorious wisdom and prudence, in
giving way to the entrance of sin, and then inflaming the anguish of it by the
law, that he may thereby have occasion to glorify his wrath against it, and his
justice; and so make his way to the more glorious illustration of his grace and
love in the close.

In this account and prospect, there is, as we shall see in the sequel of this
discourse, nothing omitted, nothing excluded, of all the ways and methods of
God with men, which have been, by good minds, variously contended for. Here his
universal grace does no longer thrust out his special and peculiar favor.
Reprobation here will be found consisting with Election, yea, Damnation itself
with Salvation. Here all those knots which other systems of divinity have tied
faster, are in a great measure loofned. Here all those difficulties, in the
Christian religion, which have so long perplexed the more thinking and
enquiring minds, are, if not quite removed, at least made so easy, that we may,
with some contentment and pleasure, wait for that state which can alone
perfectly satisfy us. And yet, all this while, nothing of moment in
Christianity is any way assaulted and shaken, but all is much better
established and confirmed, being hereby made one entire piece most pure and
pleasant, from the highest truth, and the highest good, meeting both in one,
throughout the whole contrivance.

Here all those false, barbarous and monstrous representations of a God are
taken away, which have hitherto hindered so many minds (otherwise ingenuous)
from owning him, for fear they should, at the same time they acknowledge the
supreme Being, reproach and blaspheme him, by leaving out the highest and most
essential perfection of the Deity, which is goodness, or at least making it
more narrow and contracted than that of a finite imperfect creature.

Here, in a word, all the scenes of time, and all things done therein, are with
at unspeakable pleasure discovered and seen to be environed, encompassed,
enfolded in the arms and embraces of eternity, lying down and resting there, as
in the end to which they were eternally ordained.

He is not a Christian, he is not a man, he has put off the tenderness and
bowels of a man, he has lost humanity itself, he has not so much charity as
Dives expressed in Hell, that cannot readily cry out, -- this is good news, if
it be true: that will not say Amen to it, provided it be agreeable to God, and
what his word will countenance and own. For under no other law or condition can
we groundedly rejoice in any doctrine, than as it bears the impress and stamp
of divine authority, and tends to his glory, to which all must bow; for heaven
itself must pass away, rather than the gospel be innovated, or another gospel
broached, how gratifying or acceptable soever to our fleshly minds. Upon this
supposition, therefore, I conclude this doctrine must be acceptable and welcome
to every good man.

I have often observed, with admiration and pleasure, those most affectionate
irruptions of spirit and pangs of love in Moses and Paul. Blot me out of thy
book, says one; I could be accursed from Christ, says the other: for the sake
of my brethren, I sometimes feel so much of the same love working in my soul,
that I verily believe, a man, thoroughly acted by a spirit of goodness, would
be ever content to live in a banishment from God, I mean from the sweet
illapses and touches of his love, so that he might be without sin, rather than
any of God's creation should be ever unacquainted with him: and therefore, he
thinks it would be the best employment and greatest happiness, in the world, to
be used as an instrument to such an universal good.

And whilst I sometimes entertain myself with such thoughts as these, I feel a
secret joy springing in my soul, and whispering to me, if there be so much love
in a drop, in a beam in a creature, there must sure be infinitely more in the
ocean, in the sun, in God himself. I find all these good desires and cares in
myself swallowed up by the discovery of an object, which is all goodness and
omnipotence, an infinitely wise and almighty goodness; and a ravishing sight of
all things already lying in his tender arms, and sacred embraces; who, in his
sovereign and incomprehensible wisdom, has still been conducting them through
all their various intricacies, for a greater good and glory."

Having ended his introduction, which breathes a spirit of piety and
benevolence, our author proceeds to confirm the doctrine of an Universal
Restoration of the human race, by a variety of testimonies, from scripture. I
shall not quote every thing he advances under each head, as that would swell
this work to too large a size: But, in as few words as possible, I shall
endeavor to give you his ideas.

The first text he produces is from the 1st Epistle of Timothy ii. 3. -- God
our savior, who will have all men to be saved and come to the knowledge of the
truth. Upon which he observes -- "The letter of this text is full and express;
God will have ALL MEN to be saved, and should we press it, there are almost as
many arguments as words. For 1st, It is not said God would have all to be saved
by his good will, but that he authoritatively wills it: wills it as a being of
supreme, uncontrollable power, a being that will be obeyed in spite of the
corrupt dispositions of men, or the mischievous arts of devils. It is a fixed,
determined, immutable will, no transient, nor revocable. Thus powerfully and
irresistibly does God will all men to be saved.

And as he wills the end, so does he will the necessary means leading to it. In
order to their being saved, he will have all men come to the knowledge of the
truth. No man is or can be sanctified or saved without the knowledge of the
truth; God wills this therefore, that they be saved, and that this means of
salvation shall pass upon them.

Further -- this will has its ground in the essential benevolence of God's
nature, The salvation of all men is good and acceptable in his sight. The words
God our savior are not to be restrained to the Elect, for that would not carry
forth a will to save all men; this, therefore, is to be taken in the same
latitude and extent with other places, where he is called the savior of all
men, Chapter iv. 10. And God that quickneth all things. Chapter vi. 13. And our savior
tells us, all things live to God. Luke xx. 38. And he is called the God of the
spirits of all flesh. Numb. xvi. 22. And mark you, who is this savior? It is
God, not Christ, for of him he speaks distinctly afterward. But God the father
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Upon this principle therefore, that God wills the salvation of men, he has
commanded us to pray for the whole world of mankind. He has assured us, this
is peculiarly good and acceptable in his sight, And with the highest reason,
for it perfectly falls in with his gracious design, and tends to bring it into
effect. Neither does this overset the doctrine of Election, as we shall show in
the sequel of this discourse. For though many are called few are chosen to
happiness in the NEXT state. When therefore, we are required to pray for all
men, even for their salvation, it is not meant to throw down the distinction
between the Elect and Reprobate. It is not meant to reverse and alter God's
decrees, whereby he has given some the pre-eminence and double portion above
others, but it is a seeking that salvation for all, which God has prepared for
them in his own time and way.

It is the will of God then, that all men should be saved. But remember, this
will of his does not rest in pitying men and wishing it were better with them.
No, the will of God and his work are one. He wills nothing but he works it.
Being an omnipotent and wise agent, he can never be resisted. But in as much as
he wills the salvation of all men, he will finally bring it about; so that the
wickedness of the human heart shall be tempered and subdued, the curse and
wrath be done away, and a most delightful and blissful harmony take place."

This reasoning our author further illustrates, by the following words. -- For
there is one God, and one Mediator between God and man, the man Christ Jesus,
who gave himself a ransom for all, to be testified in due time. 5th and 6th
verses.

"1st. There is one God, or more properly -- God is one. That is, all men
reprobate as well as elect, have one and the self same God. The Elect have not
one God and Reprobate another; but one God is the God of them both. To adopt
the words in Malachy ii. 10. Have we not all one father? Has not one God
created us? Yea, the same good and kind and merciful God and father made all.
So then we see the blessed God stands in same near and tender relation to the
whole human race.

Again -- 2dly, The mediator is also one. One mediator, says the apostle,
between God and man. Here again, all men are recapitulated and headed in one,
who is the mediator of reconciliation, and of all communion of good from God to
man, in whom, as such, all men have joint and equal interest. He is not styled
a Mediator between God and the Elect, but between God and Man, that is, All
Men, All that come under the denomination of men, as they have an interest in
the great God as their common father, so have they in his son Jesus Christ as
their common mediator. Under this character, he is not nearer to one part of
the human race than another. So that all men are under an equally gracious
counsel and design of salvation.

3dly, This mediator gave himself a ransom for all. These words can signify no
less than general redemption. God wills that all men should be saved, and
therefore, he has given his son a ransom for all. Here a price is paid down,
such as justice required, and God was pleased to accept. And this universal
ransom is what the mystical Jews can no more bear now, than the literal Jews
could hear of the Gentiles being taken into the covenant of Abraham. One would
imagine the apostle foresaw what a grudging spirit would prevail in the world.
But the scriptures of the New Testament speak yet more fully as touching this
point. See Titus ii. 11. The grace of God, which brings salvation to all men,
has appeared, etc. i Tim. iv. 10. Romans v. 18. 1 John ii. 2. If any man sin we
have an advocate with the father, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is the
propitiation for OUR sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the WHOLE
WORLD. A text so worded, with a Not Only, and the Whole World, looks as if the
spirit had purposely consulted to obviate and prevent all clippings of it.

But to come to the argument: From hence it will be said, what though Christ
gives himself a ransom for all, we see yet all men, nay the greatest part of
men, have no benefit by it, but live and die unreconciled to God. It is
granted; but because this redemption, this ransom does not operate now, have we
authority to say it never shall? The blood of Christ never loses its virtue.
Though the happy effects of his undertaking may not yet appear, yet the time will
come when they shall be universally felt, and most illustriously displayed. For
which reason the apostle adds -- to be testified in due time. The meaning of
St. Paul is -- that there shall be a time, when it will be manifest that all
men are ransomed and bought by the blood of Christ. God will not deny his son
the price of his blood. But before he gives up the kingdom, he shall see of the
travail of his soul and be satisfied. The reconciliation shall finally operate
upon all, and if the Elect are first received to favor, the rest shall follow
after in their proper order."

Another text produced by our author is in 1 Timothy iv. 10. The living God, who
is the savior of all men, especially of those that believe." Nothing could be
more to our purpose than these words. They imply that God is the common savior
of the whole human race, and yet that he is particularly so of them that
believe the gospel of his son. But the question here is, what this (...)
imports, chiefly of them that believe, wherein it is, that some, even of those
that believe, have the advantage of the rest of men: Before we look further let
us take what this place affords. And the special advantage of believers above
other men is, that they are saved from the wrath to come, saved in the next
state, and immediately upon the coming of Christ, are admitted to the heavenly
happiness. Others must stay for this; being unqualified for such felicity, they
must wait till they are bro't to a better temper of mind. Yet this does not
prove that God is not their savior; because he condemns them to suffering, he
has not cast them off. If you will turn to 1 Cor. xv. 22. etc. and, you will
see this matter fully cleared up. As in Adam all die, so in Christ shall all be
made alive, but every one in his own order, Christ the first fruits, afterward
they that are Christ's at his coming: And when he shall have put down all rule,
authority and power, comes the end. The argument arising from hence is, that
believers will be raised to everlasting life at Christ's second coming; that
unbelievers will be raised too, but only in order to punish them in hell; and
that when their punishment shall have produced a proper effect, they will be
recovered to the same happiness with the saints. This being accomplished,
Christ having completed his undertaking will give up the kingdom to the Father.

From what has been said it appears that this term (...) is not quiescent,
idle, or insignificant, but importing a great difference between believers and
others; yet not excluding the rest altogether, or forever, from salvation; nay
it strongly implies the contrary, it implies that all are or must be saved in
one degree or another, and at some time or another."

The ingenious Mr. White pursues his subject, by referring us next to Romans v.
from the 15th to the 19th verse. But not as the offense, so also is the free
gift: for if through the offense of one, many be dead; much more the grace of
God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded
unto many. And not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift: for the
judgment was by one to condemnation, but the free gift is of many offenses unto
justification. For if by one man's offense death reigned by one, much more they
which receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall reign
in life by one, Jesus Christ. Therefore, as by the offense of one judgment came
upon all men to condemnation, even so by the righteousness of one, the free
gift came upon all men, unto justification of life. For as by one man's
disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall many be
made righteous.

"In these words, the gracious designs of God are laid open at large. Adam and
Christ are opposed to each other; the one as the source of sin and death, the
other of life and righteousness to the human race. Between these two, there is
a parallel drawn by the apostle, showing wherein they agree, and wherein they
differ. They agree in this, that they each, by turns, represented mankind, and
greatly affected those they represented, by their conduct. And in this they
materially differ, that one will be the occasion of much more good than the
other was of hurt to the human species. For thus we read, ver. 15. But not as
the offense, so also is the free gift, for if through the offense of one many
be dead, MUCH MORE the grace of God, and the gift by grace, has abounded unto
many. I cannot conceive other meaning of these words than this. That there is
much more in the heart of God to make men righteous by the second Adam, without
their own personal merit, than to make men sinners by the first Adam, without
their personal demerit: Here you see, grace has the preference, in the plot,
God has a design to show his wrath, and to make his power known, but more to
glorify his grace.

The second difference is in the comparison instituted between the one sin of
Adam, charged upon all his seed, and the abundance of Christ's righteousness
imputed to his seed. It was but one slip, one transgression, and that was the
eating forbidden fruit, that men smart for to this day; but Christ performed
many acts of righteousness, he was all righteous, and therefore our many
offenses are forgiven, and they who "receive abundance of grace; and the gift
of righteousness, shall reign in life by one man Jesus Christ." ver. 16, 17.
yea, ver. 18. The apostle extends the respect and relation of this to all men;
therefore, says he, as by the offense of one judgment came upon all to
condemnation, even so by the righteousness of one the free gift came upon all
men to justification of life. This is directly to my general argument. There is
one offense upon all men to condemnation, and the righteousness of one upon all
men to justification. Though it is true, none but those who now lay hold on it,
have the immediate benefit of it yet, it was a price paid for all, and that
many other scriptures do attest. And therefore the many, in the next verse, is
not a bounding or limitation of the scope and intention of Christ's death, but
it is equivalent to the all before, else it should be less than the severity,
for all died in Adam* and therefore, in Christ shall all be made alive. For as
the grace and righteousness of the second Adam are much more than the sin of
the first, so the extent of them, with respect to the subject that reaps the
benefit, cannot be supposed to be less. We conclude therefore, with the apostle
that as sin has reigned universally unto death, so grace shall reign through
righteousness as universally, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Grace will triumph
at last. Though Christ has not yet reigned so powerfully, as to bring into
effect all these glorious advantages of his death, yet he will do it before the
end; for he must reign till he has put all enemies under his feet. And will not
that end, when he shall deliver up the kingdom to God* even his father, when he
shall have destroyed all the works of the Devil, when he shall have exhibited
acts of the greatest and most universal grace, be viewed with admiration by the
whole intelligent creation, and celebrated with the loudest anthems of praise!"

The last quotation I shall make from Mr. White is has remarks upon Ephesians. i. 10.
and Col. i. 20. That in the dispensation of the fullness of times, he might
gather together in one, all things in Christ, both which are in heaven, and
which are on earth, even in him. This is the mystery of his will made known to
us by the gospel, according to his good pleasure which he has purposed in
himself. To this join Col. i. 20. And having made peace through the blood of
his cross, by him to reconcile all things to himself, by him. I say, whether
they be things on earth, or things in heaven. "The words rendered here to
gather together in one, signify in the original, to rally or rehead routed or
scattered forces or members, to reduce them to the place or rank where they
were before. And the word which is rendered to reconcile signifies to change a
thing from a state of enmity to harmony; to make it another thing from what it
was. It has the same force with the other word, though from a different metaphor.
They both import, that all men, all things were originally made by Christ,
stood in him, were headed under him, comported dutifully with their relation to
him. There was no war, no fighting, no disorder. These all came in by sin:
therefore be says, Christ made peace by the blood of his cross. By the fall,
all things had fallen asunder, became disjointed, knew not their proper place
or subordination. Confusion dwelt upon the face both of the natural and moral
world. Every thing was disordered, and as it were, in a state of war. Elect as
well as Reprobate, things in heaven, as well as things on earth, were in a
miserable shattered condition. But God, who is rich in mercy, sent his Son to
recover them out of this state. And he has laid an effectual plan for it. He
has struck at the root of the mischief. By taking upon him our sins, and
expiating them on the tree, he has reconciled the world unto God, slain the
enmity between them, and made provision for an Universal restoration to favor.
The subject matter upon which God means to act is evidently universal. This is
expressed by the comprehensive term ALL THINGS. And when he says all things, it
is manifest nothing is excepted. There is nothing either in heaven or earth
which shall not finally be reconciled to God, and be reduced to a proper state
of subjection.

And is there not power in the life and reign of Christ to do it? Is he not
fully able to bring all things back to himself, as their proper head, and to
continue them so? Surely he is. And when he has once recovered them to himself,
it will appear that none are able to tear them from him. What the Father has
designed, he will execute, and, in consequence of their joint operation, all
things will be extricated from their present confusion, restored to harmony and
favor, and continue so throughout the endless ages of eternity!

This recapitulation of all things under Christ, and universal restoration to
favor, were the mystery which was hid from the beginning of the world till the
time of the gospel. God did not declare it openly till the coming of his son.
He gave secret intimations of it in former dispensations. But a complete
discovery of his merciful intentions to the whole race of Adam was reserved for
the gospel. And the time will come, when the mystery of life and salvation
shall be manifested upon all men, when all men shall know the fellowship of it.
Yet a little while, and these vicissitudes and interchangeable courses of good
and evil shall go out, and give place to everlasting love, healing and peace."
-- Thus much for the excellent Jeremiah White.

Another portion of scripture, as mentioned by another writer upon the same
subject, may be found in 1 Cor. xv. 24th to 28th ver. Then comes the end, when
he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even the father, when he shall
have put down all rule, and all authority and power. For he must reign, till he
has put all enemies under his feet. The last enemy that shall be destroyed is
death. For he has put all things under his feet. But when he says, all things
are put under him, it is manifest that he is excepted, which did put all things
under him. And when all things shall be subdued unto him, then shall the Son
also himself be subject unto him that put all things under him, that God may be
all in all. Upon which our writer observes, --

"Though the apostle turns our view, in this paragraph, to the END of the
mediatory scheme, the time when Christ shall have delivered the kingdom up to
the Father, he has yet very evidently taken care to do it in such a manner, as
to guard us against thinking, that this scheme will be finished, will come to
its intended period, upon the second advent of Christ, by his then finally and
unalterably fixing the states of men, whether good or bad. The apostle, I say,
as though he had it in express view, has taken all reasonable care to guard
against this misconstruction of his meaning, by giving us very clearly and
fully to understand, that there would be a great deal to be done, after the
second coming of Christ, for the accomplishment of which, a long period of time
would be requisite, before the plan of God would be completed, and the whole
accomplished, which he had trusted to his Son to bring into effect. For it is
here most peremptorily affirmed, that universal subjection to Christ should yet
be effected; and the affirmation is expressed in a variety of as strong and
extensive terms as could have been used: as by putting down all rule, and all
authority, and all power; by putting all enemies under his feet; by putting all
things under his feet; by all things being subject unto him. All enemies then,
yea, all things must be subject unto Christ, before he delivers up the
mediatory kingdom to his Father. This will not be accomplished at his second
coming. For however true it is that the first death will then be destroyed by
him, it is not the truth that all enemies will be subjected to him; for SIN,
the very enemy he came into the world to destroy still reigns and triumphs, and
will do so, in regard to multitudes. Nor will the second death be ever
destroyed, though the greatest enemy of man, if Christ, at his second coming to
judge the world, puts off his character as its savior.

It need not now be said, what a poor, low idea the common explanation of this
scripture passage gives us of the final effect of Christ's reign in his
mediatorial kingdom, in comparison with that contended for in the above
interpretation. According to this, Sin, Satan, and Death, the second as well as
the first death, will be totally and absolutely destroyed; and the whole human
race reduced under a free, and yet full subjection to the government of God, so
as to be the meet objects of his mercy, when he shall finally take the kingdom
into his own hands. Whereas, according to the other, myriads of the sons of
Adam will be everlasting confined in hell, as REBELS against the government of
God, that is the moral enemies of his kingdom, notwithstanding it is here most
peremptorily affirmed, that all enemies shall be subdued; that all things shall
be put under the feet of Christ; and that he shall not deliver up the kingdom
to the Father, 'till all this is actually accomplished."

Another text produced by the same writer, is the very first that reveals the
promise of a savior, and summarily comprehends the whole of what has been said
concerning the reduction of mankind universally to an obedient subjection to
the governing will of God. The text is that Genesis iii. 15. -- And I will put
enmity between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed: it shall
bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his heel. Expositors seem universally
agreed, that Christ, who was born of a woman, is the seed here intended. And
when it is affirmed of him, that he shall bruise the serpent's head, the thought
designed to be conveyed is the complete victory he should gain over the Devil,
here spoken of under the emblem of a serpent. For the words are evidently an
allusion to the way of destroying serpents, by striking at their head. To
bruise a serpent's head is a phrase expressive of one and the same thing with
killing a serpent. Consequently, when it is said of Christ, that he should
bruise the serpent's head, the idea obviously and naturally communicated by the
words, is that he shall destroy the Devil, not his being, but that kingdom of
his, which as a tempter, he had introduced into the world, accompanied with
sorrow and death. I see not, but this first promise of God fairly leads us to
look for the time, when sin, that work of the Devil, shall be totally and
absolutely destroyed, by him who was born of a woman. This is certainly the
most simple and plain construction that can be put upon the words, if they
refer to Christ, and his conquest of the Devil, that is, of the kingdom of sin,
he has been an instrument of introducing into the world. So that the whole of
what has been offered is nothing more than an enlargement upon that, which was
summarily, and in a few strongly expressive words, delivered as the grand
intention of God, in constituting his son Jesus the savior of men. And I must
freely acknowledge, if the time does not come before Christ's delivery of the
kingdom to the Father, when it shall be true in event and fact, that SIN is
totally destroyed, by a reduction of all men under moral subjection to God,
that it ought to be fairly and honestly owned, that he has not bruised the
serpent's head, as it is declared that he should. How can it be, that the
Devil, that is, his kingdom, which essentially consists in the reign of sin and
lust, is destroyed by Christ, while thousands and millions of the human race,
not only in the present state, but throughout all eternity (as is the commonly
received opinion) will live in enmity with God, retaining their character as
rebels against him, but subjects of the Devil's kingdom? How this should be
appears to me impossible!"

Another text from this same writer, and the last I shall bring to view, is
recorded Revelation v. 13. And every creature which is in heaven, and on the
earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the sea, and all that are in
them, heard I saying, blessing and honor, and glory, and power, be unto him
that sits upon the throne, and unto the lamb for ever and ever.

These words, our author observes, -- "evidently look forward to the completion
of the scheme of God with reference to mankind, or to the time of God's being
all in all. The sinless intelligences above are brought in as uniting with the
whole race of Adam, in ascribing the glory of their restitution, or redemption,
to God, who contrived the plan of it, and to Christ, who was the person, under
God, that carried it into execution. And that mankind, universally, are the
persons singing this hymn of praise, in concert with the holy angels of heaven,
is evident, as I imagine, beyond all reasonable dispute, from the enumeration
here made, which is in the fullest and most extensive terms. For, not only the
creatures which are in heaven, but those also which are on earth, and under the
earth, and in the sea, are the creatures the apostle John saw bowing down in
voluntary acts of homage, and thankful adorations, before God and the Lord
Jesus Christ, for the great benefit of redemption, or salvation. And, as though
sufficiently extensive language had not been used, in the above enumeration,
it is further added, and all that are in them. If the apostle, or rather the
Spirit of God, who spoke by him, had really intended to have introduced the
whole human kind, together with the angels, as ascribing thanksgiving and
blessing to God and the lamb, for their restoration, reduction, or salvation,
how could he have done in words that more easily and certainly convey this
sense? For the whole human kind are to be found in the places here specified;
and the specification of these places which contain them all is a sure argument
that he intended to comprehend them all. Why else should he be thus particular
in specifying them? In short, the creatures the apostle John saw paying their
thankful acknowledgments, together with the angels, for the salvation by Jesus
Christ, were the whole posterity of Adam, mankind, without exception. For he
here uses language which comprehends all that live on the earth, all that ever
died on it, and were buried under it; all that ever died on the sea and were
thrown into it. And if every creature that lives on the earth, and every
creature that is in the state of the dead does not comprehend mankind
universally, it is difficult to find words that can do it."

Having extracted from a number of writers, some few, of the many texts they
have mentioned in favor of Salvation for all men, I shall now exhibit a like
extract from what they and others have offered in answer to the objections
brought against the truth of this doctrine.

It is objected, that the punishment of wicked men in the other world, is
frequently declared in scripture to be eternal, everlasting, for ever and ever;
the consequence of which is, that it is impossible they should be saved.

Mr. Joseph Nicol Scott, in answer to this objection, says -- "for my own part,
I must frankly confess, that after having, with repeated care, examined all the
passages of scripture, that relate to the future punishment, I have not been
able to find one single text, in which this article of an eternal and endless
misery is either expressly affirmed, or necessarily implied. And as to the term
so commonly translated eternal, everlasting, for ever and ever, it does not
from any force of the word, imply what we mean by a strict and proper eternity.
The original words, both in the Hebrew and Greek, signify nothing more than an
age, and in the plural ages, either longer or shorter, definite or indefinite."
Says another writer upon this subject, "there are hundreds of texts, in the old
and new testament, in which this word, translated eternal and forever, cannot
possibly mean more than a definite or indefinite duration, which may not be
eternal. Genesis ix. 12. This (the rainbow) is the token of the covenant between
me and you, for PERPETUAL GENERATIONS. In the original it is, if translated as
the word is elsewhere, -- for eternal generations. Genesis xiii. 15. All the land
which thou see, to thee will I give it, and to thy seed FOR EVER. Genesis xvii.
8. I will give unto thee and to thy seed, all the land of Canaan for an
EVERLASTING POSSESSION. In the 13th ver. He that is born in thy house, must
needs be circumcised, and my covenant shall be in your flesh for an EVERLASTING
COVENANT. Exodus xii. 24. And ye shall observe this thing (the passover) for an
ordinance to thee and to thy sons FOREVER. But there is no end of citing
ordinances, statutes or grants, which were to be eternal, everlasting and
forever in our modern way of interpreting the original scripture words, which
yet were to last no longer, at the utmost, than the Mosaic Economy, and have
ceased more than 1600 Years ago."

"And the same use of these words is retained in the New Testament, as may be
seen by the following texts. Matthew. xxviii. 20. Lo I am with you even to the
end of the world: So the English translation is, because the translators found
it necessary. But had they translated the Greek word here, as in other places,
it must have been to the end of eternity. The evangelist Luke speaks of holy
prophets which have been since the world began. But had the original been
rendered, as in other places, it must have been from eternity. I shall take up
no more time and room in citing texts to the purpose we are upon. The reader
may, if he pleases, look into the Greek Concordance, and he will there find, a
greater number than he can well imagine." I shall only say further here, from
Dr. Hartley, that "it does not appear from the writings of the most ancient
fathers, that they construed the texts that speak of the future punishment in
the never-ending sense. And the omission of this sense, in the ancient creeds,
shows that it was no original doctrine. And indeed the doctrine of Purgatory,
as now taught by the papists, seems to be a corruption of a genuine doctrine
held by the ancient fathers, concerning that fire of hell which will burn out
Sin and Lust." He adds, "it may be, that the absolute eternity of punishment
was not received, till after the introduction of metaphysical disputes
concerning time, eternity, and the ways of expressing these; that is, not till
after the pagan philosophy and vain deceit had mixed themselves with, and
corrupted Christianity."

"Another text applicable to our purpose, is Gal. i. 4. That he might deliver
us from this present evil world. Had the original been rendered as in other
places, it would have been -- from this present evil eternity, which is
palpable nonsense. The same may be said of Luke xvi. 8. The children of this
world are wiser, etc. In the Greek it is, the children of this Eternity, which
the translators knew would be an improper and absurd rendering of the Original
Word."

"It is objected, that the word eternal, the very word which is connected with
the punishment of wicked men, is applied to God, representing his strict proper
eternity; for which reason we may conclude, that the misery of sinners, in the
other world, will be endless, and therefore, inconsistent with their being
finally saved."

In answer to this objection, a great number of writers upon the subject, unite
in saying, -- "that the eternity of God cannot be argued from the mere force of
the word rendered eternal. As it signifies duration either definite or
indefinite, it may be applied as well to that which has no end, as to that
which is of a determinate continuance. But then, it is the nature of the
subject, and not the mere force of the word that must ascertain its meaning.
And did we not know, before hand, that eternity was an essential attribute of
God, it could never be argued from the application of this word to him."

"It is again objected, that the happiness of good men, and the misery of the
wicked, are both connected with the same word, and in the same sentence. And
hence, if one is endless, so must the other be also."

The answer is, that "the bare force of the word will not support us, in
maintaining an endless duration with respect, either to the happiness of the
righteous shall be happy forever. And why! because they are said, in other
texts of scripture, to be incorruptible, indissoluble, immortal, not to die any
more, and the like. But these terms are no where, in the inspired pages,
applied to the wicked. On the contrary they are said to die the second death,
which means their suffering the future torments, which they may do, and yet be
finally saved, as has been proved."

"Another objection, and, in the opinion of some, the strongest that can be
urged, is taken from those words of our Savior in Mark ixth, thrice solemnly
repeated, -- WHERE THEIR WORM DIES NOT, AND THE FIRE IS NOT QUENCHED; which
words, it is thought, are irreconcilable with the doctrine of Salvation for all
men."

In answer hereto, it is said by one and another of the before mentioned
writers, that "this declaration of our Savior can prove, in strict argument,
no more than that the torments of the wicked shall last as long as their next
state of existence lasts, without determining how long that shall be. If their
worm preys upon them, without ceasing, as long as they are in hell, it is to
them, strictly and rigidly speaking, a worm that does not die. So if the fire
torments them as long as they exist in the next state, it is to them a fire
which is not quenched, though their existence in that state may not be
absolutely eternal."

"But the most plain, easy and satisfactory answer is -- that these words are
taken from the book of Isaiah's prophecy, and allude to the punishment of
those, whose bodies were either buried in the valley of Hinnom, or permitted to
lie on the ground in the form of dead careases, to be fed upon by worms, that
delight in putrefaction. And consequently, as the fire which burned these
bodies, and the worms that fed on them, can in no sense be said not to be
quenched, and not to die, than this, that they continued till these carcases
were consumed; so may it be said of the worm that preys on the wicked in hell,
and of the fire that torments them, that the one dies not, and the other is
not quenched, till they have certainly effected the dissolution, or death of
wicked men, in the future state. If any desire to see a more full and large
account of this text, they may find it in Mr. Joseph Nicol Scott's discourse
upon the future torments, in the 2d Vol. of his Sermons."

"It is objected yet further, that it will greatly tend to encourage wicked
men, in their vicious courses, to be told that the future torments will have an
end, which must be the case, if All are finally saved."

To this it is answered, that " moral depravity is absolutely inconsistent with
rational happiness: and that the suffering of wicked men, in the next state,
will be exceedingly great in degree, as well as long in duration, in order that
they may be made the willing people of God. Nor will they be delivered from
their suffering, till this is effected. And will it not argue folly, as great
as can be imagined, for any rather than not proceed in their vicious courses,
to choose to expose themselves to pain, unutterable pain, for a long duration
(God only knows how long) when they might, only by approving themselves
faithful subjects to Jesus Christ, pass, without suffering this pain, into the
joys of the resurrection state? And this folly will deserve the name of
downright madness, if it be remembered, they must cease from being wicked,
before they can possibly be instated in final happiness. There is no room for
debate here. Persons must act in contradiction to all wisdom, in defiance of
common sense, who will venture, for the short lived pleasures of sin, to expose
themselves to that fire of hell which will effect their death a second time,
under all the circumstances of lingering horror and tormenting agony:
especially if it be considered they may avoid all this by renouncing their
sins, and be admitted to immortal life and happiness at the resurrection morn.

Besides, it may be worthy of consideration, whether the common doctrine is so
likely to restrain men from sin, as that, which has been explained and
defended, in the foregoing pages. It Is undeniably certain, notwithstanding all
that has been said to make men believe the torments of hell will have no end,
that they generally walk in the way of their own heart, and will not be kept
under due restraint. And perhaps, upon examination, it will be found, that one
principal reason of this is, that the terrrors proposed for their persuasion,
exceed their belief. The conceptions they naturally form of the ALL MERCIFUL
BEING are a counter-balance to their fear of never-ending misery. Whereas, in
the other scheme, there is nothing incredible, in the torments of another
world. They are perfectly analogous to what is experienced in the present
state. And there is no more reason to object against them, than the present
judicial proceedings of heaven against wicked (...). They are equally
consistent with men's natural notions of the benevolence of God. And
consequently. As proposed in the above scheme, their influence would not be
obstructed by their incredibility: But they would strike the mind with full
force, and operate to a much better purpose, restraining men more effectually
from their wicked courses."

Finally -- It is said, "upon supposition of the truth of Universal Salvation,
it may yet be improper and hurtful to open it, as a scripture doctrine to the
world." To which I have seen the proper answer, in these words.

"It would be very extraordinary, if setting a scripture truth in its genuine
light should have a dangerous tendency. To suppose such a thing would reflect
dishonor upon the revelation of God. If final, universal happiness is a
doctrine of the gospel, we need not fear its injuring mankind, if they were
brought sincerely and universally to believe it. And indeed, all fear of this
kind is founded ultimately on man's wisdom, in opposition to the wisdom of God,
which stands in need of no human art or contrivance, but can, without it, guard
mankind against wickedness, and make them good and faithful subjects, in the
kingdom of righteousness."

I shall only add, as a conclusion of these extracts, that, if we shall All,
before the completion of the scheme of God, be crowned with immortality and
honor, what an argument have we for patience, contentment and an entire
resignation to the divine pleasure, under the numerous trials of this frail,
vain, mortal state. And how easily reconcilable are the sufferings of the world
to come with the wisdom and goodness, as well as justice of God? And how
absolutely are all complaints upon this head, silenced and refuted? For if we
are brought into being expectants of a blessed immortality, and upon a
foundation that will not disappoint us, why then should we find fault with that
discipline, however severe, which may, in true reason, be morally connected
with the actual enjoyment of it? We are, upon this plan of things, infinitely
obliged to God, and ought to love and thank him for our being, notwithstanding
all we may be called to pass through, before we are received into his presence
above, where is fullness of joy forever.

FINIS.

