DIVINE GLORY, BROUGHT TO VIEW, IN THE CONDEMNATION of the UNGODLY: OR THE
DOCTRINE of FUTURE PUNISHMENT, ILLUSTRATED AND VINDICATED, AS RATIONAL AND
TRUE. In Reply to a late Pamphlet, ENTITLED, SALVATION for all MEN. BY A FRIEND
TO TRUTH.

Search the Scriptures --.

JOHN v. 39. BOSTON: Printed by ROBERT HODGE, at his Office, in Marshall's
Lane, near the Boston Stone. M.DCC.LXXXII.

PREFACE.
THAT mankind universally shall, in the final issue of the Gospel plan of
mercy, be delivered from the bondage of corruption, and be admitted to the
felicity of the sons of God, we are told by the compiler of the pamphlet now
under consideration, "is no novel doctrine." This is the truth, but not the
whole truth. Had this gentleman been disposed to have made his information
complete, he would have subjoined, it is a doctrine, which has most generally
been reprobated in the Protestant Churches, as most erroneous, and destructive
to the souls of men.

In the following sheets, the author has endeavored to explain the passages of
scripture, which have been offered in defense of Universal Salvation. To this
he has added a short view respecting the necessity of future punishment, and
the ends it answers in the moral government of God. Brevity was the object for
the present; since it is very probable this important subject will employ other
pens, and, in proper time, be discussed more at large.

The author is no friend to controversy, for its own sake. He cannot, however,
be of opinion with those persons, who believe that controversial writings, on
the fundamentals of religion, and when carried on with decency, are almost
always unprofitable, and the encouragement of them imprudent, and unwise: For
certainly, whenever any doctrines, supposedly erroneous, are not only
exhibited, but very much attended to, and by numbers, even favorably thought
of, there is no better method of counteracting the consequences which are
likely to follow, than by publicly bringing them to the standard of all sacred
truth, and giving them, by this rule, a fair and candid trial. And it is much
to be doubted, whether a disposition to check every thing of this kind, can be
attributed to any thing short of the want of proper zeal in the cause of truth,
or what may be called sinful lassitude, and spiritual sleep.

The compiler of the pamphlet on Universal Salvation, seems to promise that it
will act as an antidote against the (...) of a stranger, who has of himself
assumed the character of a preacher, and discoursed on this subject, in direct
contradiction to the whole tenor of the New Testament books, from their
beginning to their end. It is true, that learning and human judgment must be at
a very low state indeed, when it shall become necessary to reason in a formal
manner against opinions of this kind, or in opposition to the writer Relly on
Union.
from whom they are selected or deduced. But, since the compiler, just
mentioned, while he promises unconditional, and eternal salvation to all men,
attempts not to ascertain any precise period to the duration of the punishment
which is to proceed, -- and it may be judged, that the most of men, from a
disposition to self-flattery, and an unconsciousness of the evil of sin, will
be ready to believe it will be very short, it ought to have occurred to his
mind, that the opposition he is professedly making against those, who presume
there will be no degree of punishment after the judgment day, is very trifling;
-- that they will be ready enough to esteem him as one of their own party, and
imagine that a coalescence in opinion is not far remote. -- If this kind of
preaching and writing be encouraged, it may prove as hurtful to civil society,
as to religion.

"Would to God it might be realized," not only that there is the same reason
from Scripture, to believe there is a Hell, as a Heaven, but, that as all
impenitent persons and workers of iniquity, shall have their portion in the
one, so they shall, for ever, be excluded from the other.

BOSTON, November, 1782.
FUTURE PUNISHMENT ILLUSTRATED AND PROVED.
THE first text produced in favor of universal Salvation, is 1 Timothy ii. 3. God
our Savior, who will have all men to be saved, and come unto the knowledge of
the truth.

The more general opinion of commentators, who have written on this passage,
and the most obvious of all is, that it was designed to militate against the
prejudices of the Jews, who had imbibed very contracted ideas concerning the
benefits which were to result from the mission, and death of Christ.

It is well known* that at first they supposed, he was to become a temporal
Prince, and redeem them from the Roman yoke; and although, by his sufferings
and crucifixion, they were undeceived in this, they still retained the opinion,
that salvation was to be confined to their own nation.

When the Apostle Peter was sent to the house of Cornelius, to preach to a
number of Gentiles, and the Holy Ghost fell on them which heard the word, then
they of the circumcision were astonished, as many as came with Peter, because
that on the Gentiles also, was poured out the gift of the Holy Ghost. Acts x.
44, 45. And so powerfully did this misconception prevail, that even afterward,
there arose very great debates on the subject.

Saint Paul, therefore, in giving advice to Timothy, whom he calls his own son
in the faith, takes pains to caution him against this error, by assuring him,
that "God the Savior, would have all men to be saved;" that is, all people,
nations, or classes of men; intimating, that as by the death of Christ, the
Jews were put into a salvable state, so were the nations of the Gentiles; and
that whatsoever spiritual benefits, it was proper for them to preach to the
one, is was proper for them to preach to the others also. "Whereunto," says he,
the more effectually to confirm him in the faith, I am ordained a Preacher, and
an Apostle; I speak the truth in Christ, and lie not; a teacher of the Gentiles
in faith and verity. -- In conformity with which opinion, "I exhort," adds he,
that supplications, prayers, intercessions, and giving of thanks, be made for
all men, even for Kings, and for all that are in authority Whenever any persons
are put into a salvable state, or may obtain mercy, if they repent and believe,
as was the case with those mentioned by the Apostle, they are the proper
subjects of the prayers of their fellow men. But in all the prayers of mere
men, who cannot look into the particular counsels of God, as they relate to
individuals, I conceive that the matter petitioned for, is to be resigned to
the determination of the Divine Will; and therefore, although Saint Paul
informs us, that all nations and classes of men, being put into a salvable
state, are to be prayed for, yet it in no sort follows from hence, that every
individual person, will finally be saved, any more than it does, that when worn
with sickness, we pray for health, we shall most certainly be restored. And yet
such a prayer may be very scriptural and proper. In evidence of which, only
read the words of Christ, John xvii. 9. "I pray not for the world, but for them
which thou have given me." Our Savior, in various parts of this chapter,
utters expressions in a manner, which would be very unbecoming us. He speaks
with authority. He seems in the text quoted, to be possessed of a certain
knowledge of the future, and particular state of things. By this knowledge, he
directs his petition; and well assured, it was not a fact, that every
individual person on earth would be saved, he here most fully expresses his
assent unto it, including in his intercessions, those only who were given him
out of the world, or did already, or might in future, believe in him, and keep
his word; that is, all believers, and friends of God. -- This alone is a
sufficient argument against the doctrine of Universal Salvation, for if there
are any persons, who are not interested in the intercessions of the Savior,
but for whom he even refuses to plead, what possibility is there, that they
will be saved?
: which he thus enforces, For there is one God, and one Mediator between God
and man, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all, even for
Gentiles as well as Jews, "to be testified," or proved, "in due time;" which
was in part (...), in the establishment of the Church, by the power of God,
among the Gentile nations, and will be fully done, when, with the present
unbelieving Jews, the fullness of the Gentiles will be brought in. -- The
argument in the words, "For there is one God," etc. appears to be this, That
the universality of God's government and dominion over all people, made it
rational to suppose, that his beneficence and mercy was equally extensive; and
therefore that his Son was not sent to be a Mediator for the Jews only, but
also for the Gentiles, or all nations whatsoever: -- Which argument, as it was
intended to refute the contracted ideas of the Jews, who considered Christ as a
Savior to them alone, so also it was equally opposed to the opinion of the
idolatrous nations, who considered the God of the Jews, as having no dominion
over, or concern about them; which opinion it was very needful to remove, as
being utterly against the doctrine the Apostle desired to inculcate, respecting
the extent of the benefits resulting from the mediatorship of Christ Jesus.

A particular attention is paid by Mr. White, the first and principal author
introduced by the compiler, to 1 Timothy iv. 10. The living God, who is the
Savior of all men, especially of those that believe.

It is observed by several writers, that the original word here translated
Savior, equally signifies, and is very often used for Preserver; -- that the
Apostle Paul, in order to encourage Timothy while encountering the labors and
reproaches he met with in his ministerial office, puts him in mind of that
substantial support which always arose from trusting in God, who was the
Savior, or Preserver of all men, but whose preserving care was more especially
extended into true believers.

But not to insist on this; it is readily admitted, that although Christ be
more emphatically the Savior of believers than others, yet there is a sense,
in which he may be said to be the Savior of all men, implying every individual
person, but this very different from the one, which those who hold to the
doctrine of Universal Salvation, exhibit to us. If any man sin we have an
advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the righteous, who is the propitiation
for our sins, and not for ours only, but for the sins of the whole world. Or,
Titus ii. 11. according to the offered translation, the grace of God, which
brings Salvation to all men, has appeared.

The language of the Gospel is, Whosoever believes, may be saved; -- Whosoever
will, may drink of the waters of life freely: For he that comes unto Christ
shall in no wise be cast out, but in every nation, he that fears God, and
works righteousness, is accepted with him. In consequence of the obedience
and death of Christ, there is a general proclamation made -- pardon is offered
unto all men -- "the sin of the world is taken away;" that is, this great
obstacle, which deserves the wrath of God, is declared to be so set aside, as
that he who repents of iniquity, or, in a scriptural sense, is an accepter of
mercy, may enter Heaven, and enjoy his Maker, as though he had never sinned.
The choice is left with man.

I presume this truth will not be doubted. Now according to the express word of
God, it is plain, that mercy cannot be granted without an atonement; and where
it cannot be granted, it surely cannot be offered; and therefore an offer of
mercy so complete and universal as has been mentioned, must suppose an
atonement equally complete, and sufficient for the salvation of the whole world.

Should any doubts arise respecting this point, let it be considered, that the
person who made atonement, is the Son of God, and represented in the scripture,
as being the greatest price, or gift, which the Father had to bestow on
mankind: From whence it follows, that if this atonement be not equal to what
has just been supposed, it is impossible with God, out of all his treasures, to
offer any that should.

A certain person comes to me at a time, when by some misfortune, I have ruined
my affairs, and lost my all. He tells me, he is sensible of my necessity, and
has brought me relief. Only consent, says he, to accept of it -- acknowledge
the gift, and it is yours. Now while it is at my own option, and in my power,
to procure happiness to myself, by this person, may I not consider him as my
deliverer, and friend? Just in the same sense, is Christ the friend and
deliverer of all mankind. -- But are we to conclude, because the atonement of
our Savior has opened the way for the offer of mercy unto all men, that it
will be accepted by all? Or because Christ Jesus has brought pardon, life, and
immortality to every man, that for a certainty, every man will receive it? When
it is said therefore, that Jesus gave himself a ransom for all, and was a
propitiation for the sins of the whole world, or tasted death for every man,
the preposition for, and the universality contained in the whole words taken
together, have in view the universal offer of mercy which is made to mankind,
or the salvable state which men are put into, in consequence of Christ's death,
without any reference to the effects or consequences which this offer will
have; for this is a wholly distinct thing.

Further, it is not only true that Christ is a ransom and propitiatory
sacrifice for all men, including every individual, because through him they are
the subjects of offered mercy, but in addition to this, there are some
blessings, which every person on earth, does in a positive manner enjoy, and
which are to be attributed solely to what he has suffered and done. This
appears thus: -- The desert of sin is death, in its comprehensive sense. When
our first parents sinned, by eating the forbidden fruit, they in a sense died
immediately; for with respect to spiritual death, they lost the image of God;
added to this, their bodies were brought into a corruptible, mortal condition
from that moment. The ground of their enjoyment of any earthly comfort in this
state of existence afterward, was the introduction of the scheme of
redemption, which had already been devised, -- the effects of which, began now
to operate. And this is the reason of each person's continuance in the present
world, and his participation of any blessing whatsoever, but the smallest
portion of time, after he has been the subject of one sinful volition. --
Immediately on the fall of Adam, the whole world was put under the mediatorial
government; -- agreeably to the designs of this government, we enter life --
enjoy the comforts which the world affords -- our food and raiment -- our
friends, and all our blessings. Every single gift is the fruit, or consequence
of Christ's obedience and death; the whole which happens to us, being intended
as the means to accomplish the vast purposes of the mediatorial work.

We see then in what sense it may be said that Christ is the Savior of the
whole world, and yet this affording no manner of proof, that all men will
finally be happy.

I proceed to the consideration of two other passages of scripture, introduced
by the same author in behalf of his favorite scheme. That in the dispensation
of the fullness of times, he might gather together in one, all things in Christ,
both which are in Heaven, and which are on earth, even in him. Ephesians. i. 10. --
And having made peace, through the blood of his cross, by him to reconcile all
things to himself, by him, I say, whether they be things on earth, or things in
Heaven. Col. i. 20.

The design of the Apostle in these chapters, seems to be, to communicate to
the Colossian and Ephesian churches, those honorable ideas, which it was their
duty, and would be their interest to form, concerning the greatness of that
Savior, whose name they had so lately professed. In doing this, he represents
him under these principal characters -- as the creator of all things which were
created in Heaven and earth -- the upholder of all things upheld, and the
reconciler of all things reconciled; that is, in sum, the great agent in the
whole, unto whom all the work, included in each of these articles belonged, and
by whom it was all performed.

The argument contained in Mr. White's observations, is, that the words all
things are universal in their signification, and therefore that all men, and
every individual, must naturally be included in them. In answer to which, it
may be observed, that if we consider the expressions, gathering together in
one, and reconciling, to imply, the reducing from a state of moral disorder to
order, or enmity to love, it is certain, that the words all things, cannot
imply an entire universality, because with respect to the things in Heaven, the
holy Angels, who have never sinned, are in no propriety of speech, the subjects
of such change and reconciliation; and thus the idea of universality is
infringed on. The question then is, if in one case the idea of universality
must be given up, why not also in the other? If the words are so restricted in
their signification, as that with respect to the things in Heaven, they do not
contain universality, why should they be supposed to contain universality, with
respect to the things on earth?

The Apostle Paul is here discoursing of Christ and the Church. By the things
brought into a state of union and reconciliation, it is therefore in no degree
unnatural to suppose he intended the whole redeemed Church, not only composed
of the saints on earth, but also of the saints in Heaven, who had lived before
the crucifixion of Christ, and should be saved equally with the others; the
words all things, plainly referring to the whole which was included under the
denomination of what he was then speaking of.

And there are various passages of scripture in which the like general
expressions are used, when at the same time, it is well known that a certain
limitation is supposed. In the 9th chapter Exodus and 6th verse, we are informed,
that "all the cattle of Egypt died:" Yet in the 20th verse of the same chapter,
it is said, that he that feared the Lord, amongst the servants of Pharaoh, made
his cattle flee into the houses; which cattle did not die. In Job xx. 12. we
read, Man lies down, and rises not again 'till the Heavens be no more: They
shall not awake, nor be raised out of their sleep. It is however expressly said
in Matthew. xxvii. 52, 53 that at the crucifixion of our Savior, the graves were
opened, and many bodies of saints which slept arose, and came out of the graves
after his resurrection, and went into the Holy city, and appeared unto many. In
the epistle to the Romans it is written, By one man sin came into the world,
and death by sin, and so death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned.
But Enoch and Elijah, were translated to Heaven, without seeing death.

Nor is it considered improper, but on the other hand, it is a license always
taken in language, to make use of expressions of general import, which admit of
some exceptions; since, if the exceptions are fully known, or by any manner,
particularly specified, the meaning of such general expressions, is well
ascertained, and the true design of language, which is to communicate ideas, is
adhered to, without the trouble, which a minute explanation would put us to,
every time we write or speak.

It is the opinion, however, of several writers, that the terms gather together
in one, and reconcile, amount to more than the merely bringing the subject
spoken of into a state of friendship, from a state of enmity; and really refer
to that condition of reconcileableness, which mankind in general, may be said
to be in, since the blood of Christ is sufficient for the salvation of the
whole world, and whosoever will may be saved.

Others there are, who consider the meaning to be, that all things are actually
so gathered together into one, and reconciled, as that they are wrested from
that disorderly state, into which they had been reduced by sin, and are now put
under a fixed plan of mediatorial government; according to which, all events
and things, even the different states of men, with respect to happiness, and
misery, in the present, and future world, will promote the purposes of God's
glory, and be to his praise; agreeably to those words in sacred writ, the wrath
of man shall praise him; for as all things are of him, likewise all things will
be to him, for evermore. In both of these interpretations, the universality of
the expression, all things, is as fully admitted, as is contended for: So that
on the whole, in whatsoever sense we consider the words gather together in one,
and reconcile; and whether we allow the idea of universality to belong to the
term all things, or not, it appears that the doctrine of universal salvation,
is by no means, necessarily implied, in either the one case, or the other.

I shall make but one remark more on this point. That after the resurrection of
the dead, and appearance of the world before the judge, every true believer
will be received into Heaven, and every unbeliever be cast into Hell, this Mr.
White himself allows, although he supposes the punishment to be but temporary.
It seems his ideas are, that this punishment is disciplinary, or the mean to be
used in accomplishing the gathering together all things, or persons, into one,
and effecting their final salvation; -- moreover, that Hell is the place, in
which this work is to be done, and that the period between the day of judgment,
and what he calls the end, is the time allotted for the performance of it.

Now the Apostle Paul assures us, that the gathering together in one, all
things in Christ, is to be done in the dispensation of the fullness of times,
which, without a critical consideration of the words, must surely be allowed to
refer to the time particularly appointed by God, for the work of grace, and the
gospel to operate. This being the case, it follows, from what our author
himself allows, that the season allotted for the punishment of sinners, is, at
least, a portion of the dispensation of the fullness of times; and that the work
of grace, is in part to be performed in Hell. But does it not appear a little
unusual, to consider the exhibitions of the Almighty's wrath and indignation
against the impenitent, as the exhibitions of his grace in their behalf? If the
future punishment of sinners is to be of the disciplinary kind, then it is like
the afflictions of the righteous on earth, working out for them, an exceeding
and eternal weight of glory. According to such a representation, the sinner is
sent to Hell for his advantage, and Tophet was ordained of old, as the place in
which the Almighty might exercise mercy on offenders, and not justice and
judgment only. Let any one seriously ask himself, whether he can reconcile
this, with the plain language of sacred writ?

The next passage I shall remark on, introduced by Mr. White, is Romans, v.
from the 15th to the 19th verse. -- But not as the offense, so also is the free
gift: For if through the offense of one, many be dead; much more the grace of
God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man Jesus Christ, has abounded
unto many. And not as it was by one that sinned, so is the gift: For the
judgment was by one to condemnation, but the free gift is of many offenses unto
justification. For if by one man's offense, death reigned by one, much more
they which receive abundance of grace, and of the gift of righteousness, shall
reign in life by one, Jesus Christ. Therefore as by the offense of one,
judgment came upon all men to condemnation, even so, by the righteousness of
one, the free gift came upon all men, unto justification of life. For as by one
man's disobedience, many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one, shall
many be made righteous.

In the first part of these words, by several observations therein contained,
the evident design is to prove the stronger degree of willingness in God, that
grace and goodness should abound by Christ, than that sin and evil, should
abound through Adam. The principal part of them, supposed to favor the
doctrine of Universal Salvation, is, as by the offense of one, judgment came
upon all men to condemnation, even so, by the righteousness of one, the free
gift came upon all men unto justification of life.

By the offense of one, sin was introduced into the world; -- all the
descendants of Adam have partook of his wicked nature, and judgment has come
upon all men to condemnation. The point insisted on by our author is, that the
free gift is as universal as the judgment. This I think may readily be granted,
and yet in no degree countenance his favorite sentiment. Adam, our first
parent, before he transgressed, was in a state of probation. He might have
secured the divine favor, if he had remained perfect. As by his eating the
forbidden fruit, he fell, and this introduced sin among his descendants, who
have fallen with him, a complete loss of the right to life has followed; -- the
whole world has forfeited the privilege of being in a probationary condition,
for judgment, which is the desert of sin, is come upon all men to condemnation.
This is the consequence of Adam's offense. What then is the consequence of the
righteousness of Christ? The free gift is come upon all men unto justification
of life; the natural explanation of which is, the free gift, or the grace of
the gospel, is come, or proposed unto all men, bringing with it justification,
which justification produces, or ends in life: That is, as by the sin of Adam,
which introduced sin among his descendants, all men have fallen from a state of
probation, and are under condemnation, so by the righteousness of Christ, the
proposal of grace and pardon, or the free gift, has come upon, or unto all; --
whosoever will, may be saved, being in fact put into an equal state of
probation, and entitled to an equal privilege with that, which existed before
the fall, and any state of trial whatsoever; or which would have existed, if
Adam had never sinned, and his posterity had not joined in rebellion.

Thus is the free gift as universal as the judgment; for certainly the offer of
mercy, may be called a free gift. It was essential to our author's point, that
he should disprove it, and show that by the free gift's coming upon, or unto
all, was intended, not only that it was offered unto all men, but that it
should finally, be universally accepted. This would be difficult; for comparing
scripture with scripture, the very contrary, is plainly intimated, in a very
striking passage, among others, on this subject, by the same Apostle to the
Romans, who speaking concerning his being sent to the Gentiles, says, that he
magnifies his office, if by any means, he may provoke to emulation them which
are his flesh, and might save SOME of them. Also, from Gal. iii. 22. But the
scripture has included all under sin, that the promise, viz. of pardon, life,
and salvation, by faith of Christ Jesus, might be to them that BELIEVE.

The next text which I shall consider, is, Rev. v. 13. And every creature which
is in Heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as are in the
sea, and all that are in them, heard I saying, blessing, and honor, and glory,
and power, be unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb, for
ever and ever.

The book of Revelation is a discovery of the vast works, and government of
God, exhibited to us, not exactly according to the manner of their existence,
but in a figurative style, and by means of Hieroglyphics.

In this chapter, the Lamb is represented as coming, and taking the book, with
the seven seals, out of the right hand of him, that sat upon the throne. At so
solemn an event, a doxology, or hymn of praise, is raised, first of all by the
church, or redeemed, out of every kindred, and tongue, and people, and nation.
The angels are next represented, as bearing their joyful part in the anthem,
and ten thousand times ten thousand, saying with a loud voice, Worthy is the
Lamb which was slain, to receive power, etc. To heighten this ascription, every
creature which is in Heaven, and on the earth, and under the earth, and such as
are in the sea, and all that are in them, are heard to say, blessing, and
honor, and glory, and power, be unto him that sits upon the throne, and
unto the Lamb, for ever and ever.

We may consider the whole representation thus: The first and second doxology,
is the real expression of the joy and rapture of the redeemed church, and
angels in Heaven, when the Lamb comes, and (...) the book. But, as if this were
not a sufficient celebration of his praise at such an event, by a grand
personification, the third is exhibited as the echo of universal nature, in
which, for the period, every being in the universe, and the whole inanimate
creation, is represented as also becoming vocal, and at once breaking out into
that praise, which praise, as the Psalmist tells us, is ever expressed, though
in silent language, by all the works of God.

There is a beautiful similitude between this part of the vision of Saint John,
and those words of David, in which he calls upon all things to praise their
Maker. Praise him ye sun and moon: Praise him all ye stars of light. Praise him
ye dragons, and all deeps. Fire and hail, snow and vapor, stormy wind;
mountains and all hills, fruitful trees, and all cedars. Beasts and all cattle,
creeping things, and flying fowl. Kings of the earth, and all people; praise ye
the Lord. And whereas in this Psalm, the whole creation is invited to join in
the hymn of praise, -- in what the Apostle was witness to, the anthem is
represented as if really sung, and the whole system of universal nature engaged
in loud responses to the doxology of the redeemed church, and the celestial
angels.

I shall proceed now to the consideration of the remarks made on the quotation
from the Epistle to the Corinthians, taking also in view, the observations on
Genesis iii. 15. concerning our Savior's bruising the head of the serpent. --
Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God, even
the Father, when he shall have put down all rule, and all authority and power.
For he must reign, till he has put all enemies under his feet. The last enemy
that shall be destroyed is death. For he has put all things under his feet.
But when he says, all things are put under him, it is manifest that he is
excepted which did put all things under him. And when all things shall be
subdued unto him, then shall the son also himself be subject unto him that put
all things under him, that God may be all in all, 1 Cor. xv. 24th. to 28th
verse.

In the use which is made of these words, in defense of the doctrine of
Universal Salvation, it might in the first place, have been expected of the
expositor, that, as being so essential to his point, he would have entered more
particularly into the argument, to show, that by our Savior's vanquishing, or
putting all enemies under his feet, and bruising the head of the serpent, is
not intended what is usually believed.

He might have been told, that the enemies of Christ are vanquished, and the
head of the serpent bruised, when at the judgment day they are sent into
punishment, and all the plots devised against the kingdom and interest of
Christ, are wholly disappointed, and even made the means of illustrating his
glory.

But the vanquishment of God's enemies, according to his idea of it, is very
different: It implies in it favor: It is not a curse, but a blessing: It
consists in the bestowment of everlasting happiness. And if I understand the
argument rightly, it involves in it the idea of the salvation of the devils, as
well as wicked men.

The question now is, whether we most accommodate ourselves to the common use
and acceptance of language, in saying, that when it was written, that our
Savior would subdue, or vanquish his enemies, it was hereby signified that he
would bestow on them mercy and everlasting gain, or in saying, that this
vanquishment implies, that they shall be overtaken with disappointment disgrace
and loss?

Another particular which might have been expected from this writer, is, that
he should have offered some kind of argument to show, that the end, and
delivery of the kingdom here spoken of, is not to be at the second coming of
Christ, and day of judgment, but at a future period.

On the truth of this single article, I conceive that the reasonings on this
text, and indeed this whole scheme of universal salvation entirely depend; for
as it is granted, that after the day of judgment, the wicked will be turned
into Hell, to be punished for a season, that is, 'till the end comes; if
therefore, according to the scripture account, the period of time emphatically
styled the end, is to commence at the second coming of Christ, or judgment day,
I infer, that the doctrine of Universal Salvation, as thus exhibited to us,
cannot be true, and that all the arguments brought in favor of it, are
unsupported, and nothing to the purpose.

The Apostle had, in the beginning of this chapter, been discoursing of the
general resurrection of the dead, immediately preceding the judgment. Then
comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom to God even the
Father, etc. But when is this to be? After he has put all enemies under his
feet. And the last enemy which shall be destroyed is death, or cessation of
existence, in a complete sense: And therefore Saint Paul adds, in evident
connection with the whole, Else what shall they do which are baptized for the
dead, if the dead rise not at all? And in full assurance of his having proved
his point, he subjoins, Oh death! where is thy sting? Oh grave! where is thy
victory?

Before our author could suppose that he had gained any strength from this
whole quotation, it was necessary it should appear, and it belonged to him to
prove, that the destruction of death here mentioned, has no reference at all to
natural death, and the resurrection. This he does not attempt, but allows in
general, that according to his own interpretation of the words at large, the
first, and the second death, will be totally and absolutely destroyed; meaning
by the first death, the mortality of the body, or the cessation of life and
existence; and by the second death, the existence of sin, and the punishment of
it. Indeed, the connection observable through the whole chapter, will not admit
the supposition, that the Apostle's words have no relation to the first death.

It appears then, that the destruction of death mentioned in this quotation, is
joined with the subjection of all things; each article, specified in the
verses, being represented, as if belonging to one work and to take place at the
same time; -- the destruction of death, apparently making a capital part in the
victory which our Savior is to obtain at the season described.

If then, by these words, the last enemy which shall be destroyed is death, the
Apostle refers, though it be but in part, to natural death, and the
resurrection, does it not plainly follow, if we would preserve any beauty, and
union, among the parts of the description, in the whole verses quoted, that the
end, and subjection of all things, and delivery of the kingdom, will exist at
the resurrection of the dead, or general judgment immediately following. For
supposing, as this writer does, that the destruction of death, the last enemy
to be destroyed, includes in it, both natural and moral death, and that the
former will be entirely destroyed at the resurrection, but the latter, not
until a long or unknown period afterward, in this case there is evidently a
dismembership in the parts of the description -- two periods of time are
introduced together, where there is only the appearance of one, and the harmony
of the whole is broken. -- I cannot therefore conceive, that there is any other
method to do justice to the Apostle's words, and the arrangement of his ideas
throughout this chapter, than by believing that the whole destruction he refers
to, is in fact to be performed at the resurrection of the dead, and appearance
of Christ to judge the world.

In further confirmation of this truth, and as an evidence that the end and
resignation of the mediatorial kingdom, will commence at the appearance of
Christ, on the resurrection day, we may consider those words in Acts iii. 21.
Whom the Heaven must receive, until the times of restitution of all things. --
It will readily be granted, I imagine, that the times, or time of restitution
of all things, and the end, and resignation of the mediatorial kingdom, are one
and the same: And therefore, if the restitution of all things, will be at the
resurrection, that the end, and delivery of the kingdom will also. What then is
the idea contained in the declaration, that the Heaven will receive our Savior
until the restitution of all things? I answer, it is this -- that he will never
be again seen by the world, or make his appearance to men* until that important
season. Whom the Heaven must receive until the times of restitution of all
things. But the Heaven will most certainly receive him after the restitution of
all things, as well as before. There seems therefore, to be no circumstance to
set in opposition to the idea already mentioned, viz. that our Savior will
remain in the Heaven, until the time of restitution referred to. And while this
interpretation of the words appears rational and easy, it has also the very
great advantage, of being the most conformable to the general language of
scripture, which often expressly makes mention of the second appearance of our
Savior, which is to be at the resurrection and judgment day, but makes no
mention of any, which is called a third appearance.

On the whole then, it appears, that all these passages of scripture, are
against the doctrine of Universal Salvation: For if the restitution of all
things, and the end, and resignation of the mediatorial kingdom, will be at the
appearance of Christ at the resurrection, at which appearance, even our author
allows, he will consign the wicked, though but for a season, to Hell, it
follows, that all the hopes of restoration to future favor and happiness, will
be entirely cut off, because, when the mediatorial kingdom is ended, there can
no longer, be any mercy bestowed on sinners, since all mercy is bestowed for
Christ's sake: And by the mediatorial kingdom's being ended, is obviously
meant, that there is an absolute close put to the period, wherein there is the
last possibility of a single addition being made to the number of the redeemed,
then existing.

But I wish to reason a little further on this subject, and ask, in what sense
it is that Hell is to be a state of purification? for this is the idea which is
offered to us concerning it, by these writers. In proof of this, I might refer
the reader, to a number of passages in the said pamphlet. If the punishment of
hell is to be, in order that the subjects of it, "may be made the willing
people of God;" if they will not be delivered from their suffering, till this
is effected, or till their punishment shall have produced a proper effect, or
"burnt out sin and lust," certainly, if there be any meaning in words, the
punishment of sinners in the other world, is to be purgative, and their
dewlling place, may be strictly termed PURGATORY.
Is the purification to be produced gradually? Then it seems there is a holy
and virtuous principle in sinners, which is capable of being wrought upon by
punishment -- which punishment, by the supposition, is to have very different
effects than that which was once inflicted upon Pharaoh and his servants, whose
hearts were thereby hardened. And may it not plainly be inferred from hence,
that sinners and saints on earth, are persons of the very same character; for
there is no saint, of whom more can be said, than that he is virtuous in part,
or in a degree, and according to the position, the same must be allowed with
respect to sinners.

Again, is this purification to be performed all at once, and when the end is
come? If so, it is evident that punishment will not be the means of it at all,
for if this will have no influence of the kind at first, neither can it have
influence at last.

But passing by the consideration of these things, it is probable it will be
allowed, that when any of mankind continue to be impenitent, and unbelievers,
to the end of life, the punishment to be inflicted on them in Hell, will be
done, in order to satisfy, or manifest the divine justice; and, that in kind
and degree, it will be so proportioned, as to be the just and full reward of
sin. This indeed seems to be the sentiment of Mr. White himself, in the
pamphlet under consideration, who, notwithstanding he may, at the same time,
consider future punishment as purgative, or disciplinary, yet says, that the
design of God in this punishment of sin, is to glorify his wrath against it,
and his justice also.

Be this as it may, the scripture is plainly decisive in the representation of
this fact. When the Lord shall be revealed from Heaven in flaming fire, to take
vengeance on sinners, and consign them to future punishment, his business, as
we are informed, will be to reward their sin, and evil works: Whether therefore
this punishment be considered as greater, or less -- as eternal, or not
eternal, it is certain, that it will be according to the full measure of the
demerit of sin; for the reward of sin, must in the nature of things, have
respect to the degree of it. It will be the execution of the threatening of
God's word; or as it is called, the recompense of the Lord against the sinner,
and the display of his justice, from which, as the scripture assures us, there
can be no possibility of escaping, until it be completely satisfied, and the
debt which is due to it be paid, to the uttermost farthing.

Let us now enquire what will be the consequence, if it should even be allowed,
that there will be some period of time hereafter, when it may be said, that
sinners have suffered a punishment wholly adequate to their crimes. It is this
-- that supposing they should afterward be admitted into Heaven, it cannot be
said, if we would give the word its comprehensive and entire meaning, that this
is the work of salvation. Are the holy Angels the subjects of salvation. No.
But why? They have never sinned, or merited evil. Salvation and redemption, in
a full scriptural sense, imply deliverance from some deserved evil. But if it
be true, that the sinner has suffered all the evil he has deserved, the idea of
deliverance and pardon, is at an end, for there remains nothing as the object
of these things. He is in the same situation, as if he had just begun to exist,
and had not been the subject, either of a good, or bad volition. It may be said
indeed, that it is by the goodness of God, he is admitted into Heaven, but it
is not by grace: Nor is there any sort of necessary connection implied between
him and a Savior, or any propitiatory sacrifice, or atonement.

If then it be a revealed truth, that whenever sinners are punished in the
other world, it is in a degree, equal to the evil or demerit of sin, it is
plainly to be inferred, that notwithstanding these several writes on Universal
Salvation, may profess to offer salvation to all men, yet to those who will
thus be punished in the other world, it is really not salvation or redemption,
in the full scriptural sense of these words, but merely happiness which they
offer; -- the idea of salvation, to the subjects now made mention of, being
wholly without foundation, and in truth, a manifest inconsistency.

Reflecting on these things, should it not occur to the compiler of the
pamphlet presented to us, and all those who abet and encourage the sentiments
it contains, that they are engaged in presenting to mankind, what is not to be
found in the sacred volume -- for which there appears to be no manner of
permission or warrant from God: -- If so -- then what Angel from on high, shall
attempt the work? Or what mortal on earth shall presume to do it? -- The
obvious remark from the preceding, is therefore by way of enquiry -- Can that
doctrine be true, which offers to any class, or number of men, eternal
happiness, but which is not to come to them through the channel of free grace,
and pardoning love, exhibited in the gospel, nor for the Redeemer's sake?

I beg the reader's patience to but one thing more in reply to the reasoning of
Mr. White, from the last quoted verses. It is this, When our Savior was arisen
from the dead, and was about to leave the world, and ascend to Heaven, he gives
this solemn commission to his disciples, Go ye into the world, and preach the
gospel to every creature. He immediately adds, He that believes shall be
saved; but he that believes not shall be damned. There follows not a single
remark on this head. This is the substance of the whole. He is taken up, and a
cloud receives him from their sight. -- If now the doctrine of Universal
Salvation be true -- much more, if it be the glorious doctrine, which is
intimated to us by Mr. White, is it probable, when our Savior was just parting
with his friends and disciples -- when he was no more to speak to them in the
body respecting it, and when it was of essential importance that, through his
words, they should form no inconsistent or dishonorary ideas, -- is it
probable, I ask, that he would have made no mention of it? Is it probable,
moreover, that he would have used a mode of speech which, allowing the doctrine
to be true, may be construed like a seeming intention to conceal it? And
lastly, is it probable, that he would have so aranged his ideas and words, as
to leave it, at least very plausible, that he intended absolutely to deny it?

"He that believes not, shall be damned;" that is, as these gentlemen must
explain it, He that believes not, shall be punished by a temporary damnation,
but this succeeded by never ending salvation. Although, therefore, there was
some reason for the observation of our Savior, "He that believes not shall be
damned," yet, by the supposition, it would have been as true, and for any thing
which appears to the contrary, there would have been as great, and greater
reason for it, if the observation had been exactly the reverse, He that
believes not, shall be saved. But if in the communication of human ideas, and
the common concerns of life, it would be thought intolerable, in such a manner,
to confound the use of language, does it seem rational to think, that the great
light of the world, and teacher of men, would have thus set us the example?

It only remains now to answer Mr. Scott, another writer introduced by the
compiler; and to consider the observations he has made on the words eternal,
everlasting, for ever and ever. He remarks, That he has not been able to find
one single text, in which this article of an eternal and endless misery, is
either expressly affirmed, or necessarily implied: and that, the original
words, both in the Hebrew and Greek, signify nothing more than an age, and in
the plural, ages, either longer or shorter, definite or indefinite.

In reply to which, I beg to observe, that wherever these words are used in the
Old Testament, they denote the duration of the thing spoken of, as long as
possible, compared with the matter, or subject, unto which it stands related or
applies. The hills and mountains are called everlasting; the meaning of which
is, they are to continue as long as mountains can continue, compared with the
subject unto which they apply, namely the earth; that is, they are to continue
as long as the earth itself. In like manner, the Passover is said to have been
instituted among the Israelites, as an ordinance for ever; that is, to exist as
long as the economy of that people continued, which was essential to the
existence of the Passover. It is very obvious, therefore, that the words
everlasting, and for ever, imply much more than what is expressed, when we say
of any thing, that it will continue for ages, or ages of ages; for with respect
to the mountains, this would be true, if they should abide even some thousand
years, but cease to exist, before the world was at an end: or if the Passover
should continue through a long number of generations, but become unobserved
before the economy of the Jews was dissolved: Whereas, the particular idea
pointed out, is in direct: opposition to this, or any other construction of the
words, which excludes the certainty of the existence of the thing spoken of, as
long as the nature and circumstances of the subject, to which it stands
related, will possibly admit.

Having now discovered in what sense we are to consider the words, everlasting,
eternal, for ever and ever, when applied to things belonging to the present
world, let it be enquired, how we are to consider them, when applied to things
belonging to the next: I answer, in a sense admitting of perfect analogy in
both cases. The hills, and mountains, are things belonging to this state of
existence. The happiness of the saints in Heaven, and the misery of sinners in
Hell, are things belonging to the future. As the mountains therefore are to
endure for ever, that is, throughout the whole of this state of existence, so,
the happiness of the saints in Heaven, and the punishment of sinners in Hell,
are to endure, throughout the whole of the next state of existence. In other
words, as the duration of being, is to be complete, and as long as possible, in
the one instance, in like manner, it is to be complete, or as long as possible,
in the other. For if this be not the case, the analogy, just mentioned, and
most clearly observable, is broken through, and the expressions, both in the
Old and New Testament, which refer to future duration, are improperly used, and
in a manner, evidently calculated to misguide the mind of the reader.

Thus much has been observed on the supposition that the original words,
translated, eternal, everlasting, for ever and ever, imply no more than ages,
and ages of ages, or excited no other ideas in the minds of those who spoke the
Hebrew and Greek languages, than what we have annexed to the last of these
words. But how does this appear to be the case? If the English language be so
much more copious, than either the Hebrew, or the Greek, as to admit the
expressions ever and ever, and also ages of ages, yet what proof is this, that
the original words did not excite the very same ideas in the minds of those who
spoke them, as we have when we use the former of these? more especially when we
add, that these words, both in the Hebrew and the Greek, as is universally
allowed, are the very fullest, which either of these languages contain, to
express what we intend, when we say, ever and ever. When we consider also, that
they are the only original words made choice of to signify the proper eternity
of God, and that the word in the New Testament, is oftener used, when his own
eternity is the subject treated of, than any other, is it in any degree
probable, that out of all the languages he then had, or could have made, he
would have chosen, two, which did not do it? We may conclude, therefore, they
really did, and that the declaration of God, respecting his own eternity, is
not, as these writers tell us, left wholly out of sacred writ; which opinion,
moreover, is confirmed by this circumstance, viz. that the translators of both
the original languages have rendered the words as most fully expressive of what
is intended by eternal, or ever and ever. This was done first in the Latin, and
afterward in the English, and other living languages; and according to all
probability, would not have been attempted, except from a knowledge, that these
were the true ideas always annexed to them in the original; since especially
with respect to the first translations, the mistake, or fraud, if there had
been any, would have been so liable to detection, as scarcely to have left a
possibility of security from it.

Surely also, it is a very melancholy idea, if there be no word in the Old and
New Testament, or in the Hebrew or Greek, which assures us of the everlasting
happiness of the saints in Heaven. We are told by these writers, that this
would in fact be the case, were it not that the words, incorruptible,
indissoluble, immortal, not to die any more, are express to this purpose. It
may be remarked, however, that the following expressions, their worm which
dies not; -- the fire which is not quenched, are, by these same writers
plainly denied to be significant of eternal duration. And what is the meaning
of the words, incorruptible, indissoluble, immortal? Certainly the whole which
can be meant is, that the subjects spoken of shall not die. It seems then, that
the expression, shall not die, may in one case be considered as clearly
signifying eternal duration, and in another, as consistent with the absolute
denial of it. Notwithstanding then, that the words, incorruptible,
indissoluble, immortal, not to die any more, do indeed evidently express the
eternal existence of the righteous, yet it may be inferred, that all these
writers, must, by their own method of reasoning, entirely renounce the idea.
The state of facts therefore, according to the account given us, is just this,
that there is no one, or more words throughout the sacred volume of
inspiration, which ascertain the certainty of any eternal duration whatsoever;
but every positive declaration respecting eternity, is entirely left out of
this book.

But in what manner can these words, Where their worm dies not, and the fire
is not quenched, and thrice solemnly repeated, be considered as consistent with
the doctrine of Universal Salvation? The compiler observes, it is intimated by
one and another of the beforementioned writers, that if they prove any thing,
it is this -- That the torments of the wicked shall last as long as their next
state of existence lasts, without determining how long that shall be; that is
to say, if they prove any thing, it is, that the wicked shall endure
punishment, 'till their next state of existence be at an end. The consequence
of this is, that they must be deprived of all salvation; for there can be no
salvation, where there is no existence. And thus the doctrine of universal
salvation, instead of being proved, is by the very espousers of it, absolutely
denied. -- This is plain reasoning, as even the compiler must allow; -- unless,
by the words, "their next state of existence," he would refer merely to the
sinner's state of pain and punishment; -- which if he does, the interpretation
of the text quoted, is exactly this -- The wicked shall be punished, as long as
they shall be punished.

There is nothing more in the observation respecting the valley of Hinnom, than
what is contained in the foregoing. -- But as it has been judged proper to
introduce the verse already considered, and thrice solemnly repeated by our
Savior, would it not have been as well, if the preceding verse, had been added
also? And then the whole together would have read thus -- And if thy hand
offend thee, cut it off: It is better for thee to enter into life maimed, than
having two hands to go into hell, into the fire that NEVER SHALL BE QUENCHED:
Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched. And if thy foot
offend thee, cut it off; it is better for thee to enter half into life, than
having two feet, to be cast into Hell, into the fire that NEVER SHALL BE
QUENCHED: Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched. Let any one
calmly peruse the whole together, and must he not think that the idea of
eternal, and never ceasing punishment, is fully comprised, and that if these
words do not comprize it, there is an impossibility that any others ever should?

HAVING now gone through the various texts which have been produced, in the
pamphlet referred to, in favor of Universal Salvation, I shall proceed to
offer to the reader the ground on which the opposite doctrine is founded, and
exhibit the valuable ends which the punishment of sinners will answer, in the
system of God's moral government; -- in doing which, I shall be as short and
comprehensive as the case will admit.

The grand object or design of the Deity, I conceive to be this -- that by all
which takes place in the intelligent system, from first to last, including all
things, which already have, and shall in future exist, his own divine
perfection, and the true nature of perfection itself, may be illustrated in the
best and most complete manner; the sum of which, in a moral view, is holiness,
or love.

It is well known, that a beautiful object never appears with such conspicuous
luster, as when contrasted with its opposite. In even a piece of painting, some
shades are requisite to set off the more striking parts, which shades alone,
would be disagreeable to the eye, but by a happy disposition, they assist in
forming a most admirable piece. May we not conclude, that when the great Ruler
of Heaven and earth, permitted sin to come into existence, the reason was, that
it might serve as a mean to give distinction to holiness, and by the force of
contrast, illustrate its beauty in a more striking light.

But besides the advantage which the existence of sin has in raising the luster
of its opposite, there is one species of love, which could not have been known
at all without it; and this is, love to the unworthy, and to enemies, or
whatsoever is included under the head of pardoning love, free grace, and
redemption, exhibited in the gospel; which exhibition of the Deity is evidently
represented, as the greatest and most astonishing that ever existed; in the
making of which, the treasures of his wisdom, power, and goodness are said to
be opened to our view, to the great wonder of the holy Angels.

What has been now observed respects the existence of sin: Next then; as to the
punishment of it; it may in the first place be noted, that as to the natural or
sensative pain, if I may so express myself, which will hereafter be the portion
of sinners, it is beyond the reach of man, to form any adequate, or particular
ideas. We must leave the discovery of this, as also of the natural or sensitive
pleasures, which the saints will enjoy in Heaven, till we have done with the
body. Where the scripture mentions these things, it is in figurative, or
metaphorical language. Heaven, is described as a city, the streets and gates of
which, are made of gold, and exquisite pearl: And Hell, as a place of fire and
burning. If the one description be figurative, the other may be supposed to be
so likewise.

The principal idea conveyed to us in these representations is, that the
happiness of the saints, and misery of sinners, and the means of promoting it,
will be very great: But there is not the least degree of probability, that like
the operation of fire on the human body, the sensitive pain of the wicked will
be such, as to destroy thought and reflection, any more than existence: On the
other hand, it is far more rational, and scriptural to suppose, that the
intellectual powers will be left in full force, and the moral affections be in
constant action; and that, at least one part of the unhappiness of sinners,
will consist in these affections themselves; so that the pain and evil
experienced by them, may truly be said to be the effect of a voluntary choice,
and such as the existence of contrary affections would destroy. And indeed it
may be judged, that this is the very chief part of the punishment of sin. The
little we know of the unhappiness attending the evil and discordant passions of
men on earth, may serve, in some degree, to convince us, how vastly more
intolerable the anguish will be, when the like passions shall come into action,
in the other world, without restraint, and grow big, as we cannot now conceive
of, and at the same time, be accompanied with that mortification and
disappointment, which, where there is no mean of gratification, must
necessarily accompany sin, and which the Diety will now suffer to exist in full
force, as its proper and deserved recompense.

The scripture warrants us to believe, that the future state and condition of
sinners, will be open to the knowledge or view of the inhabitants of Heaven.
With respect therefore to the punishment of sin, I conceive the end, and
advantage of it to be this, viz. as the existence of sin, in any state, or
degree of it, is adapted, by means of contrast, to make a more exalted
exhibition of the nature of holiness, so the existence of it, while productive
of the painful consequences now described, and while it nature and tendency,
and the manifest anger of the Almighty against it, are thus displayed, will be
particularly adapted to, and by the wise direction of God, will in fact produce
this effect in the strongest manner: Moreover, as the permission, or existence
of sin, was essential to the display of the pardoning love of God, or any
knowledge, or idea of it, among created beings, in like manner the perception
of its real tendency and consequences, will greatly help to enlarge, and
brighten up the view thereof, to the great benefit, not of those who are the
subjects of future sin and punishment, but of the holy beings in Heaven: For by
such a discovery of the evil nature, and destructive tendency of sin, the
saints will discover more fully, what they are delivered from -- they will
discover the sense the Almighty has especting the malignity of sin -- they will
discover what must have been the strength in that love in God, which inclined
him to pardon it in them: By such thoughts, the greatness of free grace will be
enhanced -- the atonement put on new glory -- the crucified Savior appear in
charms more exquisitely bright, and ravish his people's hearts: -- The angels
who are witnesses to these things, will be lost in wonder -- redeeming love be
the object of all their thoughts, and "God be all in all."

From this view then, it should seem that we are to consider the state of
sinners, and their punishment in the other world, as a real good in the created
system. And is not this the true light, in which it is considered in sacred
writ? wherein we learn, that nothing is done by God, but for a valuable end. --
He overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red Sea; for his mercy endures for
ever. And smote great Kings; for his mercy endures for ever. And slew famous
Kings; for his mercy endures for ever. In the book of Isaiah, the seraphims
are represented in a view of the judgments of God, to be executed on a sinful
people, as crying unto one another -- Holy, holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts,
the whole earth is full of his glory. And in the Revelation made to John the
Divine, after Babylon is described as being destroyed, he heard a voice of much
people in Heaven, saying, Halleluia. And her smoke rose up for ever and ever.

In what manner now shall we account for it, that these perfect, and benevolent
beings, should be thus engaged in rendering praise to God, in the view of his
judgments? for the punishment or misery of created beings, cannot, in itself,
that is, separate from the idea of its ends and effects, be an agreeable object
to any benevolent, created mind, any more than to the mind of God, who, as we
are told, delights not in the death of the sinner; whereas, these acts of
praise, are plainly described to us as expressive of the holy and virtuous
manner, in which these heavenly and benevolent spirits are employed. The only
rational conclusion we can draw is, that in their estimation, the judgments
executed on sinners, are a good, because they are among the means, by which,
they became more fully acquainted with the character of that perfect Being --.
the knowledge of which, is at the foundation of all their happiness. It may be
observed by the reader, that but little is said, respecting the display of
God's power, truth, and wisdom, in the punishment of sinners; or of his
assertion of the rights of his government, etc. It was not the writer's design
to enter into this subject at any great length. -- That an infinitely holy
Being, should possess infinite power, and wisdom, is of infinite importance;
and consequently, it is desirable, beyond conception, that these attributes
should be displayed. But still, it is the holiness of the Deity, or his moral
perfections, which are the principal objects to be rejoiced in: And it is the
love which the saints have for these, which makes his power, and wisdom, and
every other natural attribute, appear glorious.


Having thus considered the advantages resulting from punishment in a general
view of it, let us next enquire in particular, how the matter stands, with
respect to eternal punishment. -- It may be argued thus -- The punishment of
sinners, as appears from the foregoing, is one mean used by the Deity, of more
fully illustrating the nature of holiness, and his divine perfections, -- the
discovery of which, is a source of joy to the church in Heaven, and in this
respect, a good. Now if the punishment of sinners should ever cease, this mean
of becoming acquainted with the perfections of God, would cease at the same
time, and of course the good resulting from it. But as it is not consistent
with the character of an infinitely good being, to suffer any mean of good to
cease, he will therefore never suffer this to be the case with respect to the
punishment of sinners, and consequently this punishment will never cease, but
be eternal. This may be called rational evidence, drawn from the argument of
benevolence itself.

If it should be objected, that a long course of punishment admitting end, will
be sufficient to answer all the purposes mentioned, inasmuch as it is in the
power of God, to impress for ever on the memory of created beings, the ideas
they have once received; I answer, that with respect to memory, or the
impression made by any particular event, which is not to occur again, it is
known by universal experience, that it gradually, decreases by time. The
argument from experience therefore, is against this supposition. Added to this,
it is very observable, that in the communication of ideas to created beings,
the Deity always has made use of means adapted to their nature. When he
pardoned sin, he had a right to have done it, if it had pleased him, without an
atonement, or the death of his beloved Son. But this important event was
transacted as a mean, by which his sense of the great evil of sin might be
communicated; to the intent, that the greatness of his love in the pardon of
it, might the more fully be displayed. If then in the communication of pardon
and grace, so important an event, and itself considered, so great an evil as
the death of Christ, must be used as the mean, surely we cannot argue against
either the propriety or necessity of means, in other, or the like cases. -- It
is very easy to comprehend, that the punishment of sinners is admirably
calculated to continue the exhibition which our Savior's death made respecting
the evil of sin, and the opposition of the mind of God against it, by which
exhibition the wonders of the atonement, and the work, of redemption and free
grace, are set off, to the greatest advantage: And thus not only all the things
in Heaven, but all the things in Hell, will in this sense, be tending toward
the same point, and for ever adding strength, though in a totally different
manner, to the great work, which Jesus died to promote.

The reader will here perhaps anticipate another sentiment of great importance.
In every rational conception concerning future punishment, it is not only
needful to contemplate it as a mean of good, but also to consider this good, or
happiness, as far greater, than the evil, or pain, contained in the punishment
itself, and as conspiring, among other things, to produce the greatest
advantage of the created system at large, or all things taken together. -- If
in the system of intelligent, created being, and extending the idea throughout
eternity, there will exist more evil or pain, than good or happiness, it is
most certainly a melancholy system indeed. If there will exist more good than
evil, but yet less good than might exist, in this case, it is an imperfect
system. But if notwithstanding the degree of evil or pain, the balance of good
will be the greatest possible, in this case, it is a system which is worthy of
God who formed, and created it. In such a view we may well join the celestial
choir in the triumphant song, Hallelujah, the Lord God Omnipotent reigns.

The question then is, in what manner shall we, on the principles already
mentioned, and by mean of sacred writ, be able to vindicate the sentiment, that
the greatest good of the system will, on the whole exist, unless we suppose
that by far the greatest number of mankind will be saved: For it is to sacred
writ we must have recourse, in all our reasonings and proofs, since it will be
wholly insufficient to depend on human, conjecture. To sacred writ let us now
apply.

And with respect to the number of men which will be redeemed, it has indeed
been supposed by some persons, that it will be much less than the number, which
will be lost. This opinion has been partly founded on the declaration of our
Savior, that many are called, but few are chosen; together with these words,
"fear not little flock," and some other passages to the same purpose. A
discusion of each of these particulars, would be too lengthy for my present
design. Whoever examines them thoroughly, and in all their connections, will, I
presume, find no reason to doubt, that they referred to the times in which they
were spoken, or the state of things then existing, or similar in kind, and of
course, that they are limited in their signification.

In the 13th chapter of Luke, our Savior compares the kingdom of God, to a
grain of mustard seed, and also to a portion of leaven. Immediately one says,
unto him, Lord, are there, few that be saved? Who the person was, or whether
the question was put with a friendly or unfriendly design, we are not informed
of. Our Savior in reply bids him, strive to enter into the strait gate, which
certainly many should fail of doing; but does not think proper to answer his
enquiry. And why? The parable was sufficient. As the grain of mustard seed,
which, when sowed, was the smallest of all seeds, should in time grow to be the
greatest tree of the kind, so that the fowls of the air should find shelter in
its branches: -- And as the leaven, which at first was hid, should in the end,
leaven the whole meal; in like manner, the kingdom of God, or the mediatorial
kingdom, which at the beginning, and when it was first preached, was received
by a very small number, composing the least sectary in the world, shall in the
proper season, diffuse its power and relish over the whole world, and triumph
in every place, and be like the stone, out without hands, described by the
prophet Daniel, and representing this same kingdom, which at length became a
great mountain, and filled the whole earth.

I humbly conceive there is abundant reason to expect a glorious time before
the end of the world, and general judgment, commonly called the Millennium,
because it is to last a thousand years; at which time the earth will be filled
with the knowledge of the Lord, and holiness universally prevail.

The passages of scripture, on which the proof of this depends, are such as
these -- All the ends of the world shall remember and turn unto the Lord: And
all the kindreds of the nations shall worship before thee. Psalm. xxii. 27. He
shall have dominion from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the
earth. Yea all Kings shall fall down before him: All nations shall serve him.
They shall fear thee, as long as the sun and moon endure, throughout all
generations. His name shall endure for ever: His name shall be continued as
long as the sun: And men shall be blessed in him; all nations shall call him
blessed. Psalm. lxxii. 5, 8, 11, 17. Every valley shall be exalted, and every
mountain and hill shall be made low: And the crooked shall be made straight,
and the rough places plain. And the glory of the Lord shall be revealed, and
all flesh shall see it together: For the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. Isa.
xl. 4, 5. Thy people also shall be all righteous. Isa. lx. 21. They shall all
know the Lord from the least of them to the greatest. Jer. xxxi. 34. And they
shall beat their swords into ploughshares, and their spears into pruning hooks.
Isa. ii. 4. The wolf also shall dwell with the lamb, and the leopard shall lie
down with the kid; and the calf, and the young lion, and the fatling together,
and a little child shall lead them. They shall not hurt, nor destroy in all my
holy mountain: For the earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the
waters cover the sea. Isa. xi. 6, 9. And the kingdom and dominion, and the
greatness of the kingdom under the whole Heaven, shall be given to the people
of the saints of the Most High, whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and
all dominions shall serve and obey him. Dan. vii. 27.

It cannot be presumed that these things have already been accomplished. The
sacred scriptures inform us of a certain time, when the kingdom of Antichrist,
which has exalted itself against the kingdom of Christ, will be destroyed, and
Satan be bound a thousand years, and be cast into the bottomless pit, and shut
up, that he deceive the nations no more, till the thousand years be fulfilled.
This is the same period of time referred to in the beforementioned texts. That
it will take place before the end of the world, is evident from the complexion
of the whole account, and among others, from this circumstance in particular,
viz. that the nations of the earth, will then beat their swords into
plough-shares, and their spears into pruning hooks. It cannot consistently be
supposed that this will be done, after the earth is burned up with fire. And as
a further proof that this season will be before the end of the world, or
general judgment, we are informed that when Satan has been bound a thousand
years, during which time it is, that all this promised peace and holiness is to
exist, he is immediately afterward to be loosed a little season and go out to
deceive the nations, or people, which are in the four quarters of the earth;
that is, the same nations with those beforementioned, or their natural
descendents; for what other can they be? The consequence of these efforts of
the deceiver, we are told, will be the prevalence of sin in so great a degree,
as that a part of the inhabitants of the earth, will rise up against the other
part, and there will be the most violent disorder and contention among them; --
an event which certainly cannot happen to the righteous after the day of
judgment, since it is expressly declared in sacred writ, that the appearance of
Christ at that time, will bring to them everlasting peace, and deliverance from
all trouble. In addition to this, according to the order of the sacred
narration, the day of judgment is introduced as an event, which is to follow
the convulsion and disorder now described; for after mention is made of the
signal interposition of Heaven in behalf of the saints in this contest with the
wicked, the very next verses inform us of the appearance of the Judge -- of the
books being opened -- the dead standing before him, and being judged out of
those things written in the books, according to their works.

The sum of the whole seems to be this -- that prior to the second advent of
our Savior, the kingdom which he has established on earth, will become
exceeding great, and overturn the kingdoms of the world, and of Antichrist,
which are opposed unto it; -- that the glory of it will last a thousand years,
in which time holiness, peace and joy, will prevail, over the whole earth, and
continue to the end of the world; or as it is written in the 72d Psalm, as long
as the sun, and moon endure, throughout all generations, except, that after the
thousand years are completed, it will be partially interrupted for a little
season, by numbers of persons becoming so corrupt, as to rise up, and contend
against the saints -- which contest will be decided by the interposition of
Heaven, and immediately followed by the resurrection of the dead, and judgment
of the whole world.

As to the commencement of the happy time we have been considering, it has
already been hinted, and the scripture makes it very evident, that it will be
at the close of the reign, or at the downfall of Antichrist. There would be no
difficulty in ascertaining this period with accuracy, if we knew when to date
the beginning of his reign, for the whole of it together is to be a time, and
times, and half a time, or twelve hundred years. As the rise of this kingdom
was gradual, it is probable its fall will be gradual also. The writers on
prophecy are well agreed, that it will be some time about the two thousandth
year of the Christian era, and the six thousandth year, from the creation of
the world.

In the beginning, the earth was peopled by two persons only. Two thousand
years elapsed before the flood; but a little part of the world was inhabited;
the waters came, and destroyed the whole, except Noah, and those who were with
him in the ark. By this single family, the earth began to be peopled again; but
even in our Savior's time, only an inferior part of it was improved, and
sickness, pestilence, and war, had in the mean while, swept off a vast number
of its inhabitants, and retarded the increase. It is but of late years that
America, which is called the NEW WORLD, has been explored, before which time,
it was occupied only by the Indians, thinly dispersed on the sea shore.

Considering now the vast increase of inhabitants, which probably will take
place in future, and the great number the whole earth will be capable of
supporting, when, as it may be expected in the Millenium, the desert will
blosom like a rose, which number then existing, is said, in the book of
Revelation, to be, as the sands of the sea, there is no manner of difficulty in
admitting the belief, that many more, it may be, as some writers have supposed,
in even the proportion of many thousands to one, will live in this one last
thousand years, called the Millenium, than will live in the six thousand
preceding: And as this will be a state of universal holiness, and the falling
away afterward, will be but for a short season, and this only partial, even
supposing almost the whole of those to be lost who existed prior to this time,
it may notwithstanding be the case, that many more, and perhaps some thousands
to one, will be saved, than lost.

This subject is copious and grand. Can it be thought, when on account of the
atonement made by Christ, the whole world has been put under his government,
and given to his disposal, that in the close of the present state of things, he
will suffer Satan, who has exalted himself against him, to collect into his own
party, the majority of mankind? Can it be thought, that the number of the
redeemed will be less than Christ himself, may be presumed to judge, to be the
most for his own honor? Is it not fit also, that the great work of man's
salvation, and the kingdom of our Savior, should be done, and glorified, in
the same world, in which it has been set up, and opposed, and thus Satan be
conquered on his own assumed ground? And once more, may it not be expected,
that all this will be so performed, and brought into readiness, as that at the
very first general assembly of men and angels, and appearance of Christ, the
whole work done by him, may be seen in perfect glory -- every doubt be
satisfied, and every mind be struck with awe?

To return now to the point with which I began: -- as a summary view of the
whole that has been observed respecting the doctrine of future punishment, and
the permission of sin in the moral system, I beg the reader to take the
following -- that it is a mean of bringing the luster of holiness or virtue
more fully into view, of explaining the nature of redeeming love, and more
gloriously illustrating the character of the Deity: -- That being in itself an
evil, no greater degree of it will be suffered to exist, than is necessary to
promote these purposes, or operate in such a manner, as that the balance of
good may be greater than without it, yea the greatest possible: And further,
that as in its nature it is a mean of this good, it will never be suffered by
God to cease, because, if it did, the good thereby effected, would cease
together with it.

As explanatory of this, it is supposed to be very conceivable, that the view
of any moral object, is greatly heightened by a view of its opposite. By the
existence of both sin and holiness, in the other world, the total difference of
their nature will be perceived: In proportion to the degree in which each of
these will display its strength, and act out in new force, the contrast will
become brighter and brighter -- holiness will appear in increasing beauty, and
the character of the Most High in glory, and in majesty, more divine. By such
knowledge communicated, the Deity, as it were, will approach nearer and nearer
to all the holy, and heavenly beings: -- By such knowledge received, they will
approach nearer and nearer unto him, and he become one with them, and they
become one with God.

Thus will all things be rendered subservient to the great purposes of the Son
of God, whose atonement and business on earth, which in itself was sufficient
for the salvation of the whole world, will be better rewarded, than if every
individual among men were saved; and whose victory and triumph over Satan; will
be far more complete, than if the serpent had not succeeded in any of his
temptations on earth, because his very success will be to his disappointment,
confusion, and shame.

What unknown worlds of intelligent beings, will be brought into existence, to
behold these wonders, we cannot tell. But surely if the end, and design of all
things, and among them, of the existence of sin, and the punishment of it, be
that the glory of the divine nature may be unfolded to the view of creatures,
it becomes us to rejoice. Does both the order and variety discoverable in the
natural world affect us with delight? Are we not only pleased with the cheering
rays of each returning sun -- the opening of the spring, and the gentle fanning
of the zephyrs, but do we sometimes with admiration hear the rolling thunder,
and see the clouds begin to thicken, and the red lightnings play? And shall we
not admire the same disposition of things in some respects, in the moral world,
by which not one, or a few, but many of the attributes of the Godhead are
displayed, and beauty is seen clothed in glory?

Such admiration then, be your employment, ye friends of Heaven and virtue, --
ye people of the Most High. Well did the Angels, at only the birth of Christ,
fill the air with melody, while the wondering shepherds heard, Glory to God in
the highest; and on earth peace; good will toward men. And could the laws of
nature be dispensed with in our favor, as they were in favor to the
shepherds, we should hear these celestial beings still engaged in praise, and
the hymn go round. But the work, which Jesus at that time had but begun, is now
completed: Their song therefore is more triumphant, and divine. Yet yours
shall be more triumphant still. When at the last great day, the harmony of
God's works, and the beauty of his glory will be unfolded, then shall you break
forth in the victorious song -- then shall you unite with ten thousand times
ten thousand of like happy beings, saying, Blessing, and honor, and glory, and
power, be unto him that sits upon the throne, and unto the Lamb, for ever
and ever.

BEFORE I put a close to this writing, I ask the reader to indulge me in a few
remarks, concerning the tendency of the pamphlet, lately published in favor of
Universal Salvation. -- As it consists of extracts from authors, who can give
no account to men, being gone to render their account to an impartial Judge,
the compiler must answer for them, who, it is to be supposed would send nothing
to the press, but what accorded with his own sentiments, and he would be
willing to defend.

And without any exaggeration, the doctrine exhibited and recommended, is this
-- There is no crime whatever, which shall exclude a man from Heaven; -- let
him live as he lists -- let him be an enemy to the world -- his country -- his
friends -- yea, and his own life; -- let him despise the offered mercy of his
Savior, till death has taken him hence, -- by the blood of this Savior, he
shall be saved: For although he be informed, that he must endure the dreadful
weight of a temporary punishment -- yet as no temporary punishment, can bear
any comparison with everlasting happiness, which according to the scheme
proposed, is to follow, it still remains, that all things taken into
consideration, he shall be a partaker of infinite bliss, which the greatest
possible degree of iniquity, or the most horrid crimes, and unsucceeded by a
single penitential thought through life, shall not be able to deprive him of.

I have never yet heard, what amounts to but a tolerable answer to an
objection, which has often been made against this doctrine, viz. that its
natural tendency, in this degenerate world, is to encourage libertinism -- give
the reins to corruption among all orders of men, both in public and private
life, and undermine religion at the very root. -- Whenever I perceive it to be
greatly applauded and esteemed, it brings to my mind, the following description
of Isaiah, concerning the children of Israel, -- Which say unto the Seers, See
not; and to the Prophets, Prophesy not unto us right things; speak unto us
smooth things; prophesy deceits: Get you out of the way; turn aside out of the
path; cause the holy One of Israel to cease from before us.

Indeed it seems strange, but according to this doctrine it is equally true,
that the language of God's word, and the address of the Almighty to the very
same class and character of persons, should on the one side, be -- If ye sin
against me, ye shall die: -- If ye believe not, ye shall not see life; -- ye
shall drink of the wine of my wrath, and have your portion, where is the
blackness of darkness for ever. -- And on the other side -- If ye sin against
me, and repent not in the present state, I will be your friend notwithstanding;
-- I will never leave you, nor forsake you -- my mercy shall reach you, even in
hell, and cause you to rejoice in my salvation: For if ye believe not in this
world, ye shall participate of everlasting life, in the world to come.

Considering the parts of this address collectively, -- where is the
threatening? It is lost in the promise of good, which is far greater than the
evil threatened; and in a complex view of the subject, there is in fact no such
thing as a threatening against sinners, in the whole word of God.

It may be remarked further -- on supposition the doctrine of Universal
Salvation should not prove true, it is evident at first thought, that the
encouragement of it, may in the end, prove a mean of the loss of many souls,
the blood of which must be accounted for at the bar of God. For judging of
human nature by its present state, it will be in vain to deny, that while
persons can comfort themselves with the hopes of so great a degree of bliss, as
is hereby promised to them, and comparatively so small an evil to precede, they
will be much more likely to indulge mental security, in respect to the
important article of preparation for another world. -- Admitting therefore,
that there is only a possibility that the doctrine is an error, -- and that the
opposite doctrine, which has been held by far the greatest part of Protestant
divines is the true one, ought not this very circumstance to be considered as a
sufficient argument for the exercise of the utmost caution, in the exhibition,
and encouragement of it? If it be an error, it is an error on the wrong and
fatal side. And, is he a christian -- is he a man -- has he the tenderness and
bowels of a man -- does he possess even humanity itself, or an equal degree of
charity with Dives in Hell, who will not use every possible degree of
circumspection, least he should be an instrument, to some one, or more of his
fellow creatures, of an injury, so inexpressibly great?

I conceive therefore, that every honest man, who disbelieves the sentiment,
will be free to declare it, and this plainly. I take the liberty to add, that
such a declaration will come with particular propriety, and weight from the
Pulpit. It is the work of goodness, and love. "Watchman! what of the night?"
Every good spiritual guide of the flock of Christ, when he perceives danger
near, immediately gives the alarm. "Watchman! what of the night?" It is as the
language of the Almighty -- as the voice of God, unto Gospel Ministers. May it
not be suspected, that he, who in the present state of things, does not
discharge this benevolent office, and lift up his voice against the doctrine,
is either in doubt whether it be true, or false, or if not publicly, is
secretly, its abettor, and friend?

Impressed with a belief of its destructive tendency, I cannot help asking, if
it be not time for the friends of truth, in whatever station in life, seriously
to realize the evil which has already appeared, and is still like to flow from
it in many places, and particularly in this town. If we believe in the doctrine
of the immortality of the soul, with what importance do the things of futurity,
present themselves to us? -- Eternity! how vast the idea! And shall any thing
arise, which will probably injure the eternal interest of those around us? The
least we can do, is to inform them of their danger, and by every proper method,
endeavor to counteract the measures by which it is brought.

Happy is the consideration, that in every time and circumstance, we may
address our prayer to Heaven. O Thou unto whom the great work of salvation
belongs (...) down thy Spirit we beseech thee, on thy people, and unite them in
the faith: Alarm and preserve the (...), which build their hopes of happiness
on Error; and by thy benign and powerful influence, say unto the thoughtless
and secure mind, Awake thou that sleep, and arise from the dead, and Christ
shall give thee light.

THE END.
APPENDIX, In Answer to a late Letter, entitled, DIVINE GLORY BROUGHT TO VIEW,
In the FINAL SALVATION of all MEN. Addressed to the Writer of this Pamphlet.
IT is supposed by the author of this letter, that the writer of the foregoing
sheets, believes that God earnestly desires the salvation of every individual
of the human race, meaning by this desire, as he apparently explains it, not
barely a pleasure in the salvation of his creatures, as an object in itself
agreeable, which is readily allowed, but an absolute choice respecting the
accomplishment of the event, all things taken into consideration. To this it is
replied, that the supposition is a mistake. There is no such sentiment
contained in the explanation given to 1 Timothy ii. 3. or in any page of the
pamphlet; but the very contrary is most clearly expressed, especially in the
last part, wherein the design of future punishment is considered. In evidence
of which, the judgment of the reader is cheerfully appealed to. The inference
which this author draws from the supposition, and the consequential incoherence
he endeavors to point out, is therefore without foundation, and is set aside.
The ground of the misconception of this Gentleman seems to be, that he has
blended together in his own mind the interpretations of 1 Timothy ii. 3. and 1 Timothy iv. 10. as if they had been treated of as implying one and the same thing;
whereas the former is considered in a limited sense, and as designed by the
apostle to be an answer to the Jews, who were disposed to believe that
salvation was to be confined to their own nation, excluding all other nations,
people, or classes of men.

As to the other particular objected against, viz. that the atonement of
Christ, is sufficient for the salvation of all men, including every individual
person, as the offer of salvation to all men is a proof of, and yet that every
individual person will not be saved, an answer may already be found to it in
this book. The design of the atonement was, that the salvation of sinful men,
might appear to be a work of grace. In order to illustrate this, Christ Jesus
magnified the law, and made it honorable. This being done, the mercy of God,
became as open to the whole world, (...) of it. The whole world was put under
the Mediatorial government, in consequence of which and as the means of
furthering the designs of this government, it has come to pass, that every
person on earth enjoys even his temporal benefits. Now, if the punishment of a
certain number of men, who actually will, and God foreknew would remain
impenitent, will be for the best on the whole; -- or, if in the way of
vindictive justice, the future manifestation of the mind of the Deity,
respecting the vast evil of neglecting and trampling on divine grace, will be
one mean, by which the greatness of this grace, and God's sense of its
greatness, will be illustrated, as the scripture evidently affirms, how can it
possibly appear, as the writer of the letter intimates, that the doctrine of a
complete mediation or atonement, implies in it, that the design of God, in
sending his Son into the world, is in a measure disappointed, and the success
of Christ in the Mediatorial undertaking, is frustrated or diminished? -- There
is therefore no manner of reason for the supposition, that " universal
redemption," or as it might perhaps be better expressed, that universal
atonement "necessarily infers universal salvation;" but the idea, that the
atonement is sufficiently full and complete to answer a general offer of mercy,
in consequence of which atonement, the mercy of God is as readily opened to all
men as to a number only, and which is the chief or special sense in which, as
allowed in the foregoing pamphlet, Christ died for every man, -- this idea, it
is insisted on, is most perfectly reconcilable with the doctrine, that there
will be some individuals, even all impenitent persons, and despisers of the
gospel grace, who will finally perish, and never enter heaven.

Were it needful to reason with this Gentleman on his own principle, which is,
that universal atonement, in the existence of which he believes, must
necessarily infer universal salvation or happiness, or otherwise God is
disappointed in his benevolent wishes in sending his Son into the world, it
might be asked him how he accounts for the future, and vast punishment, which
he himself allows? If universal atonement necessarily infers universal
salvation or happiness, does not the acknowledgment of a future, unutterable
yet temporary punishment, suppose, although in a lesser degree, the same
species of disappointment? On the principles advanced in this pamphlet, no such
disappointment is conceived of, and an answer is offered to every such
objection against the doctrine of punishment. But he who believes that
universal atonement, to which he concedes, infers universal salvation, because
producing in the issue, universal happiness, is inconsistent with the doctrine
of eternal punishment, and yet holds to a dreadful and unutterable, though
temporary punishment in the other world, must certainly feel that the supposed
difficulty or objection lies on his own side, and that the proposal itself, or
conception of the difficulty, leaves him chargeable with the very incoherence,
which he imagines to be in the way of his opponent.

The observations of our author, in the beginning of his letter, respecting the
worship of the Deity, are rather too loose and exceptionable. Surely it is not
peculiar to the Universalists to bow the knee to a being intrinsically
excellent, and who would be the admiration of all his creatures, even were
guilt and suffering banished the creation. It is enquired of him, how this
intrinsic excellence of the Deity is to be known by creatures, except from the
illustrations of it by some means, or what may be called his works? The
intrinsic excellence of God, is the very object to which the writer of this
pamphlet would desire to lead the mind of the reader, the doctrine contained in
it being this -- that by all the works of the Deity, and by what already has,
and will in future exist, the divine perfections, which constitute this
intrinsic excellence, will be illustrated in the best manner, and the God of
glory, love and beauty, be most perfectly discovered to the intelligent,
created system.

The author of the letter under consideration, declares, that he is not a
little surprised at the reception which the foregoing sheets met with, "even
from persons who call themselves CALVINISTS." The writer does not profess to
have any claim upon the good opinion of others. If the pamphlet has met with
their approbation in any degree, he would impute it to the easy evidence of the
main doctrine, which by sacred writ, it professes to maintain; and he sincerely
wishes he had been much better able to do it justice. Our author, however,
would choose at lest to put the persons referred to in mind, that in the
article now mentioned, they are inconsistent with themselves, for in the first
place, it is suggested, that the pamphlet is not Calvinistick: and secondly, it
favors of Fatalism.

If it be not Calvinistick, why should this gentleman object to it on such an
account? For according to his declared opinion, neither the Calvi^^^^s or
Arminians, but the Universallists only are consistent. The book contains in it
the doctrine of universal, or complete atonement. The Calvinistick Divines, he
asserts, deny the doctrine. The gentleman himself declaredly believes it.
Therefore beware of it, and avoid so dangerous a book, is the inference and
lesson, which he draws and urges.

But after all this proposed cau^^^^, it happens that the book, is much nearer
to that by many Divines is (...) Calvinism, than is suggested. Among the
authors of this class, which the writer of it has at present by him, he can
produce Poole, Burkitt, Henry, and Edwards, the last of whom is a well known
American, and New England defender of the Calvinistick doctrines, who in the
very article in which this pamphlet is declared by the letter writer to have
departed from Calvinism, are each of the same opinion, and professedly believed
that the atonement of Christ Jesus, was completely answerable to the universal
offer of mercy which has been made from Heaven, and yet that some men would
perish for ever.

Respecting the fear suggested, that the writer of this pamphlet is a Fatalist,
this also is foreign from the subject, and is liable to the same imputation of
fault with the last particular adverted to, being a resemblance of that mode of
contest often used by Polemick writers, when they have been pressed close by
various obstacles, and (...) found it difficult to defend a favorite scheme.
It is impossible, that a person should believe in divine revelation, and be a
Fatalist. That men have "no will of their own," in the sense affixed to the
expression, is not to be conceived of. Each person chooses and refuses, loves
and hates, and is conscious of it. Should any one assert, that men are not
moral agents, it would be like asserting that they have no souls. And by the
way, equally absurd would it be, to rejoice in the prevalency of wickedness,
and commit sin on the pretext, that by the wise direction of God, it is made a
mean, as the Apostle Paul assures us, of the enhancing or abounding of grace.
That sin should be overruled for this good, is indeed a proper matter of joy.
But it is the good only, which is the supposed object of the joy, and this is a
virtuous feeling. Sin is an evil in its own nature. To rejoice in it as such,
is absolutely to reject and oppose the good or grace, which, not by men or
angels, but by the power and wisdom of God, to whom alone the work belongs, it
is rendered a mean of illustrating. The 6th chap. of Romans, is a complete
answer to all that is contained in our author's letter on this matter.

On the whole, the sum of the doctrine contained in the foregoing sheets, as
relating to these supposed difficulties, is as follows: -- That in the
government of God, in the most extensive view of it, there is a grand and
glorious scheme devised, the object of which is on the whole the greatest good
-- That all events will take place in correspondency with it, each one having
an influence in its place, and becoming a mean of advancing its desired end --
That for this reason, even the existence of sin, among other things, was
permited, and the punishment of the ungodly will be executed -- That man is a
moral agent, and being such, is a proper subject of blame worthiness when he
sins -- And that the object of the Deity's mind, as to all events which he
permits, being to illustrate his own glorious character, the contemplation of
which is the source of the most refined and exalted happiness that can exist in
the intelligent system, and which will exist in the greatest degree, therefore
he is infinitely worthy the love and adoration of all intelligent creatures.

Now, is there any article here mentioned, which does not set the character of
the Almighty in an honorable point of light? It is further asked, is there any
one of these particulars which being denied, includes not also an implicit
denial of some perfection or other essential to Jehovah?

As to the manner in which things come into existence, or the subject of cause
and effect, it was not the writer's design to enter into the debate. The object
of the Deity's mind, concerning the existence of all events being declared in
this pamphlet to be, in a universal sense, the greatest good and glory, his
moral character, is of course, professedly vindicated, for this is the point
which ascertains it, and proves its excellency. With respect to the other
particular, the writer's firm belief is -- That is the true system, be it which
it will, that without impeaching what are called the moral attributes of God,
maintain his natural attributes also, and not confounding the idea of his power
and wisdom, honors and exalts his holiness, and represents him as all grand --
all glorious -- and all lovely.

Be this the object of our adoration! Be this the God we love! In regard to the
author of the letter now replied to, although this Appendix bears the form of
controversy, the writer wishes him to accept his undissembling and fervent
desire, that the spirit of all truth may so influence both their hearts, as
that when the designs of the Mediatorial government shall be displayed in
inconceivable glory at the resurrection of the just and the last great day,
they may mutually unite in worshipping the one true God, and join with the
Prophets and Apostles -- the saints and angels, in sublimely chanting his
eternal praise.

And if, as Pope says, "Whatever is, is right -- " much more, if, as the
inspired writers declare, all events will finally terminate in the most exalted
illustration of the glory of Jehovah, then let it be the immediate language of
every reader's mind, "Hallelujah! the Lord sits King for ever."

ERRATA in the PAMPHLET.
Page 4, line 18, in the Preface, for proceed, read precede.

-- 8, line 9, for into read to.

-- 17, line 19, for included, read concluded.

-- 23, line 6, from bottom, for last, read least.

-- 24, line 15, for means, read mean.

-- 25, line 7, from bottom, for the idea of, read this idea of.

-- 43, line 2, from bottom, for twelve hundred years, read twelve hundred and
sixty years.


