Paris Papers; OR Mr. SILAS DEANE'S late intercepted LETTERS, TO His BROTHERS,
and other intimate FRIENDS, in AMERICA.

To which are annexed for Comparison, the Congressional Declaration of
Independency in July 1776, and that, now inculating among the revolted
Provinces, with the never-to-beforgotten Orders of the Rebel General in August
1776, for preventing a Pacification.

NEW YORK: REPRINTED BY JAMES RIVINGTON.

INTRODUCTION.
THE Public will expect no apology for the present collection of these letters;
for it is decisive of their utility, that though the Rebels began, they have
found it expedient to discontinue, the re-publication of them in their Gazettes.

They made it a question at first, whether Deane was the real author of them?
and yet what is that to the arguments, if they are sound and substantial? But
this point is now settled -- Not one of the person to whom they are directed,
has ventured to deny his receipt of the duplicate; and their presses are
pouring out abuses upon their quondam Ambassador, as freely as of late against
General Arnold, whom they had before applauded as the most active and valiant
of their Heaven born Commanders The following is copied from a Philadelphia
Newspaper entitled the FREEMAN's JOURNAL. 23d January, 17^2.

"Last week diverse of the lengthy epistles of (...), Silas Deane, vaniously
directed, which had not p^ssed through the hands of the enemy, were delivered
unsea^ed to the Pr^sident of Congress. They contai^ arguments, opinions and
advice, exactly of the cast of those which predominate in the letters which
were lat^ly inserted as his in this paper, to soms of which there are express
references, in these last arrived. Those who had the opportunity of coming at
the truth, were already convinced that our publications were genuine; but the
incident above meationed, removes all doubt on this subject. Indeed the most
increavious must now admit the baseness of this quondam Commi^^^^er of the
nasted sla^es at the Cour^ of Versailles. Whether the ^aitor had taken the
money of George the Third, as early as the nes^rious attack on congress of
December, 1778* the cause of so much discord and distraction in our public
councils during the year 1779; or whether his prostitution is to be seemed
coeval only with the visit which Mr. Walpole, agent for the English owners of
lands in the Grenad^s, was last summer admitted to make at Paris, time only can
determine. By the last accoun^^ he was at Ostend preparing (...), without
doubt, for London.


.

This is natural, and it will be the ^^e of all their leaders, the moment they
disapprove of the aims of the Junto, who are, or conceive themselves to be,
interested in the dismemberment of the empire. Those execrations however, would
be turned into applause, if the desperadoes who compose it, saw a prospect
under the restoration of the British government, for what they have sought to
obtain by subverting it -- the non payment of their debts, a way of subsisting
without re-assuming their former abject occupations, and the retention of their
present possessions, free from contribution to the losses they have brought
upon the rest of their countrymen.

The Editor has no intention to defend Mr. Deane, who will doubtless find it
easier to deal with the clemen^ of his injured Sovereign, and the ^^^rality of
a brave and gener us nation; than to pacify his own cons^rence, or atone for
the complicated misery he has been instrumental in pulling down upon his
countrymen.

This collection of his epistles, is to aid him in the designs of his penitence
for repairing if possible the mischief he has done. Happy for America, if they
are conducive to the opening the eyes of others, before their wicked seducers
shall have completed their vassalage to a crafty and arbitrary Monarchy! That
they are not already in this gulf of perdition, is under God to be ascribed,
to the efforts of Great Britain, in favor of her numerous friends in this
country.

Be it the consolation of the suffering Loyalists, that no arts of their
oppressors for concealing their numbers, to lessen their consequence, can at
this day succeed.

Neither their songs nor their addresses, their illuminations, riots, shows nor
thanksgivings, with all the variety of essays and compositions, puffs, scandals
and gasconades, in prose and meter, under which the Rebel presses have groaned
ever since the French victory in the Chesapeak, avail but to show the impotence
of a party, vainly hoping to impress Europe with an idea of their strength, and
their own countrymen with a contempt of the power themselves dread, as the
avenger of their crimes.

It is a proof that though the domineering, they are the minor party, that they
forbid the liberty of the press, and in the case of their own Ambassador's
letters, dare not appeal to the understandings of the multitude; and it adds to
the evidence, that such unceasing pains are taken, to express a joy and
confidence, felt least by those who most promote the show and appearance.

With the help of a few lying letters, those Gazettes may perhaps influence the
councils of Versailles, and furnish matter for factious oratory in England;
certainly they cannot mislead those who form their estimate of the real temper
of America, from the clear demonstration afforded by the neglect of a great
m^^ority of the people to attend the elections for officers in the usurpation;
too well is it known for the success of those arts of the usurpers, that
Congress in all periods of this struggle, from the moment of the first
discovery of the pernicious and perfidious design to divide the empire, have
^uniformly d^clin^d the general voice, ar^ently as it has been desired by the
people, and advantageous as (...) must have been to the tyrants, to have
obtained their co^currence or approbation. -- It is und^bitably true, that

The collective body were not consulted

On the declaration of independency, even in-the tumultuous days of July 1776;
nor

On the confederation concerted at Little York, on the Susquehanna, in November
1777; nor

On the British-peace-overtures, in preference of the French offers, in 1778;
nor

On the propose^ for negociating a ^^^^ent of differences, as ten^re^ by the
fr^endly d^claration of December 1780.

You confess, therefore, usurpe^ (...) your aversion (...) the experiment of a
fair (...), on the question for or against (...) reunion, that you boast of a
concord which has no existence, you confirm it by your edicts, taxations and
merciless cruelties; in which you take away life by courts-martial, and violate
the very frames and constitutions yourserves imposed; and it will ever remain
(without any other proof) an inconrestible truth, that the majority of the
continent (...) your measures, till you consent to (...) general appea^
throughout all the towns, villages and districts within the reputed bounds of
the revol^.

To (...) futile policy of (...), and lying laws, implying (...) to raise
millions you do not (...) and the increase of a (...) which by creating a
depend^ (...) upon France, lessens your own (...) hope, of perpetuating the
domination you exercis^er your miserable (...) e^austed countrymen. Say, ye
(...), politicians of a pageant Con^ (...) ye not already neg^ected by (...)
partisans? and the powers (...), substantially shifted into the hands of a
triumvirate, composed of the French (...), your own General, and Finan^. (...)
ye are w^^er ye obey: and pray from whom do the rebel army few as they are, now
receive their rewards!

There is a perhaps that you may so magnisy yourselves by your fals^^^ 's, as
to cheat France (...) one of a^quiring the dominion (...) at first meant (...)
meant, for red^ (...) Britain, and (...) her amb^ (...) ^ations. Ad^it (...)
persuaded to say a firmer hol^ (...) Chesapeak, by a reinforcement of the
troops, with which she has already turned your countrymen out of their
possessions, and admit her able to retain them against Great Britain; is she
not from that moment, in a condition to set your authority at defiance? Tremble
then at the probable consequences of a partition of the Continent to give peace
to Europe; an event which will leave you nothing in that district which shall
happily be restored to it is ancient reunion, and little to hope for in that,
which shall unfortunately fall under a haughty and Popish oppressor. Is it for
this you have waded through the blood of your own countrymen? And what prospect
of an escape from this mighty ruin, but in the blessing of God upon the future
progress of the British arms; and that by listening to the counsels of Mr.
Dead, you like him, may be subjects of that clemency you have so often
despised. Wretched America! when Great Britain instead of a war of correction
to bring you to your senses, shall forget your descent, and proceed to press
you down by the weight of affliction and general desolation.

On either of these contingencies, the pertinacious authors or supporters of
the rebellion, may rue their agency in the measures so pernicious to themselves
and their countrymen. The day of doom cannot be afar off, Pax quaeritur Bello,
and let those two individuals dread it most, who by a pre-eminence in guilt,
ventured to write and publish the general orders to the rebel army in August
1776; which by falsely denying, contrary to all virtuous and honorable policy,
the message of peace, then in their hands, prevented the instantaneous
restoration of the common tranquillity; and for the hope to themselves of the
precedence of Pennsylvania, and rank in the French army, have sent thousands of
a cheated, insulted and credulous host to the shades.

DEAR SIR, Paris, 14th June. 1781.
THERE has been lately published in the English and Dutch Gazettes, a
resolution of Congress, of March last, tending to forbid all intercourse
between the inhabitants of America and Great Britain, or on any account or i^
any circumstan^es whatever; and it is credibly reported that all British goods,
however the property of them may have been acqui^d (capture excepted) are
declared to be contraband and liable to be confiscated, and that an American in
Europe, or the West Indies, who purchases goods of British growth or
manufacture, will on his importation of them, into America, be exposed to have
his property seized, and to be (...) or at least censured* Several gentlem^n
(...) from America, have informed me, that such ^^solutions and laws, were
proposed before they left the conti^ent; and the men^ce thrown ou^ by Messrs.
Adams, Dana, and Searle, against any who should purchase British goods for the
American market, leaves me in no kind of doubt, that such violent and
^considera^e measures have been actually adopted by Congre^s, and by some, if
not by all the Assemblies. -- I know not what good effects are expecte^ in
America from such resolutions, in Europe, they are esteemed impolitic, and
useless at best for any good purpose, but what is to me the most alarming, is
that those resolutions were taken in consequence of representations made by the
French Minister at Philadelphia; and are we, in all the pride of independent
sovereignty, become greater slaves, even than the subjects of France? Is the
Congress, and are our Assemblies become so dependant on this Court, as to be
dictated to even by it is Minister? The merchants of France go freely to London,
purchase goods, and though they are obliged at all times, whether in peace or
war, to introduce them privately into the kingdom, or pay a heavy tax, yet when
once introduced they sell them openly as English goods; they now advertise them
as such, and you can scarce go through a street in Paris, without seeing many
stores, over the doors of which, English Goods just imported, are advertised
for sa^e; Congress have within three years past, acted so often in direct
contradiction to their own resolves and declarations, that it is no way
surprising that they have lost the confidence of the public, on this side the
water at least they have entirely lost it; the King gave a large sum of money
about the time of Mr. Laurens's arrival, for the use of the army, but the Court
had so little confidence in Congress, that the money was made payable to
General Washington's orders only, nor could they be induced, by the earnest
solicitations of Doctor Franklin, to give Congress any control over it; this
shows either that they have no confidence in Congress, or that they mean to
take General Washington and his army in effect into their pay, and make them
subservient to their purposes; Mr. Laurens obtained liberty to lay out a part
of the money in clothing and necessary articles for the army; the Ministers
probably considered it more for the interest of France, and better for the
army, to have such part of the money as must go in purchase of clothing, etc.
laid out in France, than sent in specie to America; but what followed? Mr.
Laurens sent his agent to Holland and laid out one million and a half of
livres, nearly, in British manufactures. -- Thus whilst Mr. Adams was
declaiming in Holland against England, and protesting against all use of its
manufactures, and threatening every American that should purchase them, with
being advertised as the enemy of his country, the Agents of Congress were
publicly (and therefore I presume with his knowledge) purchasing those
proscribed manufactures for public use; can the annals of the world exhibit
more striking instances of inconsistency? This public preference given to the
manufactures of England, by laying out the money granted by France in the
purchase of them, has irritated the Minister, ^^d given general disgust; our
affairs here will (...) feel the consequences, nor do I believe that we shall
have any credit at all, nor that our bills will be paid in two months from this
time. -- Mr. Laurens was not to blame in this affair, so far as I know any
thing of it, he acted prudently, and for the interest of his constituents; he
did what you and every honest merchant would have done, in his place he had
money to lay out for the public, and he sought the best market for the goods,
most suitable, and such as were to be had on the best terms; besides there was
a strong ship in Holland bound for America, in which they could be transported
at little risque. -- But what can be said of Congress for passing resolves,
which they must know will not be obeyed, and which as soon as published, they
themselves destroy, by acting in direct contradiction to them? What I have
hinted about our bills keep to yourself, or use it only to check any of our
friends who may be disposed to venture too deep in them. You may be assured
that no loan has been obtained either in Spain or Holland; that there is not
the least probability of any; that the resignation of Mr. Neckar has been a
sensible shock to public credit in France; and that great embarrassments are
apprehended in a few months on account of money; that too many begin to
consider every livre granted to America, as so much lest, and that Doctor
Franklin is now under acceptances for nearly three millions of livres more than
he has funds to answer for. -- Th^^e facts are sufficient for your direction --
The Doctor may possibly obtain fresh grants -- I doubt it -- I know he has been
refused, and I am told in rather harsh terms. -- Congress drew bil^s on Mr.
President Laurens, as being in Holland, many months before he sailed from
America; they drew on Mr. Jay long before his arrival in Spain; these bills
have been honored and you in America have been taught to believe that it was
from money received in Spain und Holland -- no such thing -- those bills have
been uniformly sent to Doctor Franklin for payment, even the salaries of Mr.
Jay and Mr. Adams, and their suites, have been drawn for on Doctor Franklin,
who has paid them out of the moneys received here. The Agents of private States
sent over here on one mad Quixotical scheme or other, have been furnished with
money for their expenses, out of the sums granted for the support of our army;
our Ambassadors and Agents have for some time past cost us at least twenty
thousand pounds sterling per annum, the relief of prisoners, and other
contingencies, more than as much more, all this has been taken from the money
afforded us by France for our army, Congress though repeatedly advised by
Doctor Franklin not to draw on him, have continued to draw without bounds, and
generally without advice; by their conduct one would suspect that they imagined
that the Treasury of France was at their disposal, and that they had a right to
draw what money they pleased from it. -- The Ministers here see no end to this
proceeding if permitted to run on, and if the Agents and Ministers of Congress
are permitted to contract debts, and draw on them for the payment, and if
Congress are at liberty to draw un^imitedly on Dr. Franklin, and they obliged
to answer ultimately their drafts, it is reasonable therefore to expect, that
France under its actual circumstances, will hold its hand, and that you will
soon find the bills of Congress protested for non-acceptance, or non-payment;
nothing prevents it at this moment, but the fear of a violent revolution with
us -- Is it to be supposed that France will be content for any time to defray
the expense of the various Quixotical embassies Congress are sending to
different Courts? -- That she will continue to advance money to be laid out
under her eyes, in the manufactures of her enemies, to the contempt of those of
her own; and to her real impoverishment? You who believe this have faith
indeed, but it is a question with me if it is such as will remove mountains. I
know and confess the difficult situation of Congress -- And I know also, (what
I am sure they will not confess) that they have brought themselves into it by
their cabals, their ignorance, and their mismanagement; but their present
embarrassments afford them no excuse for their involving themselves in still
greater -- If you ask me what they can do? I answer at once, let them do what
for a long time past they have left undone, let them act an honest and
consistent part, let them acknowledge their inability, let them in a word, lay
their case fairly as it is before their Ally, let them weigh fairly the
probable chances for their succeeding to establish Independent Sovereignty, and
if they find the probability against it, let them honestly confess it, and put
an end to the calamities of our country, by a peace on honorable terms; perhaps
to talk of peace on other conditions than Great-Britain's asking for it on
bended knees, is toryism with you, if so, I cannot help it. I have for some
time since, had the fate, though I shall never have the fame of Cassandra; I
have predicted misfortunes and disappointments -- Nobody has believed my
predictions, yet they have hitherto been uniformly verified by events; "I could
still prophecy but the cold hand of despair is on me" and I will only add my
wishes for your prosperity, and be assured of my sincere respect and attachment.

I am, Dear Sir, Your most obedient, And very humble Servant, (Signed) SILAS
DEANE.

To Col. Wm. Duer, to the care of Robt. Morris, Esquire Philadelphia.
Paris, 10th June, 1781. Dear Sir,
THE dangerous crisis to which our affairs are rapidly advancing affects me
greatly -- I can speak of nothing el^e with attention when in company, it
excludes every thing else from my thoughts when alone, we have been deceived,
and that principally by ourselves, we have deceived others uninten^ly I
charitably believe. The British nation has ^allen into errors equally great;
would to God this great tragedy of errors, could have a happy catastrophe! It
is in vain to blame our public managers, but it is wis^ in us to examine our
present si^uation and to weigh the probability of future consequences.
Experience has shown us that France is either unable or unwilling to assist us
effectually, so as to drive the British force out of our country; judging from
appearances, here I might conclude, tha^ France is unwilling, as appearances
warrant such a conclusion, but when the conduct of men, or of a nation is
capable of two constructions, I would willingly adopt the most favourab^ -- I
know the inability of the nation to assist us effectually, and they say, they
are not unwilling I ought to believe them, though I know it is certainly
inconsistent with their interest, and with the safety of their foreign
possessions to remove the war from our continent. But to which ever of these
causes we impute the continuance of the war, in our country, the consequences
will be found equally pernicious to us. Great Britain is determined in no
circumstances to admit the independency of America, and so long as both parties
remain inflexible, we shall continue to weaken, exhaust and ruin each other,
and who will eventually be the gainers? It is, I think time ***** for us to
enquire how our account will stand on a close. Let the contest close, when or
in what manner it may -- Will independent sovereignty, in the hands of a
democracy, be a government under which our persons and properties will be
better secured than they were before this unhappy contest began? -- Will our
commerce flourish more under independency, than it did whilst we were connected
with Great Britain? This I know is generally believed, it is even relied on, as
a principal source from which we shall reimburse our present expenses. -- The
subject however merits an examination. -- If the restraints formerly laid on
our trade were overbalanced by the protection and encouragement given to it. If
in a state of independence, that protection and encouragement must necessarily
be withdrawn, and our commerce with Great Britain and its possessions, become
subject to all the duties and prohibitions laid on the commerce of other aliens
and strangers. If ou^ commerce with France and other foreign nations must be
subject to the conditions and restraint which they shall see sit to impose, as
must be the case, it deserves enquiry whether we in our commerce shall become
gainers or not. I have examined the question as thoroughly as I am capable, and
am convinced we must be losers. We complained of England for including America
in the Navigation Act, and other acts of trade, but if the naval force of that
nation rose in consequence of those acts, into a power sufficient to protect
the trade of the whole empire; if the trade of America was protected thereby,
could it be unreasonable that the trade of America should submit to those acts
and regulations which were the source of its protection and security? We
complained that acts of parliament prohibited us from carrying certain articles
of our produce to foreign markets, and thereby gave England a monopoly
advantageous to her and injurious to us; but it must at the same time be
acknowledged that British subjects were generally restrained from purchasing
and importing the same articles from other countries; so that if England made a
monopoly of certain articles of our produce, she gave us in return a monopoly
of her market, and the liberty of re-exporting our goods if a better market
afforded elsewhere; in this, the advantage ay evidently with us; a great part
of the articles thus monopolized by England, were such as could have been, and
were formerly supplied by foreigners at as low or lower rates than we could
afford them. But the system of Great Britain being as you know to promote the
commerce of her own empire in every part of it, not only restraints and duties
were laid on foreign importations, but bounties given to encourage the growth
and importation of many of our productions, which otherwise would not have
found their way to Europe; another complaint was, that we were prohibited the
taking from foreigners, articles, which we wanted though not the growth or
fabric of England; but it is well known that those articles concerning which so
much has been said, formed but a very inconsiderable part of our commerce. --
Every one who has had an opportunity of comparing the manufactures of one
nation in Europe with another, of observing the different modes and principles
of transacting business, will at once give England and her merchants the
preference. All the more solid, substantial and useful articles are made
better, and afforded cheaper there, than any where else, certain linens from
Russia and Silesia excepted -- and even those as well as the less important
foreign articles, came to us, considering the drawbacks in England on
exportation, nearly, if not quite as cheap, as we could have imported them
directly. But it has been also objected that foreigners were not admitted to
bring their produce and merchandise into our ports, and trade with us; of all
the complaints made by us on the subject of comme^ce, this appears to me the
most absurd and gr^ndless. The exclusion of foreigners from being the carriers
for England is the corner stone in which its commerce and maritime power arose,
and the principal cause of the increase of our commerce and navigation, and if
ever we should be independent and at peace and should neglect to pass acts to
exclude foreigners from being our carriers, we shall never be either a maritime
or commercial nation. -- The Parliament^ary regulations, and restrictions on
our commerce were a principal cause of the unhappy contest between the two
countries, and we were impatient under them because we were apprehensive, that
they were part of a system to enslave us entirely, and thus thinking it was
natural that we should exaggerate their hardships, and in all our deliberation
on the subject, turn our attention to the restraints laid on trade, without
considering the encouragement and protection given to it; I do not mean to call
in question the views or designs of any one at that period. I believe that
others as well as myself, had at that time but partially examined the subject,
and in truth we know that too many of our leading patriots had little or no
knowledge of commerce, its interests and dependencies. -- I confess that on a
more extensive view, and impartial examination of the subject, I think it
evident that the restrictions which were laid on our commerce previous to the
present dispute were over-balanced by the protection, and various
encouragements afforded to it by Great Britain, but supposing that at the close
of the war America remain independent, what must be the future situation of our
commerce? Will independency at the restoration of peace, give commerce such a
spring, procure for it such new sources and encouragements as are necessary,
not only to revive it from the ruined state in which it now is, but to raise it
still higher than it has been at any former period? Or will independency prove
prejudicial to the commerce of America? This is a serious question, and the
importance of it must apologize for the length of my letter. I know that I am
writing to the first commercial character in America, but I also know your
candor and love of truth, and therefore I venture to communicate to you my
thoughts on the subject, which if just you will approve, if erroneous you will
correct. America left at liberty will, I am persuaded, take at the least,
threefourths of all the European articles she wants from Great Britain. The
superiority of the British manufactures, their conformity to our taste and
habits; the generosity and strict punctuality of her merchants, and above all
the credit which they can give, and which no other nation can, or will give,
must secure to that nation, as great a share of our trade as I have mentioned.
But how are we to pay for those purchases? Whilst we were part of the empire,
Great Britain gave a preference to our iron, naval stores, pot ash, flax seed,
timber, etc. etc. and encouraged the importation of them by bounties, and by
laying heavy duties on the same articles from foreign nations. This will no
longer be the case; we have no reason to expect to be even amongst the most
favored foreign nations in the British ports. We have imagined that
Great Britain would not support its commerce, and manufactures, without our
productions and without our markets for a consumption of theirs; this has been
asserted, in harangues and publications many thousands of times within seven
years past, I confess, that I once believed it -- but observation and
experience have convinced me, that we have been greatly mist^ken. -- Of all the
articles furnished by us to Great Britain, I know but two, tobacco and ^ce,
which cannot be obtained as good and as cheap from other countries. The
consumption of rice in Great Britain, is very inconsiderable; and that of
tobacco, does not exceed twenty thousand hogsheads annually, on an average. --
Other countries indeed can produce both these articles at as low a price as
America can, but the preference given to them from America by Great Britain,
has formerly prevented their being cultivated to any extent. -- It is well
known that the Island of Cuba, the Coast of Brazil, and many other countries
produce tobacco of a quality superior to ours. -- That the Ukraine is capable
of supplying all Europe with that article: its cultivation it is true is not
yet carried to perfection there, but as it is, Russia at this time exports
large quantities of tobacco to France, and to other nations. -- The same may be
said of many other countries respecting rice. Indigo is produced in the
Southern parts of America, and in the Islands, every way superior to ours. --
The productions of Russia, Denmark and Sweden, etc. are the same with ours, and
in exchange for them, those kingdoms take the same kind of merchandise from
England as we formerly took; at best therefore we shall meet with rivals in the
British markets on our arrival with our produce, and rivals in the purchases we
wish to make there -- But we are supposed to be Independent, and can therefore
go where we please, but we cannot find purchasers where we please, and the
nations among whom we find them may lay what impositions they please on our
sales -- The Northern powers in Europe cannot become purchasers for they have
the same articles to sell -- France wants but a very small part of our
productions; it wants neither our iron, pot-ash, flax seed, fish, oil, or in
short, scarcely any thing except about 24000 hogsheads of our tobacco, annually
-- Our timber and naval stores; and for the two latter articles, we shall find
the same rivals in the ports of France as in England; and in regard to the
first, the most important article of all, the cultivation of it advances so
rapidly in Flanders, and in the Ukraine, that those countries will soon rival
us in the quality of their tobacco, and from the cheapness of labor, be able
at all times to undersell us in France, and in all the Northern ports of Europe
-- We have no promise of a preference in the markets of France -- nor the least
ground to expect it -- Spain and Portugal it is true, may want our flour and
our fish if, contrary to all appearance, we should have any, but they will want
little or nothing else, and our trade, be it whatever it may, to the Southern
parts of Europe, and into the Mediteranean, must at all times be exposed to the
Corsairs of Barbary -- Those piratical states, who pay little or no respect to
the flags of the first maritime nations in Europe, further than they are paid
for it, will hardly pay any to the flag of a nation, they have scarcely so much
as heard of, and of which, if they come to know any thing, they will know that
they can in no case have any thing to hope or fear from -- We have protested
against the African trade, but if we relax or rescind our resolutions on that
subject, without a marine to protect our commerce there, and without either
forts or factories on the coast, we can have no share of it -- We cannot
flatter ourselves that we shall be able to reduce either Nova Scotia,
Newfoundland, Canada, or the Floridas; and if Great Britain be obliged at the
close of the war to submit to the loss of thirteen colonies, it is natural to
supposs she will exert herself to make the most of those which are left her --
We neither have nor wish for possessions in the West Indies -- We formerly had
a great and increasing trade there, but how much of it shall we retain as an in
^ependent nation? If any part of the globe be de^endent on us for our produce
it must be the W^st-Indies -- Five years ago we rated our importance so high as
to believe that from a suspension of trade with us, all the manufacturing towns
in England would rise, or at least, clamor loudly in our favor, through the want
of employment; that Ireland would be ruined only for the want of our flax-seed,
and that the British West Indies must perish by famine from the want of our
productions -- But the experience of six years ought certainly to correct such
erroneous ideas of our own importance, or we must have been incorrigible even
by experience itself -- Not one manufacturing town in Great Britain has
complained for want of employ; Ireland has been supplied with flax-seed at as
cheap, or cheaper rate than formerly, and has found sufficient markets for her
linens -- The West Indies may have suffered but little diminution. These facts
ought to convince us that the world is not so dependent on us, as we have
imagined, and by pursuing our enquiries we shall find that we are as much, or
more dependent on our neighbors than they are on us -- I am not writing to one
who declaims against luxury, without any conception of its effects, nor to one
of those who talk a great deal about commerce, and of its benefits, or of its
disservices ^o a country, without having the least idea of its nature, or of
the extent of its influence and power: I therefore may, without reasoning on
the subject, venture to say that the pro^^tions of the West Indies are
essentially necessary to us, and that we can do no better without their suga^,
coffee, cocoa. cotton, etc. etc. than ^^^y without our flour, beef, lumber,
etc. etc. Formerly as British subjects, we had the right of supplying the
British Islands with whatever they wanted, and taking in exchange whatever they
had to dispose of -- We paid no more d^ies (...) our other fellow subjects
paid, either upon importation or exportation -- We had a right of carrying to
the French, Dutch, and other foreign possessions in the West Indies, all our
productions, tobacco excepted, and of receiving in ^change from them, whatever
they could lord, rum and a few other articles excepted -- The articles we
received from them were indeed subject to a certain duty on importation into
America. But how was it then and how is it now with the French, Dutch, and
other foreigners, as to our commerce with their West India possessions: It is
true we were admitted into their ports, but our flour was a prohibited article,
and only admitted openly in times of scarcity. Many principal articles of our
produce were in the same predicament: France, by prohibiting our flour into her
Islands, shows that she was in no fear of their starving without supplies from
us. But what articles of their produce were we permitted to purchase and export
openly is exchange? Molasses, or the wretched liquor which they distilled from
it, only; all others, such as coffee, cotton, sugar, indigo, etc. we brought
away as by stealth, and by the purchased connivance of their officers -- Has
France bound herself by treaty to give us more freedom of trade with her
Island^ than formerly? By no means -- We are to be treated as the most favored
nation is treated; and the subjects of the most favored nation were never
better treated than the manner I have described -- This favorite article of my
countrymen, mol^sses, the only one of any importance, which we were at liberty
to import from the French Islands, was taken care of by Congress in their first
proposals to France for a treaty. I saw the importance of it at that time, and
flattered myself we had secured it, without any real sacrifice on our part, but
Congress afterward thought differently, and gave it up. We have not therefore,
at this day, any security even for this single article -- Every thing rests on
the general and ^ague terms of recipr^cally, and of being treated in the same
way, and in the same manner, as any, even the most favored nation shall be
treated. But it may be said that the necess^ry in which the Islands must be for
our produce, will at all times bring them to our terms, or at least to just and
reasonable ones. Let us examine the subject attentively -- The French islands
can be under no necessity of taking from us flour, or salted previsions of any
kind; on the contrary, it is the policy of France, to prohibit them from doing
it, if so disposed; for by supplying her islands with flour of her own growth
and manu^acture, and with all kinds of salted provisions purchased in Europe
with her brandies, wines, etc. she encourages the agriculture and commerce of
her subjects in Europe, which is a prime object with every wise nation; as to
fresh provisions, her windward islands only can ever be in w^nt of them, and at
most the demand is inconsiderable collectively, and the business of supplying
never was in the best of times a profitable branch of commerce; Great Britain
in possession of Canada, Nova Scotia, and the Floridas can from those colonies
supply her islands with every thing they want, at as low or lower rate than we
can; wheat, flour, pork, beef, horses, etc. have for many years since, and
before the war, been cheaper in Canada than with us, and West India goods of
every kind have been dearer; Great Britain therefore naturally must and will
shut her ports against us as a foreign independent nation; her islands will
want nothing from us which they cannot be supplied with from her own colonies
in the continent, and those islands produce nothing which is not wanted either
in Great Britain or in those colonies; good policy must therefore lead her
totally to exclude us from all trade with them. Our commerce in this most
important branch of it must therefore be confined to the supplying the French,
Dutch, and other foreign islands and settlements, with such articles as they
will consent to t^ke from us, and receiving in return molasses (openly so long
as they shall think proper to afford it to us free of duty) and such other
productions as they may be pleased to connive at our smuggling. -- Thus in
Europe, we shall be either excluded from our ancient and certain markets, or a^
least rivalled in them, and we shall have no certainty of new ones, nor any
security against heavy duties and impositions in such, as we may be able to
obtain. -- New channels have been opened for supplying Great Britain with the
commodities we formerly furnished to that nation, and for consuming the
manufactures we formerly took from her. It was the interest and policy of
Great Britain to promote our commerce and fisheries, whilst we were part of the
empire; accordingly she encouraged our ship building by the purchase of our
ships, or by giving them freights; but being independent, the reverse will
become both her interest and policy toward us; her ports will be entirely shut
against us in the West Indies, for the reasons already given, and our commerce
in that important branch confined, as I have shown, to the furnishing the
French, Dutch, and other foreign settlements, with such articles as they shall
consent to receive, and under such conditions as they shall see fit to impose,
and in return they will give us molasses, if they please, free of duty. But
their sugar, coffee, cotton, etc. will ever remain prohibited articles so long
as those nations are interested to make a monopoly of these articles in Europe,
both on account of commerce and revenue, and it is impossible they can be
interested to do otherwise; when France was in possession of Canada,
Louisbourg, etc. the government did not permit those colonies to receive sugar,
coffee, or any of the productions of those islands direct from them, but
obliged those colonies to take them from France, charged with double freights,
duties, etc. and can we expect that France will do for us what she ever refused
to do for her own subjects? That she will grant us privileges which she never
granted to any other nation? Can we expect that Great Britain, resentful on
account of her losses, and desirous of encouraging the colonies which may
remain to her in America, and which will be able to supply her islands with
every thing, can we expect that she will permit us to trade with those islands
on any terms? It is repugnant to common sense to suppose it. Congress, you may
remember spent some months in debate about the fisheries, they acted the parts
of the hunters who quarrelled about the bearskin -- for England in the mean
time drove our Allies, as well as us, entirely out of them; nor can France
regain any interest in the fisheries, but by the sacrifice of some advantage
which she has, or may hereafter gain. But how are we to come in for any share
in them? It will be to no purpose to plead that our local situation gives us a
natural right to participate, and that we enjoyed that right from our first
settlement, etc. -- We enjoyed it is true, that right with many others, as
subjects and part of the British empire, but we have separated from it and
appealed to the sword; the sword has decided against us on that subject, and
shall we at the peace have any thing to give or restore to Great Britain, equal
to the purchase of what that nation is almost as jealous of as Spain is of her
mines? Will France after having regained a share in the fisheries for herself,
go still further to obtain an interest in them for us? Look-into the treaty
between us, and you will find that France and we acted a little like the
hunters I have referred to, in our division of Newfoundland and the fisheries;
but it was made on condition of a conquest of them by either or both of us;
that failing, France is under no obligation to guaranty any part of them to us;
and what puts the matter out of all question is, that it is not for their
interest that America have any share in the fisheries. -- Deprived of these,
and of almost all the West India trade, wholly excluded from that of Africa, as
well as from the benefit of selling our iron, pot-ash, flax-seed, timber, naval
stores, indigo, etc. advantageously in Great Britain and Ireland, with few or
no markets opened for those commodities, what resources will be left for our
commerce? No nation is Europe will give a suitable price for our indigo,
Ireland is supplied with flax seed and lumber from the North, at a lower rate
than we can afford to sell them a^; Sweden and Russia can at all times
undersell us, in the articles of iron, timber, ships, naval stores of every
kind pot-ash, etc. The bounti^s on tar, turpentine, etc. being taken off, we
cannot send those articles to Europe, without an insupportable loss, and we
cannot expect that any nation (like England) will give us bounties on those
articles. In taking a view of the West India commerce, I have said nothing in
particular of the Spanish, Portuguese, or Danish settlements in America. I
think you will agree with me, that as the two former have ever been, and most
probably will remain shut against all strangers, nothing can be expected from
thence, and that as to the latter, they are too inconsiderable to merit
particular attention even were they not nearly in the same predicament, with
those of France and Holland, which you know them in truth to be.

These external difficulties, appear to me to be of themselves insurmountable,
but they are not all we shall have to encounter, if we should, contrary to all
probability, continue independent -- Without a marine force, our commerce will
be every where exposed to imposition and insult, and we shall not probably be
able to support a marine -- In truth neither our friends, nor our foes, can
wish to see us a maritime power, but there will arise at the peace, and in a
state of independency, other embarrassments and burdens on our commerce. Our
national debt, considering our ability will be immense, and we shall not easily
agree in apportioning of it, to the several states. This, and a multitude of
other causes for dispute, are so certain, and so likely to be productive, that
it will be miraculous, if we can avoid a civil war with each other, as soon as
we shall be f^^ed from foreign enemies. Heavy taxes must at least be laid to
pay even the interest of our public debts in the exhausted state in which the
pe^ce will find us. We cannot think of lessening the principal until the
continent shall have had some time to recover itself. But the interest of our
public debt and the expenses of government in each state will (though they must
prove heavy) not be the whole of our burdens. The civil (...) Congress
including the expenses of their foreign ministers, consuls, etc. will exceed
all our former expenses, public and private, under our ancient government.
Commerce therefore will necessarily become the subject of heavy taxes, because
the landholders who are naturally jeal^^s of commerce, and not the merchants
will ^redeminate in making our laws, and imposing our ta^es, a large share of
the taxes must however fall on the landholder, which will oblige him to raise
the price of his productions, and this with the taxes on trade, will increase
it to such a height, that we shall find no market in which we shall not be
undersold by foreigners. You, who are perfectly acquainted with the disposition
of those who form the Congress and the Assemblies of the several states, know
that it is very far from being favorable to commerce; their views are so
contracted, that they never have seen that agriculture and commerce mutually
depend on, and support each other. The resolutions of Congress in almost every
instance, demonstrate their ignorance of the principles and effects of
commerce; the non-exportation agreement (for which I must blame myself as well
as others) was a fatal measure; it laid the ax to the root of our commerce, and
our agriculture fell with it; that resolution shows what extravagant ideas we
then had of our importance, we flattered ourselves that by shutting our ports,
we should distress Great Britain and Ireland, and starve the West Indies, so
far as to effect our purposes, but the operation of that resolve well nigh
starved our army, and the poorer people, and brought distress to the doors of
every order; unhappily but too many of our leaders are still buoyed up with the
same wild and groundless ideas, and when I hear men, reputed as the wisest and
most enlightened of American patriots, advance that commerce is rather
injurious, than beneficial and that it would be better to have foreigners who
want our produce, to come and purchase it, than for us to carry it to them.
That the whole attention of America as an independent nation, should be turned
to agriculture, and the manufacturing of articles of the first necessity. When
I hear such doctrines advanced, and by men whom America has been taught to look
up to revere, and reviewing at the same time the other circumstances which I
have touched on, I become doubtful, whether our commerce would not suffer as
greatly from internal checks and embarrassments, as from external ones -- but,
my dear Friend, we are very far from the peaceable establishment of
independency, so far, that I heartily tell you, that I think there is not any
probability of its ever taking place, at least in our day. The nations of
Europe, France excepted, are all of them against it, and none more so than
Spain, France becomes every day more indifferent to it, but so long as we can
be made their instruments for humbling Great Britain, Spain will temporize, and
France will appear to be in earnest on the subject; we are certainly the
cheapest instruments they can find to employ full one half of the forces of
Great Britain; forces, which if left at liberty to fall on their foreign
possessions, would soon reduce them to the state they were in 1762. But how
dearly do we pay for the services we are performing.

The Powers of Europe, hitherto neuter, appear at this time far from being
indifferent to the fate of Great Britain, should any of them take part with
her, the war will assume a different appearance, and our sa^e will ^ecom from
that moment determined I think there is a probability of such an event t^king
place soon, but my wish and prayer is for peace, and th^re-establishment of
America in her ^iginal rights. The present moment is unquestionably the most
important America has ever seen, we a^e now of more w^ght in the general scale
than we can possibly expect to be hereafter, should the Po^ cr^f Europ once
agree, on the term of p^^c^, our assent will hardly be asked, and we should ^d
it necessary to acquies^e in the terms imposed on us. -- The present
opportunity ought therefore to be improved; England it is true, has a
formidable league at this time against her, but we find in ancient as well as
modern times, that nations less able to resist, have been successful, against
leagues still more formidable; I do not indeed recollect any one league, that
ever came off victorious, over the single power leagued against. The cause is
in the nature of men, and nations; it must therefore still exist in a certain
degree, and I know not why it should not even in its full force. You will call
this a political letter, against which we have often protested, I intended it
only as a commercial one, but I could not examine the future probable state of
our commerce under independency, without (...), I have ^ed you so effectually
by this time, that I will take my leave without ceremony; it is now to beg that
you will make my most respectful compliments to Mrs. Morris, and to assure you
that I am ever with the most sincere esteem and attachment,

Dear Sir, Your most obedient, and very humble servant, S DEANE.

Hon. Robert Morris, Esquire Philadelphia.
Paris, 13th June, 1781. Dear Sir,
THE appointment of an Ambassador to the Empress of Russia, has led me to make
some serious reflections on the idea which Congress entertain of their own
importance in the commercial and political world; they appear to be persuaded
that every nation in Europe, England excepted, are interested to have us
independent, and though they have been told the contrary by every Power they
have applied to except France, yet the flattering delusion continues, and a
Minister Extraordinary has been sent to Russia. The fact is, that there is not
one Power in Europe, except France, interested in having us independent, and by
much the greater part are interested against us; the Emperor of Germany, and
King of Prussia, not being commercial Powers, can be very little affected
either way; Holland, and all the Northern Powers, a^^ naturally interested
against us; their productions and ours, are the same in every article, indigo
and ri^e only excepted; Russia raises tobacco for its own consumption, and
begins to export large quantity, to its neighbors; the two great sources of
he Dutch wealth, are their fisheries and their freights for other nations, in
both these America must soon interfere with them; the Ne^ Englanders began to
rival them in th^se branch^s of business before the war; if we l^^k ^outhward,
Portugal owes its existence (...) an independent (...) to England; were ^ngland
once so (...) as to receive the law from France and Spain, Portugal would
instantly become annex^d to the latter; the wealth ^f Spain lies in its Islands
in the West Indies, and in its provinces on the continent; can Spain wish to
see a mighty independent empire of confederate Republics, established in the
neighborhood of all its treasures? It is to the lest degree absurd to suppose
that Court can be so blind to the consequences which must soon result from such
an event; whilst we continue dependent on Great Britain, and under its
control, Spain will have nothing to dread so long as it continues to be on
good terms with the Court of London, and the European connections and alliances
of Spain, will serve to prevent that Court from wantonly breaking with Spain;
but North America freed from all European control, will be at liberty to break
with Spain at any time, without disturbing the peace of Europe, or interesting
any of its powers in the quarrel; the family connection between the Courts of
France and Spain, and the desire of revenge for her former losses, have led
Spain into a war, but it is evident that the Court of Spain, will not on any
considerations make the war a common cause with us. -- America out of the
question, Great Britain is greatly superior to France and Spain united; this
France and Spain are sensible of, and therefore give us good words and
encourage us on, that England may be weakened by our expense; France has acted
openly it is true, but the assistance afforded us from time to time has been
calculated, not to drive the British forces from the continent, but to keep us
from accommodating, and to employ their enemy with us. Spain has given us a
trisling aid in money, but in the most secret manner, more like a bribe than a
subsidy. The other Southern Powers, are not in any respect interested in our
dependence or independence, but are perfectly indifferent as to either, nor if
they should interest themselves would it be of the least consequence. But you
may say, France having valuable possessions in the West Indies, ought on the
general principle which I have advanced, to fear the consequences of our
independence. -- Not at all. -- The possessions of France from their being
islands, can have nothing to apprehend from the independent sovereignty of the
United States. -- France will at all times have a fleet sufficient to protect
them, and it can never be our interest to have any other concern with them than
in the way of commerce -- but our position with respect to Spain is different
-- Nothing but a river will separate us, and the contrariety of our
dispositions, manners, and habits are such, that it is impossible, if left to
ourselves, that we should live for any time in peace with each other. --
Congress to induce Spain to declare and to act openly, have offered to cede the
two Floridas -- It is really no great act of generosity to offer what is not
our's, but suppose Spain accepts and gets possession of them we shall thereby
become still nearer our neighbors, and quarrel so much the sooner -- Spain is
not however, or appears not to be contented with this offer, insinuates that
Louisiana ought to be thrown into the scale -- on condition of her guaranting
our independence. It is but too probable, that Congress will not even refuse
this, if they are persuaded that their independent sovereignty cannot be
established on easier terms But no man of sense and knowledge in these affairs,
can imagine that Spain is scrious in this demand, or that, that court means any
thing else, by it than to gain time -- Spain cannot be ignorant that from the
day in which we become peaceably established in Independent Sovereignty, she
must look forward to the loss of all her southern provinces as an event
certain, and not very distant; and she must know, that though she obtain
Louisiania, yet the Allegany, or western mountains, will be as insufficient a
barrier between us, as the river Missisippi -- I must tell you, that our
Independence is spoke of in a very different style here, from what it was three
years since, it is not viewed here in the light in which Congress speak of it,
when they say it is as fixed as fate (or if they mean any thing) as certain as
those eternallaws of nature which Omnipotence itself cannot alter; on the
contrary, it is considered by every sensible man here, as not only doubtful,
but the probability greatly against us: The consequences of American
Independence are also estimated very disterent from what they were formerly in
France -- Experience has shown, that our attachment to the English manners,
customs, and to their manufactures, is such, that if Independent and at liberty
to trade where we please, England will have the preference; almost every
American who arrives in France is impatient to get over to England, and the
severe laws you are passing on that subject, may prevent their ever returning
to America, during the war at least; but it will not prevent their going over
-- The laws ordering confiscation, etc. demonstrate more fully than any direct
language is capable of, the predilection of Americans for England. France,
though at war with England, permits her subjects to go to London openly and
when they please, they taking out passports, and not a week passes but some of
the citizens of Paris go over to London, and there are now more than four times
the English goods consumed in this city, than there were before the war; the
better sort of people here, both at court and in the city, are now become mad,
as I may say, after every thing that is English, and even the ribbons worn by
the ladies at court, are, in a great part, from English loems.

I have been told that Mons. Luzern remonstrated to Congress against our
trading with England, or purchasing and importing its manufactures, and that
those laws have passed in compliance with his remonstrances and requests; I am
unwilling to believe it, for if true, we are become, and that voluntarily,
greater slaves to France than its own subjects are. On whatever ground the laws
have been passed, I venture to predict that not any one good effect will be
produced by them, but the contrary -- A little time will show what success Mr.
Dana meets with at Russia, but if he meets with any at all, I am greatly
mistaken -- I know of no Power in Europe, Portugal only excepted, that is
naturally and necessarily more in the English interest than Russia -- I hear
that your spirits were greatly raised on hearing of the declaration of England
against Holland; I expected it would be the case, though every thing considered
there is not the least ground for encouragement from that event, but the
contrary -- It is now more than four months since England commenced
hostilities, yet the Dutch have made no reprisals, nor are they prepared to
make any at this time. Nearly one half of the Republic are violently against a
war with England on any considerations whatever -- The views of England in
declaring were to exclude Holland from the armed neutrality, to dissolve at
once a confederacy, which at best, could not have lasted any time, and to
deprive France and Spain of their naval supplies, furnished by the Dutch, and
the French Islands of provisions, by the same channels -- The purpose has been
effected -- Russia offers to mediate, but refuses to take part with Holland;
Denmark has in effect long since deserted the confederation, and the armed
neutrality, on which I never built any hopes, is come to nothing.

Before the arrival of Mr. Laurens, jun. France gave Dr. Franklin six millions
of livres for the current year, it has since added four more, and as it is said
has engaged to be our security for 10 millions of livres in Holland, if to be
borrowed at four per cent. You will be told therefore of 20 millions, and may
possibly receive that sum, but will that do more than prolong the war another
year? Without a fleet superior to that of England, nothing can be done to any
purpose, as to finishing the war. I wish I could give you a more favorable
account of affairs here, and such as you wish to receive and credit, but I
cannot do it consistent with truth, and though you are certainly misinformed as
to the face of affairs in Europe by men who are either ignorant of them, and
who are resolved at all hazards to write what they know you wish to believe,
yet this will not justify my doing the same. In a word, my friend, nothing
short of peace can save our country from ruin and slavery, and whatever you may
think in America, I am convinced that the terms offered by Great Britain
afforded a good room to open a treaty on, and ought not to be rejected. This
will not perhaps be a popular doctrine at present, but it must be sooner or
later -- for me, I have freely opened my mind to you, and though you may differ
in sentiment you will not, I trust, condemn the motive for my having done it. I
have long since had my accounts ready for settlement, and have been waiting
here for six months past, on heavy expense, unable to get them audited, Mr.
Johnson, nominated by Congress, as auditor, refused from the first to act, and
Congress have not named any other, thus I am kept out of my money in a cruel
and most unprecedented manner, but I will not add on the subject at this time.
My compliments to all friends, and be assured that I am with much respect and
friendship

Dear Sir, Your most obedient, And very humble Servant, SILAS DEANE.

To Jeremiah Wadsworth, Hartford, Connecticut.
Paris, 14th May, 1781. DEAR SIR,
I HAVE not had the pleasure of any letters from you since my leaving America,
so that though I have written several, am uncertain of any of them coming to
your hand, you doubtless must be as desirous to know the true state of affairs
on this side the water, as I am to know how things really are on yours, -- the
few letters I have received have been too short, and written with too much
caution to give me the information I wish for, and the Americans who arrive run
into such extremes that I know not what to depend on. But a few weeks before
the news of the defeat of Genesis Gates in Carolina, we were told by Mr. Searle,
who arrived directly from Philadelphia, that the British were shut up, and in a
manner besieged in Charlestown, that General Washington's army consisted of
more than 20,000 men, etc. others gave an account very different: In short,
nothing can be more contradictory than the accounts given by the different
persons, who arrive in France, of the state of affairs in America. I wish you
could find time and a safe opportunity to send me the truth, and the whole
truth; I assure you it would be of service, and tend to prevent the mischiefs
which flow from false and exaggerated accounts transmitted from America, and
which are repaid with interest in the account sent back to you of the state of
affairs in Europe. The writers and relaters of false accounts on both sides the
water, have done us infinite mischief. The war itself was occasioned at first
more by them than by any other, or perhaps every other cause taken together,
and the continuance of it has been equally owing to them; and in the beginning
of the contest, the friends of the British ministry in America assured them,
that America would not persevere in its opposition, and our agents and
correspondents in London encouraged us, by assuring us that the majority of the
nation was in our favor, that government would not go to extremities, that
Parliament would, and must recede, for that the nation was unable to make war,
and to support it for any time; thus false representations on both sides laid
the foundation for the scenes which succeeded, and in which we are still
involved, and a continuation of the same kind of wrong and groundless
information has kept up the action of this great tragedy of errors. You have
found so many of the accounts transmitted you from Europe to have been
groundless, and so many of the flattering encouragements and promises made you,
disappear and vanish into air their original composition, that I presume you
would now bear to hear the truth at large, if I dared to send it you, and
though it is hardly safe for me to do it, I dare not send you any thing else --
Great Britain is neither exhausted nor dispirited as you have been taught to
believe, the Parliament appear more unanimous and resolved in the prosecution
of the war, than at any former period, and the warmest opposers of the
Minister's unite with him in refusing to accede to the Independence of America.
The British fleet is evidently superior at sea to that of our ally, and the
former are preparing to augment it by more than thirty new ships of the line,
and near forty frigates, actually on the stocks -- The late subscription to the
new loan, shows that money is not wanted though the national debt is become
immense; this is their fituation -- The state of our friends has been as
greatly misrepresented in America, as that of our enemies -- I will not enter
into particulars but I think you cannot rely on either men or ships from hence,
until very late in this season if at all -- Mons. de Grass has sailed with
about twenty sail of the line for the West Indies, from whence, it is said, he
is ordered to America, but as Admiral Rodney has a fleet nearly equal in force,
in the Islands, I see no prospect of any thing decisive should such a maneuver
be made, and should it take place, the French fleet cannot be with you before
August, or later, and in these seas the maritime force of contending powers
appear too nearly balanced to expect any thing of importance from them this
Summer -- I am fully of opinion however, that England enters on this campaign
with greater advantage, than it has began any one since France joined in the
war, and if they succeed in bringing the Emperor of Germany to interpose in
their favor, I think the balance will be decidedly on their side. This will be
known in a very short time, possibly before I send on this letter -- Our first
object of the war was the repeal of those acts of Parliament which were
injurious to our rights and privileges; before this repeal was obtained we were
forced to declare Independency, and solicit an alliance with France, the
hereditary enemy of England -- By a fortunate turn of our affairs, France was
brought into an alliance with us, and to guarranty our Independence, just at
this time the Parliament of England repealed the obnoxious acts; this changed
entirely the object of the war on our part as well as on that of England; it
was no longer for the redress of grievances, but for sovereignty that we
fought; at the time in which France came into a treaty of alliance with us,
their object was to separate America forever from England, and thereby to
weaken effectually, a power which for centuries past, had given them more
uneasiness and stood more in their way than any other power in Europe, from
appearances they judged that by a sudden declaration and vigorous exertions the
point would be gained, in a very short time, and at little expense, either of
men or money; that England would be brought to consent to the independence of
America, after which every thing else would follow of course, and in its proper
time, but the first stroke failed, the favorable moment was lost, and all the
preparations which had been made for improving it, served only to show England
the danger it had been in, and to rouse the spirit of the nation to make the
most vigorous exertions. From this period the object of the war became almost
as much changed with France, as it had before been changed in America; at
first, it was by a sudden stroke to force England to acknowledge our
independence and separation from their empire, which being done, peace must
have followed, and time will have soon effected the rest; but this failing, the
original object was changed, or rather it was thought best to obtain it, by
taking a different line of conduct. England was loaded with debt, and was
violently agitated by parties, the opposition to Ministers in Parliament and
out, was formidable, and it appeared more so than it really was, from the
English freedom of speech in Parliament, and of publications out of it; America
was not perfectly unanimous in any of its measures, except ^n the support
generally of their independency, in this they appeared sufficiently unanimous,
to prevent any fear of them falling off or accommodating. Therefore what could
not be gained in one way, was to be attempted in another; the ^eakening of
England was the primary and constant object, but the means for doing this were
changed; it was as I have already said (...) to be done by our being
immediately established independency, and the consequences which time would
naturally produce, would effect every thing desired; but this failing through
the same ostensible object, that of our independence has been held up to view,
yet measures so very different have been pursued, that their first object, so
far as it respects us, has become entirely changed, and the plan now is so far
as we can judge by appearances, to weaken England by spinning out the war, and
of employing of us against them; and after England is reduced by th^^^ means,
our independence may possibly be established. -- I need not point out to a man
of your superior penetration the fatal mischiefs, with which such a system is
pregnant. -- Whilst England is at war with France and Spain united, we are left
with more than one half of its land forces, and a considerable part of its
marine on us; we may struggle hard and behave manfully, but must be continually
losing ground and strength, whilst (France) our Ally with Spain, may possibly
hold a balance to the rest, without any material injury to themselves, though the
fact is they have not done even this hitherto. But supposing that England in
consequence of such a system, should in two or three years be reduced to
receive the law from France and Spain, in what situation must America by that
time be? And to what Power can we look for relief, if France or Spain, or both,
should offer to dictate the laws to us? Though this may not be the case, yet
nothing is more evident than that he present object of France and Spain, is to
employ, and waste the forces of Britain at the expense of America; evident as
this must be to every one who impartially reviews the past, and compares it
with the present, we are unwilling to see or believe it, and are prevented from
the examination by fair promises, generous professions, and just so much and no
more assistance as will serve to keep us from sinking at once, or flying off to
the other side -- In the mean time you must observe that Spain has from the
first refused to know any thing of us, thereby holding it in its power to
declare for or against us, or to insist on any conditions ^atever, as interest
may dictate, whilst America is bound by a secret article of the treaty of Paris
of Feb. 6, 1778, to make a similar one with Spain whenever required, ye^ though
this article was obtained from the American commissioners at the signing of the
treaty at Paris, and though Spain has been now for two years engaged in the
war, yet that Court still refuses to acknowledge us, or to receive our
ambassador, though the Presi^ent of Congress -- I will not enter further on the
important, and to me painful subject -- I have already said enough to a man of
your penetration and judgment, and have no need to go into a particular and
minute discussion, I will therefore finish my letter on more private matters;
you must recollect the many and long conversations we have had, on the subject
of a settlement on the Mississippi, near the Illinois, or on some other part of
hat fertile western country, when I left America I intended to have made some
attempt a least, to interest some gentlemen in Europe i^ the scheme, but the
unfavourable appearance of American affairs, and the uncertainty how the war
may terminate, have prevented me from saying any thing on the subject. -- I
have not however lost sight of it, and if you continue in the same sentiments
as form^rly, it will be well to turn your though^s that way. -- I can see no
prospect of our being so happy, or of doing something to repair the injuries,
we have done ourselves and families in point of fortune any where as by such an
establishment. -- If we return to our dependence on Great Britain, it will not
probably be with unanimity and parties, animosities and bickerings between the
different Governments, and even between individuals, will probably exist longer
than we shall, and render the remainder of our lives disagreeable: -- On the
other hand, if ou^ independence is established, the jarring interests of the
different States, will be such, and so many grounds for disputes are already
laid, that we shall be happy even to escape for any time the going into a civil
war among ourselves, by retiring west, and which we may^d, let the event of the
war turn either way, we may escape those disagreeable scenes, which await our
country, and enjoy more satisfaction, as we (...) find our account much better,
in settling a new colony, than in mixing in the feuds and factions of old ones;
if indeed the report is true, that Congres have offered to cede Louisi^nia, and
the navigation of ^e Mississippi exclusively to Spain, I confess I know not how
this can be done, if they accept of it, and America becomes ind^pendent in such
cruel terms, but I can hardly conceive it possible that such an idea could have
entered the head, of the weakest and maddest of our politicians. -- I cannot
expect that you can have leisure to send me any digested plan, on this subject,
but I pray you not to be sparing of gener^l hints, of the grounds and
principles on which you would wish to have one formed, and when you write send
duplicates, that some one may reach me, address your letter under cover, to Dr.
Franklin, who will know where to forward them. -- I have nearly finished a
third sheet, and have not the courage to enter on a fourth, though in writing
to you, I enjoy in some degree the pleasure of conversing with you, of which
you know I am not easily tired; -- but I shall write again in a few days, and
in the mean time wishing you all which one friend can wish or desire for
another, I am most sincerely,

Dear Sir, Your most obedient, and very humble servant, SILAS DEANE.

Samuel H. Parsons, Esquire Brigadier General in the Service of the United States,
America.
Dear Sir, Paris, June 1, 1781.
THE famous Abbe Raynall has published a new edition of his Histoire
Philosophique and Politic. The Parliament of Paris have condemned the book to
be torn and burnt, his person to be seized, and his estate confiscated. The
Abbe, however, had timely notice, and has fled. The Book is at present both
scarce and dear, or I would send it to you. The liberties which the Abbe has
taken with the Christian Religion, and with the political maneuvers of France,
have caused his persecution. I am of opinion that the latter has been the
principal, for it is well known that no country in Europe abounds more in
Deists and Deistical writers than this -- As you must be anxious to know the
sentiments of this celebrated and eloquent writer with respect to the American
revolution, I have made a few extract, and would gladly oblige you with more if
I had time, but having only borrowed the books, I must return them as soon as
read, speaking of our revolution he says. (1). Of all the energetical causes
effecting so may revolutions in the world, not one of them have existed in
North America. Neither religion nor the laws were outraged. Martyrs or citizens
had not been massed out of their blood upon the scaffold. No i^sult had been
committed against morality, manners, or customs, nor any thing dear to a
people. Not a man had been snatched from the bosom of his family or friend to
perish in the horrors of a dungeon. Public order was not inverted. The
principles of administration, remained unaltered, and the maxims of government
continued what they ever had been. The whole amounted only to this, whether the
parent country, had, or had not a right, directly or indirectly, to put a
trifling duty on the colonies? For the grievances accumulated in the
declaration of independency, amount to nothing, because the first grievance --
a question nearly metaphysical, was not sufficient to justify a general
commotion, and much less an insurrection, for which a country is to behold
herself deprived of the hands that should have been her support, her harvests
ravaged, and her fields covered with the carcases of her relations, or stained
with her own blood.
De toures les causes energiques que produiserent tant des revolutions, sur la
Globe, aucune n'existoit dans le Nord de l'Amerique, ni la religion, ni les
lois n'y avoient ete outragies, les sang des Martyrs, ou des citoyens, n'y
avoit pas ruissete sur des echauffauds, on n'y avoit pas insulte aux meurs, les
manieres, les usages, aucun des objects cher au peuples, n'y avoient ete livres
au ridicule, le pouvoir arbitraire n'y avoit arrache aucun habitant du seine de
sa famille, ou de ses amiss, pour les hainer dans les horreurs du'n cachet,
l'ordre public n'y avoit pas ete inverti, les principes d'administration, n'y
avoient pas change and les maxims du government^y etoient toujours restees le
meme. Tout se reduissoit, a scavoir, si la metropole avoit, ou n'av^it pas le
droit de mettre directment ou indirectment un ledger impot sur les colonies, car
les gri^fs accumulees dans le manifest n'eurent de valeur, car par ce premier
grief, cette question presque metaphysique, n'etoit guerre propre, a soulever
une multitude, ou du moins a l'intereser fortment a une querelle, pour
laquelle, elle voyoit ses terres privees des bras destines a les seconder, ses
maissons ravagees, ses campagnes couvertes de cadavres, de ses proches, ou
teints de son propre sang. On the Tender Act, he says, (2). Were they (the
Congress) ignorant that the understanding is no more to be controled than
opinions? Did they not perceive that in the present crifia every reasonable
citizen was fearful of exposing his estate? were they not apprized that i^ the
birth of a republic they permitted deeds of despotism, unknown to countries
already molded into slavery!
Est ce que a corpse (Congress) ignoroit qu'on ne command pas plus aux esprits,
qu'aux sentiments? est ce qu'il ne sentoit pas, que dans le crise present,
tout citoyen raisonable craindroit decommetre sa fortune? est ce qu'il ne
s'appercevoit pas qu'a l'origine d'une republique, il sa permettoit, des acts
d'un despotisme inconnu dans les regions meme faconnees a la servitude! On our
alliance with France, and the transactions of that time, he says, (3). It Is the
reproach of the Councils of Lewis the XVIth, that they have tarnished the
Majesty of the first power upon the glope, by disavowing in the face of the
uriverse, the succors clandestinely given to the Americans. It is a reproach
that the intrigues of Minister^, or the ascendancy of certain obscure agents,
have engaged the nation in a destructive war, when the springs of government
should have been strengthened to heal the wound of a reign, the last half of
which had been contemptible and weak, divided between plunder and disgrace, the
meaness of vice, and the convulsions of arbitrary power. It is a reproach to
have provoked to arms by an insidious policy, and to become entangled in
speeches unworthy of France to utter to England, the language of a cowardly
bravado, giving the lie to projects already formed, and the real set time^ts of
the hearts language, debasing him that uses it, without deceiving those to whom
it is spoken, and which expeses to a disgrace, profitable neither to the
minister nor the ration. Why ask then the reason that men who have in their
hands all the power of the nation, and who to be obeyed have only to speak the
word (...) command, suffered themselves to be sur^r^zed in every sea by an
enemy whose constitution ne^essarity compels them to be slo^? Why suffer
themselves by an into siderate treaty to be entangled in the net of a Congress,
that should have been herd in a state of dependence, for their large and
regular (...) sid^es? -- Europe, that has her eyes fixed upon us, (...) a grand
design, and not a ^ell-judged step to accomplish it; sees in out arsenals, and
in ^u^po^ts, immense preparations but no execution; sees menacing fleets and
little or nothing effected, courage and bravery in individuals; in the chiefs
effeminacy and irresolution -- here every thing that bespeaks the strength and
commanding power of a great people, and there the weakness and tardiness,
natural to the character and aims of the most inconsiderable. It is by this
striking contradiction between our projects and our conduct, between our means
and the head that directs them, that the genius of Great Britain stunned for a
moment, recovered its vigor, and to this hour, it is a problem for Europe to
selve, whether in declaring for America, we have not ourselves increased the
strength of England.
On rapproche aux conseils du Louis seize, d'avoir bless la Majeste de l^
premier puissance de Globe, en desavouant a la face de l^univers des secours,
qu'on ne cesseit de donnor, clandestinement aux Americaines, on leur
rapproche-d'avoir par une intrigue des Ministres, our par l'ascendant de
quelque Agens obs^ures, engagee l'etat dans un guerre dessess^reux tandis
qu'ill falloit s'occupe^ a remonter les ress^rts du g^vernment, a gu^^rir les
longues plays d'un regne don't toute le derniere moitie avoit ete vile and
soible, partagee enter les depredations, and la honte, enter la bassasse du
vice and les convulsions du despotisme. On leur rapproche d'avoir provoque les
combats par une politic insiduese, de s'etre enveloppes dans des discourse,
indignes de la France, d'avoir, employe, avec Angleterre, le langage d'un
audace timide qui semble dementir les projets qu'on a fermee, les sentimens
qu'on a dans sa coeur, langage qui (...) p^u^qua viler celui qu^ s'en sert,
sans p^uvoir tromper celui a qui on l'addresse, and qui deshonore, sans que ce
dishoneur meme puise etre utile, ni au ministre, (...) a l'etat, pourquoi
demand t'on encore, pourquoi des hommes, qui ont e^tre les mains, tout la
puissance de l'et^, and qui pour etre obeis, n'ont qua commander, se sont ils
laisses prevenir, sur toutes les mers pa^ un enemi, don't la constitution
entraine des lenteurs necessaires? Pourquoi s'etre mis par un traite
inconsidere dans les fers du Congress qu'on auroit tenu lui meme dans la
dependence par des subsides abondans and ^^gles. L'Europe qui a les yeux fixes
sur nous, voit un grand dessein and nul^e demarches concertier, voit dans nos
Arseneaux, and sur nos ports preparatifs immense, and nulle execution, voit des
flottes menacantes, and cet appareil rendu presque inutile, l'audace and la
valeur, dans les particuliers, la molesse, and l'irresolution dans les chefs,
rout ce qui annonce d'un cote la force, and la pouvoir important d'un grand
peuple, tout ce qui annonce de l'autre, la foiblesse and la lenteur qui
tiennent au charactere and aux vues, c'est par cette contradiction frappante
enter nos projets and nos demarches, enter nos movens, and l'esprit qui les
empl^ie, que le genie Angl^is, un moment eto^ne, a repris sa viguer and jusqu'a
present ^'est une problem a sa resaudre pour l'Europe* si en nous declarant
pour l'Amerique nons n'avons pas nous meme releve les force de l'Angleterre. --
Speaking of the motives of France in the treaty with us, he says, (4) In fine,
philoso hy, whose first sensation is a detu^ (...) all governmen^ j^st and all
nation^ happy; in glaneing a eye (...) ^nce of a monarchy w^h? people d^serding
their liberty, looks for the (...). T^o well she perceive that the se^city of
ma kind is no part of (...). She think (...) the love of justice had any
infl^ence upon the Count of Ver^is^le ^t would have ^de a part of the first
article, that every oppreifed people had (...) to rise againsh their oppressors.
E^fin la philosophy, don't le premier sen^im^nt est^ desir de voi tous les
governments justes, and tout les peuples, heureux, en portant un coup d'oeil
sur cette alliance d'une monarchy, avec un people qui defend sa liberte, en
cherche le motif, elle voit trop, q^e la bonbeur de l'humanite n'y a point de
part, e^e^ense que, s^ l'^mour de la justice, eut ^ec^de la cour de Versailles,
elle auroit a rette dans le premier article de sa convention ave^ l'Amerique
que tous les peuples opprimes avoint le droit de s'elever contre leurs
oppresseurs. Speaking of the refusal on the part of Great Britain, to accept of
the mediation of Spain, on terms which would at least have tacitly acknowledged
our independence in fact, though not in right, he says, (5) If I am asked for
names to be given some years hence, to the firmness the English are now
demonstrating; the answer will be, I don't know -- As to what they merit, I do
know -- I know that the a^n^ of the world rarely show a nation choosing rather
to rencunce her exislence than her glory.
Si done on me demandoit quel, est le nom, qu'on donnera dans quelques annees a
la fermete que les Anglois ont montre, dans ce moment, je repondroi^ que je
l'ignore; quant a celui qu'elle merit, je le sais; je sais que les annals du
monde ne nous offrent que rarement, l'aguste and majesteux spectacle d'une
nation qui aim mieux renoncer a sa duree qu'a sa gloire. With respect to the
continuation of the confederacy against England he queries, (6) Is it possible
that a strict union can long subsist between confederates of such opposite
characters as ^he hot, disd^inful, and inconstant Frenchman; the slow, haughty,
jealous, and cold Spaniard; and the American, who retai^s a lasting regard to
his Mother Country, rejoicing in the misfortunes of his allies, as far as it is
compatible with his independence -- Can those people, whether acting in concert
or separately, avoid mutual accusations, complaints and quarrels? Besides,
history informs us, that few leagues have divided the spoils of the nation
against which they were aimed -- Athens was victorious over the Persians --
Rome delivered from Han^ba^, and in modern times, Venice escaped the fam^^s
league of Cambray; and now in our day. Prussia by the genius of only one man,
made a head in Europe, and this should induce us to suspend our judgment it
upon the issue of the present war -- In a word, it w^ consider the spiritof the
French nation, which is so oppofite to that against which they are contending,
w^ shall see that the French a^dor is perhape, as ready to infl^me as to
extinguish itself; that it hopes every thing at the beginning, and that it
des^ai^ of all things when checked by an ^b^ac^e; and that, as belonging to its
character, it wants the eathusiasm of success to acquire new successes -- That
the English, on the contrary, less presumpt^ous at the on^et, notwithstanding
their natural pride, know how, at a proper time, to fight with courage, ise
with danger, and harden themselves against he disgrace of adversity, like the
stout oak, to which H^ace compares the R^mans, which smitten by the (...), and
hacked by the steel, grows under the strokes, and draws fresh vigor even from
its wounds.
Est il possible qu'une union etroite, puisse longtems subsister enter des
confederees d'un caractere aussi oppose que le Francois, emporte, dedaigneux
and ledger; l'Espagnol, lent, hautain, jaloux and froid: l'Amerique qui tient
secretement ses regard tournes verse sa mere patrie, and qui se rejouiroit des
devastres de ses allies, s'ils etoient compatibles avec son independance? Ces
nations, soit qu'elles agissent en concert, soit qu'elles s'agissent separament
tarderont else a s'ente accuser, a se plaindre, and a se brouillon? L'Histo^e
nous apprend encore, que peu de ligues, se sont partagies les depouilles, de la
nation enter la quelle else se sont formies Athenes, victorieuse de la Perse,
Rome sauvee d'Anibal: dans les tems modernes, Venise echappee a la fameux ligue
de Cambrai, and de nos jours meme, la Prusse, qui par la genie d'un homme a
soutenir tete a l'Europe, ont droit de suspendre notre jugement sur l'issue de
la guerre present. Enfin si l'on considere l'esprit de la nation Francoise
oppose a celui de la nation qu'elle combat, on verra que l'ardeur du Francois,
est peutetre egalement prompte a s'allumer and a s'eteindre; qu'il espere tout
lors qu'il commence qu'il desespire de tout des qu'il est arrete par un
obstacle, que par son caractere il a besoin de l'enthusiasme des success, pour
obtenir des success nouveaux; que l'Anglois au contraire, meme presumptueux
d'abord, malgre sa hardiesse naturelle, sait, quand il le feut, battre avec
courage, s'elever avec le danger and s'affermir par la disgrace; semblable a ce
chene robuste auquel Horace compare l^s Romans, qui frappe par la hache and
mutile par le fer, renoit sous les coups, qu'on le port, and tire une vigeur
nouvelle, de ses blessures meme. He then considers the part which other
European Powers take, and says, (7). It is odd that the nations have not yet
crossed the projects meditated against Great Britain. A general resentment for
the injustice and arrogance of this proud island, must be the cause of this
inactivity; but hatred subsides when interest appears It Is possible for Europe
to judge against her own safety for the depression of the power of
Great Britain, in the old and new hemisphere, and that after rejoicing in the
humiliations an^ dangers of this proud and tyrannical power, they take up arms
to desend her.
C'est peutetre beaucoup que les nations ne l'oient pas encore traversie dans
ses projets contre l'Angleterre. Le resentiment que les injustices, and les
hauteurs, de cette Isle superbe, ont inspire par tout, doit etre la cause, de
cette inaction mais la haine l'ai, lorsque l'interest montre, il est possible
que l'Europe juge contraire, a sa surete, l'afroible ferment de la Grande
Bretagne dans l'ancien and le nouvelle hemisphere, and qu'apres a voir joui des
humiliations and des dangers, de cette puissance orguelleuse and tyrannique
elle prunne ensin les arms pour la defendre. He enquires what will be the true
interest of France and Spain with respect to America, if victorious, and gives
it as his opinion that it will be their best policy to have us divided, not
between them, but between ourselves and England; but I am tired with giving you
extracts, the above are sufficient for a sample of the sentiments of this
eloquent and popular Author. He is perhaps the most popular writer of the day
in France, and his exile will most probably increase his popularity here and
indeed in all Europe. As you understand French, I have preferred the sending
you the Author's own words to any translation of mine, and have already made
this letter too long to add any thing more than my compliments to Mrs.
Thompson, and sincere wishes for your mutual happiness. -- I am with most
sincere respect and attachment,

Dear Sir, Your most obedient, And very humble Servant, SILAS DEANE.

To Charles Thompson, Esquire Secretary to the Congress.
Paris, May 16th, 1781. My dear Brother,
I EXPECT by the time you receive this, you will hear me announced from
letters, written by certain Americans on this side the water, as an enemy to my
country; though I do not imagine you will credit such reports, yet I am
persuaded you interest yourself so much in what concerns me, that you will be
glad to know what gave rise to them. -- Too many of the Americans who arrive in
France, bring with them all that spirit and rage, and of party by which they
were actuated at home, they think, or pretend to think, that the only way to
serve America, and at the same time to make their Court here, is to represent
the situation of our affairs totally different from what it really is. In
August last I arrived here; Mr. Searle soon after me, that gentleman asserted
that the British were shut up in Charlestown, so that he said not a soldier
dared to venture out far enough to shoot a bird. That General Washington's army
consisted of more than 20,000 effective men well supplied, that so far from
wanting recruits, men pressed for to enlist, that America was in no way anxious
for peace, but on the contrary wished the war might be continued until England
should be humbled, if not ruined, until (said he) that old Lion's claws shall
be out, and his teeth all drawn. When any one doubted of these and such like
extravagant assertions, he was sure to be answered with a most important air,
You must pardon me Sir, but I do know, for I am a Member of Congress, the only
one that ever was in Europe in that quality, and I think I must know better
than any other, having been Chairman of most of their Committees. -- Those who
from their personal knowledge were able to bring facts as well as circumstances
directly in contradiction to his assertions, were sure to be represented as
Tories, unfriendly, or as enemies to America, though events too notorious to be
concealed, and the representations of Congress of the State of America fally
contradicted his assertions, yet all si^nified nothing; the man who ventured to
question the policy or rectitude of any measure of Congress, who would not
agree that America was able alone to support the war, that Great Britain was
exhausted, and become as weak as she was wicked, that commerce had done us the
most essential mischief; that merchants, that is American merchants, who he
declared to be in general, mere pitiful speculators and undeserving of the
name of merchants, had by their trade, done u^ such injury that it would have
been well for America had they long since been exti^pated -- That the goods
sent out by France had been worse for us, than if in their room, forty thousand
Russians had been sent to fight against us -- The man who would not assent to
these and such like mad assertions, but ventured to contradict them, was sure
to be noted down as unfriendly at least, if not an enemy to his country, and
thus I was entered on his black list -- You will hardly believe it possible
that any man without being perfectly mad, could be capable of talking in such a
manner, yet many, as well as myself, can assure you that this was the common
style of his conversation; that he often went beyond any thing I have told you
of, and what will equally surprise you is, that there were at Paris, Americans
who joined him and acted as his echo; you well know that I am so incapable of
acting a tame, equivocal part, that I do not always act even a cautious one; I
did every thing in my power to discountenance this mad rant; this drew on me
the ill will of several of my countrymen, whose good opinions I wished to have
in preference, though too indifferent as to either, to step aside from the line
of truth and candor to ga^n the latter or to avoid the former -- I have said
here (what is acknowledged even by Frenchmen, and ought by this time to be
known in America) that Great Britain is not an exhausted, contemptible kingdom,
but on the contrary, that they possess a greater share of energy and vigor, and
are capable of making greater exertions than any nation in the world besides --
Was it criminal to say what all Europe acknowledges with surprise and
admiration to be the case? -- Was, or is it high treason, to call in question
the perfect wisdom and rectitude of any of the measures of Congress? -- or to
withhold one's ass^nt to assertions, declaring that Congress never were at any
period, so respectable both at home and abroad, as at this time, that they
never possessed the confidence of the people at large, in so perfect a degree,
as at present; and that America had never been at any time more unanimous or in
better circumstances? By Mr. Searle, and some others, it has been deemed
criminal next to high treason, not to go those lengths; indeed one would
imagine that he carried it still higher, for speaking one day at table (a
French gentleman who understood English, being present) on American affairs,
and the Americans then in Europe, he exclaimed, that he wished to God every
American in France might be instantly hanged, and that he would be content to
suffer among them, could that be effected, since by that means a better set
would be introduced.

I should not trouble you with these expressions, which you can consider in no
other light, than the ravings of madness, were it not that this gentleman, has
been seconded and supported in this style, by some Americans here, though I
know of no one of them who has gone by any means so far; what idea must
foreigners have of us, and of our councils, when they hear a man who boasts on
all occasions of being a member of Congress, and to have had a prin^ipal share
in all our public measures, talk at such a rate? you can easily conceive and
without my proceeding to reci^e instances of nearly the same nature, which I
could easily do, sufficient to fill a large volume, whence has arisen one of
the principal causes, of our national character and credi^'s having sunk so
very low within these three years past.

Though this letter, and others I have lately written contain my opinion of our
affairs, and of the state as well as of the views of the Powers in Europe, with
which we have any concern, yet I have on no occasion ventured to make it public
in Europe, but have most cautiously avoided giving of it, even in private
conversation. I consider the people of America, to be ^ill too violently
agitated, to listen to any thing which appears to contradict their favouri^e
wish; they have been taught to believe, that their happiness and that of their
posterity, is inseparably connected with independency, or rather with their own
Sovereignty. The generous and noble enthusiasm, which first inspired them, to
oppose acts and claims, injurious to our rights and privileges has been kept up
after the claims and acts have ceased to exist, and its force turned to the
support of independent sovereignty, a claim never heard of on our part, until
since the year 1775. Yet I cannot in justice to myself and friends conceal from
them my sentiments on the important subject, nor the dangers which to me appear
at the door. It is the interest of each of the contending parties to make peace
as soon as possible, and nothing at this time prevents, but our claim of
independent Sovereignty, which France by treaty is bound to support. If we
consent with an accommodation with England, the great obstacle will be removed,
if we do not, it is probable that the war will become more general, and it is
not difficult to foresee where we shall land, and in what condition in the
general storm; have we not by sending ambassadors to almost every Court in
Europe, h^d an opportunity of trying the disposition of the several courts
toward us? Not one of them except Dr. Franklin has been received, the others
after an enormous and foolish expense, have returned or are still waiting with
their credentials in their hands, at some Minister's door, undistinguished
among the crowd of suppliants. -- Our submitting to this, continuing to solicit
under such mortif^ing treatment, and our appointing an ambassador to Russia,
after having been refused audience, almost every where else in Europe, but ill
agrees with the character of independent sovereignty. The spirit and manlike
boldness, with which we asserted our rights, and ventured singly to oppose
Great Britain in the defense of them, drew the attention of all Europe, and
raised our character high, and the very name of an American became respectable,
but the turn which our affairs have taken since the year 1778, owing to the
management of them by men intexicated with the ideas of sovereignty, and the
flattering prospect of becoming ambassadors, envoys, etc. thus reversed the
scene, and convinced the world at large, how unequal our gentlemen in Congress,
are to the task of Sovereigns, and of great statesmen. -- Emoluments have had
their weight with these men, the Secretaryship to an embassy, has not been
thought below their acceptance, especially as a salary of 1000 l. sterling, per
annum, was attached to it.

The salaries to the different boards, though by no means extravagant, have
been tempting objects to many, and the civil list of Congress, which has been
as rapidly increasing, as that of France has been diminishing, under the hands
of its present minister of finances, held out hopes at least to all. It is no
way surprising that men in possession, or in expectation of sovereignty, or its
emoluments, should labor incessantly to persuade America that its peace,
liberty and safety cannot be secure but under an independent democratical
government, the men of this character form a numerous body, and they "labor
faithfully in their v^cations." It is to no purpose that the experience of all
ages and nati^ns of the world contradict the doctrine which they advance, but
few read the history of past ages, and still fewer reflect on what they have
read, and on what the present time offers to their most serious consideration;
if we were contending only for momentary peace, safety and liberty, or only for
the enjoyment of them for the present age, with the offers made us, we must be
more than madmen to continue the contest, but the professed object and the only
one that can in any degree justify a prosecution of the war, is the security of
those blessings to the latest posterity; will an independent democratical
government secure them better than any other? In the examination of the
question, some regard ought to be paid to what has passed in the world, and we
ought to inquire if any country ever was, for any time, even for one century at
peace, free and happy under a democracy? for myself I confess, I have never
heard, or read of such a country either ancient or modern; all the ancient
republics were aristocratical is a greater or less degree, the modern ones are
the same, and the moment that the democracy in any state breaks down or
subjected the aristocracy, every thing has ever gone to confusion -- peace,
liberty and safety have all been lost in the distractions of democracy, which
in a very short time has prepared the way to absolute monarchy -- but possibly
America has produced a race of men more simple, virtuous, and patriotic, than
any part of the world has hitherto been blessed with: If we are sure of this we
have some grounds for making the experiment, if what has failed in every other
instance; but if in fact we find ourselves agitated, and led by the same
passions, as the rest of mankind have ever been, we ought to pause and weigh
seriously whether in future, we shall be blessed for having sixed the peace,
liberty, and safety of America on a sure basis, or on the contrary, be
execrated for having destroyed the very basis and foundation of good order and
government, and entail^d on posterity all the miseries, which anarchy o^
despotism can inflict. It will perhaps be said, that the nations which have
been so convulsed and distracted by Democracy, were previously corrupted, it
may be true, but did any nation ever retain that degree of disinterestedness
and of rigid patriotic virtue necessary to support good order and government
under a Democracy, after they became rich and powerful? further where is the
nation that ever preserved it even in poverty, under a Democracy? I confess I
recollect no one. The Spartans by banishing wealth and luxury, and holding
comm^^ce the parent of both in abhorrence, pr^served their form of government
(liberty they never had any idea of) for many ages, but their government was as
far or farther removed from Democracy, than it was from absolute Mo^archy. --
The Romans began under a system of government partly Royal, and partly
Aristocratical; the latter destroyed the former, and to support itself mixed
some portion of the Democratic with the Aristocratic, to gain over the people,
to assist them in the perpetual exclusion of Royalty. The Democratic power was
at first very confined and limited, and the Aristocratic remained for several
centuries almost absolute, but in every struggle between the two, the
Democratic gained more or less the advantage over the Aristocratic, until after
the most violent and bloody contest, the former came off victorious, and the
Roman empire became in effect, in absolute Democracy, which soon prepared them
to receive an absolute master. -- Caesar with the advantage of victories and
personal abilities unparalleled even in the Roman histories, could not have
succeeded had not the Republic been previously thrown into confusion, and all
principle and subordination destroyed by a Democracy, at the head of which he
for some time placed himself to facilitate his becoming their sole Sovereign,
Lord and Emperor: But there is no necessity for traveling far, or searching
into ancient history; nor should I have mentioned the above instances but by
the great stress laid by certain declaimers, in American assemblies, on (...)
Spartan and Roman government, and their virtues -- whilst it is evident they
either kn^w nothing of them more than their names, or wilfully misrepresent
fects. -- We have had some small experience ourselves, of democratical
government; and we cannot, from what we have seen and experienced, but be a^le
to form a judgment what the consequences will be when it comes to operate in
full vigor and without restraint.

Absolute democracy and absolute monarchy are nearly connected with each other,
and even wise and tried patriots, have, in all ages, submitted to the latter,
to escape from the distractions of the former; perhaps the situation of our
country, upon every account, is such, that it will not bear a strict comparison
with any other, I believe it to be the case; at the same time I am of opinion
that this is against us, under the proposed government of a democracy.

At this time we are of some wright in the general scale, and may by improving
it be able, though not to dictate the law absolutely, yet to obtain such terms
of peace, as may come up to every reasonable wish. -- But are we sure of
obtaining the same, when the great contending Powers tired of the war, come to
settle their differences by a peace, shall we then find ourselves in a
situation to dictate, or to be dictated to? We have ranged ourselves on the
side of France and Spain, against England, but shall we in a treaty of peace,
be considered and respected as their equal, or shall we be regarded in the
settlement of their accounts as an article to be used in discount, by either as
the balance may fall? This is a serious enquiry, and France has already put it
in our power to answer the question. When Spain offered to mediate between
France and England, the latter accepted the mediation, on condition that France
withdrew their rescript of March 1778, which declared America independent -- to
this France replied, that England could not with propriety demand of them a
concession at the beginning of a war, the events of which were uncertain, which
they could only be brought to grant at the close of an unfortunate war. This
reply of France says plainly, that if the war should be unfortunate on their
part, our independence may be given up, and shows in what point of light we are
considered. -- The events of the war have not hitherto been fortunate, on the
part of France and Spain, nor have they been greatly unfortunate though the
balance (were the accounts now to be settled) is against them. -- Future events
are uncertain, but should France or Spain unfortunately loose considerably, we
and our independence remain as a pledge, by a restoration of which their losses
will be made up; if on the other hand, England proves unfortunate, the
acknowledgement of our independence, may serve them in the same stead, if the
latter proves the case, as it possibly may, after two or three years more of
war; what by that time will be our situation? Our country ravaged, and
exhausted, our commerce destroyed, an immense internal and foreign debt
contracted, the interest only of which will be a greater tax, than we ever had
any idea of before this war, to which will be added, the support of civil
government, as expensive, or more so than formerly, and the expenses of new
establishments, internal and external, such as Courts of Admiralty, etc. Boards
of Trade, of Marine, of Treasury, etc. etc. of Ambassadors, Envoys, Consuls,
etc. which alone will amount to more than all our former public expenses,
besides we must have a marine force at least, or we cannot expect to have our
flag respected -- nor our commerce secure from imposition -- shall we find
ourselves equal to all this? Will the inhabitants of America, taught to
believe, that they fought to exonerate themselves from taxes, be contented
under ten times the tax they ever paid, and to have the same entailed on their
posterity? -- In this state of weakness, debt, and discontent, is it possible
that we most lie at the mercy of the victorious, or most fortunate power which
eve^ it be, at the peace? If England dictates the terms of peace, we must he
unconditionally at their mercy, if France does it, we shall be equally so
(...), in this moment we may escape the danger of lying at the mercy of either.
France will not be able to dictate the la^ to England, without having
previously so effectually reduced that power, as to render it unable to (...)
in our behalf, should any, even the most (...), be dictated to us. If this is a
just state of the case, and it appears to me such, we may possibly enjoy^^
nominal independent sovereignty, but in (...) and reality (...) dependent, and
that unconditionally on France, on the other hand should the war prove
unfortunate on the part of France, France m^^ agreeable to their public
declaration withdraw its rescri^^, which declared (...) independent, and leave
us to unconditional submission to England; we are thus pushed on by the
continuance of the war toward the streights of Scylla and Ch^ryb^is, but thank
God we have not yet arrived there, and if there is any prudence of skill with
those who are at the helm of our public ship, we may land (...) and honorably
on so (...) ground. I have given you, and that freely, my sentiments on our
public situation. Though treated with a degree of injustice and ingratitude
which has scarce a parallet in history by a faction of my countrymen; my
country and its interests still lie nearest my heart. I have met with many
English, Scotch, and Irish families, in the course of my acquaintance in this
country, who following the dictates of conscience, and what they thought to be
their duty, took part with the Stuart family, and who in consequence had been
proscribed, and driven from their country under the loss of title, fortune,
etc. I was at first surprised to find that these people, though many of them
had been born in France, and inheriting as one might suppos^, the severest
resentments against England, still valued themselves on the country from which
they and their (...) had been expelled, with the unmost (...) and disgrace, and
in a word, in (...) the varnish and paint that had been laid on in the course
of a century in France, (...) original canvass was still visible in their
sentiments and actions. Since I have been in exile ^^self my surprise has
ceased. I find it is not difficult to change climate and country, but that it
(...) impossible for any one, that is not either less or more than m^, to
conquer those early arta^hments and predilections which every citizen of a free
government has for his country and its interests -- my saying one word on the
affairs of America is one proof of this, but my letters being filled with
scarce any thing else, shows that whatever resolutions I have taken to the
contrary, I can neither think nor write without touching, and even dwelling on
the subject, in fact, it is the only one, which lies down with me at night and
rises with me in the morning, it accompanies me in every circle whether gay or
serious, and often makes me blind and deaf to every thing else. I am sometimes
attacked by prudence, which asks me what I have to do, under my circumstances
with the politics of any country, or particularly of one more than an other.
She tells me if I have time to listen, which I seldom have, that of all men, I
ought not to meddle, that being fairly on shore, though after suffering a
shipwreck, I have nothing left but to collect what I can of my fortune out of
the wreck, and make the best of it. Though judgment pronounces fully in favor
of this opinion, still I cannot remain indifferent to what affects a country
which I must for ever call mine. I take up my pen almost every day to write to
some friend or other in America, I determine not to let any thing political
fall from it, yet before I have finished one page I find myself in the full
force of a current which I cannot escape or resist, but I will be carried on no
further by it is this letter. I promised myself with being able to do something
in the commercial way. I have been disappointed from various causes, I hoped to
have finished my accounts soon, and received the considerable balance due me
from Congress; but though my accounts with vouchers to support my demands have
been ready more than four months, I can find no auditor. Congress have been
informed near a year since that their auditor could not serve, yet they have
not appointed any other, though they knew I was waiting at my own expense to
adjust my account. The cruelty and injustice of this proceeding is too visible
to require my enlarging on it, I am discouraged in writing to men, who consider
themselves omnipotent, and who have among their other attributes, taken that of
doing injustice when they please, and justify all by the tyrant's plea,
necessity; out of a balance of more than 300,000 livres, I have not been able
to obtain one shilling, by a prevailing junto in Congress, I have been
represented in America as a defaulter grown rich at the public expense, this
was done to prejudice my countrymen against me, and to cover or justify their
horrid ingratitude, and at the same time to force me on a dangerous and
expensive voyage, to obtain justice here, where they had previously taken such
arrangements, as to counteract me in pursuit of my right; it is true they
appointed an auditor, but laid him under such restrictions, that they must have
known at the time, that no man of spirit would accept the office, and on a
refusal, they have neglected the naming any other; does this show them acting
like my creditors in earnest for the settlement, or like shuffling evasive
debtors, who push it off, by every means in their power, to have some plausible
excuse for the non-payment of their debts? the world will determine without
hesitation, and I am resolved the cause shall be soon laid before them. I
despair of s^eing of any change for the better, I have long, though impatiently
waited for it, to the almost total ruin of my fortune and prospects in life,
and can any one blame me if I lay before the world the history of that
injustice and ingratitude under which I have suffered? and of those vile
intrigues and detestable cabals which have occasioned the most complicated
misery and distress to my country; I am confident no disinterested or impartial
man will censure me for doing myself justice, and for disabusing the public
with respect to certain characters and proceedings, at the same time that I
have ample materials in my hands for doing this, I take no pleasure in the
idea, I have put it off as long as possible, but I cannot forbear much longer,
I hope this letter will come safe to your hands, if so, communicate the
contents to such of your and my friends as you judge proper, but let no
extracts or copies be made of it. I have already exhausted your patience, I
will therefore add only, that I am,

My dear Brother, Most affectionately yours, SILAS DEANE.

Simeon Deane, Esquire Merchant, Williamsburgh, Virginia.
Paris, May 10th, 1781. Dear Sir,
A Gentleman lately here from America, assured me, that it was considered by
our countrymen as political heresy or treason to entertain a doubt that France
would under any circumstances whatever, give up our independency by withdrawing
from its alliance with us. -- This way of thinking, reflects honor on m^
countrymen, as it must proceed from their resolution to support inviolably and
at all events, their own engagements; but too much confidence proves fatal to
nations oftener than too little, and it is not unseasonable for them to review,
what has so frequently happened in Europe under circumstances similar to the
present, and reflect on those instructive lessons which the history of the last
two centuries lays before us. What nation in Europe has not during that period
broken their most solemn treaties, and deserted their allies, as often as state
necessity or public interest and safety dictated the measure? I declare I know
of none; England (and until lately we joined them in it) has always been very
free in censuring the count and people of France as the most perfidious of any
in Europe; France has retorted the charge, though to her honor she has
generally done it i^ a more decent language; but shall we not be found equally
in the wrong, if at this time, we think, speak and act, in the opposite extreme
from that in which we acted formerly. On an impartial review of the past, and
examination of the present, I confess, I think we shall, and if we eventually
become the dupes, and are sacrificed by our unsuspicious confidence, the
political world will judge, at least, that we were rather too young and
unexperienced for the great affairs we engaged in. The style of Congress
appeared to me, I confess, a little too strong and presumptuous, when in
September 1779, they declared that the independence of America was as fixed as
fate; this was in a religious view, bidding defiance to Omnipotence, and
placing our independence on a basis which no civil government or human system
ever yet could boast of. Since my return to Europe, I have had leisure to take
a calm and unprejudiced view of our situation, and however confident you may be
in America, I can but have the most distressing apprehensions for our future
peace, liberty and safety; not that I have more reason to distrust the good
faith of France than that of any other nation, under similar circumstances, but
I have every reason to doubt of the favorable issue of the war, and if it
should be unsavourable, France has already declared to the world the part it
will take with regard to our independence. I will explain myself -- when Spain
offered to mediate, England insisted on France's withdrawing the rescript of
the 13th March 1778, (which acknowledged our independence as preliminary to any
treaty) France replied that it was unreasonable in England to require that at
the beginning of a war, (the events of which were unce^tain) which could only
be complied with at the close of an unsuccessful war. This reply needs no
comment. The war, though not greatly unsuccessful hitherto, on the part of
France, has been very far from being successful; France is at this time a great
loser on the whole, but whilst the high style of England embroils that nation
with other Powers, and so long as we find employ for near one half its forces,
France will continue the war, and encourage us by temporary and partial
supplies, and the most liberal promises -- but a storm is gathering on the
continent of Europe, and how soon it will burst, God, who views the hearts of
all men (the Emperor's not execpted) only knows, but the moment it begins, we
must bid adi^u to every hope of aid from Europe: The storm which we have been
for six years tossed by, does not abate, and if we have any skilful pilots on
board, they must see Sevlla on one side, and Charybdis on the other, and that
unless we make a safe port immediately, we must be shipwrecked on the one or
the other, and increase the list of those unhappy people, who in every age,
have been sacrificed under the appearance of friendship and assistance, to
ambiti^n and interest. With our country ravag^d and exhausted without any
effectual aid, or perhaps any at all from our Asly, what have we a right to
expect in the end (if we continue to reject with contempt and insult every
offer of peace) but unconditional submission? Will France in no case, do at
this time, what they have repeatedly done heretofore? I mean not to cast the
least reflection by referring to any particular instance, what I have already
said of nations in general, will clear me of having such intention -- But we
ought to recall to our minds, how often the people of Scotland, since the
beginning of this century, have been encouraged to rise in claim of their
supposed rights, and of those of the House of Stuart; stores, troops, ships and
money have been sent to their aid, the consequences are two well known to need
repeating -- At the close of a war, not very unsuccessful on the part of rance,
they were given up, and their Prince, Charles Edward, though he, as well as his
ancestors, had received as solemn promises from France, to be re-established on
the throne of England, as we can pretend to have for independency, was ordered
to quit the kingdom, and on refusal was publicly sei^d^on, and bound like a
common felon, in the streets of Paris, and forcibly carried off; the interest
of the ^^tion was the plea which justified the measure, and may not the same
again have equal (...) At least our sit^ation calls for serious rest^. -- We
may at this time obtain all and more th^n we first claimed, and improving the
p^esent moment, I will v^nture to say, more than we (...) ever expect under any
other probable, or almost possible circumstances. But there is a treaty, and
our public and national honor and character are pledged. But if France, to whom
it is pledged, trifles with us, if unable or unwilling to assist us
effectually, or if to serve its own views, it leaves us to wear out the force
of its hereditary enemy by our destruction, are we holden to support our honor
pledged in treaty, at such an expense? The universal maxim of all nations,
Salus Populi, suprema lex, will in such case have no weight with us, by
persevering we may possibly, though not probably, effect with others, the ruin
of Great Britain; but if we and our country must be involved and crushed by the
fall of that paternal edifice, in which we once took shelter, and in the beauty
and grandeur of which, we once placed our greatest pride and security, shall we
act the parts of patriots or madmen? I know not how you will relish these
reflections, but I cannot forbear making them, so long as I can neither forget
my country, or cease to be anxious for its peace, liberty and happiness. I
wrote you a few days since on private affairs, by the way of L'Orient, I will
therefore close this by assuring you, that nothing personal, though I have
suffered more injustice, than almost any man of my time, has had the least
influence on my mind, as to our general interests. I have done much toward
promoting a separation from Great Britain and for independency -- I acted from
a sincere belief that it would soon, and certainly be effected, and that it
would tend to our happiness and peace; I now see no prospect of it is being
obtained, and am fully convinced that the irreparable mischiefs we have already
suffered and must suffer, with the temper and disposition of my countrymen, are
such, that independency must prove a curse rather than a blessing to us -- From
this persuasion I have written freely to many of my friends -- Few men, not
natives of France, have juster, or more favorable ideas of the nation, than I
have, and shall ever entertain, nor shall I ever be wanting in personal
gratitude for the many civilities and favors I have received from men, in place
and out; but these ought, and have not any influence on my mind when the true
interests of my country are in question -- I know, personally, but one of the
ministers, I esteem and respect him as much as any man can do; but if I dared
to intrude so far as to hint my opinion to him, it should be not to pursue the
war another moment on account of our independence, nor to hazard any thing for
an object, which will never prove of that advantage to France, in its
commercial interests, which I once thought it would, if indeed it can prove of
any at all -- But I have tired you with the length of this letter, I will
therefore close with assuring you I am, with sincere esteem and unalterable
friendship, Dear Sir,

Your most obedient And very humble Servant, (Signed) SILAS DEANE.
P. S. When I query whether the independency of America will prove of so great
advantage to France, as was once imagined, I confine myself to advantages
merely of a commercial nature, to be derived from us in that state. If France
by our assistance succeed so far, as to ruin the commerce and marine of Great
Britain, and if we in the course of effecting this, become reduced to be in
effect dependant on France, there can be no question but that we shall be of
advantage to France, but such a supposition destroys every idea of real
independency.

My compliments to Mrs. Wilson.



To the Honorable James Wilson, Esquire at Philadelphia.
Paris, 20th May, 1761. DEAR SIR,
PRESUMING that you still continue in Congress, and that the friendship which
has so long subsisted between us, remains unimpaired, I have determined to
write you a long and confidential letter, on subjects intimately connected to
the well being of our country. Some of the sentiments I am about to
communicate, may perhaps appear inconsistent with my former conduct and
professions, and therefore it is incumbent on me to explain the causes which
have in any degree changed my political opinions. I need not particularly recur
to the origin of the present controversy with Great Britain; what I professed
and did at that period, was professed with sincerity, and done with the best
intentions, but had I then foreseen one half of the calamities that have
followed the measures of that time, instead of approving, I should have most
strenuously opposed them; for it must be confessed, that we were actuated
rather by the apprehension of future grievances, than by the actual pressure of
any which we really felt; and most certainly I should not have thought it
either wise or justifiable to run into the horrors of civil war, without more
urgent necessity, and a much greater load of oppression. But unfortunately, we
in America were deceived by those flattering accounts transmitted to us from
England, as much as the British government was deceived by opposite accounts
sent from America. We were fully pers^aded that a majority of the people of
Great Britain, approved our claims, and that a short suspension of commerce
with that kingdom would obtain us all we desired; under this delusion we went
forward until hostilities suddenly began: Those who have most studied human
nature, and the history of mankind, will best conceive the effects and changes
which followed: Inflamed and afterward exasperated by the provocations and
ravages of war, our minds became gradually alienated from that people whose
ancestors were ours, and to whom we had always been connected by the strongest
ties, that can bind or unite societies of men. We indignantly slighted that
union which had been esteemed our greatest glory and happiness, and under whose
benign influence we had increased and prospered beyond example. With this
change in our sentiments, we heard of the British government having engaged
foreign troops to be employed against us, and we naturally determined to follow
the example and seek foreign aid from those most likely to afford it; for this
purpose, and with this commission I came to Europe, and the Declaration of
Independency soon followed; a declaration which though absent I approved of,
because I thought Independency attainable with but little more difficulty or
bloodshed, and that our countrymen were wise and virtuous enough to use it
rightly and make it a blessing. -- I had besides other reasons -- I thought an
independent government was allotted to us by nature, and that the establishment
of it could not be long prevented, after the change which had taken place in
our sentiments respecting it: That, to depart from the claim we had made to it,
would at that time and in that state of things, be like hastily ^inning over a
wound corrupted within, and would only convert to waste all the blood which had
been spilt in the contest, and entail on our children, if not on ourselves, the
necessity of shortly beginning and supporting another. -- Actuated therefore by
a desire to spare the people of England, as well as of America, from a renewal
of such calamities, I heartily concurred in negociating and signing the
treaties with France, and afterward returned to America, in the hopes of
seeing our country soon restored to the blessings of peace, commerce, and good
government: I need not tell you that the hope proved abortive, nor need I
explain to you how much I was disappointed and dissatisfied by the changes
which had taken place in America, and which were every day increasing. You will
recollect the conversations that passed between us on this subject; I found
indeed the hills, the mountains, and rivers of America, situated as formerly,
but almost every thing which had d^stinguished and done honor to the
inhabitants appeared to have changed The dangers of suddenly releasing a people
from the restraints of regular government, which were visibly experienced. --
Noisy and d^signing individuals had risen from the lowest order, and displaced
the best and most respectable members of society. -- The new governments were
almost every where feeble, and ill administered; anarchy and licentious violence
frequently prevailed, and even in Congress itself, reason, patriotism, and
justice, were but too often vanquished by faction, cabal, and views of private
interest. But what appeared a more alarming evil, was the depravity of morals
which had taken place among our countrymen, and been encouraged if not produced
by the revolution; and particularly by the laws for making the depreciated and
depreciating paper currency a legal tender, instead of its nominal amount in
gold and silver; laws which not only afforded temptations, but in effect
offered rewards to dishonesty, by enabling those already in debt to liberate
themselves for a twentieth or thirtieth part in value of the real debt, and
encouraging all who could obtain credit, or property from others, to withhold
payment in the certain expectation of being able at a future period legally to
exonerate themseves almost for nothing; laws by which more injustice seems to
have been occasioned, than what was ever committed under any other government,
and among the same number of people, in so short a space of time. I do not mean
however to censure our countrymen with severity, I am persuaded that probity
and good mora^^ were no where more generally prevalent than in North America,
before the late revolution, and that any other people would have been at least
as much changed by the same causes, and in the same circumstances. I could not
avoid however, regretting, that a similar change had taken place, and lamenting
the miserable prospects which were present on every side. -- Agriculture
declining; the progress of arts and sciences suspended; the education of the
rising generation (the hopes of our country) neglected; thousands of
industrious youth forced from the plough, and other useful homely occupations,
and prematurely destroyed by the diseases, wants and sufferings of a military
life, whilst the survivors by exchanging their plain morals and honest
industry, for the habits of idleness and vice, appeared more likely to burden
than to benefit their country hereafter, and above all the numerous causes and
sources of future dissentions between the disterent States, left very little
room for agreeable expectations or ideas. Distressed at the prospect of these,
and a thousand other evils, of which there appeared neither a remedy, nor an
end, you will not wonder that I quitted a scene so unpleasant, and came again
to this country, where I have had time and opportunity to reflect
dispassiona^ely, on the general state of things, and the probable consequences
so far at least as the interests of our country are concerned; and from these
reflections, combined with all the facts and informations, that I have been
able to obtain, I have deduced two propositions, of the truth of which I am
fully convinced, however extraordinary they may appear in America: -- The first
of these is, that there is no probability of our being able finally to
establish our independency; and the second, that if it were established, it
would prove rather a curse than a blessing to us. -- As I am persuaded, that
you will at least read with attention and candor, what I write on subjects so
interesting; I will enter into a particular consideration of each of these
propositions, and begin with the first which concerns the probability of our
being able finally to establish the independency which we have assumed and
declared. -- Experience has I presume by this time, so far corrected the vain
opinions we formerly entertained of our strength and resources, than ever the
most insane of all our mad politicians will hardly pretend, that we can alone
resist the force of Great Britain. -- The final establishment of our
independency must therefore greatly depend on the assistance, which other
nations may be able and willing to afford us, and I think it very evident, that
we have most egregiously flattered and deceived ourselves on this subject.
There is indeed a generous propensity in human nature which inclines mankind to
favor those who struggle against superior force, in defense of their freedom
and just rights, and this propensity led many ind^viduals in different parts of
Europe, (who considered us engaged in such a struggle,) to bestow on us their
unavailing good wishes and applauses. -- But it is impossible that the motives
of our revolt should have been really approved by the government of any kingdom
or state of Europe, because there is not one among them, whose subjects and
colonies were so free as those of Great Britain; and it would have been
manifestly absurd, in any government, to vindicate our claim to privileges,
which at the same time it denied to its own subjects; and besides insurrections
are naturally viewed with jealousy, and dislike, by all regular long
established governments as of dangerous example to their own subjects. -- It
happened indeed that Great Britain, by her vast acquisitions of wealth and
power, had become the object of envy and dread to certain European nations, who
without expecting or intending, that we should ever become independent, were
pleased at our revolt, and rejoiced to see that kingdom weakening itself by a
destructive civil war, and least we should be too soon subdued, and the
mischiefs of our revolt too soon terminated, a little scanty assistance was
from time to time secretly given to us, until this alliance was publicly
announced, and France engaged in the war against Great Britain, it might have
been naturally expected that every other Power in Europe inclined to favor our
independency would have openly acknowledged it, after the example of France.
Great Britain was then universally believed to be so weakened and discouraged,
that no nation could have been restrained through the fear of incurring her
resentment; and therefore it is difficult to conceive why any one really
withing for our independency, should have witheld from it the sanction of an
open avowal or acknowledgement, which would necessarily have tended to finish
the work and secure our future gratitude and friendship -- But though more than
three years have passed since the French alliance was announced, no other
nation has manifested the least intention to follow the example, or the least
favorable inclination toward us, but several have, on the contrary, most
unequivocally discovered, that their wishes and views are repugnant to our
pretensions. The government of Portugal very early proscribed all intercourse
with us, in terms of extreme vigor, if not hostility; and this very
proscription remains unrepealed -- That of Denmark has denied our independency,
and even forced out of our hands (as out of the hands of pirates) several
prizes which our ships of war had taken from Great Britain, and sent into the
ports of Norway -- The Emperor is notoriously an enemy to our independency --
he retains an hereditary attachment to Great Britain, as well as jealousy to
the House of Bourbon; and views with impatience, on every side, the territories
of his ancestors possessed by his neighbors -- he is in the full vigor of his
life, master of the best disciplined, most numerous and formidable army in
Europe, and certainly is not without ambitious, enterprizing views; so that
should the war continue, we have every thing to fear from his influence and
interference, which certainly will be against those nations who possess the
countries he wishes to regain, and not against Great Britain who witholds
nothing from him, and from whom he has nothing to claim -- He has indeed
already prepared the way to interfere by offering to mediate between the
belligerent powers, and you need not be told that an unsuccessful mediator
almost always takes part in the quarrel -- The Dutch, though at war with
England, publicly disavow our independency, and so far from connecting their
cause with ours, that they notoriously would have made a separate peace with
Great Britain, had not the British Government refused to treat separately with
the States General; a refusal that manifest^ how little the British Ministry
feels itself embarrassed by these new enemies. Whatever you in America may
imagine, the true interests of the Dutch are by no means favorable to our
independency; they have no manufactures of any consequence for our use, and as
merchants, fishermen and carriers, we should certainly become their most
dangerous rivals and competitors: Respecting Russia and Sweden, they certainly
cannot expect to gain by our independency, excepting indigo and rice we have
nothing for their use: -- Russia exports tobacco, and their other productions
are all similar to ours, and we should naturally interfere with them in every
market. The governments of these countries have never manifested the least
disposition to favor our independency; I think, at most we can only flatter
ourselves that they will remain idle spectators. Congress appear indeed to have
formed very pleasing hopes from the Northern treaty of n^utrality, and have
consequently appointed a Minister Plenipotentiary to the Empress of Russia, who
i^ now on his way to Petersburg, where he will doubtless find that humiliating
reception, which their other Ministers have met at every other court but that
of France. It seems however, that no experience will cure them of the folly of
thus meanly exposing themselves to new insults. Respecting the conduct and
views of Spain, I think they are of a nature that deserves our most serious
consideration, I ha^ almost said detestation -- You know that a secret article
was annexed to the treaty of alliance with France, by which his Most Christian
Majesty stipulated, and the American Commissioner engaged, that the Spanish
government should be entitled to accede to the treaties made with France, or to
make other similar treaties with us, and we were ful^y persuaded that
government would, in a reasonable time, accede to, or make such treatie^,
otherwise we most certainly should not have thought ourselves just^f^ble in
thus binding our constituents indefinitely, and leaving the Spanish government
absolutely free respecting the time. Above three years have now elapsed since
this engagement was made on our parts, and near two years since Spain has been
a^ open war with Great Britain, no more time, and no better opportunity can
therefore he desire^ by the Spanish court for treating with us, and yet there
has not been the least appearance of a desire to do it, or of an intention ever
to own us as an independent people; though being at war with Great Britain, no
obstacle or restraint can possibly (...) from the fear of offending the British
government. It is universally understood, that his Catholic Majesty after the
peace of 1763, always retained a strong desire of revenging and repairing his
losses by the preceding war -- The controversy between Great Britain and her
colonies promised a favorable opportunity of doing this, and therefore he
early began to equip a powerful fleet and make ready to avail himself of
future occasions and events -- The treaties which France suddenly made with us,
were most certainly and avowedly contrary to the views of the Spanish Minister,
and there is not the smallest reason to believe that any change, favorable to
us, has since taken place in the policy and designs of the Spanish court; but
there are the strongest reasons to justify a contrary conclusion. That court
professedly came into the war from motives absolutely foreign to our
independency, and has since prosecuted it solely with the view of recovering
Gibraltar and the Floridas -- Especial care has been taken that not a single
Spanish ship or vessel of war (though many frequently pass by our ports) should
ever stop in any one of them, least that court should incur the reproach of
having assisted or favored a people, whom it neither acknowledges, nor
apparently ever intends to consider in any character but that of rebellious
subjects of the British Crown. Our operations and designs must indeed
necessarily have great influence on the progress and issue of the war, and
therefore the ministry of Spain were naturally solicitous for information about
them, (...) obtain it a Spanish gentleman was sent to reside among us; but
though Congress had at different times, appointed no less than three ministers
to the Spanish court, this gentleman was never permitted to assume any public
character, and therefore his residence among us was a continual insult, an
indirect denial of our independency, so long as he lived, and his death
produced a remarkable instance of condescension and inconsistency, not to say
hypocrisy, in Congress, who, to liberate the soul of the deceased from
Purgatory, very devoutly attended one of the most superstitious rights of a
religion, which that body but a little time before, in addressing the people of
England, had described as having dispersed impiety, bigotry, persecution,
murder and rebellion through every part of the world. But this and all other
endeavors to conciliate the good will of Spain appear to have failed -- Near
two years have passed since Congress appointed their president, a gentleman of
distinguished merit and talents, as Minister Plenipotentiary to the Catholic
King, and he has not only been unsuccessfull in the business of his mission,
but is now humbly waiting at Madrid without any probability of obtaining the
smallest acknowledgement or notice of his public character. -- Supposing the
government of Spain to be most unalterably determined that we shall finally be
the dupes and facrifices of this war, it might still have been expected, that
as we a^e fighting against the same enemies, it would have assisted us with
some of the means to fight, but in this, as in other things, we have been
disappointed, not only from what Congress expected from the "everflowing
treasures of Spain," but of what policy ought to have engaged that court to
afford us. The little paltry sums that have been obtained (less than a
mercantile house in moderate credit might have supplied) have been dealt out
with such niggardly reluctance, that it manifests the most beggarly meanness
and insensibility to accept, and much more to solicit them so long and
importunately. Nothing is more evident to me than that Spain looks on our
independency with jealousy and aversion, as being a most dangerous example to
her vast American e^^ories, and of the most dangerous tendency in respect to
her future dominion over them. Indeed she cannot desire that so remarkable a
revolt from the greatest power of Europe, should by its successful issue afford
encouragement to her distant provinces to make similar attempts, nor can she
wish that a new maritime empire should rise up so contiguously to her treasures
and American possessions, which at all times have been the objects of her
peculiar care and jealousy. An empire too far removed from Europe to be
restrained by the power of Spain, and too near the sources of that power not to
excite the utmost fear and apprehension. So long as the Spanish government
continues at war with England, so long it will naturally wish us to be the
instruments of injuring and distressing that nation. But when the war ends,
that government will undoubtedly wish to see us, not only reduced again to the
dominion of Great Britain, but at the same time weakened and chastised, so that
instead of affording encouragement to its colonies by a successful revolt, we
may serve as an example to deter them from attempting to become independent. I
think it therefore evident, that France, the only nation that has acknowledged
our independency, is also the only one inclined to support it. How long that
nation, contrary, to the views of Spain, and the rest of Europe will think it
wise or necessary to continue the war for our support, are questions that merit
our most serious consideration.

The only advantages which France can have expected from our independency, are
a diminution of the trade and power of England, and an increase of her own
commerce by a participation in ours, there advantages doubtless were expected
from the treaties with America, a few measures of government ever gave more
universal satisfaction, that was manifested by the French nation when those
treaties were announced, but since my return here I have seen that satisfaction
generally abated and succeeded by disappointment, so that in truth but little
benefit is now expected from our independency, at least by the most discerning
part of this nation. The merchants complain of losses on almost every adventure
to our country, through the depreciation of the paper currency, the breach of
public faith, and other causes unfavourable to us. They complain of a general
predilection toward English manufactures, which in spite of the war, and the
laws of the several states, are imported through Holland, St. Eustatius, etc.
and every where purchased by our countrymen in preserence to those of France,
or any other nation. Most of the French gentlemen that have served in our army
or traveled in our country, complain of a similar predelection in favor of
Englishmen, and manners, and a similar ave, sion from those of France. They
perceive a general dislike of them among the people, and allege, that French
Officers who sight and bleed, in our cause, receive fewer attentions and
civilities from our countrymen, than are bestowed on British officers of
inferior rank when taken prisoners. In short, that our manners, habits,
propensities and prejudices, are all English, as well as our language, and that
neither regard for our allies, the authority of our laws, nor yet the
animosities which the war necessarily produces, can engage us, even during its
continuance, to suspend the use of British manufactures, or lay aside our
former regard for individuals of that nation; and it is therefore naturally
concluded that when peace shall be restored, whether we remain independent or
not, the greatest part, if not the whole of our commerce will certainly return
again to its former British channels, and that our former attachment to that
nation, will again revive, so as to leave little or no benefit to this country
from our independence. Those of our countrymen who visit France, afford cause
for similar conclusions, retaining the same appearances, manners, language,
prejudices, affections and aversions, they are confounded with, and mistaken
for Englishmen by all but those to whom they are personally known, and as their
peculiarities but ill accord or assimilate with those of our new allies, they
feel like strangers or exiles from their country, and generally hasten through
this kingdom to Ostend, Amsterdam, etc. from whence, in spite of Dr. Franklin's
earnest dissuasions, and even the menaces of Mess. Adams, Dana, Searle, etc.
the greatest part of them secretly venture over to England, and when arrived
there (though in constant danger of being imprisoned) they almost believe
themselves at home; such is the power of old habits, and early prejudices. You
will not therefore wonder that a discerning, jealous nation, like this, begins
to think with Horace, Naturam expellas, etc. and to perceive that nothing will
finally detach us and our commerce from Great Britain, and that ever if our
independency was established, we should soon be again united to that country by
confederation, and the closest alliance, and to contribute as much if not more,
than ever to it is trade and power. This, the most sensible part of the French
nation believe, and with this belief it^h impossible they should think it wise
and expedient, to persist obstinately in wasting the force and treasures of
France, and endangering her possessione, from an object unlikely to be
obtained, and which if obtained would afford no solid advantage. -- You will
not therefore be surprised, that the war, though begun with general applause,
has now become unpopular, as well as our cause in this country, a great part of
the nation ardently wish for peace, and as our independency, and engagement of
France to support it, are the only obstacles, it is not likely the nation will
long look with patience on that which notoriously opposes its desires, and even
its felicity, and therefore it cannot be reasonably expected, that France will
long persevere in the war on our account. A man must be little acquainted with
history, who can imagine, that because the French government has acknowledged
our independency, and entered into treaties with us, that it will therefore
never desert us: The same government had much oftener acknowledged and asserted
the right of the Stuart family to the (...) of England, and had much oftener
promised to maintain that right, yet those promises were never fulfilled;
multitudes who trusted to them were deceived and sacrificed; even the Pretender
himself, notwithstanding the most formal acknowledgements and frequent promises
was not only abandoned, but to gratify the British government, was exiled,
seized, and ignominiously transported out of France. I have many reasons
individually to be satisfied with the French Ministry, and therefore I would
not mention transactions of this nature, even to you, were they not so
generally notorious. It may however appear invidious, and it certainly is
unnecessary to recollect such facts, or apply them to the present question,
because the French government has itself with unusual candor, publicly
explained its opinion of the extent and force of its engagements to us, when
they say in reply to the demand of England, that France would withdraw its
rescript of the 13th March, 1778, as a preliminary to the mediation of Spain:
That it was not reasonable to expect of them, to do that at the beginning of a
war, (the events of which were uncertain) which could only be done at the close
of an unsuccessful war.

France, therefore, holds herself at liberty to desert our alliance and
independency at the end of an unsuccessful war, and as the present is not
pretended to be a successful war, the inference is plain, and the time to apply
it may be near; so long indeed as we are able to support a great part of the
war, and France escapes any considerable disaster, this government may not be
in haste to abandon us, because we may be thought the cheapest and fittest
instrument for weakening our parent country: But our resources, credit, and
ability to bear any considerable share in the war, will be soon totally
annihilated, and when this happers, I am fully convinced, that France will no
longer suffer her treaties to deprive her of peace: let us however suppose that
France should obstinately persist in the war, and even that Spain, contrary to
her system and views, should do the same in order to establish our
independency, still it does not appear probable, that this object would be
finally obtained. The navy of France has for some time been in the most
formidable state to which it can be carried. That of Spain had nearly attained
this point of perfection before she entered into the war; and yet while both
were in this state, no advantages were gained over England. What then can we
expect hereafter, when the navy of both count^i^s must daily decline? In
France, every seaman being at the disposal of government, the g^eatest number
of ships of war, can possi^ly be manned, may be ma^ned immediat^ly, by
withdrawing the seamen from every other service. -- At the beginning of the
present war, France attempted to do this in some degree, but totally abandoning
the fisheries, the best n^sery of seamen, and diminishiug every commercial
branch of her navigation. -- It was, indeed, intended to encourages the
equipment of privateers, whereby a considerable number of seamen might have
been continually so^ming, but the dreadful mortality which took place in the
fleet under M. d'Orvilliers, in 1779, frust^^ted this intention. Privateers
were then deprived of their crews, and since that time, it is only by
particular permission and favor that seamen could be obtained to equip her
privateers or merchant vess^s; no nursery of sermen therefore remains, and yet
a very great supply is wanted from time to time in the French navy, through the
practice of crowding an un^sual number on board their ships of war, whereby a
greater pr^portion (...) ^ed in action, and perish by contageous us dis^s.
Spain is equ^ly destitute of resources to supply the waste of her seamen, and
the e^o^e the maritime power of both nations must hereafter ^y d^^line, and
that of France would be almost annihilated, if a conti^ental war should
supervene. -- On the other hand the B^itish navy is becoming every day more
formidable; forty additional ships from 50 to 100 guns, besides a much greater
number of frigates, are now on the sto^ks, and when ready may be all manned,
because the British government under its greatest embarrassments has preserved
every reso^rce and nursery for seamen untou head; the fisheries, consting trade,
and other branches of navigation have been all maintained, and an incredible
number of privateers continually employed, the crew, of which may all be
transferred into ships of war, whenever it becomes necessary; so that the
marine of Great Britain, by increasing on one hand, whilst that of France and
Spain diminish on the other, will soon become greatly superior to both, and
when this happens, you need not, I think, be told the consequences. You will
doubtless hear in America, as usual, that Great Britain i^ exhausted, divided,
and disc^u aged, but such accounts are as fallacious now as they were f^rmerly.
This might be demonstrated by many facts, but I think it will not appear
doubtful, when you recollect the immense sum that was subscribed in England for
the service of the present year, and that the British Court, far from fearing
new enemies, not only attacked the Dutch, but has since refused the mediation
of Russia, in making a separate peace with that republic. It has long been
fashionable in America to rail at the British government, as being not only
wicked but weak and incapable. These imputations are however certainly
repugnant to facts, for it must be confessed that none of the belligerent
powers has displayed so much vigor and ability as Great Britain, in prosecuting
the war; and though we may incline to shut our eyes against the truth, a great
part even of the French nation is just and generous enough to acknowledge, and
admire the superior fortitude and intelligence with which the British
government has hitherto repelled and frustrated the efforts of enemies so much
more numercus. Indeed there never was a period in which the resources, bravery,
and real greatness of the British nation were more eminently displayed, than at
this time. But having discarded the remembrance of former friendships that
pride in the glerious achievements of our common ancestors, and that affection
for the heirs of their virtues which Congress itself but a few years since
boasted of; we may be unwilling to admit this truth, -- it will not however
cease to be truth. -- The sun will shine whether we open or shut our eyes;
thinking ourselves alone almost able to resist Great Britain we very
confidently inferred that the force of France joined to ours, would become
irresistible, but we found ourselves mistaken. When Spain joined in the war, we
formed similar expectations, and they likewise proved fallacious; the same
hopes will doubtless be entertained in America, from the addition of Holland,
and they will, I am persuaded, prove equali^ delusive. The British Ministers
certainly think they have more to gain than to lose by the Dutch war, and
hitherto events have confirmed that opinion; but should it hereafter prove
erroneous, they will be able at any time to make a separate peace with that
Republic, so that at best we can have no dependence on any foreign assistance,
but that of France and Spain, and the latter being no way committed on our
side, may at any time make a separate peace as well as Holland; indeed I have
already shown it to be pro^ble not only that Spain, but that France also will
soon relinquish the contest; should both however persivere, we cannot expect a
successful issue; ^e have seen that the ^ited forces of both, during two years,
in which they were the most formida^le, have proved unavailing, even when our
credit and re^ources were inex^au^ed. H^w then can we expect success hereafter,
when the forces of France and Spain are declining, and our own faith and credit
irretrievably ruined; our paper money, the most important of all our resources,
for ever destroyed; several of the southern States already conquered, many of
our countrymen disaffected, and many more wearied and discouraged by the long
continuance and hopeless appearance of the war; accompanied with a multitude of
difficulties which I need not mention to you, but which utterly preclude the
least probability of our being able finally to continue an independent people.
If this be evident, as I flatter myself it is, we are next to enquire whether
the establishment of an independent government, were it practicable, would not
be injurious rather than beneficial to us. But a few years have elapsed since
you, and I believe every other American, were firmly convinced that the peace,
freedom, and happiness of America, could in no way be promoted so well and
secured, as by a dependence on the British Crown; we were then sensible of the
"inestimable advantages of a free English constitution of government." We
publicly ascribed our amazing increase and prosperity to its "protection and
encouraging influence," and declared that "we should ever esteem an union with
the people of England to be our greatest glory, and our greatest happiness."
Had the British Government at that period threntened to withdraw its protection
from us, and abandon us to that very independency, for which we are now
suffering and facrificing so much, we should have been universally alarmed, and
have considered ourselves as menaced with the severest punishment. Recollect
the unanimous opinion of that time, and compare it with what has since been
taught and believed on this subject in America, and then let me ask you,
whether this change of opinion be the work of reason and experience, or of
exasperation and madness? And whether the sober, unanimous conviction, under
which we and our fa^^ers had happily lived, and which our experience h^d
invariably confirmed, is not more likely to be well founded than any sentiments
which the rage and animosity of civil war have produced, and which have never
been brought to any fair dispassionate examination or trial? Should I ask the
advocates of independency what benefits they expect, which we did not, and
might not again enjoy without it; I should probably be told, freedom of
legislation and of commerce; it seems however to me, that on both these
subjects we are deceiving ourselves. There are few, if any benefits, which we
have not their attendant disadvantages. There may be too little as well as too
much restraint in the making of laws, and the former excess is full as
mischievous and liable to abuse as the latter: In those which were called Royal
governments, the exercise of the King's prerogative may have sometimes
prevented wholesome laws, but on the other hand, it has also prevented the
people from injurious ones, and if we were to review the legislative acts of
the several states since the revolution, we should find that the facility in
making laws, has produced a multitude of bastly and injudicious, not to say
pernicious ones; and that the number of these has been greatest in the States,
where the fewest restrain^ attend acts of legislation respecting the freedom of
commerce; I think we have formed mistaken ideas of it is benefits, and that we
have not sufficiently considered, in how fewer instances we have really
suffered any considerable disadvantage, by being restrained in our trade with
foreign nations, and how very little we shall gain by an exemption from those
restraints.

Among all the nations in Europe, there is certainly none, where commerce is so
reputable, or where it is carried on by men of so much fortune, probity, and
honor as in Great Britain, and consequently there is no where an American
merchant could obtain the same credit, or be served with the same fidelity as
in England; and certainly the British manufactures exceed those of any other
country, i^ goodness and cheapness, excepting only a few articles, the greatest
part of which, by means of drawbacks on exportation, may be obtained from
England almost as cheap as from the countries where they are made: and on the
other hand, if we were restrained from carrying some of our own productions to
foreign countries, the people of England were in most cases restrained from
buying the like productions of foreigners; so that we had all the advantages of
a monopoly, and in general a much better price than we could have obtained any
where else, besides large bounties on our iron, naval stores, and other
articles, should we be deprived of these advantages, and bounties, precluded
from the privileges of British subjects, and made liable to the alien's duty; A
trade with foreign nations on such terms, as they might choose to grant us,
would I think prove an unusual compensation, and we should be soon desirous of
returning again to our former restraints, accompanied with our former
privileges: this is however but a partial view of the subject; absolute freedom
of legislation and commerce, or in other words independency, can never be
maintained without fleets, armies, ministers of state, am assadors, boards of
war, of admiralty, of treasury, and many other expensive establishments of a
severeign independent government. We have heretofore enjoyed, and may again
enjoy the benefits of all these establishments, as well as the protection of
the British fleets and armies, without any other contribution or burden, than
what resulted from a few unimportant restraints on our trade, and certainly an
exemption from those restraints, can never afford any advantages equivalent to
the taxes which the people of America must necessarily bear to support
independency, should it be established, not to mention what must be paid to
discharge the enormous public debt already incurred, and which remains to be
incurred by a prosecution of the war; and should we after all succeed, it will
only be to set up and become subjects of a state, which as being the youngest
republic, must take the lowest rank among the nations of the earth, instead of
continuing as we were, members of "an Empire, which (to use the words of
Congress) has been the envy and admiration of ages." These, however, are but a
few of the evils to be expected from our independency. You, my friend, know so
much of history, and of mankind in general, as well as of our countrymen in
particular, that a little reflection must convince you, that the Democratic
Governments lately formed in America are far from being suited to the people
there. I need not remind you of the tumultuous disorder, ingratitude, violence,
and injustice, which in all ages and parts of the world have attended this
species of government, I can only say, that if it can be advantageous to any
societies of men, it is only to those which are small and uncorrupted by luxury
or vice. -- Our own colony of Connecticut has I believe experienced the best
effects which a Democratical government is capable of producing, but these
effects have resulted wholly from the rigid morals, frugality, and industry of
the people: And we must not forget that in the adjoining colony of
Rhode Island, the very same Government was attended with much anarchy, faction,
licentious disorder, and injustice. And if we consider the late progress of
luxury, immorality and vice, and the decline of public virtue among our
countrymen, there will appear but so much reason to fear that the Democratical
Governments established in the united states will produce the same dreadful
effects, which the history of the world, informs us they have invariably
produced in every large society or government where they have been established.
But the intestine disorders, that may arise within each particular state among
its own inhabitants, are not the only mischiefs to be expected, greater evils,
if possible, are to be apprehended from the contentions of different states
with each other, considering the various manners, prejudices, and
prepos^essions of the people of the several states, and their discordant
opinions, claims and pretensions, it seems impossible that our confederation
can long subsist, or that we can long remain at peace with each other, when
relieved from the present war with Great Britain -- Hitherto the different
states have voted supplies according to the allotments and requisitions of
Congress, but there is not a single state, which has not protested against
these allotments as being unequal, and claimed future retribution. To allot the
portions of public expense to each of the several states with exact justice,
will always be a difficult task, on account of their continually varying
circumstances, but when these allotments are made as justly as possible, it is
not probable they will ever be satisfactory to all, so that from hence a
fruitful source of future discord will arise. -- Virginia claims to itself
almost all the valuable uncultivated lands, adjoining to the united states, and
is rapidly selling them; other states protest against the injustice of this
claim; Virginia and Pennsylvania have already been nearly engaged in
hostilities on account of their boundaries; and hostilities were sometime ago
actually begun between Pennsylvania and Connecticut on the same account, and
are now only suspended by the more urgent necessity of resisting the arms of
Great Britain. -- There are similar disputes between New York,
Massachusetts Bay, and New Hampshire, which though now dormant, would
immediately revive, should peace and independency be established in America. I
had almost forgot the inhabitants of several inferior districts, who assume a
right of separating from the colonies or states, to which they have hitherto
belonged, in the same manner as those colonies have separated from
Great Britain, and of being admitted into the confederation as distinct
independent states. -- One of these states in particular (that of Vermont) is
secretly abetted, by some of the New England states against New York, and
though Congress has undertaken the decision, it dares not decide against the
claim and pretentions of the people. In short, the sources of internal
commotion and civil war between the several states are so numerous and
plentiful that it does not seem possible for peace and union long to subsist
among them, or that evils even greater than those we have suffered, since the
declaration of Independency should be avoided after the establishment of it:
The protecting, mediating and restraining influence or power of some other
nation is indispensably necessary to our well being, and certainly there is no
other nation on earth so well suited to this purpose by religion, manners,
language, government, etc. or on which we can so honorably and advantageously
depend as Great Britain.

If then there be no probability of finally establishing the Independency we
have declared, and of the establishment of it be more likely to prove
pernicious than beneficial to us, what obstacle or objection is there to
prevent our renouncing the beneficial claim and reconciling ourselves again to
the parent country? Of all the various objections that have been made on this
subject at different times and by different people, there are but two which
deserve the smallest notice. The first of these is, that the solemn acts and
declarations of the King and Parliament of Great Britain, are not to be relied
upon; That when we shall have laid down our arms, former pretentions may be
revived and new acts of Parliament made to subject our rights, etc. If there be
any force in this objection it will operate even more strongly against
negociating for peace than for reconciliation; a treaty of peace would be an
act of the crown only, and might be more easily evaded than a solemn compact,
in which the Parliament as well as the King would be a party. Those therefore
who from apprehensions of this nature, refuse treating for reconciliation,
should not think of treating for peace, they should resolve to prosecute the
war with unrelenting fury; to reprobate the folly of Congress in sending Mr.
Adams to negociate with Great Britain, they should forget how often that nation
has interposed to save the civil and religious liberties of other countries
against the ambitious views of France and Spain, and regardless of the danger
of f^lling under the power of these our new friends, they should resolve never
to sheath the sword until the British nation is exterminated; in this and only
in this way they will act consistently and reconcile their actions to that
distrust which they profess to entertain of the national faith of Great Britain
-- Wise, impartial men, will however think, that objections of this nature come
with very little propriety from the people of America, who, as an independent
people, are too young, and even already have shown too little regard for their
own national faith, to have a right to distrust that of others; and especially
of a nation so long distinguished by a faithful adherence to its engagements,
and which, even at this moment, enjoys the confidence of Europe more than any
other, as is manifested by the readiness with which the people of all
countries, even of France itself, still lend and confide their money to the
British government, notwithstanding its embar^asments. But what renders this
objection more contemptible is, that it proceeds from those very men who were
most active in evading and violating the most solemn engagements, and the most
sacred obligations of justice respecting the redemption and value of the
Congress bills of credit. The last objection against a reconciliation with
Great Britain is, that it would be rep^g^ant to our engagements with France,
and consequently dishonorable and ungrateful in us. No man can be more jealous
of the honor of America, or more zealous in its support than I was, so long as
even the semblance of it promoted our public measures; but my jealousy and zeal
were naturally extinguished when Congress on the 18th of March, 1780, committed
that very act, which, but six months before, they had unanimously and publicly
reprobated as "excerable deed," an unpardonable sin, and which, by their own
judgment and sentence would justly render us a reproach and a bye-word among
the nations of the Earth, and make us "appear like a common prostitute among
chaste and respectable matrons, etc" -- Such being our situation, such our
crime and punishment, according to the decision and sentence of our own
representative. I do not conceive that any deviation from our engagements with
France, can add to our national dishonor, nor can I indeed discover any way to
escape this dishonor and infamy, but by deserting that independency which we
have so disgracefully perverted, and blending ourselves again with the British
nation, but I would not even for so desirable a purpose commend an
unjustifiable departure from our treaties with France. It has already been
demonstrated, that the French government considers itself, as at liberty, to
desert us at the end of an un^uccessful war, and consequently we must be
entitled to the same liberty, and to the same interpretation of our
engagements. -- Should we continue independent, our treaties with France ought
to be most sacredly fulfilled, but we never could have intended by those
treaties, to bind ourselves eternally to fight for independeney, even when the
attainment of it becomes evidently impossible, and when through our own
incapacity, it is more likely to prove injurious than beneficial to us, such an
engagement, had we even been insane enough to make would be nu^, because it
would be contrary to the first laws and duties of nature. Politicians do not
generally feel or expect much from sentiments of national gratitude, yet I am
far from wishing that my countrymen should become ungrateful. I have been as
you well know most ready to magnify our obligation to the French, as well from
my personal regard to that nation, as from a persuasion, that the appearance of
gratitude on our side would produce beneficial effects. I was willing even to
err by an excess of grateful sentiments toward our new ally, so long as that
excess appeared harmless, but when a claim on our gratitude is set up, and
opposed to the peace and happiness of millions, it becomes proper at least to
enquire if it is well sounded? In what, let me ask are we obliged to France?
She scarcely knew a single individual of our country, and therefore could not
have been actuated by any motive of regard for us, at the time when she began
to afford us secret assistance. It is with reluctance that I enter on the
discussion of this question, even privately with you, but it is as easy, as it
is expedient to ascertain the views of the French government and its conduct
toward us; envious as well as apprehensive of the rapid increase of the
British wealth and power, a r^inous contest between different parts of the
British empire, wa^ naturally viewed with particular s^sfection and to prolong
this centest, with all its destructive consequences, it was thought politic to
assist the weakest side, which was ours, enmity toward the British nation, and
not a regard for us was the prevailing motive. In similar circumstances as much
assistance would have been given to any other people under heaven, and there
can be no cause for gratitude for any aid given in such circumstances, and with
such views. The first an of the French government evidently was to assist us
just so far as might be absolutely necessary to prevent an accommodation, and
to give this assistance with so much secrecy as to avoid any rupture with Great
Britain. On this plan succors were first permitted to be dealt out to us, by
private individuals, and only on condition of future payment, but afterward we
were thought to be such cheap and effectual instruments of mischief to the
British nation, that more direct and gratuitous aids were afforded us; these
were however soon discovered, and frequently complained of by the British
government, and as often denied by that of France. The whole of the year 1777
passed in a succession of complaints from Lord (...) t^rmont on one side, and
of solemn denials accompanied with the most friendly protestations and
assurances from the French minister on the other. Each complaint produced a
temporary suspension of our succors, and a new contrivance for secretly
conveying them to America, and eluding the vigilance of the British minister.
While the French count was thus violating its ^ng^gements and promises to
Great Britain, it does not appear to have ever expected, or desired, that we
should become independent, but on the contrary to have always had in view and
contemplation, the time when we were to b^ subdued, and lest at the mercy of
Great-Brit^in, and when it would be nighly dangerous for us o^ possess any
evidence of the assitance we had received, or of the fa^acy of those amicable
assurances and protestations which had been so often repeated to the British
Ambassader, and accordingly all inter ourse between the French minister and us,
passed by me^ns and channels s^^ed to the views I have just described. No
written proof of the least importance was ever left in our hands, even Mr.
Gerard's letters appointing occasional interviews with us, were always without
any signature, and though five hundred thousand livres were quarterly paid to
our Banker, from the Royal Treasury, not the smallest evidence of the source
from whence that subsidy came, was permitted to remain in our power. So much
precaution did nor pass unnoticed by us at that period. I saw clearly, and with
concern, that it was dictated by a persuasion that we should be finally subdued
by the arms of Great Britain, and an intention finally to desert and disown
having ever had any connection with us: Toward the end of the summer 1777,
this court seems to have thought the time near for so abandoning and disavowing
us. The capture of Ticonderoga, and the progress of General Burgovne's army on
one side, with the victory at the Brandywine, and the taking of Philadelphia on
the other, convinced the French Ministers, that the period of our resistance
would soon come, and made them solicitous to remove every impression which the
assistance previously given to us might have been made on the British
Government. Amicable protestations and assurances were therefore renewed, with
unusual servour, and least words alone should be insufficient, they proceeded
to important and effectual acts of complaisance American armed vessels were
every where arrested and detained in the French ports, and afterward only
permitted to sail, under engagements to return home without committing any act
of hostilit in the Puropean Seas. Two v^uable Jamaica ships, taken by American
privateers, and brought to Nan^z, were wrested from the captors, and restored
to their former British owners. Injunctions of a nature not to be disobeyed
were sent to all the ports affording us any supply of military stores. etc. and
to gratify Lord Stormont, the Captain of the ship Amphitrite was thrown into
prison, for having carried such st^res to America, though with the privity and
approbation of this Court. The principal actor in this affair was under the
greatest apprehensions and alarm for his own sa^ety, when a messenger arrived
with the news of General Burgoyne's army having surrendered to that of General
Gates. The ^ews allayed his fears, and stopped those proceenings, by which the
French government had already manifested it is intentions to disown and abandon
us. The impression which th^s news made in England, and the intention ann^uncea
in Parliament, of soon offering the most liberal terms to America, produced a
sudden change in the conduct and policy of this Court respecting us. It was
perceived, or at least believed, that nothing short of an open declaration in
our favor, would pretract the quarrel, or prevent our reconciliation with
Great Britain; and it was apprehended, that when reconciled, both countries
might turn their force against France, -- England from resentment for what had
been done, and America for what had been refused for our support. The French
Ministry then appeared, for the first time, to think seriously of promoting a
final separation between us and our parent country, being convinced, from the
strength which we had manifested, in singly resisting the power of Great
Britain, and the general discouragement which notoriously prevailed in that
nation, that such a separation might be effected with but little difficulty,
and no danger to France.

The proposals of Congress, therefore, which had been lest twelve months
unnoticed, were suddenly accepted, and the treaties speedily concluded, and
afterward hastily announced to the world, in order to frustrate the pacific
endeavors of the British Government, and engage us to reject it is liberal
offers, for promoting a reconciliation. Having been personally engaged in
concluding and signing the treaties with France and personally favored and
obliged to it is Government, and being also persuaded as I then was, that those
treaties would prove infinitely beneficial to our country, I very naturally
approved of their ratification, and of the rejection of all terms offered by
the British Commissioners. Situated as I then was, and thinking as I then did,
it was impossible for me to act otherwise; but yet I shall for ever regret,
that a majority of our countrymen were not wise enough to know, and pursue
their own interests, and to accept of offers, which contained every thing
conducive to their future peace and prosperity, and which, had the, been
accepted, would have saved us and our parent country innumerable calamities,
and have preserved thousands of useful rives, with oceans of kindred blood,
which have been since offered up as a sacrifice to our idol, Independency. --
Unhappily that time and opportunity were irrecoverably lost, and all regrets
must necessarily prove unavailing. It now only remains with us to employ all
our thoughts and faculties in repairing the mischiefs that are past, and
stopping their future progress.

In examining the motives and views of the French ministry there appears no
reason to believe that the change in its system and policy toward us, and the
treaties thereby produced, were the effect of a regard for our country, any
more than the preceding resolution to disown and abandon us, had been -- In
every variation of conduct, this Ministry, like true politicians, pursued what
they considered as the interests of their country, regardless of ours; and
though I have no desire to censure them for acting from such motives I cannot
admit that any just title to our gratitude can be from thence derived. -- If we
proceed to review what has passed since the treaties were announced, we shall
doubtless find abundant reason to form the same conclusion. -- By your station
in Congress you must have necessarily known the extent and nature of the
succors afforded to us by this government since the war, and I cannot believe,
after mature consideration, that they have been such as to lay our country
under any great load of obligation. -- I do not mean, like Mr. J. Adams, to
assert, that France has broken, or at least not fulfilled the terms of her
alliance with us, though, between ourselves, I cannot but think there is some
foundation for such an assertion, by the letter as well as the spirit of the
treaty; the first article of which says, If war should break out between France
and Great Britain during the continuance of the present war between the United
States and England, his Majesty and the United States shall make it a common
cause, and aid each other mutually with their good offices, their councils and
their forces, according to the exigence of conjunctures, as becomes good and
faithful allies.

It is to be remembered, that before France entered into the war, we had alone
supported a very unequal contest with Great Britain for near three years, and
had thereby incurred an enormous debt, and nearly exhausted all our credit and
resources; it might therefore have been expected from the terms of our
engagement, that instead of continuing to bear an unequal share of the burden,
our own proportion would have been lightened by our Ally, in consideration of
what we had previously done and suffered alone; but has this been in any degree
the case? Is it even true that France has since, in proportion to her superior
wealth and numbers, borne a just share of the war? No enemy has ravaged or even
landed within this kingdom; no new tax has been levied to support the war;
almost every thing expended is the fruit of economy, and has been employed in
building and sustaining a formidable navy, and particular care has been used to
expose it as little as possible, in order that it may remain entire at the end
of the war. The same principle which has furnished the means, appears likewise
to direct the operations of the war on this side, whilst England and America
have been wasting their strength and resources against each other; very strong
and early representations were as you know made, and from time to time
repeated, to this government, respecting the disorder of our finances, and the
absolute impossibility of supporting the war, unless our ally would either
lend, or assist us in borrowing considerable sums of money; but these
representations produced no effect, although France has from the beginning always
been able to borrow with so much facility, that there could have been no
difficulty in affording us sufficient pecuniary aid, if the inclination to do
it had not been wanting. It is not until since the alarming revolt of the
Pennsylvania and Jersey troops, that this government could ever be brought to
promise a single shilling toward paying the army in America, and the sum now
granted is placed under the direction of General Washington, in a way that
manifests a total want of confidence in Congress, and renders the General in
effect independent of the body by whom he is commissioned, and who will not
dare either to dismiss, or even to disoblige him; because without his
concurrence, the army cannot obtain a single shilling. You can best decide
whether Congress has deserved this distrust, not to say insult; but if that
body has deserved this, it certainly does not merit the confidence of America;
and in either case, the preference shown to General Washington seems likely to
produce dangerous jealousies to say no more; the esteem which I have long
entertained for him precludes every suspicion that he will adopt, or become the
instrument of any improper design. But this reference will doubtless be
considered and represented in America, as indicating an intention in this
government to attach General Washington, to the interests of France, and to
support him against all opposition, and it is easy to conceive the animofities
likely to result from such apprehensions.

Respecting the sea and land forces sent at different times to America, they
doubtless were never suited nor intended to drive the British forces out of the
United States, probably this government thinks that so great a part of the
British forces can no where be employed and wasted so advantageously for
France, as in fighting against the people of America, where they can do no harm
to the French nation, and where we are under the necessity of opposing them,
but were the British fleets and armies transferred from the continent to the
West India islands, it would depend on our inclination, whether we followed
them or not, and in either case but especially in the latter, the French and
Spanish possessions would be in imminent danger. These reasons sufficiently
explain, why in truth, the French Government never did nor will make any
effectual efforts to drive the English from New York, etc. Respecting the fleet
and army sent last year to Rhode Island, under the command of Mons. de Ternay,
and Mons. de Rochambeau, you who were in Congress, need not be told the purpose
for which they were professed to be sent, and probably by this time, you will
be convinced that the great additional force which was promised, and of which
the first sent was represented only as the van guard, was really never intended
to follow, and that the true, though secret object in view, was not so much to
act offensively against the British forces, as to secure and hold Rhode Island,
in the same manner as Queen Elizabeth held cautionary towns belonging to the
Dutch. This Government has for a confiderable time been apprehensive that
Great Britain might soon regain the southern States by conquest, or their own
defection, but it was also expected that the people of New England, by more
vigorous and persevering efforts would still maintain the contest, even if all
the other States should be again reduced to their former dependence, on the
Crown of Great Britain. The herbour of Rhode Island is commodiously situated in
the center of New England, and was therefore thought a desirable possession by
the French Ministry, and a fleet and army were accordingly sent to fortify
themselves, and remain there, ready to favor and encourage those among us, who
should appear more attached to the French interest, and disposed to go the most
desperate lengths against reconciliation with Great Britain, and at the same
time ready to overawe and restrain those of a contrary disposition. Indeed any
one who considers how long the French fleet and army have remained in their
station at Rhode Island, without having ever received any order to engage in
the smallest offensive enterprise, and that no attempt has been made to send
even the smallest part of the reinforcements promised, must conclude that this
fleet and army were not sent to America for our sakes, so much as to gain an
advantageous strong hold in our country, and a controling influence over the
people there, in order to prevent our reconciliation with Great Britain, until
we shall both have so far weakened and ruined each other, that France with a
formidable navy carefully preserved, will at the close of the war have nothing
to fear, whatever becomes of us, or of our independency. Many other facts might
be adduced, but they cannot be necessary to support this general representation
of the policy and views of France toward us, and to invalidate every cliam
which may be made from thence, on our gra^itude, if it be then true that there
is no validity, in either of these objections, nor any probability of finally
establishing our independency, and if the establishment of it would more likely
prove prejudicial than beneficial to us, it is high time to reflect on our
situation, and instantly terminate the destructive contest in which we are
engaged. Dr. Franklin's sentiments on the separation of America from
Great Britain, even after the declaration of independency, are very plainly, as
well as forcibly expressed, in his letter to Lord How, Long (says this
venerable patriot) did I endeavor with unfeigned and unwearied zeal, to
preserve from breaking that fine and noble China Case -- the British Empire,
for I knew, that being once broken, the separate parts could not retain their
share of the strength and value that existed in the whole; and that a perfect
reunion of those parts could scarce ever be hoped for. I know of nothing that
has occurred since the date of that letter, to induce Doctor Franklin to change
his private sentiments on this subject, it is true that at that time, a
reunion, though devoutly to have been wished for, could scarce be hoped or
expected, so long as every original cause of the separation still existed, and
were so many obstacles in the way of the wished for reunion; but those having
been since removed, and America having fatarly experienced, that separate, it
does not retain even it is share of that strength and value which existed in the
whole. On the Doctor's own principles, a reunion ought to be hoped for, and
endeavored after with unfeigned and ^wearied zeal by him, and by every friend
to America. If our own future prosperity requires that we be again united to
Great Britain, and if through inability to resist, we must eventually return to
that nation, it is both parricide and suicide to employ and waste our strength
and blood for the destruction of a country, which is shortly to become our's,
and to which we must hereafter resort for protection and support, against those
to whom we are now attached, and whose ba^tles we are fighting. But besides the
f^lly and wickedness, we ought to reflect on the danger of such conduct, for if
we cannot finally withstand Great Britain, nothing can be more hazardous than
to prevoke her resentment, by ^n obstinate and desperate resistance -- If the
United States persist in rejecting all evertures for a reconciliation, and be
finally conquered, after mis^hievously protracting the evils of civil war, as
long as possible, what favor and indulgence can they reasonably expect? These
considerations are of the utmost importance to our future wellbeing, and
wretched will our condition doubtless become, should they be much longer
disregarded.

The causes which first occasioned the civil war, have long ceased to exist,
the acts complained of have been repealed, all right of taxing us, solemnly
renounced by the British Parliament, and offers made to us at different times,
more than equivalent to all that was originally demanded by our delegates in
Congress. We therefore no longer contend for our rights, but for Sovereign
Dominion, for a new o^ject, to which we had originally no claim, and which even
after the commencement of hostilities we most solemnly professed to hold in
aversion and abhorrence. This is the idol, which in the days of peace, and
under the empire of reason we behold with sentiments of detestation, but which
in the rags and phrenz^ of civil war, we have set up and worshipped. This is
the false divinity, whose votaries we have become, and on whose altars we daily
offer up the dearest of all sacrifices. The peace and presperity of our
country, and the blood of our nearest relations and friends. To labor in
curing this madness, and in exciting forgiveness, peace, and brotherly love
among the contending parts of the British empire, would certainly be a most
laudable and meriterious employment, and never did any contest afford so many
reasons for charity and mutual forgiveness as the present. "To err is human."
but in case of error, be it on either side, is peculiarly entitled to
indulgence from the other; the cause of this dispute having been so intricate,
and the question of right so doubtful, that the wisest and best men would not
avoid thinking differently about them. Those therefore, who unrelentingly
cherish vindictive resentments on this subject, and deny forgiveness to each
other, will have very little reason to ask, or expect it of Heaven -- Let us
then exert our utmost efforts in promoting peace and reconciliation, if we
accelerate these blessings, if we contribute to receive "transcendent relation"
that formerly subsisted between us and our parent country, we shall deserve the
applauses of present and future generations, and in every event we shall at
least secure the approbation of our own consciences. I pretend not to know
exactly the terms on which a reconciliation might now be effected, every
overture from Great Britain having been treated with insult, and considered by
u^ as a proof of her weakness and our own strength, no encouragement has been
left to further offers; on her part, enough however has already been offered to
afford a basis for safe and honorable negotiation; and I am fully persuaded
that every thing which we ought to desire, every thiug consistent with our own
and the general good of the Empire, may be finally obtained if we do not
neglect the present opportunity and wait till conquest supersedes all
negotiation. It never can be the interest of Great Britain to deny our
reasonable demands, because it can never be beneficial to her to govern a
people so remote, and so rapidly increasing, by force; and on our parts, we
should recall amd regulate our demands by those sentiments which Congress
professed even after the commencement of hostilities. Our breasts, said they,
retain too tender a regard for the kingdom from which we derive our origin, to
renew such a reconcili^tion as might, in any manner, be inconsistent with her
dignity or her welfare; these, related as we are to her, honor and duty, as
well as inclination, induce us to support and advance Every thing which we can
ask consistently with these sentiments, will not, I am confident, be denied to
us. Respecting the first measures toward a negotiation with the British
Government, they must, I think, begin among the people at large, in the same
manner as the first steps toward the present contest originated -- If the
people in general be made sensible of the mischiefs and dangers attending the
present pursuit of independency, they will naturally assemble as formerly, in
town meetings, etc. and by suitable resolutions will procure instructions from
their several assemblies to their delegates in Congress, for promoting a
negotiation and reconciliation with the parent country; and if it should appear
that a majority of the states is not inclined to ^egocia^e, in that case they
never can be in doubt about suitable ways and means to treat scparately.

If these facts and observations appear to you well founded, I beg you will
employ them in such way as may be best suited to promote the salutary purposes
of this letter. I do not however wish that any part of it should at this time
be ascribed to me, unless there may be more necessity for it than I can at
present conceive of; I shall however acquiesce in every thing you may think
expedient in this respect, as I am confident, that though our countrymen may
not be yet prepared for the^^ truths, the time cannot be distant in which they
will be universally admitted, and when recovering from our present delirium, we
shall reflect with anguish of mind on the blessings we have lost, and the
miseties we have suffered by ou^ pursuit of in dependency. When that period
arrives, we shall equally regret, and wonder at our infatuation in desiring to
separate from a people to whom we were connected by all the ties of
consanguinity, mutual affection, and interest; by similarity of religion, laws,
manners, and language; and generally by every thing fitted to bind mankind to
each other; a people justly celebrated above all others for civil and religious
liberty, for public and private virtues, for philosophy, science and arts, and
generally for all that exalts and adorns human nature; and we shall no less
regre^ and wonder that in thu^ breaking the bonds of law, loyalty, faith and
blood; in thus discarding all remembrance of former benefits, all pride in the
glorious achievements of our common ancestors, and all affection for the heirs
of the^ virtues, and separating from an empire, which (by our own confession)
has been the envy and admiration of ages, we should at the same time ^ni^e
ourselves to, and render ourselves virtually dependen^ ^n, a nation and
government, which we and our fathe^s have considered as hereditary inimical to
us, to our religion, and to every species of freedom. As I have devoted this
letter solely to reflections on the public affairs of our country, and have
already made it so long, I will not add to it by saying any thing more, than
that I am with the most sincere respect and friendship,

Dear Sir, Your most obedient And very humble servant, (Signed) SILAS DEANE.

To the Honorable Jesse Root, Esquire Member of Congress, Philadelphia.
Mr Silas Deane's Letter to Major Benjamin Tallmadge, at Genesis Washington's
Headquarters.
Paris, 20th May, 1781. DEAR SIR,
YOUR letter of September last did not come to hand until a few d^s since, its
de^ntion is to me p^ctly (...) countable -- You ask me what I think (...) aff^
and that ^ll be the issue of ^nem -- Thinking in the manner I do, silence on
the subject would be prudence, at least in me; but it would not be acting the
friendly and open part toward you -- In a word, I think that our affairs were
never at any period in a worse situation than at present, and that the issue of
the war if continued much longer, will be in the ruin and slavery of our
country. You may be assured that England is determined, o^ no consideration,
nor in any circumstances whatever, to admit of our independency; that nation is
neither exhausted nor dispirited, its energy, resources, and national character
never appeared in a greater and more striking point of view than at this time;
you are not to suppose that all the powers of Europe have deserted
Great Britain, and become indifferent to the fate of a nation which at
different periods have relieved and defended most of them, when in the most
imminent danger themselves; nor have you any ground to conclude, as too many
rashly do, that because no power in Europe has as yet declared for England,
that therefore they all (at least secretly) wish us success. There is no nation
at this day in Europe, except England, in which the subjects are in reality
anything more than the properts of government, for except that arbitrary and
tyrannical nation of Great Britain, they are no where entitled to any share in
the legislation. The government of Holland, about which you have heard s^ much
and know so little, is included in the above description, being an absolute
aristocracy, the members of which are not chosen by the people, but by those
who compose the aristocracy; that government is in its nature as despotic as
any in Europe, but fortunately for its subjects, the genius of commerce
protects them from the baneful effects of despotism; they think they are free,
they have not experienced the contrary, and until lately have been happy, but
is it not surprising that we should imagine, that monarchs who hold their own
subjects in chains, should, from motives of disinterested generosity and the
love of liberty, assist a people in their revolt from a government infinitely
milder than their own? A people whose first and favorite position is, that all
men are by nature equal. Reflect cooly for a moment if the sounding epithets of
great, good, generous, disinterested ally, protector of the liberties of
mankind, etc. will protect you, and then answer me: Few nations ever engaged in
war but from motives of ambition, interest or revenge; the latter is
notoriously the sole motive in Spain for the present; her interest in
incompatable with our independency, in every point in which it can be viewed.
Spain is sensible of this, and therefore will not acknowledge us -- Can it be
believed that an arbitrary, despotic and jealous monarchy can wish to see a
mighty empire of confederated republics, whose religion, genius, and form of
government are directly the reverse to, and naturally at war with theirs,
established in the neighborhood of all its treasures? at the doors of its
unarmed and enervated colouies? But Holland is also at war with England! rather
say that England is at war with Holland, for the latter has not, as yet, made a
single reprisal; but if the States of Holland enter seriously into the war,
they will not do it on our account, nor will they take any part in our affairs;
they have told Mr. Adams so, in plain but modest terms, repeatedly -- They are
not so much interested against our independency as Spain; but they are far from
being interested to have it established, every other power to the North are
interested in a greater or less degree against us, the natural produce of their
country being the same as ours. As to those to the South they must naturally be
indifferent to our fate, except Portugal, which is essentially affected by what
affects England, and is of course as great an enemy to our independency as
England can be; but the Southern powers, Spain excepted, are of very little
importance in the present subject. If I were to hazard a conjecture it would
be, that the Emperor of Germany and Empress of Russia will ultimately take part
with England, and decide the contest, and that the terms of peace will finally
be dictated by them. If we continue to reject all overtures, until such an
event arrives, unconditional submission will be our fate; but if those and all
the other Powers in Europe, remain peaceable spectators of the war, it does not
follow that Great Britain must fall, her naval power and resources are equal to
those of all her enemies, and the war being solely maritime, the event must be
uncertain, Great Britain is undoubtedly able to support the war for several
years to come, and she is at all events resolved to hazard every thing sooner
than yield to our independency; but suppose the war continued for two years
longer, and suppose at that period, the resources and maritime power of
Great Britain exhausted and broken, her credit lost, and general bankruptcy and
despair throughout her dominions, and finding no friend to interfere, that she
is obliged to receive the law from her enemies. -- This may afford a triumph
for us for a moment, before our resentments have time to cool, but when we have
laid down our arms and become cool enough to look round, and examine our
situation, we shall find that we have purchased this triumph at the price of
the peace, safety and liberty of our country, we shall by that time find our
country exhausted and ravaged, an immense national debt on us, and the expenses
of our civil government, and public departments, so greatly increased, that the
burden of the whole will be unsupportable. -- The war has already cost us more
than thirty millions sterling, if justice were to be done to every one, and
though by the breach of public faith, and the highest act of national injustice
and despotism ever known, it is liquidated at much less, yet two years
continuance of the war, will leave us near that sum in debt, the new
established government will cost us, ten times more than the old ever did; we
now expend near 20,000 l. sterling annually, on foreign embassies and agencies,
at the peace these establishments must be enlarged, as well as the expense;
Congress must be supported in a certain dignity, Boards of Treasury, of Marine,
of Commerce, etc. must be established with salaries, sufficient to induce men
of abilities to serve; Consuls in the different foreign ports must be
appointed, a marine force must be kept up to a certain degree, or our flag will
not be respected, nor our commerce protected in any part of the world. -- In
short, from the best calculations I can make, the expenses of our public
government will greatly exteed 100,000 l. sterling annually, independent of the
expenses of the government of each particular State, which will necessarily be
increated, and if j^stice be done our officers and soldiers, in their half pay,
the expenses of our new public government only, will be at least 300,000 l.
sterling annually. The proportion of the public debt to Conn^cticut, supposing
that State to share one equal thirteenth of the whole, will exceed two millions
sterling, that state is the best able to pay taxes, of any in the
confederation, will it be able to pay the interest only of such a sum, and its
proportion of the public current expenses, in addition to those of their
private government? You know it is impossible. -- Will the States when peace
leaves local prejudices, ancient jealoufies, and every other seed of contention
at liberty to spring up and operate, will they agree in the partition of their
public debts and expenses, in the share of vacant lands, of emoluments, and
o^c^s? In short, will they agree in any thing, will the honest Farmers in
Connecticut be contented to find, that after they have suffered so much, in a
war, professedly undertaken to free them from taxes, and impositions, that
their lands have become mortgaged nearly to their value? Will not discontent
prevail universally in the States, between each other, and among the
individuals of each, and will the Democratic system we have adopted, have
sufficient energy to govern so extensive a continent, uneasy and convulsed in
every part? Will it be able to prevent universal Anarchy, the natural child of
Democracy in every age and nation, of the world? If ever a state was calculated
for Democracy, it must have been Connecticut; an equality of fortune, the
influence of religious sentiments, sober, virtuous and frugal manners, with the
small extent of territory, were all in our favor; and we and our ancestors
were happy under an apparent Democracy -- I say apparent, for we always beheld
and acknowledged a supreme power at a distance, and complied with its
requisitions, but the case will be materially different in future, if
independency is established at the peace, besides are our manners the same as
formerly? Have they been changed for the better or worse? If civil feuds and
anarchy pre^ail, ^e shall lie at the mercy of any power that may be disposed to
interfere, it is next to impossible but that they will not prevail, and I leave
you to reflect on the consequences, but if France and Spain succeed with our
assistance in ruining Great Britain, if they dictate the law to us also? They
certainly will, it is not in the nature of a despotic victorious Power to do
otherwise; and if they dictate the feverest conditions, to whom have we to
apply? -- No power on earth will be left to take our part, no one whom either
affection or interest will induce to interfere, that great nation from whom we
have so often boasted of our descent, that nation which has so often unlocked
its treasures and spilled its best blood, in the defense of the rights and
liberties of other nations, though strangers to her, will not be able to reach a
helping hand to her descendants in distress; she may afford us her unavailing
pity, or offer feeb'e entreaties on our behalf, but we have no reason to expect
either, I view our situation as with Sylla on the one hand and Charybdis on the
other, and our pilots drunk with the intoxicating ideas of independent
sovereignty, madly pushing us into that vortex, in which our peace liberty and
safety will be swallowed up and lost for ever, if you ask me what is to be
done, I say make peace immediately on the best terms you can, the present
moment is a favorable our, we are now of more weight in the scale, than we can
possibly be in a general treaty, at the close of the war, we may then find
ourselves light as the dust of the balance, at best but a mere article to be
set off to either fide, on a general settlement of account; Mr. Sebor will
write to you by this conveyance, and I leave him to inform you of Simonet's
villainy and imposture in the bill which he sold you, as well as of other
private matters, for I am heartily tired, and my spirits are too low to attempt
a more cheerful subject at present, wishing you success and happiness, I am
with sincere esteem and friendship,

My Dear Sir, Your most obedient, And very humble Servant, S. DEANE.

Major Benj. Tallmadge, at Genesis Washington's Headquarters.
The following is one of the Papers intercepted with Mr. Silas Dean's letters;
and from the matter and style, seems to be a composition of his, though none of
his letters expressly refers to it as an enclosure. It was probably put under a
cover to some one or other of his particular friends, which is missing.
The AMERICAN ACCOUNT CURRENT, with its Vouchers.
THE war between America and Great Britain, was enter^ (...) on account of
certain acts of Parliament, injurous to the rights and privileges of the
former; unhappily to (...) count^^es, the (...) misre^resentations of de^ning
man on hot: (...) prevail^d so far as to have the most unfavourable
construction put, by each p^ty, on every word or (...) of the other, and (...)
the (...) the (...) extre^ity, an appeal to the sword. -- America^ (...)
(single and u^supp^ted) to contend with Great Britain, applied to France the
^reditary (...) the latter, for assistance (...) was formed, and the refusal of
Great Britain to rece^e from its claimt, or to rep^al the (...) complained of,
(...) the measure taken by America, in the opinion of great part of Europe.

Great Britain from conviction, that the acts c^mplained of were wrong, has
receded from the claims which occasioned the first une^^iness, and now invites
America to return, and be reconciled.

America says, that it is too late, that she has put herself under other
pretection, and made choice of a new friend, which she will not on any
consideration desert.

In this situation, and after six years contest, it is not unseasonable to
enquire, what have been the gains or losses of America, to this time, and to
state facts, from which a judgment may be formed, with moral certainty, what
her future loss or gain will be. -- I propose, in the first place, to state the
acco^ of the loss and gain of America, in the present war to this time, and to
cite facts to justify the charge^, or credits entered on each fide; -- and in
the second place, to state all the facts, necessary to enable us, to judge with
moral certainty of the final issue of the adventure, and to calculate if the
balance be now found in favor of America, whether it is equal to the risque:
she has already run, and the probability of increasing or lesing such balance
by continuing of the adventure: -- On the other hand, if it fall against her,
what probable chance or prospect she has of retrieving her loss, or of
increasing it by going on, being simply a merchant, I know of no other method
equally plain and certain, to come at the true state of America, at this time,
or for calculating, with any degree of certainty, as to the future; as my
couatrymen, even the most illi^erate understands something of accounts, and my
great and sole object being to state in the most simple and plain manner
possible, the real situation of America. I shall make use of such mercantile
terms only, as are universa^y understood, by which if the account shall have
one article wrongly charged in it, or if any thing be given for a fact, which
is not such, I shall be open to im^ conviction.

(...) to ^ting of the account it is necessary to examine what the state of
America was at, and for some time before the commencement of the war, by which
it will be seen at once on comparing it, with the present, on which side the
balance lies.

In 1775, the number of inhabitants amounted to about three millions, settled
on a sea coast of near 1500 miles in extent, with an immense continent behind
them, fettile and uninhabited, except by a few wandering savages; and being all
employed (a very few (...) in the innocent and healthful business of
cultivating the earth, this, stock of inhabitants, independent of importations
increased at the rate of doubling or cent per cent. every twenty years; their
(...) exportations, which consisted in all kinds of provisions, in lumber,
tobacco, indigo, and other produce of the country, amounted to nearly three
millions and an half ste^ing.

The demand for this produce, encouraged and paid for the clearing up, and
improving the lands, and gave such a spring of agriculture and navigation, that
those most useful arts were carried to great persection, and were rapidly
improving.

This annual exportation, of three millions and an half, was not a clear profit
in favor of America, for the greatest part of it, and at times the whole, was
returned in foreign commodities, part of which might have been dispensed with,
but at the same time it must be acknowledged, that if^ the tasie for foreign
superfluities and luxuries, excited the Americans to clear up, improve and
cultivate their country, as the only means by which they could obtain them;
this produced a substantial and pe^manent addition to the stock, or capital
wealth of the country -- And if it be granted, that the real wealth of any
country, is to be estimated from the number of inhabitants living comfortably
within it, and the quantity of its produce of the most necessary articles,
(...) clear that America, though it had not the practed, had the most it creasing
capital of any country in the world -- It has already been observed that the
increase of population in America, was at the rate of cent per cent every
twenty years; and if their exports are examined, they will be found to have
increased in still greater proportion from 1675 to 1775. This observation be
carried further, and it would be easy to show, that every useful art and
science had, during the same period, kept pace with the population and
cultivation of the country in America -- But it is sufficient for the present
adjustment of our general account, to show that the capital, or stock of
America, in 1775, without mentioning less^ a ticles, consisted in a fertile
country of immense extent; three millions of free industrious inhabitants,
living in independent ease on their forms and plantations, which supplied them
with all the first necessaries of life, and a surplus of near three millions
and an half sterling, for commerce with other countries -- That this commerce
employed upwards of 1500 ships and ve^l^ls of different sizes, and a
proportionable number of seamen -- That much the greater part of these ships
were built and owned in the country -- That the American commerce and
fisheries, were fruitful nurseries for good seamen, which useful order of men
were increasing, in a greater proportion, than even the inhabitants at large;
these are some of the capital articles of our real stock in 1775, and every
thing considered, they were such as no other country could boast of. But it may
be said with justice, that neither the number of inhabitants, extent and
fertility of the terr^tory, or the productions and commerce of a country, can
be counted on as forming a solid and permanent stock, unless the civil and
political constitution under which the inhabitants live, be such, as will
secure to them the property and free use of those advantages which the nature
and situation of their country gives them -- The rapid increase of population
and property in America, for more than a century past, is a convincing proof
that the civil constitution was such as secured the liberty and property of its
inhabitants.

But the claims of the British Parliament to the right of making laws binding
on America in all cases whatever, and to tax its inhabitants at pleasure, with
other acts, of theirs since 1763, subjected both the liberties and property of
America to the will of Parliament -- America was alarmed at such dangerous
claims, and apprehensive of the consequences, remonstrated and protested
against those acts and claims, and resolved to oppose them to the utmost. It
was, as Congress in the most express and solemn manner declared, not for the
"gaining any new rights," but to secure those which by charters, compacts and
the British constitution, they, as British subjects, were entitled to; that
America contended -- In the course of the two first years of the war, matters
were carried so far, that Congress judging that the Parliament was determined
in no case to recede, but to pursue and enforce those claims and acts to the
utmost, resolved to separate America from the British Empire, and declared it
independent and sovereign -- The people of America confirmed this resolution of
Congress, to maintain their rights and privileges, not as being part of the
British Empire but separate and independent -- It is near five years since this
resolution was taken.

I have briefly shown what the stock or capital of America, was previous, and
by what means it became in danger, In the next place I will endeavor to state
with impartiality, what our losses and gains have hitherto been; but it must
previously be observed, that those claims and acts of Parliament, which brought
both our liberty and property into danger, and which gave the only original
cause for the dispute, having since been given up and repealed, independent
sovereignty remains the only object for which America is now adventuring, for
since every personal right and privilege may be secured and enjoyed, though
America continues part of the British empire, there can be no other, America
then, has credit for stock in hand in 1775. The thirteen provinces or states,
of New Hampshire, Massachusetts Bay, etc.

For three millions of inhabitants, the annual increase of which stock was
150,000 people.

For three millions and an half of annual produce, over what was consumed by
the inhabitants, which increasing annually in the same ratio, with the increase
of population added to the capital 175,000 l. sterling yearly.

For the navigation, fisheries and commerce, which America then had on hand,
amounting to an immense value, and increasing at the above rate.

For the peace, good order and moral principles of its inhabitants as
inestimable, as they were unparalled in almost any other country.

These articles put to the credit of the account, let us examine the debit, or
what deduction is to be made on the score of expenses, and disbursements, at
and before that period. The support of civil government, supposing it to have
cost each province 8000 l. sterling annually (which is estimating it high)
amounted to 104,000 l. sterling,

The duties paid by the commerce, taken at its highest gross produce, to be
between 30 and 40,000 l. annually.

In this account the balance appears at once to be immensely in favor of
America, and justiries the Americans in opposing with the utmost firmness and
perseverance, every claim or act of parliament, which tended to diminish, or
deprive them of it. But those claims being now out of the question, and America
offered the peaceable enjoyment of this capital with all its increasing
advantages, secured and guaranteed under the British empire, it is evident that
in proceeding to state the account of our expenses and losses, previous to
this, stand as so many charges, incurred in defending and securing our original
capital stock, that effected, every thing further must be charged against
independent sovereignty.

This account is most unquestionably the most important that America, or
perhaps any other country, ever had to consider and to state fairly, without
prejudice or partiality, and I trust my honest and brave countrymen, will view
it in this right, that they will estimate without exaggerating, or diminishing,
what their losses and expenses have actually been, since the present object of
independent sovereignty, has been the only one in question, what the situation
of our country has been ever since it has been claimed and exercised, what our
circumstances now are, what they were previous to this contest or to 1763, and
from comparing the present, with the past, form a true judgment on the whole to
direct their future conduct. In the beginning of 1778 an offer was made to
America to be placed in the situation it was in, at, and previous to the year
1763, to have all the grievances complained of by Congress in 1774 and 1775
redressed, to have the acts which they remonstrated against, and which were
then declared to be the ^ole cause of the war, revealed, and several advantages
granted to America, which the inhabitants had n^, previous to 1763, either
claimed or enjoyed, had these offers been accepted of, the account would then
have been closed (as I have already shown) in our favor. But independent
sovereignty was by Congress made an essential prelimenary, a sine qua non, of
any negotiation at all. In July 1776, the above terms had not been offered to
us, and a persuasion that England would not recede so far, as to offer them was
the principal ground on which that resolution was taken. All the declarations
of Congress and of the different American assemblies prove the truth of this
fact; the declaration of independence itself acknowledges it, and the arguments
made use of in support of the measure were all drawn from that presumption
only, Foreign aid was solicited, this could neither he asked or granted
consistently with the laws of nations, and the says of treaties, whilst we a
knowledged ourselves to be the subjects of Great Britain, therefore being
resolved to deserd our rights, the foreign aid solicited, became indispensably
necessary, and the establishment of civil government in the several provinces
equally so, to prevent general anarchy and confusion. On this ground, and on
this only, Congress were forced into a measure, which they had before
reprobated in all their public declarations. -- In their petition and address
to the King, and people of England, in 1774, and 1775, they solemnly called God
to witness, that they had no view of a separation, and that they regarded such
an event as the greatest of evils, which could befall both countries. I dare
appeal to the warmest supporter of the Declaration of July, 1776, to say, if
the same offers had been made on the part of England, as were made in 1778, any
such resolution would have passed in C^gress, or in any one of the American
assemblies. Our Declaration of Independence could ^^t give a new cause of
complaint, or our part, against England, though by our challenging a new right
unheard of by our ancestors, and expressly disclaimed by all the pre^ing
resolutions of Congress, we enlarged the subject of contest. But In epe^dence
being considered, as the only ground on which our rights and liberties could be
established and secured, under the circumstances America then was, the measure
on this principle was consistent and right but otherways wrong, and
contradictory to our repeated and most solemn declarations. -- From the moment,
therefore, in which we were offered a redress of the grievances we had
complained of, and to have the rights reclaimed, to be confirmed, and that in
the very way in which our petitions to the Crown of England had pointed out, no
other subject of dispute could remain, but the new claim of independent
sovereignty, and to this only all our subsequent losses and expenses are to be
charged. -- And as we were in 1778 offered assistance, to reimburse the
expenses of the war, our pervious expenses, by the refusal of that offer, may
with justice be charged to the same account.

I have style the claim of Independence a new and unheard of claim; the
following expressions of Congress will justify me; -- In the unanimous petition
of that body to the King, in 1774, they say, We ask but for peace, liberty, and
safety, we wished not for a diminution of the prerogative, nor do we solicit
for the grant of any new right in our favor, your royal authority over us, and
our connection with Great Britain we shall always carefully and jealously
support and maintain. Again, they say, addressing the King, That your Majesty
as the loving Father of your while People, connected by the same b^ndo^ law
loyalty, faith and Slood, though dwelling in different countries etc. In the
address of Congress in July 1775, to the Inhabitants of Great Britain, they
say, and declare before God, and the world, that they have not raised armies
with ambitious designs of separating from Great Britain, and establishing
independent States, and that they, sight not for glory or conquest. In their
Petition to the King of the same da^e, they say: Attached to your Majesty's
person, family and government, with all devotion that principle or affection
can inspire, connected with Great Britain by the strongest tees that can unite
societies. etc. These, and and similar declarations of Congress, show that the
claim of a right to Independence, was not only unheard of in July, 1775, but
that every pretension to it was disclaimed and reprobated by Congress, in terms
of the warmest indignation.

I will not presume to enimate the value of independent sovereignty to America,
if our right and liberties, our peace and safety, cannot be secured in any
other way, it exceeds all calculation, but i^ these can be as well secured by
accepting the offers made us, its value becomes ^t bed but idea, and imaginary,
and if in pursuing this object we exhaust and ruin our country, lay the grounds
for civil seuds among ourselves, and become ^ality mere dependent on France,
than we ever were on England; (...) such cas^, every expected good will fail,
and we shall realize evils, greater than we can at this time conceive of.

I am very far from condemning the resolution of the 4^h July, 1776* But though
under certain circumstances, a measure may be wise and good, yet under others,
it may be the height of folly and madness, to persevere in supporting of it.

A review of what we have expended and lost, and a ca^ did examination of facts
and probabilities, will enable us to form our judg^ment.

I have already sh^wn that our capital stock a^ and previous to 1775, consisted
in 3 000 000 of inhabitants the neat yearly profit or increase of which was 150
000. In an annual exportation of three million and an half (...) of p^o^iuce
which was increasing in the same proportion. In an ex^sive and growing
ravigation, co^merce, and fishery; in thirteen Colonies or States, ex^^n^ing
near 15 0 miles on the sea c^act, with an immense and fe^ country behind them,
r^ady to find employ, and to afford an honest and pl^tiful subsistence to their
increasing numbers, and above all, in the peaceful industrious, and moral
principles and dispositions of the people at large.

It is allowed by all, that the principle sou^ce of the wealth of every
country, consists in the number ^f its inhabitants living at their ease, or
above want, by honest industry; if then America made previous to the war, an
actual acquisition of 150,000 inhabitants of this description, six years would
have added 900,000 to their stock, and so far as their increase has fell short
of that, in consequence of the war, so far a loss has been suffered which is
justly chargeable to the war, or rather to the object of it. -- If in fact the
number of inhabitants has not increated at all since 1775, the loss is immense;
I will not pretend to say they have not increased at all, but appearances
strongly countenance such an opinion, and demonstrate that the increase, if
any, has been inconsiderable.

The number of houses, in a country where the materials for building are found
in plenty, and cost little more than the charge of collecting them together,
will ever be in proportion to the number of inhabitants; but there are not at
this time more houses in America, than there were in 1775, whereas by the above
calculation, they would, had we been at peace, have increased near one third.
In the Autumn 1774, upwards of five hundred houses were contracted for to be
built in Philadelphia the next year. Other Towns were in proportion to that
City. The increase of houses in country Towns and Villages was such, that the
articles of nails, window glass, and other necessary materials for building,
formed a very capital part of our imports; I will not pursue the subject, these
observations being sufficient to justify the presumption, that the number of
inhabitants has not increased to any considerable amount since the war. It is
indeed impossible to ascertain this with certainty, as no exact numbering was
ever made; the aggregate of three millions was a presumed one, from the general
estimate made by the Delegates from different parts of the continent. But the
number of houses not having increased, ^or house rent advanced, convinces me
that there has been but little, or no increase since the war. The annual
importation of inhabitants, amounted to near 20,000 one year with another; the
stopping of this source of population, our loss of men by the war, the
continual emigrations from us to Europe and the West Indies, and the before
unexperienced obstacles and difficulties, in the way of establishing and
supporting families, appear to me sufficient to have prevented any increase of
our numbers. To this immense loss of inhabitants, we may justly add those, who
by a military life, or otherwise, in consequence of the war have acquired such
dissipated habits, that they cannot be expected to return to their old
industrious and lab^rious employments.

This great and capital loss, has been attended with another naturally and
necessarily connected with it, and with the loss of commerce, viz. the decline
of agriculture, and reduction of our exports. It is to no purpose to urge our
former exports were repaid by imports of articles not essentially necessary,
and in part by those of mere luxuries, since admitting that part of our
importations were mere luxuries, and but few of them articles of the first
necessity, yet if the taste of the inhabitants for them, induced them to clear
up and cultivate the country, it produced a real and permanent addition to the
capital stock of American wealth, since every acre of wild land cleared up,
added just so much to the natural stock as it would sell for in its improved
state. I will not presume to say, that all our importations were wisely made,
or that many of the articles were such as we had better have been without, for
admitting of this, nothing can be urged from it against the above genera^p
inc^le.

The plough and the s^il mutually aid and encourage each other, and it is the
policy of every wise na^ion, to keep both for ever in view, and to improve and
cultivate each, as the most natural and certain support of the other.

Before commerce flourished in England, agriculture was in as low a state in
that Island as in any kingdom of Europe, and their commerce and agriculture
have in every flage, advanced together and kept pace with each other, until
both have arrived at the highest perfection ever known or heard of in the world
-- But there is no necessity for locking abroad for insta^ces; agriculture and
commerce have rose and flourished and they have declined and languished
together under our eyes in America.

In 1772 Philadelphia exported 3,43,384 barrels of flour, and 7,06,185 bushe's
of wheat, and 361 square rigged vessels, and 391 floops and schooners were
cleared out from that port.

In 1773, there were 265,967 barrels of flour, and 1,82 391 bushels of wheat,
and 48 183 barrels or tierces of bread exported, and 426 square rigged vessels,
and 370 sloops and schoon^ were cleared,

The amount of the whole of the exports of every kind, from that city, was as
follows: In 1772, L. 6,31 534 14 10 1-2 sterling, 1773, 7,84 254 4 2 ditto.
1774, 7,20,135 13 7 3 4 ditto.

If it be considered that the exports from New York were nearly equal to those
of Philadelphia, and that Virginia and Maryland exported in to bacco alone, to
nearly as great an amount as the whole exportation from Philadelphia, it must
be allowed that the whole exports of America are not rated too high at L.
3*500,000 sterling, annually. If from 1775 to this time, our exports have not
exceeded L. 500,000 per a^num, (and they have fell much below that sum) there
must have been an annual loss of three millions, and in six years of eighteen
millions in our commerce.

But how has it been with our agriculture, and has it not failed in some degree
in the same proportion?

The ports of America were shut, and commerce almost en^irely suspended in
17^5; I have shown that antee^dent to that period, Philadelphia alone exported
in flour, wheat and bread, equal to 400,000 barrels of flour; if the
exportation of the same from New York, Maryland and Virginia, are taken into
the calculation, it will not be ex^avagant to suppose that America exported at
that period, one million barrels of flour annually: But what was the situation
of America, as to this article, in 1778, 1779 and 1780? Every one who knows
that the victualling Commissary could not in Pennsylvania and all the Northern
States, procure bread in those years for General Washington's army, which
scarce ever amounted to ten thousand men, but was obliged to send to Virginia,
and even to North Carolina, for flour, can resolve the question and must
acknowledge that our agriculture sell (...) our commerce.

The history of our nation affords a stronger proof of the mutual dependence of
agriculture and commerce on each other. The losses of population, agriculture
and commerce have not been the only ones; the actual expenses of the war, have
been considerable though they are indeed trifles, if compared with the others,
yet in settling the account they merit attention.

In May 1775, Congress began to emit paper, on the credit and faith of America,
this paper obtained a credit at first, equal to silver or gold, and so long as
this paper retained this credit, Congress received of individuals for public
use, its full nominal value, in their produce, merchandise, or service.

By the quantity of paper sent out by Congress to market, and by having no fund
established, for i^s redemption, it depreciated. But the question is not at
this time, at what rate Congress have offered to redeem their paper, but what
real value they have received for it in exchange. A bankrupt who pays two and
an half per cent, or 6 d. in the pound, to his creditors, never argues from
that, that he has received no more, what real value has Congress received in
exchange for two hundred millions of dollars of their paper, and the large
loans they have had? Congress by their resolutions of the 18 h of March 1780,
offered to call in all their paper bills at the rate of 40 for one, but they
forced no one to accept of their offer. Whether the holders of their paper will
finally receive no more, is out of the question. By their resolutions of the 28
h of Ju^e following Congress gave a certain rule, by which the above question
may be determined, for it is not to be presumed, that in the table which they
than published, they rated depreciation either higher or lower than the
reality, and having received the same value, for a bill emitted, as for the
bill at the same time borrow^d depreciated in their hands, the rule for fixing
the value of their several loans, must apply with equal justice to their
emissions, they do not allow of any depreciation until Sept. 1, 1777, previous
to which they had passed in exchange for the produce of the country, the
payment of the army, etc. 36 610,000 Dollars, or 8,237,000 l. st^ling, and
consequently must have receiv^d i^s value, the am unt of loans to that time was
7,545,196 dollars, which b^ing also with u^deprecia^ion make an addition of L.
1,697,699 2^. od ^ter^ing,

From Sept 1777 to Sept. 26, 1778, Congressissued and ^assed 45,50,000 Dollars,
i^ paper, the value of which from the table of rates fix^d on by Congress is as
follows, viz. Dollars. 1,000,000 Nov. 7, 1777, value 8^2 880 1,000,000 Dec. 3,
750 000 1,000,000 Jan. 8, 1778 671,000 2,000,000 22, 1,285 320 2,000,000 Feb.
16, 1,180,524 2,000,000 Mar. 5, 1,122,444 1,000,000 April 4, 490,444 5,000,000
11, 2,376,110 500,000 18, 230,277 5,000,000 May 22, 1,976,110 5,000,000 June
20, 1 375,0^0 5,000,000 July 3^, 1,244,440 5,000,000 Sept. 5, 1,224.444
10,000,000, 26, 2 222 222 45,500,000 equal to 16,941,215

real value, or L. 3,811,773:7:6 Sterling.

From September 26, 1778, to September 1779, Congress struck off, (...) passed
55,000,54, dollars of the following dates and value, viz. Nov. 4, 1778,
10,000,000 value 1,807,777 Dec. 14, 10,000,000 1,476,666 Feb. 3, 1779,
5,000,160 570,182 19, 5,000 160 525,017 April 1, 5 000,160 452,766 May 5,
10,000,000 812,000 June 3, 10,000,0000 740,000

55,000,540 equal to 6,384,408 or L. 1,436,491 16 S^e^ling.

But Congress declare 13th September 1770, that they had issued, and had then
in circulation to the amount of 159,948,880 Dol.

The sums above calculated amounted to but 137,110,480 do.

Which leaves a difference of 22,838,400

But Congress in January 1779, or^ered a large sum of their bills to b^ called
in, by ^an, or by exchanging for new bills, and some time after ^ck off 50 0 0
395 dollars, to redeem by exch^ng^ for the emissions of 20 h May 1777, and of
April 11, 1778; in ^he lists of C^g^s emissions of paper, certified at
Philadelphia, 13th July, 1779 by Robert Troup, Secr^tary of the Treasur^
Office, and from which the above was takes, I find only ten millions of these
emissions set down, there remains therefore forty million (...) be added to the
debt, viz. twenty millions of May 1777, and twenty millions of April 1778; the
difference between this amount of forty millions, and the above balance of 22
838,400 must run from the amount of those emissions which were paid into the
Loan Office, the first sum having been passed before depreciation commenced,
was in value equal to L. 4,500,000 sterling, and the latter of April 1778, to
9,504,000 dollars, or L. 2,138,400 sterling.

On the 13th September 1779, Congress declare that the amount of their loans
from March 1, 1778, to that time, amount to 26 188,909 dollars, but do not give
the dates at which they were made, I will therefore take the whole at a medium
of six months back of that date, (as at that time large sums were lent on
account of the emissions called in) and the value will be, dollars or L.
sterling. Congress compute their foreign debt at four million of dollars, or L.
900 000 sterling; the above ^um, though f^r below the amount of the public
expenses of Congress at that time, are sufficient to show that they then
amounted to upwards of twenty millions sterliog, independent of the private
expenses of each State for its own particular dif^nce.

Congress on the 13th September 1779, resolved to c^vtinue their emi^ions to
2^0 millions and no farther, in consequence of which they soon after gave cut
the balance.

I have not presumed to hope that I could af^ertain the amount of the public
expenses with precision; Congress confess that this is even beyond their power;
but it is sufficient to show from unquestionable facts, that in September 1779,
it greatly exceeded twenty millions sterling. It is still more difficult to
state ^he amount of the expense of private State^; b^t as in the above stating,
I have kept below the real amount, so I presume if the private expenses of all
the particular S^a^s, be ^stimated (...) one fourth of that (...) the public,
it will not exceed the rea^ity; and if the large sum^ drawn for l^st yea and
now dra^ing f^, on Europe, and the increased and i^creasing expense of every
kind (...) consid^e^, the actu^ am^unt of the charge of the war, (...) 1781
cannot be estimated at less tha^ forty million (...). Nor can it be presumed,
(...) antages it has necessa^ily (...), could have cost less in six years; but
it is (...), at Congress having fixed the (...) their bill^ at forty for o^,
(...) the have given out and passed two hundred millions, ye^ the^ o^e but
five; (...) that account, and for their loans according to the rates they have
fixed them ^t, and calcu^a^ing in this manner, some ^ssert, that the war has
not cost us more tha^ 7 (...) 8 millions herling, but such persons go on
principles (...) fa^^e and ab^. -- If Congress had reduce^ their paper and Loan
Office certificates to the one hundredth part of their n^m^al value, it would
have argued nothing against their having actually received, and the people at
large having paid, the full value of what the several emissions and loans, were
worth, at the time of their being made, and Congress have received just as much
for every paper dollar, from this press, as for the one at the same time
borrowed, nothing either in justice, or equity, can be urged against the same
rule of calculation for both. -- But Congress have not reduced their
circulating paper, to 40 for one, they have offered by their resolution of
March, 1780, to barrow and receive it at that, but they force no one to accept
their offer; on the contrary every one of their promises and resolutions, to
redeem the whole in 18 years, at the nominal value, remain unrepealed and in
full force, and every one is at liberty to hold his money in hand, or to part
with it as he shall prefer. -- It is true that if it be held back, and the
nominal sum exacted, even eighteen years hence, great injustice will be done
the public who instea of paying less tha^ the real expense of the war, will in
such case pay much more, but neither will o^n affect the assertion, that this
part of the actual expense of the war, amounts to the value of the several
emissions of the bills, at the time of their being made and of the loa^s wh^^
borrowed, and the general calculation I have made, sufficiently pr^ve that
those with the foreign debt, and the debts of particular States, amount to the
sum, I have stated our six years expenses at. If indeed the arrcarag^, of the
officers and soldiers of our army, who on this subject have been treated
differently from almost any other order of me^, be taken into conside^tson, as
I think they most certainly must, and ought to be, and the expenses of
inlistment, ^es, of sub^itute money, paid by individuals, I am well persuaded,
t^t 40 millions sterling, will fall much below the actual expenses of the war,
this year's included.

It has been a fav^urite argument in America, that the paper money depreciating
in the hands of the pub^e a large op^ated as a tax on the people, and therefore
whatever value, was ^inally received for it, the present debt of America, is ^o
more in justice or equity, than the present value of the money. -- I shall not
at present (...) this sperious (...), I am not stating what we actually owe
^e^qu^ing what we intend sinal^ to pay, bu^ what o^r expenses real^y ^ave (...)
how they have, or may be cancelied; but I cannot pass it over, without
observing that the justice of this argument, rests solely on the supposition,
that every American from time to time became possessed of his proportion of
those bills, as they were emitted or borrowed and passed, and that he continued
^o hold just so much as the amount of his tax for their redemption: Had this
been the cause, neither depreciation nor appreciation could have affected him,
but just the contrary has happened and his imaginary payment of the public
debt, has occasioned a loss, of what is of more consequence than 40 millions
sterling. The loss of our national character, of our faith and honor, and the
perversion of every idea, or principle of moral and civil justice.

The tender act as it is called, passed in all the States on the urgent
recommendation of Congress, obliged creditors, salary men, widows and orphans,
to receive the paper, in every stage of its depreciation at its nominal value,
for old debts, for salaries, legacies, and dowers, contracted for, or
bequeathed in specie. -- By this law, this pretended payment sell on creditors,
salary men, and most heavily on widows and orphans, the latter of which, though
in every country, they claim the first protection of the Magistrate, and of
every man who pretends to the lesst portion of honesty or humanity, have been
oppressed and sacrificed, beyond any thing ever heard, or read of, among
civilized nations. -- I will mention two or three instances out of the many
which have come to my knowledge; a captain of a merchant ship had by his
industry and economy, become master of a comfortable little interest, the
greatest part of which he vested in the purchase of a house not far from
Philadelphia, in 1775, he sold it for one thousand pounds payable in December
1779, with interest, at the day of payment his creditor tendered him Congress
paper, to the nominal amount of his bond, and offered him that, or eight half
Johanneses in full. The debtor had the law on his fide, and the honest
creditor, took the eight half Johanneses, in preference to the thousand pounds
in paper.

The widow of a reputable merchant, who in 1774, left her at his death, with a
jointure of six hundred pounds per a^num, expressly to enable her to keep his
infant children under her immediate care, during their education, was in 1779
forced to accept of the nominal sum in paper, not equal in value to twenty
pounds of the principal.

In 1779. I knew a judgment given in one of the supreme Cou^^s in America,
ordering an heir to receive of hi^ guard an in lien of 1500 l. sterling, which
his ance^to^ left him, the nominal sum in paper, which on the day this
iniquitous, but legal judgment was rendered, was not equal to 6 per cent. on
one years interest of thi^ capital.

Thus regislative assemblies, in compliance with recommendations from Congress,
passed laws, which established and protected the most cruel injustice. -- Every
man of extensive aquaintance in America, must have met with many instances
similar to the above in the course of the 4 last years. I have cited only three
out of the many thousands on record in America, and in ci^ing them, I have had
no view in casting any reproach on Congress, and the assemblies, in passing
^uch laws had no other object in view but the establishment of the rights and
siberties of America. This great object ^d every other from the view of men,
zealous in the cause of liberty, but unexpe^ienced in, and unequ^ to the great
affairs before them, and in thi^ zeal they undesignedly laid the axe to the
root of all morality and justice, and ruined more widows and orphans, than the
sword of the greatest conqueror ever made such -- This measure forced honest
guardians and trust^es to vi^iate their trusts, and to ruin their wards -- The
guardian who in pursuance of the will of his deceased friend had put out the
fortune of orphans at interest, for their benefit, was obliged to receive of
the debtors, paper, of less than one twentieth of the value -- what could he d^
the law oblig^d him to receive it, and neither justice nor equity required him
to became a sufferer, had he been able to have taken the loss on himself. The
loss was in most instances too great for him to attempt it. The debtors excused
themselves by saying that those with whom they had contracted forced it on
them. In a word the mischief became general, and the ^atal effect which
dep^eci^tion and the Tender Law, had on the moral principles of the people at
large, will be long fe^ in America -- and can men boast of having ex^ne^ated
the public of debts, justly contracted by ^uch a sa^ifice? by the ruin of the
widow and the orphar, of or di^^s and s^^ary men, who had from their confidence
in the justice of their country, rested their whole fortune and future support
and prespects in (...), on the known and established laws of the land.

Those who can boast or avail themselves of such advantages, must hold public
as well as private justice in very low account, and it is to no purpose to
attempt to reason with men, who can view the distress of the widow and the
fatherless, and the ruin of honest men, and the destruction of the principles
of common justice, with indifference.

Instances of injustice and distress, flowing from this source, have unhappily
been so frequent, that too many have became hardened and insensible to them,
and ^o their f^tal consequences. The body of the people, surprised, to find
injustice sealed by public authority, on the tribunal from whence, they had
ever looked for the most just and equitable decre^s, have been told that public
necessity required it, and justified the change: thus the plea of public
necessity, has been made use of to destroy the eternal and sacred principles of
justice and morality, And with necessity the tyrant's plea excused these cursed
deeds. -- Milton.

The loss of the principles of justice, equity and good faith, exceeds all
possible calculation, and if any thing can augment it, it is the additional
loss of a good and vir^uous education to the rising generation. This having
been in great part lost in America for six years past, threatens the
perpetuation of the evil to future generations -- we have still other losses to
place on the debit side of our account, though loss considerable and alarming
th^n the last, yet they are very serious ones.

Georgia, South Carolina, North Carolina, and a part of Vi^ginia are ruined,
and we ^ke no use of the whole sea coast south of Che^e peak Bay.

Our enemies have possessed themselves of the city of New York, of a great part
of that state, and of the whole ^f the province of Main, which forms a part of
the state of Massachusetts Bay, and our ally h^s permission to take (...) of
the harbor and island of Newport under pretense of assisting us but in reality
as a pledge for our fidelity to our alliance, and for the payment of the sums
lent to us.

If all terms of accommodation and peace with Great Britain are rejected, what
have we to put on the opposite or credit side of the account? The ^^urity of
our liberty and property? with grief we must acknowledge, that neither were
ever less secure than at present -- Our independence? at this time but a (...)
states, enjoy a nominal independence, to support which they have rendered
themselves more dependant on France, than ever they we^e on England To count on
independance as a preseat reality, is therefore absurd, we have, (...) is true,
a treaty with France, in which France declares that we are actually in
possession and enjo^e (...) of independence, and that it shall at all hazards
be (...) to us, but is it not with equal solemnity declared, some millions of
times every day, i^ the same country, that a wafer of an inch diameter, and two
lines in thickness, contains the flesh, bones, etc. of a complete human body,
and that half a gill of bad wine, contain^ the whole of its blood?

On the Debtor side of the account I have shown that we had a right to charge
as loss,

More than half a million of inhabitants,

The loss of our fisher^es, trade and commerce.

The decline of agriculture, by which our exports have in six yeart suffered
eighteen millions sterling.

The actual expense of 40 millions sterling 1781 included.

The loss of Georgia, South Carolina, North Carol^^^, with all the coast from
Cape Henry southward.

The loss of a part of Virginia.

The loss of the city of New York, and a great part of that state.

The loss of the province of Main, part of Massachusetts State.

The mortgage of Rhode Island and Newport to France.

And, what exceeds all other losses, we have suffered a depravity of manners
and principles to prevail under the the^ter and support of regislative
authority, and by the loss of the education of the rising generation, and the
ground so ^erpetuating this depravity.

Our articles in credit against this i^mensue am ^^at of debt, or loss, are, in
a word, an alliance with France, the hereditary enemy of our once fond and
indulgent parent friend.

The p^ssession of a ^minal independence by a part of the ^a^es, and the hopes
of regaining b^ the and of our ^lly the ter^itory we have lost, and of finally
enjoying independent save e^gnty over the whore.

A few ^^questionable sects will enable us to judge what probability there is,
that these hopes will be realized. In the mean time, every one must judge, w^
the, if reatized, he ^ain wi^^ balance the loss.

From the (...) in which France took part in the war, (...) offers of England
have been such as to leave ^ing (...) independent sovereignty for us to contend
for.

France wishes to improve every occasion for the weak^ing and humbling of
England, and so far as the (...) of America from its dommion will effect (...),
(...) independence is an object with France, bu^ no further; and is America c^n
be (...) use of, to ruin the made and (...) of England, and in d^ing this, t^
(...) and (...), and (...) every ^ quite (...), the ^bject (...) to France,
(...) nothing is, or (...) in Europe, (...) We^t-Indies and South America,
(...) North^ America from the (...) into a large, populons, and mighty empire
of confede^ated republica, wholly detached from, and independent of any
European control.

Spain, whose aid we have in vain solicited for four years, is directly and
greatly interested against such an event. A desire of revenge on England for
past inju^ies, and the connection between the two Crowns of France and Spain,
have been the only motives which engaged Spain in the war. But these motives
have not so far blinded the Court of Spain, to their true interest, as to
induce them to take any one step tending to the acknowledgment of our
independence.

After two years war with England, S^ain refus^s to receive our Ambassador; we
have, at a great expense of money, and to the sacrifice of our national
character, sent Ambassadors to Italy, to Vien^a, to Madrid, to Berlin, and to
Holland, and have been affronted by a refusal of audience every where, -- and
how the new embassy to Ruffia will s^cceed, time will soon discover.

France, af^e two years ineffectual solicitations, was induced from the
apprehension, that on the surrender of General Burgoyne's army, England would
recommodate matters in America, and turn its force on them, suddenly changed
their ^ile of conduct toward us, and made a treaty with us.

To any one acquainted with the history of what passed between the Court of
France and the Commissioners of Congress, from the first application made,
until the arrival of the news of the affair of Saratoga, nothing can appear
more ridiculous, than the pomp^u^ declarations of disinterested friendship and
royal generosity, on the part of France, except it be our eternally echoing
them back in^ the epithet of our great, good, generous, disinterested ally, the
great protector of the liberties of mankind, etc.

The prospects then of the establishment of our independence rest, on the
advantages which America and France, have, or may gain over England in the
course of the war, and on the promises of France, but is it to be expected that
France will continue the war for ever, or to the sacrificing of all i^s foreign
possessions to fulfill this promise? A peace must be made, and the account
sooner or later settled between the to ^tending parties, suppose it to be
entered on at this time.

The baian^e lies heavily against us on every account, we have lost much, and
gained nothing, but is the balance so much in favor of ourally, that a
discount may be expected from us? quite the contrary, France is at this time
greatly the loser both in point of commerce and territory. In the West I dies.
S^. Vincent's and Dominica, balance St. Lucia, and the Islands of Grenada and
Tobago, remain in favor of France; but the loss of their fisheries more than
balances this, to which is to be added, the whole of their East In^ia
possessions and commerce. France cannot, at this time, regain the point started
from, and has this year less prospect of ^aining any thing than it has had in
an^ one year since the war commented. The neval force of France, as well as
that of Spain, has reached its zenith, and cannot rise higher this war, but on
the contrary must decline through the want of seamen; on the contrary, the
naval force of England is rapidly augmenting, and their naral resources,
especially that capital one of seamen, remain unex^austed.

The war being fimply maritime from these facts, the probabilities of future
success, are easily calculated. I have in the above account set down the
harbor and island of Newport, as mortgaged to France, I do not pretend it is
so by any f^rm ^erntract, but many circumstances show, that it in reality is
so, and for the sole purpose of kee^ing America seady to her alliance with
France, and to oblige us to conti^ue the war. -- Mons. de Ro^h^mbe^ took
possession and fortified it, under the pretense that the fleet and army, under
his command, were only the vanguard of a much greater (...) it, on its way, and
to b^d^ily expected, (...) armament ever was sen^at that time, nor intended.

Did Monsieur Ro^h^mberu, when h^ made that d^cla^tion (i^ the name of his
mast^r) to the ^ssen^bly of Rh^de^s^a^d, speak as he was ordered, or did he
knowingly impose on and deceive that body, and (...) America?

The common language of France, of those most at (...) is, The^ are two parties
i^ America one for an accommodation and peace with England, the other or the
support of the alliance (...) France and a continuance of the war, it is
therefore necessary, that France sho^ have a force in Ameri^ sufficient to
support the latter party.

The Southern S^are will unqe^ (...) under the British power and government,
(...) the Nord^, the New England State, may b^ having a France force, kep^ in
the center of them, be held in the inte^ers o^ France

In fact, my countrym^, the French were sent to Rhode Island, not so much to be
employed against the British, as to (...) the possession of that port and
Island, and to oblige us to (...) the war; and the pardal empo^ary suppliea
sent us from time to time, are neither calculated nor designed, to fore: the
British to abandon America, but to keep us from fi^king entirely, and to
encourage us to find employ on^our contiment for a British army, which
otherways must reduce their islands in one s^son, or in two campaigns at most.

So many facts point to this as the only object France has in view, the nothing
but the most generous and unsuspi^ious confidence on our part, can make us bend
to it.

When Chariest own was befieged, France and Spain had in the West Indies, a
supe^ier fleet, which in ten or filt^en days at most, could have relieved it,
they were applied to, but made no movement or di^e^sion whatever. The (...) of
(...) ditheartened the wh^e (...) at that time M^ (...), and by his deciaration
and (...) re-animated the people, but his p^mises (...) spirits of the country
again sell, and Ge^era: Washington's army were on the point of disb^nding. --
In this situation, France has stepped in, and given or leat ten millions of
livres, and guarranted a loan for us in Holland, for ^s much more, if we can
borrow money at four p^r^cent. this is set down as twenty millions in hand; we
are sure of one half of it only, but if we obtain the whole, it (...) at best
only encourage us on through another loosing campaign, for it can d^ nothing
toward driving the British fl^^ts from our ports, or their troops from our
continent.

It is said that Monsie^, de Grass, is to go to our assistance with his fleet,
after touching at the West Indies; but can any one who knows that the British
fleet in the Islands, will be there too, build any thing of solid use to
America, on such a promised ^noeuvre. I say another loofing campaign, (God
grant my prediction may prove a false one^ but when it is known that a
confiderable fleet and army are to fail from England, in four or five weeks,
for some part of our continent, and that Monsiour de Grass, cannot be expected
these before next September, it will be agreed, that I have grounds for making
it. I have now with as much brevity ^s the subject will admit of, slated our
situation; I have not knowingly exaggerated in any instance, nor misrepresented
any fact; and I submit it to the judgment of the impartial and confiderate
patriots in America, what meaures ought to be taken?


