THE Plainness and Innocent Simplicity OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION. WITH Its
salutary Effects, compared to the corrupting Nature and dreadful Effects of
WAR. WITH Some Account of the blessing which attends on a Spirit influenced by
divine Love, producing Peace and Good Will to Men.

The true Believer in Christ, is redeemed from all fear; but the fear of
offending God; nor does he know of any Enemy, but the Corruption of his own
Heart

No Man is happy, till he thinks, on earth,
There breathes not a more happy than himself
Then envy dies, and Love overflows on all:
And Love overflowing makes an Angel here.
Such Angels all, entitled to repose
On him who governs fate, though tempest frowns,
Though nature shakes, how soft to lean on heaven.
Young's Night Thoughts: COLLECTED BY ANTHONY BENEZET.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, IN MARKET-STREET, BETWEEN SECOND
AND THIRD-STREETS. MDCCLXXXII.

THE Plainness and Innocent Simplicity OF THE CHRISTIAN RELIGION.
THE Gospel of Jesus Christ is a special manifestation of the love of God to
mankind. Our blessed Savior came into the world to put an end to sin, to
finish transgression and in the room thereof to bring in everlasting
righteousness. Hence he was called Jesus, a Savior, a Deliverer, to save his
people from their sins Not in their sin by a faith or belief in our Savior's
outward sufferings, but by a radical change of heart through the operation of
his spirit.
and in the room thereof to introduce his life, light and spirit in them, that
they might serve him, without fear, in holiness, and righteousness, all the
days of their lives. Hence we are told, John i. 12. That as many as received
him, to them he gave power to become the sons of God. Himself kindly invites
his creatures to partake of this love, Matt. xii. 28. Come unto me all ye that
labor, and are heavy laden and I will give you rest. No circumstance of life
can separate or incapacitate us from being made partakers of this love; ever
the most abased appear to be the particular objects of his care, Isaiah lxvi.
1. The Heaven is my throne and the earth is my footstool -- but to this man
will I look, even to him that is poor and of a contrite spirit and tremblesh at
my word The plainness and simplicity of the work of redemption, in opposition
to the perplexed intricacies of those systems of religion taught in the
schools, etc. is most worthy of note. Where a feeling sense of our natural
corruption prevails, and a sincere desire of being delivered from the power of
evil, with a convincment that this great work is alone to be perfected by
obedience to the teaching of the spirit of grace, the work of redemption is so
plain and easy, that we read Isa. xxxv. 8. The wayfaring men, though fools
shall not err therein.

This power of God to salvation, operating through obedience, in the minds of
the sincere hearted, has from the beginning of the world been verified in the
experience of people of every kind and nation. Matt. viii. 11. Many shall come
from the East, and West, and shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, in
the kingdom of Heaven. -- Rev. vii. 9. I beheld, and lo, a great multitude,
which no man could number, of all Nations, and kindred, and people, and tongues
stood before the throne
Indians, Negroes, and others, even those esteemed of the lowest order, by no
means excepted: Many of these have, in great simplicity, experienced its
salutary effects: a remarkable instance, whereof some years past appeared in a
number of Indians in this province, since removed beyond the Allegany
Mountains. The account given by some of the first of these was, that being,
through divine favor, made desirous of leading an orderly, religious life,
they found a violent opposition in themselves, to this good work, from the
hardness, or as they termed it, the badness, which they felt in their hearts,
Jer. xvii. 9. The heart is deceitful above all things, and desperately wicked,
who can know it.
this put them upon seeking help from their fellow-men; but being disappointed
therein, they were induced to seek and cry to God, the great and good Creator
of the heart of man, who, as they persisted in seeking to him, granted their
request, they finally experienced the hardness, and badness of their hearts
taken away; Ezekiel. xxxvi. 26. A new heart also will give you, and a new spirit
will I put within you: and I will take away the stony heart out of your flesh,
and I will give you an heart of flesh.
and in the room thereof, love to God, and tenderness to their fellow-men
prevailed to that degree, as enabled them to bear the ill usage which some of
these might inflict upon them, without resentment; but rather with pity and
compassion; from a consideration that those who thus persecuted them, were
still captives to that evil power which had so long kept them in thraldom, from
which, through divine favor, they were delivered. These Indians, absolutely,
refused to be concerned in war, of any kind, however they were threatened and
abused on this account by the other Indians, being persuaded that in the
original creation of men, God did not intend they should annoy, or kill, but
cherish and comfort each other. In this disposition they have continued now,
for about thirty years, notwithstanding the ill treatment they have received
from Indians and others: more especially of late that they have been pillaged,
their setilements at three towns broke up, and they carried away captives
toward Canada. Those Indians who carried them away, giving as a reason for
this violence, that they were in their way, and a great obstruction to them,
when going to ward. See the Pennsylvania Packer, for December 22, 1701.


The simplicity and plainness of the Gospel call, farther appears in the
account given by Edward Andrews, a person, afterward, an eminent instrument in
the hand of God, in gathering many toward the fold of rest. His residence was
at that time in the Jerseys, near the Seashore, amongst a wild sort of people,
Indians and others, vain and loose in their conversation, fond of frolicking,
music and dancing; amongst these he acted the part of a fiddler. In this
situation, as he was one day working in his field, he came across a part of a
human body, which he had seen before, which, as he now saw it, lying on the
ground, a thought struck him, that it was not right to suffer a part of his
fellow creature to be thus thrown up and down in the open field; but that he
ought to do with it as he would desire to be done by in the like condition;
after some reasoning in this sort, he decently buried it, and returned to his
work again, with an answer of peace in his mind. From that time he grew
pensive, the pure witness of truth rose in him, by which he was made sensible
he had spent many years in vanity, that it was high time for him to turn unto
the Lord, and a desire was begot in him to experience an inward acquaintance
with God, and be favored with power from him, to forsake his vanity and loose
living the iniquity of which was then opened to him; and he found a call in his
mind to destroy that fiddle, which had been so much an instrument to lead
himself, and others, to the mispending their precious time; this he concluded
to do, when he went home; but delaying to perform this resolution, as he lay in
his bed he felt the fire of God's wrath kindled, on account of his
disobedience, which induced him, the next day, to break the fiddle in pieces,
which, when done his heart rejoiced, and he felt a strength of hope rising in
him, that God would give him farther power over all his vanities: A sense was
also given him, that if he was faithful to what the Lord would require of him,
he should be made an instrument in God's hand, to gather a people to his
praise, from those very loose people amongst whom he resided, which seemed
strange to him. But as his heart became daily more and more exercised toward
God, and in giving him thanks, for his mercies, a lively concern and desire
came upon him, that sinners might be brought, as he had been, to a sight of the
error of their ways. He then found it to be his duty to speak to those same
people, whom he had led on in folly and vanity, and to direct them to the
service of God; this he at first found to be hard work; but being charged by
the spirit, to be faithful to what was required of him; and made sensible that
if he was so, God would be with him, but that if he refused, he should be left
to himself, and fall into a worse condition than that he was in before, he was
enabled to speak to them, though in great fear, and the Lord caused his
admonition to be well received by his neighbors. And on the next day of
worship, instead of spending their time in rioting and excess, as they were
used to do, some of them sat with him to read the scriptures, and confer
together upon the things which related to eternity; in which his understanding
was opened to see, that the right worship of God was to be performed in
silence, unless when moved by the spirit to appear in vocal service, under
which prospect he found himself moved to kneel down and pray; and, sometime
after, to exhort his companions, which was accompanied with so much energy and
power, that the people were much affected: Thus the Lord manisested his love
and power amongst those people, by this mean instrument, till by degrees, a
religious meeting was gathered to the praise of God, whose baptizing power was
sensibly felt amongst them; in which service he continued during the whole
course of his life.

By these and many more instances which could be mentioned, the gospel
dispensation is undoubtedly confirmed to be a manifestation of peculiar love
and good will to men, through a communication of the spirit of grace,
influencing the hearts of those who submit to its operation, whereby the hearts
of the faithful being replenished, it abundantly flows out in acts of goodness,
sympathy and compassion to their fellow-men, and leads not only to pity and
commiserate those who remain in bondage to their corruption, but also to
overcome the evil they may inflict, with benignity, patience and love.

When christianity, considered in this light, is compared with the pride, the
selfishness and the wrath, so predominant in the world, particularly in the
indulgence of those lusts, which the apostle declares to be the occasion of
war, with all its destructive and corrupting effects, it cannot but strike the
considerate mind with amazement and horror.

Several historians observe, that at the battle of Cunnersdorf, between the
Prussians and the Muscovites, in 1759, the carnage was truly horrible, about
twenty thousand Prussians lay on the field; the loss of the Russians, amounted
to ten thousand. At the battle of Zorndorf, the loss of the Russians, amounted
to ten thousand dead on the spot, and ten thousand wounded most of them
mortally. History of the war, from 1756, to 1760, page 314.
To think how many of these were dragged from their connections, and compelled
to kill or be killed, separated from a wife, a parent, or children, who stood
in need of their affectionate care and assistance; but more especially to
consider the number, which were suddenly cut off from life, and driven into
eternity, in the bitterness of wrath and revenge or other excesses, to which
the life of a soldier is so much exposed, from any farther power of answering
the end of their existence, must occasion very solemn reflections to every
considerate, feeling, mind. And if we turn our eyes from this deplorable
spectacle, toward the many thousands In some cases were the vanquished
retreats before the victor, many thousands are after battle, left to die in the
field.
who, after such battles remain alive, in a wounded condition; many so sorely
as to be obliged to undergo the painful amputation of their limbs, or perhaps
more grievous operation, to suffer long under the cure. And yet more piteous is
the case of those whose wounds, beyond the possibility of cure or for want of
sufficient help, die in painful languishment. From this view of the dreadful
effect of war, there will naturally arise a query, in the minds of every
reasonable, feeling, heart, why and whence does such shocking scenes take place
amongst men of humanity and reason, to say nothing of christianity; a scene
contrary to every idea of that mutual affection and good will, which nature and
duty, so forcibly calls for, from creatures so helpless in themselves, and who
stand in such need of one another's sympathy and assistance, originally formed,
by one common father, for the purpose of serving and honoring him, through a
life of virtue, thankfulness and love, which, himself declares, is best
manifested by mutual endearments, in patience and love to each other. To these
observations, which will necessarily occur to those, whose senses are not
totally deafened, or heart quite hardened by the lust of revenge, the lust of
honor, the desire of wealth; it is generally answered, that the case is
grievous indeed, but that there is no other means of preventing injustice and
oppression from reigning in triumph, but by the means of war. If those who make
this answer, would endeavor to quiet the tumultuous passions of nature, suffer
reason and humanity to speak, and only consider from the idea implanted in us,
from our youth, of our Maker's goodness, they cannot otherwise think, but that
if he was properly sought unto, he would provide different modes of settling
those differences, which will naturally arise from the different tempers and
interest of mankind. He has expressly declared himself to be a God, hearing
prayer, For the oppression of the poor, and for the sighing of the needy, now
will I arise says the Lord, Psalm lxxvi. 9. That he is so ready to fulfill the
desire of the honest hearted, that even before they call he will answer, whilst
they are yet speaking he will hear, Isa. lxv. 24. And to remove all doubts of
every right petition being answered; our Savior brings it to the most sensible
feelings of nature, even to the tender connection of a father, to his child; if
a son, says he, ask bread of any of you who is a father, will he give him a
stone; or if he ask a fish, will he give him a scorpion; if you then being
evil, know how to give good gifts to your children, how much more will your
heavenly Father give the holy spirit, to those that ask it. Luke xi. 11. But in
fact men, who are encouragers of war, either give way to an evil heart of
unbelief, or take pleasure in indulging their wrath, their selfishness and
pride, or the more iniquitous desire of advancing their fortunes. That wars are
mentioned in the Old Testament to have subsisted before the time of our
Savior's appearance upon earth, makes nothing in its favor under the
dispensation of peace and universal love, under which we now live, which he
came to establish. The apostle in the description he gives of the occasion of
war, makes no distinction between present and past times, but centers the
origin of war wholly in those lusts, which war against the soul, "ye fight, ye
kill, and desire to have, that ye may spend it upon your lusts." Hence there is
reason to conclude, wars were allowed to the Jews for the same reason, as our
Savior tells them, Moses suffered them to put away their wives, because of the
hardness of their hearts, and was a violence upon that purity and brotherly
love, which subsisted in the beginning. Neither does the force used in the
support of civil order, to regulate the weak and ill disposed, make any thing
in favor of war. Government is the ordinance of God, a compact and agreement
of a number of people, mutually to support justice and order amongst
themselves, upon an infringement of that order, restraint becomes necessary as
mentioned in scripture, for the punishment of evil doers, and the praise of
those; that do well; for this purpose, that we may lead a peaceable life, in
all godliness and honesty, which falls solely on the transgressors, upon the
breach of their own agreement; hence civil government will always be necessary,
for the maintenance of the peace and happiness of mankind. But the case is
vastly different in the prosecution of war, when people engage in the military
service, as a profession, their ideas of right and wrong become, in a great
measure, vitiated by many corrupt prejudices and customs; looking upon war, as
the most agreeable means of advancing themselves, they often in despite to the
impressions of grace, and the feelings of humanity wish for it, and endeavor
to promote it. And here the several innocent and useful employments, either of
agriculture or mechanism, so congenial with our health of body and peace of
mind, are generally slighted or despised; a vain esteem for the importance of
his situation, generally takes possession of the mind of the warrior, which
causes him to behold with undervaluement and scorn, every other way of life.
That golden rule of doing as we would be done unto, so much the glory as it is
the happiness of humanity, is given up for a foolish idea of human glory; the
most empty fanthom that ever possessed the distracted mind of man, or some
other vain or corrupting pursuit, which centers in human life; the calls of
humanity and reason are, avowedly, no more to regulate our conduct, the maxims
generally agreed to, by the military men, must supersede all other
considerations; one of which is, that where a fortified place refuses to obey
the enemies summons, and is taken by storm, those within may be put to the
sword, even though the soldiers and inhabitants were not parties to their
commanders imprudent resolution, nevertheless they must fall victims to this
horrible maxim. Several historians mention the dreadful tragedy which was acted
at the city of Magdeburg, by the Austrian General Tilly, who having taken it by
storm, delivered up the citizens, without distinction of age or sex, to the
barbarity and lust of his soldiers. Besides the general massacre, they
exhibited such acts of wanton cruelty, as disgrace human nature. Three or four
hundred were all that were saved out of twenty thousand citizens.
Whatever pillage and destruction is accounted necessary, to annoy and distress
the enemy, must be put in practice; nor, (say they) can any distinction be made
on these occasions; those who are peaceably and innocently disposed, must
partake of the same fate with the guilty. Neither may the warrior parley with
reason or humanity, much less christianity, in strictly executing the orders of
his superior; which he has engaged in all cases to obey.

And here a reasonable query arises. What real advantage has been gained from
the pursuit of these horrid maxims, to those who are principals therein, even
when they have obtained their desire by the addition of some territory, to
those they held before, perhaps; already larger than they could properly
govern; in the prosecution of which so vast a number of their fellowmen, who
might, in the innocent and useful engagements of life, have been happily and
profitably employed for themselves and the advantage of society, have been cut
off in their prime. What benefit has been reaped by the several powers, engaged
in the last German war, wherein during the short space of only six years, from
1756, to 1762, more than twenty battles were fought, two hundred thousand
soldiers flain, the souls of each of whom, were as valuable in the sight of God
as their own; and this with as little concern, or perhaps less concern, than if
they were so many brute beasts, in the particular description of which, from
the account of the history of that war, printed in London 1762, we meet with
relations of barbarities the particulars of which, the author says, would be
shocking to humanity; whole districts laid waste; cities destroyed, by bombs
and red hot bullets; regiments cut to pieces; a horrid and undistinguished
carnage in close engagements, by sword and bayonet, and lanes made through the
ranks of soldiers, by the artillery charged with cartridge shot. If persons who
are active in war, particularly those who for gain, or in pursuit of honor, or
from some other selfish views, have been instrumental in its promotion; if
these are not hardened beyond reason, or the feelings of humanity; the thought
of this dreadful carnage, cannot but strike them with amazement and horror. And
however whilst in health and under the prevalency of corrupt prejudices and
passions, people may make light of such awful scenes; yet if not deprived by
sudden death, of the desirable opportunity of reflection, or besotted by the
stupid persuasion of an annihilation; when the awful time of their dissolution
shall draw near, and their spirits fail under pain or mortal languishments; and
they erpect to meet with those souls, they have been instrumental to hurry into
eternity; the reflection of having in any degree promoted this mighty evil,
must be a cause of deep anguish and forrow, which will be much augmented in
those who, believing the christian religion to be a revelation of the will of
God to man, will consider the different fruits it would produce in those who
submit to its spirit, as mentioned by the apostle, even love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, meekness, etc. Gal. v. 22. or, influenced
by its wisdom, which is pure, peaceable, gentle and easy to be entreated, full
of mercy and good works, James iii. 17. In the course of this German war we
meet with accounts of a whole regiment, some battalions, and in one instance,
of eight hundred Pandours cut to pieces; now simply to picture to ourselves the
horror of such a transaction; the confusion, the carnage, the streaming blood,
the cries and shrieks of the wounded; by men and horse, striving with every
effort of nature in the utmost rage and fury to out do each other in the murder
of their fellow-men; in despite of the commandment Thou shall not kill; and
this toward men whom they have no personal enmity against nor knowledge of,
but that they are of those whom, by every call of nature and religion they are
required to love, as they love themselves. The imagination of the reader, if
not lost to every sense of reason and humanity, must suggest such apprehensions
of the horror as well as wicked ness and madness of such a scene, as is beyond
the force of expression to remark upon, and which no pretended necessity nor
usage can excuse or paliate.


Surely the dark cloud of prejudice which prevails in support of war, amongst,
the christian powers will, by the mercy of God, in time, be dispelled; men will
see their mistake and be as much astonished at their blindness and folly, and
look with as much abhorrence at that cruelty, which is such an obstruction to
that happiness which God intends for his creature man, as they are at the
recital of the folly of our ancestors, exposing themselves to so much labor
and suffering, in the time of the Croisades, for the recovery of Jerusalem from
the Turks.

The sentiments of that celebrated author A. De Voltaire, upon the solemn
subject of war, is worthy of note. In the first vol. of his works, he observes
"That the primitive christians, without exception, held the same sentiments
with relation to war as did the Essenees and some others; and as the Quakers
now do. Tertullien he says, speaks with the most strength upon these legal
murders, which our abominable nature has made so necessary; that there is no
law nor usuage that can justify this criminal act. In other parts of his works
he says, It would seem that the law of loving our neighbors as ourselves was
made only for the Quakers; and in truth, how can any one pretend that he loves
his neighbor as himself, when for reward he will shoot or stab him, and, at
the same time he exposes himself to be killed, might it not rather be truly
said, That he hates his neighbor as himself. He reproaches the preachers of
the time when he wrote, who made so many sermons against impurity and other
smaller evils, whilst they were silent against those various kinds of murder,
those robberies, those violences and that universal rage by which, under
pretense of necessary war, the world is laid waste. Put together, says he, all
the vices of all ages and places, and they will not come up to the mischiefs or
enormities of one campaign." He appears to have a prospect of a time, when as
he says, "That part of mankind dedicated to heroism, will be esteemed the most
execrable and destructive monsters in nature."

Under these afflictive prospects, we have reason to return thanks to the great
and good Father of mankind, in that, there is a remnant, under different
religious denominations who remain, unshakenly convinced, that the voice of
reason, the feelings of humanity, and more especially the gospel of Jesus
Christ, calls upon them to bear a uniform testimony against every thing which
is inconsistent with that patience and love, which the gospel proposes; and
which, in any measure tends to impede its establishment, agreeable to the
ancient prophecies. Hence they can in no wise support that spirit which gives
life to war in any of its branches, but apprehend themselves uniformly called
to promote to the utmost of their power, the welfare of all men, to bless those
that curse them, and do good to those that hate them, thus to overcome evil
with good, agreeable to the precepts of their meek Savior, who overcame by
suffering, leaving us, says the apostle an example that we should follow his
footsteps. These are persuaded that the great and good Father of mankind, will
preserve and protect those who endeavor to the best of their power, to obey
and love him, so that what ever may befall them, in consequence of their
obedience, of their dwelling in the patience, and maintaining that love and
forbearance to their fellow-men which he requires, however threatening of
depriving them of what men so much esteem to be happiness, yet he will in such
sort protect them that every thing will work for their good, and will afford
them such a degree of inward peace and consolation, such a frame of submission
to the will of their creator, such a fund of compassion and love to their
fellow-men, as will give them a happiness which passes the human understanding.

And however worldly men, or short-sighted politicians, may conclude, that no
other means but that of war can be pursued to protect their respective
countries from oppression; yet instances are not wanting, of the blessing which
has attended upon contrary measures. Pennsylvania furnishes an instance how far
the divine blessing may cooperate with the spirit of peace and good order; so
long as the government continued chiefly in the hands of a people principled
against war, notwithstanding their exposed situation, the great number of
Indians within their borders, and the several warlike nations which surrounded
them, they experienced the protecting hand of providence, and enjoyed an
uninterrupted tranquillity for more than sixty years; whilst Canada, and most
of the other colonies who pursued different measures, suffered dreadfully from
their Indian neighbors. Ancient history also furnishes a striking example of
the happy effect which a spirit influenced by the fear of God, producing
moderation and universal benevolence will produce. Numa Pompilius, the second
king of Rome, is a particular instance of this interesting truth, born some
hundred years before the christian Era, he appears to have been in a special
manner one of those wise heathens, mentioned by the apostle, who, from a
conformity to that inward principle of divine intelligence, which all men are
favored with, doing by nature the things contained in the law, was a law unto
themselves; which showed the works of the law writin their hearts. Some of
these were doubtless favored, as our Savior declares Abraham was, with a
sight of his day, a day of good tidings to the meek, and special peace and good
will to men. Numa's natural disposition for moderation, probity, and justice,
had been greatly strengthened by a proper education. Inured betimes to industry
and labor, and extremely averse to ambition and violence, he infused the same
sentiments in his subjects. Numa, says Rollin, had a great veneration for the
Deity, whose nature and perfections were his study. He deemed true goodness to
consist in ruling the passions, and keeping them in subjection to reason.
Luxury and magnificence, were unknown to him. He plainly saw that to accomplish
his design, and infuse the same sentiments into the Romans, his first care must
be to soften and tame their minds, in order to extinguish by degrees, that
inclination for war, which Romulus had inspired them with; and insensibly turn
them to such pacific, gentle, and profitable exercises, as would cause them to
forget and lose this first inclination. The remembrance of the Deity, whom Numa
endeavored should be always present in their thoughts; Numa labored to bring
the Romans from that wretched inclination, so prevalent with mankind, of
corpolizing the divinity. Hence, Plutarch observes, that he forbade to
represent God in the form of man or beast; no painted or graven image was
admitted amongst them; thinking it great impiety to represent the most
excellent Being, by things so base and unworthy. He taught them, that there was
no possible access to the Diety, but by the minds being raised and elevated by
divine contemplation. That he seemed to favor the Pythagorien doctrine of
silence, in a familiar and constant attendance on the Deity, who was not
subject to sense or capable of passion, but invisible, incorruptible and to be
comprehended only by the mind. Hence Numa, before his advancement to the
throne, spent much of his time in unfrequented groves and fields, consecrated
to the Diety, not out of melancholy, or disturbance of mind; but because he had
experienced a more sublime conversation, by which he became skilled in matters
of a divine nature. Plutarch adds, That it was not strange that God should be
pleased to dwell with those who were more eminently virtuous. That many in past
ages had been thus favored with the love of God.
the industry and moderation, he had instilled in the Romans, caused that
warlike people to lay down their arms, and employ themselves, throughout his
whole reign, which lasted forty three years, in conciliating the favor of
heaven, cultivating their land, and the other innocent employments of a country
life; which proved an excellent school of simplicity, frugality and other moral
virtues. "He dedicated himself entirely to the service of the citizens and
strangers, to whom he was counselor, arbiter and judge. All, says Livy, formed
their manners by the King's, whom they took for their sole pattern." Hence the
nations about him who before had considered Rome more like a camp than a city,
conceived such a reverence for them, that they would have thought it a sort of
impiety to have attacked a people, wholly intent upon serving God, and making
men happy.

A wonderful change of manners also prevailed in the neighboring cities; the
people visited one another without fear, uniting in religious services, and
rejoicing together, as if Numa's wisdom had been a plentiful fountain, from
whence the streams of virtue and justice had flowed into the minds of the
people; instead of a martial ardor, an eager desire to live in peace, to
cultivate their lands, and bring up their children in the same, infused into
their hearts the same tranquillity which reigned in his own.

The nations around, were so far from taking advantage of his pacific temper,
to make war upon him, that in their differences, they chose the Romans for
umpires, and referred themselves entirely to Numa's decisions; a glory founded
on the esteem and gratitude of the nations, who paid a public homage to the
wisdom, justice and sincerity of a prince, void of self interest and solely
intent on the happiness of mankind. Neither did any rebellion appear during the
long reign of Numa, whether, says Plutarch, reverence for his eminent virtue,
or fear of the Diety, who so visibly protected him, vice was disarmed; or
whether, by a particular providence, Heaven was pleased to preserve this happy
reign from whatever might sully its glory, or disturb its peace; it has served
for a proof of what God, in his mercy and love can do, in rendering virtue
triumphant over vice. Numa ended his life in the gentlest manner, by nature's
being quite exhausted, in the 83d year of his age, and 43d of his reign.

If Plutarch, though an heathen, under the prevailing prejudices in favor of
war, could manifest so much esteem for the maintenance of peace, as freely to
acknowledge the display of a particular providence in Numa's protection, from
the violence of unreasonable men, as a special mark of the divine approbation
on his diligent labor, for the establishment of virtue in a people, before so
daring in rapine and murder, how much more have christians reason to rely upon
the same divine protection, in the maintenance of that love to their fellowmen,
and patient suffering of injuries, so strongly enjoined by the precepts and
practice of their great exampler Jesus Christ.

And certainly men thus peaceably disposed, have great reason to expect to be
protected by the rulers wherever their lot may be cast, as these rulers cannot
but be sensible of the advantages which arises from the virtuous example of
persons so disposed, in opposition to those vices which war naturally produces.
For, notwithstanding some christians look upon defensive war as lawful; yet
sober men, of every religious denomination agree, that it is a great evil and
much to be depricated; hence great tenderness is due to those who, in sincerity
of heart, apprehend themselves called out of the spirit of war, to the
promotion of harmony and love.

We also find Cardinal Fleury, long Prime Minister of France, under the late
King, to have been a person of much mildness and moderation, and a great lover
of peace. He had seen the dreadful misery occasioned by the prosecution of a
long war, during great part of the reign of Lewis the 14th, which several
writers of that reign say, gave the old king so much concern, that, upon his
deathbed, he exhorted his successor, the late king, to use measures different
from those he had pursued. The good disposition which prevailed in this
cardinal, in favor of pacific measures is thought to have, in a great degree,
been the occasion of the long peace, which so generally prevailed amongst the
different powers of Europe, from the peace of Utrecht, in 1712, to the year
1733. If the influence of one minister of state can have so good an effect, how
happy would it be for mankind, and how happy for themselves, if the present
rulers of the different kingdoms, would so far yield to that good principle,
which every man in his cool moments, is, in some degree favored with, as to
feel for the miseries of mankind, and become advocates on behalf of the Prince
of Peace, and thus promote as much as may be in their power the prevalency of
that peace and love, which not only the prophets, but also the wise men of all
ages have had a prospect of, a time of love and good will to men; when
righteousness and peace shall universally prevail.

The prejudice that so strongly prevails in the young nobility of most European
Monarchies, in favor of war, which they are taught to look upon as the only
business worthy their attention, very much prevents the establishment of that
peace and love amongst men, so much the desire of the well minded. Most of
those who do not inherit the family estate, and indeed most who do, enter into
the military life; hence the disorderly passions of the human mind, instead of
being molihed by the soft endearments of locial life, are rather increased,
through the violent and cruel measures they are obliged to pursue. The culture
of their estates, which might afford them so much benefit and pleasure, is
abandoned to the attention and weak efforts of a poor, often exhausted and
oppressed race of peasants, who have neither ability, nor courage to do any
thing to purpose.

And, indeed, it must be allowed, that those evil lusts and passions, which are
the remote causes of war, are much supported and increased by that romantic and
false idea of the honor, resulting from a military life, which induces so many
of the principal men, of most christian States, to spend the prime of their
days in that service, whence, from a strange infatuation, it is esteemed the
greatest honor to risque the putting a period to their existence, before they
have answered the purpose for which their life was given, even the subjection
of the corrupt propensities of nature; so as to bring them under the regulation
of reason and religion. Wonderful instance of the corruption of the human
heart; that men will voluntarily, and even with pleasure, encounter so much
hardship and labor, in the prosecution of war, which upon the least
reflection, they must be sensible, so greatly tends to corrupt the morals, and
so miserably destroys the lives of their fellow men. The weight of this
consideration is greatly increased from a thought, how, trivial and often
unjustifiable have been the occasions of some dreadful wars. The last German
war, wherein as has been mentioned, more than twenty battles were fought, two
hundred thousand soldiers were killed, cities and extent of countries laid
waste, besides the numberless deaths, distress and destruction, which on these
dreadful occasions, on various ways attend, was chiefly consequent of the
question, Whether the King of Prussia or the Queen of Hungary, should govern
Silesia, founded upon some ancient contract between their ancestors, in which
it is doubtful, the people of that province were never consulted After six
years war, a peace was concluded in 1763, when it was agreed by the contending
powers "That all things are to remain in the same state in which they were at
the beginning of the war." What a dreadful consideration, that to answer the
politics of a few, such a sacrifice of men should be made to the Prince of
darkness. And what must all those think, if they dare to think at all, who from
vain or selfish ends have given it support or encouragement, particularly when
on a bed of sickness and of pain, they will have to reflect on those numbers of
souls, which they have been instrumental, to bring to such a miserable and
untimely end. Under these awful considerations can it be thought strange that
some who behold war in this fearful light, and are persuaded that such doings
are utterly abhorent in the sight of the great and good Father of mankind, will
encounter all difficulties rather than take any part in it.
How long will men thus suffer the enemy of their happiness to them? How long
will it be ere they retover their senses, and suffer the voice of reason and
humanity to prevail in their councils and conduct.

If the young nobility and gentry were encouraged by their elders, whom it
might be expected age, and experience had given a better estimation of the
nature and value of things, to employ themselves in the cultivation of their
estates; giving proper encouragement and assistance to their tenants and poor
neighbors; promoting useful arts and manufactures; the proper education of the
children of the poor, and in every other respect, as the truly great and happy
Numa did, earnestly labor to make the people around them virtuous and happy,
they would surely render better service to their country, and soon find
themselves possessed of a substantial happiness, unknown to those who pursue
different measures. How different, on a dying bed, must the sensation of these
who have thus labored to procure the improvement and happiness of mankind be,
to that of those who have lived to themselves, in the pursuit of those vain
honors and pleasures, which the thoughtless part of mankind so carnestly seek
for, in camps and courts.

However mankind when in health and strength, generally suffer themselves to be
influenced by selfish principles of pride, wrath, etc. yet, when humbled by the
approach of death, we often find them bearing a uniform testimony, to those
humbling truths of the gospel, which they had depreciated in their lives. The
two noted ministers of state of France, Cardinal Richelieu and Mazarine, appear
to have been of this number. The first, confessed to Peter Dumoulin, the famous
protestant, that being forced upon many irregularities, by that, which they
call reasons of state, he could not tell how to satisfy his conscience for
several things, and therefore had many temptations to doubt and disbelieve a
God, another world, and the immortality of the soul, and thereby to relieve his
mind from any disquiet, but in vain: So strong, he said, was the notion of God
on his soul, so clear the impression of him, upon the frame of the world, so
unanimous the consent of mankind, so powerful the convictions of his own
conscience, that he could but "Taste the power of the world to come" and so
live as one that must die, and so die as one that must live forever. And being
asked one day, why he was so sad; answered, The soul is a serious thing; it
must be either sad here for a moment, or sad forever.

Cardinal Mazarine, reputed the cunningest statesman of his time, and who gave
great proofs of it in the successes of the French crown, under his ministry:
His aim was the grandeur of the world, to which he made all other
considerations submit. But, poor man; he was of another mind a little before
his death: For being awakened by the smart lashes of conscience, which
represented his soul's condition very dismal, with astonishment and tears he
cried out. "O my poor soul, what will become of thee: Whither will thou go" And
speaking one day to the Queen Mother of France, he said "Madame, your favors
have undone me: Were I to live again, I would be a Capuchin, rather than a
Courtier."

Charles Vth. Emperor of Germany, after many pitched battles, many triumphs and
kingdoms conquered, etc. resigned up all his pomp, and betook himself to
retirement; leaving this testimony behind him, concerning the life he spent in
the honors and pleasures of the world, and in the little time of his retreat
from them all, That the sincere study, profession and practice of the christian
religion, had in it joys and sweetness, which courts were strangers to.

Philip III. King of Spain, his grandson, reflecting upon the life he had led
in the world, cried out upon his deathbed. Ah! How happy were I, had I spent
these twenty three years, that I have held my kingdom in a retirement -- My
concern is for my soul, not my body.

Count Oxenstiern, Chancellor of Sweedland, a person of the first quality,
station and ability. After all his knowledge and honor, being visited in his
retreat from public business by Bulstrod Whitlock, Ambassador from England, in
the conclusion of their discourse, he said to the Ambassador, I have seen much,
and enjoyed much of this world, but I never knew how to live till now, I thank
my good God that has given me time to know him, and to know myself. All the
comfort I have, and all the comfort I take, and which is more than the whole
world can give, is feeling the good spirit of God in my heart, and reading in
this good book (holding up the bible) which came from it. And further addressed
himself thus, to the Ambassador, You are now in the prime of your age and
vigor, and in great favor and business; but this will all leave you, and you
will one day, better understand and relish what I say to you; and then you will
find that there is more wisdom, truth, comfort and pleasure, in retiring your
heart from the world, to the good spirit of God, and in reading the bible, than
in all the courts and fayours of princes. Bulstrod Whitlock, himself, gives a
noble testimony to the power of religion. "I ever have thought, said he, there
has been one true religion in the world, and that is, the work of the spirit of
God in the heart of souls of men. There has been indeed diverse forms and shapes
of things, through the many dispensations of God to men, answerable to his own
wise ends, in reference to the low and uncertain state of man in the world; but
the old world had the spirit of God, for it strove with them, and the new world
has had the spirit of God, both Jews and Gentiles; and it strives with all; and
they that have been led by it, have been the good people in every dispensation
of God to the world. And I myself must say, I have felt it, from a child, to
convince me of my evil and vanity, and it has often given me a true measure of
this poor world, and some taste of divine things; and it is my grief I did not
more early apply my soul to it. Since my retirement from the greatness ness and
hurries of the world, I have felt something of the work and comsort of it, that
it is both ready and able to instruct, and lead, and preserve those that will
humbly and sincerely hearken to it. So that my religion is the good spirit of
God in my heart; I mean, what that has wrought in me, and for me.

Secretary Walsingham, a man of great note, in Queen Elizabeth's time, toward
the conclusion of his days, in a letter to his fellow-secretary Burleigh, then
Lord Treasurer of England, writes thus. We have lived enough to our country,
our fortunes, our Sovereign. It is high time we begin to live to ourselves, and
to our God. Which giving occasion for some court-droll to visit, and try to
divert him, "Ah! said he, while we laugh, all things are serious round about
us; God is serious, when he preserves us, and has patience to wards us;
Christ is serious, when he dies for us; the Holy Ghost is serious, when he
striveth with us; the whole creation is serious, in serving God and us; they
are serious in Hell and in Heaven; and, shall a man that has one foot in the
grave, jest and laugh." -- O that our statesmen, would serjously and deeply
weigh the conviction, advice, and conclusion of this great man.

Sir John Mason, who though but 63 years of age, at his death, yet lived and
flourished in the reign of four princes, viz. Henry 8th Edward 6th Queen Mary,
and Elizabeth, and was Privy-counsellor to them all, and an eye witness of the
various revolutions and vicissitudes of those times. Toward his latter end,
being on his deathbed, he called his clerk and steward, and spoke thus to them.
"Lo here have I lived to see five princes, and have been Privy-counsellor, to
four of them, I have seen the most remarkable observables in foreign parts, and
have been present at most transactions for thirty years together, and I have
learned this, after so many years experience, that seriousness is the greatest
wisdom, temperance the best physic, and a good conscience the best estate; and
were I to live again, I would change the court for a cloister, my
Privy-counsellor's bustle for an hermit's retirement, and the whole life I
lived in the palace for an hour's enjoyment of God in the chapel; all things
else forsake me, besides my God, my duty, and my prayers.

The renowned John Lock, wrote as follows to his friend Anthony Collins, to be
delivered to him after his decease. "I know you loved me when living, and will
preserve my memory when I am dead, all the use to be made of it is, that this
life is a scene of vanity which soon passes away, and affords no solid
satisfaction, but in the consciousness of doing well, and in the hopes of
another life. This is what I can fay upon experience, and what you will sind to
be true when you come to make up the account. Adieu! I leave my best wishes
with you."

Extract of a letter wrote by the Earl of Essex, to his particular friend the
Earl of Southhampton, sometime before his death.

WITH respect to your natural gifts or abilities, remember, Eirst, That you
have nothing, that you have not received. Secondly, That you possess them not
as a Lord over them, but as an accomptant for them. Thirdly, If you employ them
to serve this world, or your own worldly delight, which the prince of this
world will seek to entertain you with, it is ingratitude, it is injustice, yea,
it is perfidious treachery: For what would you think of such a servant of
yours, who should convert your goods, committed to his charge, to the advantage
or service of your greatest enemy; and what do you less than this with God,
since you have all from him, and know that the world, and the princes thereof,
are at a continual enmity with him: And therefore, if ever the admonition of
your truest friend shall be heared by you, or if your country, which you may
serve in so great and many things be dear unto you; if your God, who you must
(if you deal truly with yourself) acknowledge to be powersul over all, and just
in all, be feared by you; yea, if you be dear unto yourself, and prefer an
everlasting happiness before a pleasant dream, which you must shortly awake out
of, and then repent in the bitterness of your soul; if any of these things be
regarded by you, then, I say, call yourselves to account for what is past;
cancel all the leagues you have made without the warrant of a religious
conscience; make a regular covenant with your God, to serve him with all your
natural and spiritual, inward and outward gifts and abilities, and then he who
is faithful and cannot lie, has promised to honor those, who honor him; he
will give you that inward peace of foul, and true joy of heart, which till you
have, you will never rest; and which when you have, you shall never be shaken;
and which you can never attain to any other way, etc.

Hugo Grotius, of whom these latter ages think they have not had a man of more
univerial knowledge, witness his annals, his book De Jure Belli, etc. He winds
up his life and choice in this remarkable saying, which should abate the edge
of other men's inordinate desire after what they falsely call learning, namely I
would give all my learning and honor for the plain integrity of John Urick,
who was a religious poor man, that spent his whole time in labor,
contemplation, and prayer. And to one that admired his great industry, he
returned this by way of complaint, Ah! I have consumed my life in laboriously
doing nothing. And to another, that enquired of his wisdom and learning, what
course to take he solemnly answered, Be serious. Such was the sense he had how
much a serious life excelled, and was of force toward a dying-hour.

Salmasius, the famous French scholar, after his many volumes of learning, by
which he had acquired great veneration among men of books, confessed so far to
have mistaken true learning, and that in which solid happiness consists, that
he exclaimed thus against himself, "Oh! I have lost a world of time; Time, that
most precious thing in the world: Whereof, had I but one year more, it should
be spent in David's psalms and Paul's epistles. Oh! Sirs, said he, to those
about him, mind the world less, and God more. The sear of the Lord, that is
wisdom; and to depart from evil, that is understanding."

Seldom, one of the greatest scholars and antiquaries of his time; who had
taken a diligent survey of what knowledge was considerable amongst the Jews,
Heathens, and Christians; at last prosesseth toward the end of his days (in
his conference with Bishop Usher). "That notwithstanding he had been so
laborious in his enquiries, and curious in his collections, and had possessed
himself of a treasure of books and manuscripts, upon all ancient subjects, yet
he could rest his soul on none, save the scriptures; particularly that
memorable passage, Titus 1.12. etc. "For the grace of God, that brings
salvation, has appeared unto all men, teaching us, that denying ungodliness
and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly, in this
present world; looking for that blessed hope and glorious appearing of the
great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ; who gave himself for us, that he might
redeem us from all iniquity, and purify unto himself a peculiar people, zealous
of good works. etc.

Francis Bacon, Lord High Chancellor of England, some time before his death
confessed. "That to be religious, was to live strictly and severely; for if the
opinion of another world be false, yet the sweetest life in this world, is
piety, virtue, and honesty. If it be true, there be none so wretched and
miserable, as loose, carnal, and profane persons. Cardinal Woolsey, the most
absolute and wealthy Minister of State, England ever had, who in his time
seemed to govern Europe, as well as England, when come to the period of his
life, left the world with this close reflection upon himself. Had I been as
diligent to serve God, as I was to please my King, he would not have left me
now in my gray hairs. A dismal reflection for all wordly minded men; but those
most especially, who have the power and means of doing more good than ordinary
in the world, and do it not, which appears to have been the case and reflect on
of this Great Man.

Extract of letters, wrote by David Brainard, a person of great piety, who
spent much time in a religious labor, for the welfare of the Indians, some
time before his death.

MY DEAR BROTHER,

THERE is but one thing, that deserves our highest care, and most ardent
desires and that is, that we may answer the great end for which we were made,
viz. to glorify that God, who has given us our beings, and all our comforts,
and to do all the good we possibly can to our fellow-men, while we live in the
world: And verily life is not worth the having, if it be not improved for this
noble end and purpose, yet, alas, how little is this thought of among mankind;
most men seem to live to themselves, without much regard to the glory of God,
or the good of their fellow creatures; they earnestly desire, and eagerly
pursue after the riches, the honors, and the pleasures of life, as if they
really supposed that wealth, or greatness, or merriment, could make their
immortal souls happy. But, alas, what salse and delusive dreams are these, and
how miserable will those ere long be, who are not awaked out of them; to see,
that all their happiness consists in living to God, and becoming holy, as he is
holy. Oh! may you never fall into the tempers and vanities, the sensuality and
folly of the present world, you are, by divine providence, lest as it were
alone, in a wide world to act for yourself; Be sure then to remember, it is a
world of temptation. You have no earthly parents, to be the means of forming
your youth to piety and virtue; let this excite you with greater diligence and
fervency to look up to the Father of mercies, for grace and assistance against
all the vanities of the world. Daily endeavor to practice a life of
seriousness and strict sobriety -- Think of the life of Christ; and when you
can find that he was pleased with jesting and vain merriment, then you may
indulge it in yourself.

Be careful to make a good improvement of precious time. When you cease from
labor, fill up your time in reading, meditation and prayer. And, while your
hands are laboring, let your heart be employed as much as possible in divine
thoughts. Never expect happiness from the world. If you hope for happiness in
the world, hope for it from God, and not from the world. Don't think you shall
be more happy, if you live to such or such a state of life, if you live to be
for yourself, to be settled in the world, or if you should gain an estate in
it; but look upon it, that you shall then be happy, when you can be constantly
employed for God, and not for yourself; and desire to live in this world, only
to do and suffer what God allots you. When you can be of the spirit and temper
of Angels, who are willing to come down into this lower world, to perform what
God commands them, though their desires are heavenly, and not in the least set on
earthly things, then you will be of that temper, you ought to have, Col. iii.
2. Never think you can live to God, by your own power or strength; but always
look to, and rely on him for assistance, yea, for all strength and grace. There
is no greater truth than this, that we cannot do any thing of ourselves. Yet
nothing but our own experience can effectually teach it to us. Indeed, we are a
long time in learning that all our strength and salvation is in God.

To A SPECIAL FRIEND.

CERTAINLY the greatest, the noblest pleasure of intelligent creatures, must
result from their acquaintance with the blessed God, and with their own
rational and immortal souls. And Oh! how divinely sweet and entertaining it is
to look into our own souls, when we can find all our powers and passions,
united and engaged in pursuit after God. Verily, there are no hours pass away
with so much divine pleasure, as those that are spent in communion with God,
and our own hearts. Oh! how sweet is a spirit of devotion, a spirit of
seriousness and divine solemnity, a spirit of gospel simplicity, love, and
tenderness. Surely this is a pious temper worthy the highest ambition, and
closest pursuit of intelligent creatures, and holy christians. Vastly superior
is the pleasure, peace, and satisfaction derived from this divine frame, to
that which we (alas) sometimes pursue in things impertinent and trifling. Our
own bitter experience teaches us, that in the midst of such laughter the heart
is sorrowful, and there is no true satisfaction but in God.

MY DEAR BROTHER,

IT is from the sides of eternity I now address you. I am heartily sorry that I
have so little strength to write, what I long so much to communicate to you.
But let me tell you, my brother, eternity is another thing, than we ordinarily
take it to be, in a healthful state. Oh! how vast and boundless! Oh! how fixed
and unalterable, Oh! of what insinite importance is it, that we be prepared for
eternity; I have been just a dying now for more than a week; and all around me
have thought me so: But in this time, I have had clear views of eternity; have
seen the blessedness of the godly in some measure, and have longed to share
their happy state; as well as been comfortably satissied, that, through grace, I
shall do so! But, Oh! what anguish is raised in my mind, to think of an
eternity for those who are Christless, for those who are mistaken, and who
bring their false hopes to the grave with them: The sight was so dreadful, I
could by no means bear it. Oh! methought, that I could now see my friends, that
I might warn them to see to it, that they lay their foundation for eternity
sure. Oh! my brother, let me then beseech you, now to examine, whether you are
indeed a new creature? Whether you have ever acted above self? Whether the
glory of God has ever been the sweetest, highest concern with you -- whether
God has been your portion, and a holy conformity to him, your chief delight? If
you cannot answer positively, consider seriously the frequent breathings of
your soul, But don't, however, put yourself off with a slight answer. If you
have reason to think you are graceless, Oh! give yourself and the throne of
grace no rest, till God arise and save. But if the case should be otherwise,
bless God for his grace, and press after holiness.

And now, I shall conclude with the testimony of the pious Bishop Tailor,
Chaplain to King Charles, the Is It. with respect to war. " As contrary as
cruelty is to mercy, tyranny to charity, so is war and bloodshed, to the
meekness and gentleness of the christian religion I had often thought says he,
of the prophecy. That in the gospel our swords should be turned into
plow-shares, and our spears into pruning books. I knew that no tittle spoken by
God's spirit, could return unperformed. and ineffectual; and I was certain,
that such was the excellency of Christ's doctrine, that if men would obey it,
christians should never war one against another."


