Mr. Adams's ELECTION SERMON. May 29, 1782.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE HIS EXCELLENCY JOHN HANCOCK, ESQUIRE GOVERNOR; HIS HONOR
THOMAS CUSHING, ESQUIRE LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR; THE HONORABLE THE COUNCIL, AND THE
HONORABLE THE SENATE, AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES OF THE COMMONWEALTH OF
MASSACHUSETTS, MAY 29, 1782, Being the Day of General Election.

BY ZABDIEL ADAMS, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN LUNENBURG.

COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS: PRINTED BY T. and J. FLEET AND J. GILL.

In the House of REPRESENTATIVES, MAY 29, 1782.
On Motion, ORDERED, That John Row, Esquire Capt. Josiah Stearns, and William
Vans, Esquire be a Committee to wait on the Rev. Zabdiel Adams, and thank him in
the Name of the House for the Sermon delivered by him this Day, and to request
of him a Copy for the Press.

NATH. GORHAM, Speaker.

AN Election SERMON.
ECCLESIASTES, 8th Chap. 4th Verse. Where the Word of a King is, there is
Power; and who may say unto him what do thou?
LEST it should be thought, by any of this assembly, that the preacher has
stumbled at the threshold in choosing a text contrary to the genius of our
present constitution, it may not be amiss to observe, that according to the
language of scripture, the word king signifies any kind of governor, or the
ruling power of any state. Accordingly Moses is called king in the 33d chapter
of Deuteronomy; the Judges have the same appellation, Judges xvii; to the four
great Monarchies, the government of some of which was democratic, viz. Greece
and Rome, the same title is given; and in the new testament, the seven kings,
mentioned Rev. xvii. 10, are, by some of the latest and best expositors,
understood of seven particular emperors of Rome. So that by king in the text,
without putting any force upon the words, may be understood the ruling power of
any nation, be it called in modern language by what name soever. Were this not
the truth of fact, it would be necessary for us, as we have changed our form of
government, to omit a considerable part of the scripture as inapplicable to our
condition. But interpreted in the manner above suggested, those passages are as
proper to be used by us, as by any people under heaven. The truth of the case
seems to be this. At the time the text was penned, kingly rule was the most
prevalent. Those who were called by this name, were vested with different
degrees of power. Some governed by standing laws; and others conducted the
great affairs of states and kingdoms according to their own arbitrary pleasure.
Amongst the Jews, the king was only the supreme executive magistrate. He had
little or nothing to do with matters of legislation. Their code of laws was
previously settled by God himself, and given to Moses for the rule of their
conduct, in all the subsequent stages of their political existence. In the
times of the Judges the administration of their government was in the hands of
God; and hence by the learned it is frequently called a theocracy: But the
Jews, tired with having Jehovah for their supreme ruler, and perceiving that
the nations around them had a mortal man to stand in this place, desired, as is
too common at the present day, to be in the fashion, and to have a king like
others. The request, as being to their own disadvantage, was displeasing to the
God of heaven. But, as he would not rule them in a manner contrary to their own
inclination, he consented to their petition, after pointing out to them the
oppressive manner of the king. Their kings for several generations ruled in
righteousness, and made the institutes of Moses the measure of their
administration. Concerning such, Solomon pronounces as in our text, where the
word of a king is, there is power. Whilst they keep within constitutional
limits they cannot be resisted with impunity. Disobedience to such, exposes
both to temporal and eternal punishments. To temporal; as the king is vested
with great authority, and may do whatever he pleases for the preservation of
order and the advancement of the public happiness: To eternal also; as
government is of divine institution; and it is the will of heaven that we
should obey not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake, provided the
ruling power be the minister of God for good.

There is no necessity of supposing the declaration of Solomon true only of
kingly government, properly so called. It is, or ought to be true of all kinds
of government; and if there be any concerning which the assertion of the wise
man may not, with truth, be made, it is evidently defective, and ought
immediately to be amended, or totally changed. Three different modes of civil
rule have been prevalent among the nations of the earth, a monarchy,
aristocracy, and democracy; and indeed some have a combination or mixture of
all three, as England. This has been esteemed by enlightened foreigners to be
the happiest of any other, and infinite encomiums have been passed upon it.
Under such a form the people were free for many centuries. Corruption has at
length taken place, and deprived the community at large of many of the
blessings which they formerly enjoyed. There was formerly a proper balance of
power between the three constituent branches of the British constitution; and
at that time it was a noble one. It had the strength and dispatch of Monarchy;
the dignity and wisdom of Aristocracy, and the freedom of Democracy all
combined in one. But this happy equipoise of power was destroyed, when the
Commons granted to the king certain duties and customs, in lieu of personal
service due to the Lord paramount, by the feudal system, together with the
disposal of all the lucrative places that became necessary for the collection
of those customs. This gave the king an undue influence, and enabled him to
carry any point in Parliament. He is now vertually, though not nominally, an
absolute monarch; especially as the people are very venal and corrupt.
Innovations in government are dangerous.
Hence we learn that something else is necessary toward making a people free
and happy, besides a good constitution.

Amidst the different forms, it has often been enquired, which is the best? To
such a question it may truly be answered, that no particular one is suitable
for all people; nor any one for the same people always. As the tempers and
manners of nations change, a change in their government becomes necessary. The
Jews, at first, lived under a free commonwealth. Advancing in vice, they chose
a different one; and being indulged, they descended at last, namely, before
their Babylonish captivity, to a mode of civil rule, similar to that of the
eastern nations, at the present day, where one man, by birth or conquest, takes
the sole command, and rules according to his despotic will. -- The Romans
underwent many changes in this regard. Formed at first of a set of outlaws and
insolvent debtors, they instituted kingly rule. This continued for a few
generations, till their kings, intoxicated with power, broke over all wholesome
restraints, and committed personally, and by their sons, crimes intolerable to
a free and virtuous people. Brutus, teaching the evil of a certain nefandous
deed, and seconded by his worthy citizens, banished the royal family from Rome.
After this, they set up a government of the popular kind, under which they
enjoyed their liberties in great perfection, till falling under the burden of
their own vices, and descending to a thousand factions, Julius Caesar, at the
head of a well-disciplined body of troops, taking the advantage of this
distracted state of the republic, retired from Gaul, and thundering with his
legions at the gates of Rome, struck terror into the inhabitants, and fighting
a battle with Pompey, one of a wicked triumvirate, obtained a complete victory
over him, and was, in consequence, declared by the senate perpetual Dictator, a
title similar to that of absolute Monarch. Now, it may well be questioned,
whether this, for that people, under their present temper, was not the best
government they could possibly have. Holland was once governed by a monarch who
bid defiance to all former laws. They groaned under his jurisdiction; they
refused his edicts; and, though they suffered much, they, at last, obtained a
complete independency, and remain to this day free in constitution, though some
have pretended to affirm that they are slaves in reality.

From this view of the matter, it is apparent, that the character of a people
is to be taken into account, in order to pronounce what mode of civil policy is
best for them. This may, on the whole, be affirmed, that no people can be said
to enjoy freedom, who have not the choice of their rulers, either mediately or
immediately, in their own power. A different doctrine, I am sensible, has
frequently been preached. Time-serving priests and fawning sycophants have
sometimes flattered kings that they enjoyed their places jure divino; and
scripture has been quoted in defense of the absurd tenet. Thus St. Paul has
been supposed to patronize the doctrine, when he tells us, that the powers
which be are ordained of God. But as this cannot intend that rulers are
elevated to their places by the immediate agency of heaven; so neither does it
mean that Peter, Richard, John, Charles, Henry or George are particularly
designated to office. From that passage we learn only, that government is of
divine appointment, and that rulers have no other qualifications for their
places, but what God, in the course of his providence, has given them. King
Solomon has been produced as an advocate for the doctrine of passive obedience
and non-resistance, the divine hereditary right of rulers. My text has been
quoted in support of this opinion by men, from whose genius and learning we
might have expected more sober and rational sentiments. But, is it possible
that a book written by divine guidance should teach the doctrine of unreserved
obedience! The second verse of my context plainly demonstrates the contrary.
Hear what the wise man says; I counsel thee to keep the king's commandment, and
that in regard of the oath of God. Now, can we suppose it is the pleasure of
heaven that we should obey the unrighteous and oppressive commands of those in
power, and that, not merely for wrath, but for conscience sake. What! Does the
command of heaven make it necessary that we should take an oath of fealty and
allegiance to all kinds of authority; and that, by virtue of it, we are obliged
to obey even those magistrates who command us to practice idolatry, or any
other evil work? The case is too evident to need many words. All that Solomon,
therefore, meant was, that it is impious and dangerous to resist the authority
of those who rule for God, and consult the common good.

My following discourse will be to show how the supreme authority of any state
should be appointed and conduct, in order to its coming with power in its
several edicts and commands; and then, secondly, show what is the proper
application of this power.

1st. The ruling power of every state or kingdom should be elected by the body
of the people. As no man is born a ruler, so there is no possible way for him
to get regularly into office, but by the election of his fellow-citizens.
Dominion by conquest, by artifice, by saintship, or grace, is justly to be
reprobated. It is our duty to resist such usurpers whenever we are able. Under
God, the original source of all power, mankind enjoy, or ought to do so, the
liberty of governing themselves. The powers of government are vested in the
body of the people, and they may exercise them as they please, either
personally or by representatives. Their local situation and numbers make it
inconvenient to do the former; hence the latter mode usually prevails.

Government by deputation does not consist with that plenitude of liberty in
the people that they might enjoy, could they give their suffrages personally.
However, when our representatives are regularly chosen, are amenable to our
tribunals, and their election is not of long duration, then we may be said to
be as free as the state of the world will commonly admit. To be deprived of the
power of choosing our rulers, is to be deprived of self dominion. If they are
appointed over us, by those over whom we have no control, we are in a state of
slavery. There is no difference, in this respect, between such a people, and
the horses they ride on; neither are governed by their own will, in which the
essence of all freedom consists. Indeed, it is generally allowed at the present
day, by men of the first character, that the choice of the people is the only
source of power; and that republican government looks best on paper, but that
it is not sufficiently energetic and decisive to answer the necessities of the
state. There has been, it must be confessed, too much reason for the above
observation. Very popular governments have sometimes been found too weak to
prevent tumults, insurrections and factions. A wise people, therefore, in the
organization and establishment of a constitution, will take all possible care
to guard against such a defect. But how shall this be done? Shall they recur to
the long since exploded doctrine of the divine right of rulers; and labor to
possess the body of the people with an opinion that damnation will be the
inevitable consequence of opposing tyrants? Shall they give up the claim of
election, and assert that magistrates are sent immediately from heaven, and
govern independently of them? This would be speaking wickedly for God. There is
no necessity of recurring to any such paltry expedients. To give energy to
governments erected with our own hands, nothing more is necessary than a union
of all the most enlightened and virtuous people in support of them. And if our
elections are made in wisdom, if we choose out able men, who fear God and hate
covetousness, then among such a people, obedience will be cheerful and prompt.
All laws bind by consent. The majority can, and does always govern. It is their
consent and concurrence; their countenance and support that give energy and
power; and in order to obtain this, nothing more is necessary, than to have the
whole government administered for the public good. This makes it the interest
of the people in general to obey. Individuals having a different interest may
be disposed to resist and even to call others into their vortex; but their
feeble efforts may be easily overcome by the contrary exertions of the more
numerous, the more virtuous and more rational part of their fellow citizens.

Republican governments are said not only to be destitute of energy, but to be
slow and unperforming. This defect may be removed by allowing such prerogatives
to a single person as are necessary to the vigor and dispatch of public
measures. However, in large assemblies, where there is a diversity of interests
and opinions, matters of importance will never be speedily discussed. This is
an inconvenience to which we must submit, and it is the price we pay for our
liberties. It ought to be remembered there is safety, though there is expense in
these slow and tedious discussions; and if we allow it a defect, we certainly
can find no form of government, but what is chargeable with as great or greater.

In all free states the people have a right, not only to say who shall be their
rulers, but also by what tenure they shall hold their offices, and the steps by
which they shall arrive at them.

In order to avoid the feuds and factions that the election of a chief
magistrate would occasion in some large nations, the constitution provides,
that certain families should rule by hereditary right. Though this
establishment avoids some, it is exposed perhaps to greater inconveniences. By
means hereof, they may oftentimes have for their first ruler, though not a
complete idiot, yet perhaps one separated therefrom, only by a thin partition.
Further, when children are born heirs apparent to some high and important
station in government, their education is commonly such, as to fill them with
ideas of superiority, unfriendly to the rights of mankind. To govern well, with
justice, clemency and mercy, we ought to be acquainted with human nature in the
lowest walks of life.

In elective kingdoms, the election for the most part, is either for life or
for a considerable number of years. The better way is to choose our rulers
frequently. The term ought to be known and ascertained; at the expiration of
which we may omit them if we please. This is true if they conduct ever so well;
and there is great reason for it, if they have been guilty of
mal-administration. But though frequent elections may be proper, yet it must be
highly imprudent, frequently to change those who are qualified for their trust
and disposed to do the duties of it. This observation is true of any officer,
but more especially of those who are high in command. There may be reasons for
electing the chief magistrate annually; but if a new person is yearly chosen,
it will lessen the influence of authority, weaken the sinews of government,
crumble the people into parties, and establish habits inconsistent with that
spirit of submission which is highly necessary to the good of society. A
monopoly of office should never be permitted; a rotation indeed excludes it;
and changes at proper intervals, excite people to a laudable application to
business and books, that they may become qualified for posts of eminence and
distinction. But on the contrary, if the man who holds the first place in the
government, knows that he shall enjoy it but a short space, let his deportment
be ever so unexceptionable, he will hardly be warm in his office, get but a
miserable acquaintance with his duty, acquire no facility in the performance of
it, and lose a grand stimulus to excel. Unless therefore we were born
governors, legislators, etc. it must be wise in a people to elect their
principal officers for a succession of years, provided they answer the end of
their elevation. In this way, we shall secure to ourselves more of the
beneficial influences of government, than it is possible for us in the contrary
practice.

As the choice of the people is the only rational source of power, so it makes
obedience the most rational act. Slaves fear the rod, but freemen are kept in
the line of duty by more ingenuous principles. That society who will not be
governed but by brutal force, is unworthy any degree of freedom, and will not
long enjoy it. If we will not govern ourselves, we must be ruled by those over
whom we have no control.

The nation of America is remote from such a calamitous event. The whole series
of our conduct, the unexampled patience with which we have waded through a sea of
trouble, in order to gain the present separate and independent station among
the nations of the earth; the blood we have cheerfully spilt in this unhappy
contest, and the present determined spirit of by far the greater part of the
community, will not admit the most distant thought of ever returning to a
foreign jurisdiction, through want of alacrity in obedience to those whom we have
by our free, unbiassed suffrages constituted our rulers. But it is not to every
kind of injunction they will readily submit. Several things are necessary to
procure cheerful obedience to laws, besides their being enacted by men in our
own election. Particularly, first, they should be agreeable to the genius of
the people, and the spirit of the constitution. The constitution contains the
fundamental principles of the state in which we live. It is the civil compact,
and points out the manner in which we choose to be governed, the privileges of
the people, and the prerogatives of the governing body. These powers are ceded
to others, not for the sake of aggrandizing any class of men; not for the
purpose of keeping up a vain distinction among those who by nature are equal;
not that some may riot in plenty, whilst others are indigent and distressed;
but only that they may use them for the public good. As the rivers empty their
waters into the sea, that common receptacle, in order to receive them again,
that their sources may not be dried up, that they may wash their banks, spread
over and fertilize the adjacent plains; so the people delegate a part of their
inherent power to those whom they constitute their rulers, that it may be used
in defense of their properties, their remaining liberties and their lives. --
For this purpose some are clothed with those extensive powers, which by the
constitution reside in the first magistrate of the Commonwealth. -- He is the
"mirror of the people's majesty, and the right hand of their power." If he were
more limited in his prerogatives, he would be incapacitated to answer the
exigencies of the state, and be only an empty pageant, an image of tinsel, or
of gold, unworthy the confidence of the people. -- The same may be said of the
emoluments of his office. -- poverty and power are incompatible. The poor man's
authority as well as wisdom is despised. Wealth gives influence. A splendid
exterior does much toward commanding respect. Such is the nature of mankind,
that with huge reluctance they obey those, on whom fortune does not smile. --
Besides, his stipend is granted, partly, in order to support the dignity of the
Commonwealth. He is the representative of the people's wealth as well as power.
To him foreigners of distinction resort, by him they are accommodated in a
manner suited to their condition, and in him they view the ability of the
state, (...) in him all their scattered rays of opulence are reduced to one
common focal point. Further, it ought to be observed, that he who bears the
burden, should reap the benefit. Rulers of exalted station have a painful
service. A great weight lays upon them; they bear the cumbrance of all the
people. It is therefore certainly reasonable, that they who exhaust their
strength, and spend their wakeful hours in the service of the public, should
reap in some measure, the fruit of their toil and vigilance. At the same time
no worthy magistrate would choose to become opulent from the profits of his
office, especially at a time of general distress. Good Nehemiah was so far from
this, that when his countrymen were poor and afflicted, he would not so much as
eat the bread of the governor -- In conquered countries where governors have
been sent they have frequently robbed the people of their dear earned wealth,
and returned to the land which gave them birth, after a few years absence, with
their coffers filled with the issues of oppression. Witness some of the
pro-consuls of Rome. But with us, where our governors are at our own election,
who are natives of the country, there is no fear of this. The probability
rather is, that they will spend their own inheritance, in order to keep up the
dignity of the government.

The legislative body is superior in power to the executive. They hold the
reins of government in their hands; but as in this, and all free countries,
they constitute a numerous assembly, it is not to be expected* that at the
public expense, each individual should be supported in affluence. They ought
however, certainly to be supported. Many of their High Mightinesses, the
members of the States General, make no great personal appearance; the splendour
of majesty resides in the Stadtholder. But though the individuals who compose
this body, may not all of them be personally very respectable, yet as a part of
one great whole, they are, when acting constitutionally, an assembly with whom
resides a power, which no separate parties may resist. But if this assembly
stretch their prerogatives beyond constitutional bounds, they may lawfully be
opposed. Power is extremely apt to dilate, or spread itself abroad. Hence there
is need of vigilance on the side of the people. They who guard the golden alter
of liberty, should be possessed of eagle eyes. This sacred depositum cannot be
watched with too great attention. But then there is a wide difference between
reasonable care and capricious jealousy. Allowances are ever to be made for the
involuntary failings of rulers, but none for their designed faults. There are,
and ever will be, in all free states, a number of restless spirits, who under
the specious clock of liberty, are perpetually raising a clamor against those
in authority. We need no such prompters. A gross infraction of the
constitution, and oppressive measures, will be immediately perceived by an
intelligent people. Public incendiaries are baneful. To be called into
combinations, under the notion of supporting liberty, is always a dangerous
measure, and ought never to be complied with, except in some extreme cases. A
government within a government is a monster in politics. It is attended with
the most unhappy consequences. The best organized constitution in the world,
may be subverted by the frequent meetings of such demagogues. Of combinations
there can be no need, where our rulers are so immediately under our control,
where they are elected once a year, and where every corporate body may meet as
often as they please, to give instructions to those whom they have deputed from
their number. But though such proceedings as I have now mentioned are justly to
be despised; yet a ready obedience is not to be expected to resolves and edicts
that generally appear to sensible people to be unwise and hurtful. It concerns
rulers therefore to keep within the boundaries established by common consent. A
departure therefrom will bring their measures into contempt. In this case they
may "resolve and resolve and dye the same." What signified the mandatory
letters of Philip the second, to the people of the United States, when the
design of them was to deprive that people of the unalienable rights of men and
christians? Equally unavailing were the laws of the British parliament, at the
beginning of these times, when their manifest purpose was to despoil us of our
chartered rights, and bring us into a state of bondage. Such acts are as little
regarded as the bulls and thunders of the Vatican; at this enlightened period
of christianity.

Further, in order to have the word, or laws of rulers come with power, it is
necessary to make frequent appeals to their constituents, and inform them of
the necessity of their measures. This among an intelligent people has a weighty
tendency to procure respect, and a ready obedience. Indeed this cannot always
be done with safety. There is a maxim often mentioned of late, that there
should be no mysteries in government. If this be understood of the theoretick
principles, it is just; but if of the administation thereof, it is not always
true. The necessities of the state sometimes require great secrecy. The most
important expedition or negotiation might otherwise fail. But where secrecy is
not essential, there the authority ought to make known the accessity of their
measures. As rulers should be just, so they should remember that they rule over
men, who are intelligent beings, and who are commonly governed by reason. To
set before them, therefore, the necessity of their proceedings especially when
they are burdensome, as is always the case in time of war, is the directest way
to have a cheerful compliance. If taxes are heavy, and people know not to what
uses they are applied; if they are left to vain conjectures, and finally
conclude that they are swallowed up in a manner not beneficial to the public,
no wonder there is a reluctance in paying them. Frequent settlements with those
who are entrusted with public moneys, and a proper account of the expenditure
of them, laid before the community, will silence all murmerings among a people*
where reason is more prevalent than passion, and where every noble principle is
not under the control of avarice.

Again, if rulers would speak with power, they must speak in the language of
justice. All their laws, resolves and taxes must be agreeable to the eternal
rules of right. To do impartial justice to all; to preside with an even hand,
and carry the balance in equilibrio, is certainly their indispensible duty.
There is oftentimes a jealousy between the different parts of a nation or
commonwealth; a struggle and competition between the landed and mercantile
interest. It is the business of rulers to lay all such jealousies asleep, and
by their public determinations demonstrate that they are not so friends to the
one or the other party, but that they are greater friends to truth and equity.
The same rule is to be observed in the proportion of taxes, that are laid upon
the different states in the continental confederacy. This should not only be
invariably maintained, but reasonable evidence of it communicated to the
constituents. Nothing gives life and spirit to any corporate body; nothing
induces them to submit to burdens with greater alacrity than to find they are
necessary and levied in equal proportions.

Further, those measures that are evidently calculated to promote the welfare
and prosperity of the republic, are ever attended with energy and power.
Government was instituted for the happiness of the community at large. Rulers
are ministers to the people; they should be ministers of God for good, and
where they are evidently so, there is but little danger of their commands being
resisted. If the people oppose such power, thus benevolently exercised, it is
an evidence they have fallen into a most distempered state, and are nigh unto
cursing.

Again, in this view much depends on the conduct of the executive power. In the
administration of justice and execution of the laws, much firmness,
impartiality and mercy are requisite. The supreme ruler of heaven and earth has
required this. He will not allow one rule of administration for the poor man,
and another for the rich. He says to the Judges, take heed what you do; for you
judge not for man but for the Lord who is with you in the judgment: Wherefore
let the fear of the Lord be upon you; for there is no iniquity with the Lord,
nor respect of persons, nor taking of gifts. 2 Chro. 19. 6. 7. As on the one
hand, they should not take bribes and favor the rich; so on the other, an idle
compassion should not lead them to befriend the poor, and indulge them in
measures iniquitous, to the exclusion of a worthy part of the community from
their just demands. The obstructing the course of commutative justice even in a
small degree, though it may be done under the notion of mercy, is, however, a
very pernicious precedent, and in the issue will be found to be extremely
detrimental. It discourages the most industrious part of the community, and
puts it out of their power to support the burdens of government, on whose
shoulders they principally fall. If any thing further can be done to prevent
litigation, and the exhorbitant expenses of suits instituted for the recovery
of property, it certainly demands the attention of those in power.

The Judges of the supreme judicial court have deserved well of the public in
these distracted times. With an even hand with a resolute courage, and with a
proper mixture of compassion have they distributed justice in their circuitous
course; and much to them are we indebted for that peace and order which have
been conspicuous at a time when the sinews of government have been much relaxed.

Lastly, if those in authority would have their word come with power, they must
themselves be an example to others. To lay heavy burdens grievous to be borne,
which they will not so much as touch with one of their fingers, is what a
rational people will not suffer in those that preside over them. Hence we see
the reason why the measures of Britain with regard to this country were so very
disgusting. Living at ease, and rioting in luxury, they wanted assistance to
support them in this course. In this state they cast a wishful look upon
America: From us they proposed to draw a revenue sufficient to uphold their
prodigality, and enable them to live in splendour and pleasure. Her Parliaments
accordingly assumed a right of taxation, and of making laws to bind us in all
cases whatever. Feeling none of the burden, and under the influence of the most
rapacious desires, they would soon have brought us into the most unhappy
situation, and imposed burdens upon us, which neither our fathers nor we were
able to bear. But now that our rulers feel themselves a proportionable part of
the burden, what rational body of men can with propriety complain? Are taxes at
any time heavy, and do we under the burden begin to entertain hard thoughts? It
is enough to repress the rising emotion, when we remember, that the same
persons who lay them, bear an equal proportion of the whole, and are taxed
according to their estates. As self interest has so predominant a sway among
all orders of men, it cannot be thought, without doing violence to nature, that
such taxes are laid with ill design. Imposts and duties of the same
denomination with those formerly laid upon us by Britain, which were then
objected against, may be reasonable now, as the objection was not against the
duties themselves, but the appropriation of the moneys thence arising, and the
authority by which they were imposed.

As it is the business of those in power to see justice done between man and
man, and to keep the law open for that purpose, so example loudly calls upon
them, as a public body, to do justice both to individuals and to other states.
In short, I mean, it is of high importance that public credit be maintained; as
a failure of it is attended with a thousand difficulties.

The matter of example is to be extended still further. Rulers should not only
be exemplary in matters that relate to the duties of their particular station;
but in all the virtues of life, they should go before us in a shining example,
if they would have their measures properly respected. Those who live at the
upper end of the world are greatly observed. Their manners are contagious. They
do as much to support order by their behavior as by their laws, nay more. As
every government makes laws to punish offenders, proportioned to the nature and
degree of their crimes, so they ought to adopt a code of regulations which tend
to prevent the commission of evil. This is the most essential and benevolent
part of government. Now, laws of this kind can never be better enforced than by
the examples of men in authority. The examples of men in places of eminence and
distinction, have such an influence on their constituents, that the matter may
be aptly illustrated by Ezekiel's vision of the living creatures and the
wheels; when the living creatures went* the wheels went by them; and when the
living creatures were lift up from the earth the wheels were lift up. When
these went, those went; and when these stood, those stood; for the spirit of
the living creatures was in the wheels.

Thus I have mentioned some of the principal things that have a tendency to
give weight and influence to the public measures of authority. After all, it is
not to be supposed, that every one will be contented. A few dark designing
knaves, a busy plotting crew love to make distracted times. But this is
certain, where a government is constituted and administered in the manner above
mentioned, the body of the people; a goodly majority will always be in favor
of it. For what should make them oppose it? Do they think it unnecessary? Let
them try; let them live without government if they can? A few enthusiasts in
former, and at the present times, thought it a useless and burdensome
institution. But they are grossly mistaken. Indeed, were all men righteous
there would be no need of human laws. The law was not made for the righteous
man. But as there are multitudes who fear not God, and are not much influenced
by future considerations; hence the restraints of human laws are necessary to
keep the world in order. Without these, murder, adultery, rapine. and every
evil work, would frequently happen. In vain would it be for individuals to have
distinct interests, were they not preserved in the enjoyment of them, by the
combined power of the whole. Dreadful must be the state of the world, when
every man does what is right in his own eyes; when there is no king in Israel
and when every person gives an unbounded license to a spirit of avarice,
revenge and lust. What scenes of misery would hence ensue* Although a state of
nature may have some attendant advantages; yet the inconveniences of it are a
thousand times greater -- It is a state of war. The passions of mankind being
left to an uncontrouled range, would multiply numerous spectacles of distress.
Implacable revenge. under the impulse of keen resentment, would hunt the real
or supposed offender, and in order to meet him stretch the length of a spacious
continent, traverse prominent mountains, wade through eternal snows, penetrate
almost inaccessible woods, and when it overtakes him, inflict a punishment
greatly superior to the nature of his crime. But why do I multiply words in so
plain a case. Without government societies cannot live in any security.

Again, as this is necessary to the public order and happiness, so it is an
appointment of heaven, the ordination of God, who is a God of order and not of
confusion. By him kings reign and princes decree justice. The powers that be
are ordained of God; therefore let every soul be subject to the higher powers.
Whosoever resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, and they that resist
shall receive to themselves damnation: For rulers are not a terror to good
works, but to the evil. Will thou then not be afraid of the power? do that
which is good, and thou shall have praise of the same; for he is the minister
of God to thee for good; but if thou do that which is evil be afraid; for he
bears not the sword in vain; for he is the minister of God, a revenger to
execute wrath upon him that does evil; wherefore ye must needs be subject, not
only for wrath, but also for conscience sake. For this cause pay ye tribute
also; for they are God's minister's attending continually on this very thing.
-- These are the words of St. Paul. And in perfect harmony therewith, says St.
Peter; submit yourselves to every ordinance of man for the Lord's sake, whether
it be to the king as supreme, or unto governors as unto them that are sent by
him, for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well.
From these passages it appears, not only that government is an ordinance of
heaven, but also that obedience to it is a duty enjoined under the highest
penalty. Upon the whole, therefore I may be allowed to conclude that those
rulers who are introduced into office by the choice of the people, and are
upright and faithful in their stations, ought to be regarded as much as the
Dictator, when he marched through the streets of Rome, preceeded by Lictors,
bearing axes and rods.

We cannot resist such government without subverting the order, and
interrupting the happiness of society. Oppugnation to it is opposition to the
Deity himself; it exposes to many troubles here, and to damnation in the future
world. Rebellion against such authority is as the sin of witchcraft, and
stubbornness as the iniquity of idolatry.

I shall say a few things concerning the application of this power, and have
done.

It should be put forth to make the people industrious. Industry is the life of
all states. It is this that supports the world. When any are idle there must be
a deficiency somewhere. The Chinese have a maxim that the earth produces no
more than is sufficient to maintain very industrious persons. Perhaps it is
from a conviction of the truth of this observation, that the Emperor of China
goes forth once a year, in solemn pomp, and sowes a quantity of seed with his
own hand, in the view of numerous spectators. This industry is a matter of
importance at all times, but more especially so, at the present day, when
demands are great for the various product's of the earth. The best rulers have
heretofore been called from the plow. Cincinnatus was twice taken from thence,
and made dictator. Though we do not desire to have all our rulers in this way
employed, yet we could wish to have them industrious in their proper stations,
and thereby set an example of diligence to others, who should be farther
excited thereto by premiums, and other methods within the limits of the
magistrate's power.

Frugality is another important object of the rulers attention. This, both as
it relates to dress and food is a matter of moment. Millions since the present
war commenced might have been saved in this way. Sumptuary laws have often
times been made; why they should be improper now it is difficult to say? At
least the regulation of licenced houses and a discouragement to the too copious
consumption of spirituous liquors, is a matter on which the welfare of society
much depends.

The promotion of learning demands the attention of the civil authority. It is
never expected that all should be philosophers. The state of the world, the
necessities of mankind demand different improvement of their time and talents.
All, however, ought to be taught the rudiments of science. Schools should be
maintained, at the public expense, for this purpose; otherwise, in a few years,
we shall not know the nature or the value of that liberty, for which we are now
so justly contending. An ignorant people will never long live under a free
government. They will soon become slaves, or run into anarchy. This, therefore
teaches the infinite necessity of diffusing intelligence among the body of the
people. Several valuable literary institutions have lately been founded by
government; and the establishment adds a brilliancy to their character. These
societies are still in their infancy. Much is wanting to their perfections; to
make them the glory and ornament of the land. When by a series of observation
and experiment, by diving into the arcana of nature, and investigating the
occult qualities of things, they shall have made considerable accessions to the
heep of science, then their benign influence will be felt. Speculative
knowledge may please the possessor, but that which is practical is only
beneficial to mankind. What can be more so than the science and art of
medicine. Health is one of the noblest blessings. To have for the conservators
of it, men of genius, penetration and study, who understand the human
constitution, the connections, dependence and subservience of the particular
parts of it, the diseases to which it is obnoxious, and the most effectual
means of cure, how happy the attainment? The Medical Society, if properly
encouraged, will in a few years, give us a plenty of enlightened Physicians,
before whom all empiricks, all pretenders to nostrums and catholicons will hide
their diminished heads. -- Our University, which has for a long time supplied
both state and church with men of eminence and renown, now stands with uplifted
hands imploring the aid of government. Let not our academies, erected by
patriotick persons, cast our alma matter into obscurity, or in any degree
supersede its utility. May not the former, though noble foundations, acquire such
credit in the view of the authority as to put them on a par with that society
which was early instituted, which is richly furnished with a library, and an
apparatus in natural philosophy, and at the head of which there are men of
eminent abilities.

Again; religion and morality among the people, are an object of the
magistrate's attention. As to religion, they have no farther call to interpose
than is necessary to give a general encouragement to it. Matters of conscience
are to be left to God and our own souls. Modes and forms of religion;
sentiments concerning doctrines, etc. people should be indulged in, without
molestation. If coertion would bring mankind kind to a uniformity of sentiment,
no advantage would result therefrom. It is on the contrary best to have
different sects and denominations live in the same societies. They are a mutual
check and spy upon each other, and become more attentive to their principles
and practice. Hence it has been observed that where Papists and Protestants
live intermingled together, it serves to meliorate them both. The same may be
observed of any other sects. It is however greatly to be lamented that there is
not a more catholic and comprehensive spirit among different denominations of
christians. Bigotry and censoriousness sour the temper and interrupt the
happiness of society. The diffusion of light lessens this unhappy temper; and
among people of knowledge, though of different communions, a harmonious
intercourse commonly takes place. With madmen and enthusiasts there can be no
agreement, except among people as distracted as themselves. But even such,
where they put on a religious guise, and do not interrupt the peace of society,
are not to be disturbed by the civil arm. Render to Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, and to God the things that are God's. To their own master they stand
or fall. But that part of religion which has an immediate aspect on the good of
the community falls under the cognizance of the ruler. Every thing that tends
to promote the fear of God, and reverence for an oath, to advance the interests
of virtue and morality in the world, should be encouraged and enjoined by those
in power; for where there is not the fear of God and reverence for an oath, it
will be extremely difficult to keep the world in order. The young should not
only be instructed at schools in matters of science, but also in the principles
of morality; and they together with the adult should attend those places where
they may hear the sacred obligations of religion pointed out and inculcated. To
compel them to attend any particular society in preference to any, or all
others, would be an infringement on the rights of conscience. But to oblige
them to attend somewhere, is what the authority have an undoubted right to, and
it is moreover a most benevolent exercise of power: for should public
instructions in religion and morality be laid aside, profaneness, barbarism,
and every evil work, would become triumphant. Righteousness exalts a nation;
it gives dignity, strength and firmness to every body politic. Whilst the
Romans reverenced the Gods, and were nice in their notions of honor, truth and
temperance, they conquered the neighboring nations, spread themselves far and
wide, and were possessed of all worldly felicity. But when they lost their
virtue, they were weakened by feuds and factions; they were straightned and
brought low; tyrants ruled over them; till at length, being greatly enervated
by voluptuousness and effeminacy, they were overran and totally subdued by the
hardy sons of the North. Sin is a reproach or debasement to any people. It is
especially detrimental to free states. Statesmen may plan and speculate for
liberty, but it is religion and morality alone which can establish the
principles upon which freedom can securely stand. The only foundation of a free
constitution is pure virtue; and if this cannot be inspired into the people at
large, in a greater measure than we have reason to think they possess it now,
they may change their rulers and the forms of their government, but they will
not obtain a lasting liberty; they will only exchange tyrants and tyrannies. So
fully was Lycurgus, the Spartan king, persuaded of this truth, that he took
particular care of the youth, and had them educated in a manner suited to the
genius of their government.

Lastly; The power of rulers is to be exerted in the management of the great
affairs of war. We have reason to be thankful that wars do not always rage; yet
so frequent are they, that they should be studied as a science, and prosecuted
by the rules of art. Britain, a haughty and high-spirited nation, have been at
war near half their time for some centuries past. It is lamentable to think
what desolations they have made in the earth. What judgment is there greater
than this? How are the civil establishments of former times subverted by war,
and confusion introduced into the world? The blood of our citizens is spilt;
the bands which tie together the dearest connexions are frequently in the most
painful manner dissolved; the pensive widow and the prattling babe being
deprived of those on whom, under God, was their main dependence. What
benevolent heart can contemplate the ravages of war without pain? There are
none but the fierce and savage who can delight in scenes of carnage. But,
though the horrors of war are great; yet, when we come to contrast them with
slavery, we find the darkness of the night-piece immediately lessens! Where
slavery reigns, nothing good or great can possibly take place. Look into
despotick governments, and you find no ebullitions of genius, no strokes of the
sublime; but on the contrary, poverty of spirit; a depressed temper marks the
character of the enslaved nation. "What a high value ought we then to set upon
liberty, since without it, nothing great, or suitable to the dignity of human
nature can possibly be produced? Slavery is the setter of the tongue, the chain
of the mind as well as the body. -- Reason and Freedom are our own, and given
to continue so. We are to use, but cannot resign them, without rebelling
against him who gave them. The invaders of either ought to be resisted by the
united force of all men, since they encroach on the privileges we receive from
God, and traverse the designs of infinite goodness." Where, therefore, there is
no other alternative but war or slavery, there should be no kind of hesitancy.
Being in this situation, we were compelled, more than seven years ago, to take
up the sword and make our solemn appeal to Heaven, who has remarkably owned our
cause and succeeded our military enterprises. So wonderful were the
interpositions of God's providence, in many instances, in our favor, that we
may, without presumption, adopt the words of the Psalmist and say, the Lord of
hosts is with us, the God of Jacob our refuge. How did the Almighty ride on the
heavens for our help, and in his excellency on the skies, in the capture of two
famous generals, with their powerful forces. Burgoyne and Cornwallis.
Such events rarely take place, and are to be ascribed to the Lord of hosts,
the God of armies. They are the Lord's doings, and are mavelous in our eyes.

If slavery still clanks her iron chains, we must resolutely persevere in a
measure which has been hitherto so very successful. To arms, America, to arms!
Let the former experience you have had of God's gracious assistance, induce you
to put your trust in him for the future, and say with the Apostle, he that has
delivered, and does deliver, will still deliver. But hark! Rumors of
accommodation are circulating through the air. Great Britain, it is said, holds
out the olive branch, and makes overtures of peace. If the terms are not
insidious; if our independency can be secured; and treaties formerly made with
our illustrious Ally, the King of France, kept sacred, then it must be the wish
of every good man in America to have the horrors of war speedily closed by such
a peace. But of this our rulers in Congress must be the judges in the dernier
resort. With them it lays to make peace or prolong the war; and in them we
should confide. But, in order to a rational confidence in them, they should be
men of wisdom, penetration, knowledge of mankind, their arts and intrigues; men
of known probity, who are above the influence of venality and corruption; men
of steadiness and courage; incapable of being either terrified or flattered
into measures dishonorable, or incompatible with the public weal. Of such
men, there is a plenty, even at these times. It is the duty of the electors to
give their suffrages for them, and to act with caution in the choice of all our
officers. A neglect in this regard, will be the source of the most formidable
evils. The direction of Moses is, to choose out able men, men of truth, who fear
God and hate covetousness, and constitute such to be rulers. Now, if instead of
regarding this direction, people are inattentive to the qualifications of those
men whom they choose into office; if they will suffer themselves to be
influenced in this matter by private piques, or favor, by party views, or
sinister motives; or, if they should become generally indifferent about the
election, and not attend assemblies called for that purpose then our pleasing
prospects from our republican governments will "vanish like the baseless
fabric of a vision."

It is a matter of great importance to have wise men at helm at all times, but
more especially so in times of difficulty and danger. Abler pilots are wanted
in a storm, when the waves run high, and the wind is boisterous, than in a calm
when the sea is smooth and placid. Now is a tempestuous time, and with
difficulty is the political ship kept from rocks and quicksands, from shipwreck
or foundering. How necessary then is it for the people at large to have at the
helm, men who may with propriety be called Gods, for the superior
qualifications of their minds and hearts? If we are favored with such, we
should treat them with peculiar reverence and honor. This honoring rulers,
implies that we esteem them highly for their office and works sake. I know of
no men more deserving of esteem and honor than good magistrates. He that has a
suitable idea of the necessity of civil government, can not easily prevail upon
himself to reproach, defame, malign those in power; because such conduct tends
to weaken their hands. To honor government, and treat with contempt the
governors, is impossible, according to the apprehensions of mankind in general.
We testify our respect to the office, by our respectful treatment of the
officer. As speaking evil of dignities has a powerful tendency to weaken their
hands and lessen their power to do good; hence God has forbidden us to speak
evil of them; and those who despise government, and are not afraid to speak
evil of dignities, are ranked amongst those presumptuous and self-willed
persons who are reserved to the judgment of the great day. From a conviction of
the truth of the above observations, all virtuous considerate persons will bear
their testimony against those discontented men who are continually raising a
cry against those in power, and in this way keeping society in confusion. On
the contrary they will endeavor in all proper ways to strengthen their hands
and encourage their hearts, that their united exertions may come with power;
and that under their wise and equitable rule, we may lead peaceable and quiet
lives in all godliness (...) honesty.

Such has been the wisdom of our elections in time past, that we may place a
rational confidence in (I would charitably hope) all; but certainly in those
who have been some time in station, and possess some of the most important
places in government. We have had experience of their firmness, fidelity, love
of liberty, patriotism, uniformity of conduct, and talents for command. His
Excellency, the third time chosen the first magistrate of the Commonwealth,
will excuse me in saying, that the suffrages of his countrymen are an
attestation to his merit, greatly surpassing the encomiums of an individual;
and that his love of mankind, his generous soul, large as the sands on the sea
shore, his princely munificence, his voluntary sacrifice of ease and fortune,
for the sake of placing his country beyond the reach of despotism, have set his
virtues so on high, that the tongue of malevolence and slander has not been
able to throw them into the shade. -- May God take his Excellency, his Honor,
the Council, and both branches of the Legislature under his protection and
guidance, bless them and make them blessings to the people. My honored Sirs,
you have taken the lead at a time of great distress, when burdens are heavy,
when jealousies are strong, when clamours are rise; and when it requires the
wisdom and prudence of Angels to avoid the censures of petulant and licentious
tongues. It is yours faithfully to discharge the duties of your trust. In doing
these you will have the approbation of your own minds, and, I dare say, the
concurrence, the good wishes and support of by far the greater part of the
community.

The late measures of the British Parliament and king, will embarrass your
proceedings and make your path of duty more difficult than it was before. The
total change of the ministry, and the introduction of those who were heretofore
deemed our friends, will probably bring on a negotiation delicate in its nature
and difficult in its settlement, for those before whom it properly comes.

Some seem to be confident we shall have a speedy peace; but what honorable and
lasting peace can we expect when the luxury and pride, the profaneness and
debauchery, the dissipation and intemperance of the people are so great? To
pave the way for so desirable a blessing, rulers and people should exert
themselves to bring about a reformation. No wonder the times are perilous. when
men are lovers of themselves, covetous, proud, blasphemers, false accusers,
incontinent, dispisers of those that are good, lovers of pleasure more than
lovers of God; When we discern a different spirit, we may rationally hope for
better times. Then will our peace be as a river, when our righteousness is as
the waves of the sea. Much may be done by you, civil fathers, toward bringing
the people to an outward reformation. The enacting and carrying into execution
wholesome laws, tending to the better observation of the sabbath; requiring
persons under suitable penalties to attend, where they may hear their duty, and
be reminded of the awful consequences of neglecting it; where a future world
may be brought into view, and the moral character of the Deity, as governor of
the universe, is unfolded, will tend much to this. Laws of this kind properly
executed, would very soon put a new face upon things; especially if at the same
time suitable care was taken to regulate some other matters of internal police.
I am sensible I speak the sentiments of very many, when I assert, that serious
people long to see a system of preventive jurisprudence better established,
more attended to, and more generally carried into execution. This would make
government easy, prevent a multitude of crimes, conciliate reverence to the
persons of those that are in command, recreate the hearts of the pious, and
contribute to the peace and pleasure of society. -- Whilst people are fighting
against the burdens of despotic rule, some of the blessings of free government
should be tasted by them, least they become discouraged, and ready to say, the
former times were better than these. And though the war will take up much of the
attention of our civil rulers, yet we hope they will find leisure to prosecute
measures for bettering the morals of the people. As this may be in part
effected by proclamation. By law, and advancing none to places of trust, but
men of virtue; so perhaps more effectually by the shining examples of those in
power. If you will tread the paths of piety, probity, truth and honor,
multitudes will follow you with a resolute and persevering pace, through the
whole steep ascent of duty.

You have, it must be confessed, a difficult station, a laborious task. Some
perhaps may seek the place through a love of power or lust of domination. But the
better instructed know that there is no good in power, but the power of doing
good. You have great opportunities for this. Your influence is large. If it be
properly directed, you are Gods to the world, his vicegerants on earth. As you
have this title given to you by the great Jehovah himself, so it becomes you to
imitate him in his perfections of justice and righteousness, of wisdom and
truth, of patience and compassion, and especially, of benevolence and diffusive
goodness. -- How extensive a blessing is a good magistrate? He is a father to
the poor, and the cause which be knows not, be searches out. He breaks the jaws
of the wicked, and plucks the spoil out of his mouth. He delivers the poor that
cries, and the fatherless and him that has none to help him. He is eyes to the
blind and feet to the lame. The blessing of him that is ready to perish comes
upon him; and he causes the widows heart to sing for joy. He puts on
righteousness, and it clothes him; his judgment is as a robe and diadem. Such
an one is as the light of the morning, when the sun riseht, even a morning
without clouds, as the tender grass springing out of the earth, by clear
shining after rain. This should not only reconcile those in power to the
arduous and multiplied labors of their places, but also animate them to the
faithful discharge thereof. This will embalm their memory, and procure them
juster praise than ever was bestowed on Alexander or Caesar. Good magistrates
are excited to fidelity by other and nobler consulerations than those of going
off the stage with the applause of their fellow men. They labor to approve
themselves to the heart searching, and omniscient Jehovah. They know that
though they are called God's, yet they must die like other men, and appear
before the bar of Christ, to answer for the improvement of their time and
talents. Keeping this solemn event in view, they endeavor to approve
themselves to their divine master, that so when they are called to account,
they may receive this blessed euge from his lips, well done good and faithful
servants, enter ye into the joy of your Lord. -- If you, my honored Sirs, act
under the impression and influence of this solemn thought, I am persuaded the
elections of this day, and all the transactions of the ensuing year, will be
such as to meet the approbation of the wise and virtuous, and bid defiance to
the impotent attacks of disappointed ambition, or the unhallowed clamors of the
licentious.

Finally, may the people at large see the importance of supporting government,
and the necessity of carrying on the war with vigor. We are now in sight of the
promised land. How humiliating would it be to have our independence, just
brought to the birth, sail for want of strength to be delivered? To encourage
us to persevere, let us anticipate the rising glory of America. Behold her seas
whitened with commerce; her capitals filled with inhabitants, and resounding
with the din of industry. See her rising to independence and glory. Contemplate
the respectable figure that she will one day make among the nations of the
earth; behold her venerable for wisdom, for counsel and for might; flourishing
in science* in agriculture and navigation, and in all the arts of peace. Figure
to yourselves that this your native country will are long become the permanent
seat of (...), the retreat of philosophers, the asylum of the oppressed, the
umpire of contending nations, and, we would hope, the glory of Christ, by a
strict attachment to his gospel, and divine institutions. What though the
present generation may not live to see the completion and fulfillment of these
grand events? If we have laid the foundation of them, and can die in
expectation that our children will taste the happy fruits of our toil, it will
give to benevolent parents the most heartfelt joy; and children possessing the
effects of their fathers sacrifice, will rise up and call them blessed -- But
if there be any on whom these noble considerations will make no impression, I
would beg leave just to turn their attention to those scenes of distress and
carnage, which will certainly take place, provided we fail in our present
enterprise, and are brought, by artifice or power, to submit to the dominion of
the British king. May the United States of America therefore bow down their
shoulders to bear all the future burdens that may be devolved upon them, in the
progression of this tedious and expensive conflict. A few more campaigns will
determine the event of the present struggle, and doubtless land us on the rock
of independence, security and peace. Expense is not to be regarded in a contest
of such magnitude. What can possibly be a compensation for our liberties? It is
better to be free among the dead, than slaves among the living. The ghosts of
our friends, slain in war; the spirits of our illustrious ancestors, long since
gone to rest, who transmitted our fair inheritance to us; a regard to children
still unborn, all call upon us to make greater exertions; and will rise up in
judgment against us, if, through cowardice, we desert the noble cause, in
which, for many years past, we have been engaged. From these considerations,
therefore, let us persevere till we have obtained the completion of our wishes,
and have placed our country beyond the reach of over-bearing foes. -- But let
us remember that we are engaged in a higher warfare; and that, if we overcome
our spiritual enemies, we shall, at last, be put in possession of that kingdom
where perpetual peace will reign and liberty, the most exalted and refined,
shall be obtained. Be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a crown of
life.

AMEN.

