A DISCOURSE DELIVERED Near YORK in VIRGINIA, ON THE MEMORABLE OCCASION OF THE
SURRENDER OF THE BRITISH ARMY TO THE ALLIED FORCES OF AMERICA AND FRANCE,
BEFORE The BRIGADE of NEW YORK TROOPS and the DIVISION of AMERICAN
LIGHT-INFANTRY, under the Command of the MARQUIS de la FAYETTE.

BY ISRAEL EVANS, A. M. CHAPLAIN to the Troops of New Hampshire.

[ On the 13 th day of December, the day of General Thanksgiving, this
Discourse, nearly in its present form was delivered in the second Presbyterian
church in Philadelphia. The author is indebted for its publication to the
generosity of a number of gentlemen in this city; and it is principally
intended for the gratification of the brave soldiery fighting in the cause of
America and mankind.]

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED by FRANCIS BAILEY, in Market-street. M,DCC,LXXXII.

TO THE HONORABLE MAJOR GENERAL THE MARQUIS de la FAYETTE, WHOSE DISINTERESTED
SERVICES IN THE CAUSE OF AMERICA, PROVE HIM TO BE The Friend of Mankind, AND
WHOSE WELL KNOWN AMIABLE VIRTUES RENDER ALL PANEGYRIC NEEDLESS, THE FOLLOWING
DISCOURSE IS MOST RESPECTFULLY DEDICATED,

BY HIS MOST HUMBLE AND OBEDIENT SERVANT, THE AUTHOR.

A DISCOURSE, etc.
1 SAMUEL vii. 12. Then Samuel took a stone, and set it between Mizpeh and
Shen, and called the name of it Ebenezer, saying, Hitherto has the Lord helped
us.
AN army and nation standing upon the foundation of a rational and pious hope
of divine aid; and united in defense of honor, innocence and justice; should
never despair of obtaining success. For they, whose principles of warfare are
truly benevolent and righteous, will in the end find themselves triumphant over
the injustice of tyrants, and all their minions and armed slaves.

Such considerations have often, in adversity, consoled the minds of those
advocates for the interests of men, who esteem themselves most dignified when
they are numbered among the true friends to their country.

In further introducing what I intend to perform on this auspicious day, let me
hope to offend no one by reciting a part of those orders which where addressed
to this army, and seem to accord well with the sentiments just expressed. The
general orders which only a short time preceded our operations against the army
commanded by earl Cornwallis, show a virtuous dependence on heaven and say, "We
have prospects, which, UNDER THE SMILES OF HEAVEN, promise to crown our toils
with the most brilliant success."

This was an honorable and public declaration, that the influences of Almighty
power were necessary in order to give us a fair prospect of victory; this was
an humble invocation of the divine favor: and heaven has smiled upon the
exertions of our combined forces, and "the Lord," in the style of the text,
"has helped us."

The sacred penman of the history of the prophet Samuel informs us, that this
pious and illustrious person was, in a very remarkable manner, raised up to
judge and govern the Jewish nation. He was the gift of God to reward the
prayers of piety, and was by his parents early devoted to the service of God
and his country.

But before I enter fully into a discussion of the subject, we may take notice,
that during a considerable length of time which preceded the government of
Samuel, the Jewish nation had very much degenerated in their customs and
manners. Vice and iniquity so abounded throughout the nation, that scarcely
could the vision of truth, mercy or justice be perceived either among priests
or prophets, judges or people. The judgments of Heaven had collected and
kindled over the heads of a people who, with very few exceptions, had forsaken
their God, and united their sins to draw down whole stores of punishment from
the very hands of mercy and goodness. Let rulers and nations know their fate
when they neglect or despise their God.

In a word, the Israelites were sorely oppressed by the Philistines. They had
been defeated in repeated battles; their young men, and judges, and armies were
slain; the ark of God was taken, and "the glory had departed from Israel." The
hand of God was also immediately against them, to punish them for their sins;
and "he smote of the people fifty thousand and threescore and ten men. And the
people lamented saying, Who is able to stand before this Holy Lord God?"

At this time of universal calamity, Samuel rose up and judged the children of
Israel.

"Prepare your hearts unto the Lord," said the prophet, "and serve him only:
and he will deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines." By the prayers and
intercessions of this man of God, and the penitent returning of the people unto
the Lord, the aid of omnipotence was allied to their cause: "For when the
Philistines drew near to battle against Israel, the Lord thundered with a great
thunder on that day upon the Philistines, and discomfited them, and they were
smitten before Israel. And the men of Israel went out of Mizpeh, and pursued
the Philistines and smote them."

"Then Samuel took a stone, and set it between Mizpeh and Shen, and called the
name of it Ebenezer, saying, Hitherto has the Lord helped us."

I now beg your further attention, my dearly beloved hearers, while I attempt
to illustrate the meaning of the words, which I have chosen for the assistance
of your devotions on this joyful day.

"Hitherto has the Lord helped us. By these words we are called to a devout
consideration of our dependence on the Almighty God, and to a recollection of
the many instances of help and relief with which he has condescended to bless
us.

"Then Samuel took a stone, and set it between Mizpeh and Shen, and called the
name of it Ebenezer."

This was intended to manifest the grateful sense they entertained of the
merciful deliverance which God had granted them, and their earnest desire of
perpetuating their praise and gratitude to nations then unborn. This part of
the subject shall solicit our care and attention in the second place.

What I have in view, as we advance in the business of this day, is, in the
first place, to illustrate that part of the text which informs us, that
"Hitherto has the Lord helped us."

Here, perhaps, it may be asked, does this subject require any illustration
before men of thought and reflection? Are not all men, it may be said,
persuaded by the force of reason that the supreme being has supported and
preserved them in every stage of life? But shall there be many found
notwithstanding this persuasion, who have neglected to pay their dutiful homage
to the most merciful guardian and benefactor of mankind? If this be so, I shall
not do wrong, when I endeavor to make my fellow-men sensibly feel their
dependence on the creator as well as acknowledge this truth. I will then both
wish and attempt to remind them, that they can be in no situation where the aid
of the creator is not the existence of the creature: That we may give weight to
this sentiment, let us view mankind when they first awake into this world of
toil and hazard. All the weaknesses and imperfections of infancy attend them.
They are, in themselves considered, most deplorably helpless. The very animals
of the field may, with great propriety, laugh at this feeble creature man, and
boast of their superior strength and independence. Nor is man helpless only in
this dawn of life. Even when he has reached the utmost strength and wisdom
within the attainment of human nature; yet he must still confess that safety is
not derived from himself. For it will ever be found that, we can neither
foresee nor overcome all the toils and dangers which await us in our passage
through life.

Every man must therefore feel himself lonely and melancholy in this world,
until he has confided in one whose power can protect him, and whose wisdom can
guide him into the pleasant paths of glory and felicity. This sentiment seems
to be born with us and not merely the effect of teaching; the voice of nature
and not the labored acquisition of philosophy. It is a truth authorized and
supported by the testimony of much the greater part of mankind in all ages of
the world. Were we to call for the opinion of those nations, not acquainted
with the knowledge of the true God, and ask the religious pages of their
histories; there we should be informed that their greatest support and
consolation amidst the common or extraordinary vicissitudes of life, were
founded on the supposed goodness, wisdom and power of those beings to whom, in
their unenlightened zeal, they attributed the government of the world and its
numerous inhabitants. Let us a little farther follow the doctrine of our
personal dependence on the supreme being. We will for a moment reflect on some
of the circumstances of our lives, and what smiling prospects of human felicity
have presented themselves before us. Upon recollecting their instability and
painful delusion we are constrained to say, that neither what immediately
respects ourselves nor the affairs of the world are under our control or
direction. Is not every man able to say, that a thousand disappointments have
attended him in the transactions of life, and all of them perhaps quite
contrary to his most lively hopes and expectations. What appeared perfectly
just and proper at one time, has nevertheless afterward assumed a very
different aspect.

We have seen the best human abilities and the oldest experience fall under the
weightiest disappointment. Schemes which were in appearance well calculated to
produce favorable events in the concerns of life, have nevertheless proved
abortive.

Nor will it appear, upon examination, that nations or kingdoms have any stable
foundation for their support, independent of the Sovereign Governor of the
universe. All their combined wisdom and strength are subject to the direction
of that Omniscience which perfectly comprehends every tendency of the councils
of men. None of those plans of operation, which are founded upon our imperfect
knowledge of future events, and the scanty experience of past ages, can, with
any certainty, promise great success. Of this truth the greater part of mankind
have been very sensible; for they saw such national events take place among
them as were evidently of a magnitude too great to be accomplished by any human
means. A conviction of this kind induced many nations, which can be named, to
begin all public business of importance with public acts of worship. We are
also assured, that they never declared war, nor undertook any hazardous
enterprise, or entered the field of battle, without imploring the aid and
direction of supernatural power. Influenced by these religious sentiments,
their generals, and officers, and soldiers, have performed many things which
were astonishing, and much above all that could, with reason, be expected from
human strength and sagacity. In the support of this declaration, I am richly
furnished with the venerable authority of ancient historians and eminent
statesmen. They teach us, that the hope of divine aid was the noblest incentive
to valor and resolution in the field of war, and gained them the most
important victories. The courage of the soldiers was animated by piety, and
their fears dispelled by a firm reliance on heaven. And both sacred and
profane authors inform us, that commanders of armies have been attended by
victory no longer than they thought an alliance with heaven was necessary. Here
I think we may, with advantage, recollect the conduct and vanity of a certain
Grecian general: when among his companions, and recounting the victories which
were gained under his command, he often ascribed the success of his army to his
own good management and courage, and frequently said, "and in this fortune had
no share." Afterward he never prospered in any thing which he undertook. The
same instruction may be derived from the infamy and ruin of the Pharaohs, the
Senacheribs and Herod's of all ages. These are the men who defy the powers of
heaven and earth, and seem to challenge the utmost exertions of Omnipotence.
They carry with them the marks of weakness and presumption, and are followed by
ruin and confusion. On the contrary, those nations and commanders who placed
the greatest confidence in Almighty God, have been most victorious and most
flourishing. This is a truth which cannot be justly contradicted; and this is a
truth from which America ought to learn her happiness as a nation. When a
lively confidence in God springs from the source of a warm and enlightened
heart, and this confidence is aided by our most skilful and most vigorous
exertions, then may we entertain a well grounded hope that we shall be blessed
with help from on high. This rational hope of divine aid will beget fortitude
in danger, patience under hardships, cheerfulness and pleasure in prosperity,
and modesty and mercy amidst all the triumphs of victory. Hear what the sacred
scriptures say to those who acknowledge the providence of God; who are obedient
to his commands; who confide in his goodness and power; and who humbly ask his
aid and direction. "Then shall no man be able to stand before you: for he Lord
your God shall lay the fear of you and the dread of you upon all the land that
ye shall tread upon."

Therefore, a righteous people may encourage themselves when they oppose their
unjust enemies; and, while they adopt the following language of the sacred
volume, may rejoice and say, "With them is an arm of flesh; but with us is the
Lord our God to help us and to fight our battles."

With these words I close what I have thus far designed. They are able to
support my honest exertions in the cause of justice and religion. I ask their
aid, and earnestly wish our minds may be ever impressed with a weighty sense of
our needed help from Almighty God.

In the farther discussion of my subject, I will recollect some of the past
mercies which have been extended to us by our gracious God. Suffer me to say,
they are sufficient to enforce on our minds both a personal and national
application of the words of the text; "Hitherto has the Lord helped us."

Who, that considers the weakness of human nature, and how much it is exposed;
who, that reflects on the journey of man through this world, or marks the
various circumstances which visibly attend his life: I say, in the midst of
these sober thoughts, who does not find himself constrained to give his
grateful assent to this declaration of one of the holy prophets: "It is of the
Lord's mercies that we are not consumed, because his compassions fail not.?"

Were it possible to disclose the histories of our lives; could we rehearse the
hazards of infancy and childhood, and recount the toils and dangers which have
kept pace with the increase of our years; or, to go yet further, were it in our
power to enumerate not only the open and professed enemies of our lives and
happiness, but also to enter into the secret ambushments of our concealed foes,
and to point out our narrow escape from evils against which we could not guard,
methinks there would be very few pages in this history without a "Hitherto has
the Lord helped us." It is said, "In the midst of life we are in death;" and
indeed death in a thousand dismal forms continually surrounds us. His arrows
fly thick at all times; and it can be owing only to the guardianship of heaven
that they have not been aimed at us, and fastened in our vitals. Every morning
and evening we can only say, that we have lived, but are uncertain of the
consequences of the next hour. But these are not all: how many thousand
precious gifts are we blessed with from the hands of our bountiful benefactor?
He gives us life, and all the blessings of it. "In his hand is our breath, and
are all our ways." Let each one of us say, then, in the inward gratitude of our
hearts, "Bless the Lord, O my soul, and forget not all his benefits. Who
forgiveth all thine iniquities: who heals all thy diseases. Who redeemeth thy
life from destruction: who crowns thee with loving kindness and tender
mercies."

But I correct myself. I check that general zeal of gratitude which may another
day be more indulged. I came not, my friends, to exhaust your whole time by
addressing you on those subjects of gratitude which have a common relation to
the particular and personal situation of every one present. This employment,
however pleasing and rational, must submit to claim only a future, though a
more enlarged attention.

The voice of authority among men, calls us to diffuse a general joy and
gratitude through our hearts, and the hearts of the generous sons of freedom.
Nay, the voice of God, in his providential goodness, demands our thankful
homage for a national and most signal blessing; yes, and for repeated
blessings. Let us then, whether under the heaven's spacious concave, or in the
sacred temple, let us worship the King of heaven and earth, and adore his mercy
and power, which have given us the victory over our enemies.

Could we give a general utterance to the united states of America; could the
voice of her annals and records be heard on this glad day: or, were our pious
ancestors to appear before us to aid our praise and increase our devotions,
they would all, with one harmonious voice, unite with this assembly in
proclaiming, that "Hitherto has the Lord helped us."

Join then, friends and brethren of America! join in heart and spirit, ye
patriots and friends to posterity, and form one general concert of praise to
HIM who has aided us! Time and history, who point out to the world the ways of
God, ye shall teach men that the Father of the oppressed became the advocate of
the inhabitants of this land! "He found them in a desert land, and in the waste
howling wilderness; he led them about, he instructed them, he kept them as the
apple of his eye."

As a vine is planted, so, O God of hosts, thy hand did establish a people in
this land. "The hills were covered with the shadow of it, and the boughs
thereof were like the goodly cedars. She sent out her boughs unto the sea, and
her branches unto the river."

But tyranny, which raged against this people in their infancy, again prepared
calamity and oppression for them: and, notwithstanding our enemies enjoyed the
fruits of our industry and virtue, and grew great by the labor of those they
had exiled; yet they became envious of the happiness, and jealous of the
flourishing state of those who were befriended only by their God. In the spirit
and style of Egyptian tyranny, they call upon one another to unite in measures
of cruelty and injustice. "Come on," say they, "let us deal wisely with them,
lest they multiply. Therefore they did set over them taskmasters, to afflict
them with their burdens." Such was the conduct of Britain toward the
inhabitants of this continent. But the Lord helped us, and their secret
councils and schemes, the most wisely planned, at least in the eye of human
wisdom, were turned into foolishness.

The Lord raised up wise and public spirited men, able to discern our rights
and privileges, and willing to defend them. The Lord raised up warriors and
statesmen, and united their hearts and strengthened their hands in the service
of their country. Our enemies were disappointed; they despaired of success,
unless by their superior strength and skill in the field of war.

Ministerial avarice, arrayed in rigorous acts and unjust laws, suddenly
changed into British vengeance; and then hostile armies advanced to enforce
submission by the weapons of death and the shedding of blood.

Then was war in the gates. Was there a shield or a spear seen among forty
thousand in America? But with joy, with praise we will say, "The battle is not
to the strong, nor the race to the swift. My heart is toward those that offered
themselves willingly among the people. Praise ye the Lord. O give thanks unto
the Lord, for he is good. Who remembered us in our low estate: for his mercy
endures for ever."

Will any one blame me for honestly attempting to kindle the warmth of this
day's gratitude into a generous and perpetual flame; a flame which, like the
refiner's fire, shall purify our hearts and consciences from all evil, and
consume the dross of every sinful practice and impure affection?

Let, then, our gratitude be increased, by a recollection of the unexpected and
astonishing union of the inhabitants and states of America, in opposition to
the usurpation of Britain. We will call to mind some of those gallant actions
in which the assisting hand of heaven has appeared, and the wisdom and courage
of our armies were conspicuous.

Seven dangerous and laborious campaigns shall aid my feeble voice. Ye well
fought fields of battle, and ye joyful victories, from the heights of Boston to
the plains of Georgia, ye shall all conspire to prove, that the Lord has
helped us.

Begin we then with the nineteenth of April, memorable for the first open and
bloody assault on the liberties of this continent. Oh! Americans, forget not to
tell your children, that liberty was on that day marked for the slaughter, and
appointed to bleed on the altars of avarice and tyranny! Oh! ye parents, tell
your young offspring, as they rise under your tender and instructive care, tell
them, they were devoted to slavery! teach them what a heavy curse it is! let
them know what miseries they have escaped! kindle their young minds to a manly
and generous love of freedom; but let a dignified resentment against every
system of slavery grow with their growth, and strengthen with their years. Let
them hear of the cruelties of Britain; let them listen to those narratives of
war and battles, till the name of Britain and slavery shall make the blood
thrill in their veins; let them attend to these tales of horror, until a
martial spirit shall mingle with their blood, and glow in their faces, in an
aspect daring and resolute as the front of the Libyan lion.

In the temples of that beneficent Being, who delights not in the miseries of
mankind, in his temples let the sound of liberty be lifted up, as well as the
seraphic voice of religion; let them give force, and influence, and happiness
to each other. Let the benevolent preacher teach his people to esteem the
blessings of liberty, and to be religious and thankful; let him also require
them to regard their freedom as one of these blessings: but to consider
voluntary slavery as the most dreadful curse that can be inflicted on mankind.

But I return to consider what has been done between the ever memorable 19th of
April, 1775, and the joyful 19th of October, 1781.

Following the example of the holy scriptures, and humbly aiming at what the
judges, and the prophets, and the divine poets have done, fain would I bring
into view every remarkable interposition of heaven, and, in the words of the
grateful psalmist, close every period of mercy and deliverance with "Praise the
Lord, who has redeemed us from our enemies: for his mercy endures for ever."

Hear then, citizens and fellow soldiers, what was done on Bunker's hill: that
place shall claim a splendid page in history, from that time, when virtuous
citizens so gallantly opposed British troops, and humbled their proud contempt
of the American arms.

In Canada, though there the brave have fallen, have sunk to rest, yet in the
early stage of this war, very important success attended our arms: strong
fortresses and British troops were compelled to acknowledge the prowess of our
forces.

From thence, in imagination, let us pass to our army before Boston: there the
enemy were forced to look for safety by the evacuation of that place.

That year the war was carried into the state of New York: then did our enemies
hasten from the other side of the ocean to join their brethren, already
engaged, to make so large a portion of mankind miserable. Number the enemy from
Britain! number them from Hesse! number their ships of war! Describe, if you
can, all the awful engines of death and carnage! At this time, Oh, my brethren!
who taught you to hope that you could be free and independent? who preserved
you from falling at the feet of Britain?

But see the waters, though not, "like the Red sea," divided into parts, yet
favorable to us in a time of distress and danger. The very winds in the hand
of God granted their aid to save our army. That night which bro't our troops
from Long island to New York, shall be foremost in giving an example of the
most interesting and finished retreat from the most imminent military ruin.

That year Clinton and Parker felt the weight of American bravery; and being
defeated and miserably shattered, were obliged to relinquish their southern
expedition. This campaign wore away, and saw no extraordinary success attend
the numerous forces and the powerful fleet of the enemy; unless to murder a
garrison of brave men after they had capitulated, may be called extraordinary
success.

Oh! ye first fruits of American fortitude and perseverance, let me, in
imagination, drop the tear of love and compassion over your honorable graves,
if your iron hearted enemies gave you any! Ye martyrs for the cause of freedom,
whose steady souls could never bend even to a partial and momentary desertion
of your principles of virtue, neither the fair promises of your enemies were
able to allure you, nor the unutterable horrors of the most execrable prisons
and cruelties; not death in his slow and ghastly approaches; not the lingering
death of hunger and torture could terrify you from your fixed attachment to
your country! Oh! were it consistent with the will of heaven, I would say,
arise, and come from the dead, to behold a large army of your enemies
conquered! arise, and animate your countrymen to finish the glorious work of
liberty! arise, and lead on your brother soldiers to dreadful deeds of death
and slaughter, until the ruthless hand of Britain shall no more disturb the
peace of men.

We will now pass on to a view of the American army. It was almost disbanded;
it was reduced to a small number, and better fitted to draw forth pity and
compassion from the beholders, than to strike them with terror; more able to
show their fortitude in adversity, than to do execution with their arms! Why, O
Cornwallis, did thou not seize the feeble warriors, and their persevering
commander? Then who can say thy present fate would not have been suspended?

Next go with me, I beseech you, through one of the storms and tempests of
nature. Follow the march of a few naked men, or if they were clothed it was
only with rags, exposed to the rigors of December's cold. O liberty! by what
charm, or what magnetic power, did thou hold these suffering men firm in thy
interest? But follow them to the capture of a large body of Hessians at
Trenton. From thence pass on with the troops to Princeton; and in your way
learn the resources and stratagems of war, and hear of the disappointment and
confusion of the enemy. Princeton, that once peaceful abode of the muses, and
seat of science, then heard unusual thunders, and saw Britons defeated and
slain. Then the dying lamp of liberty was kindled anew! Thousands of heroes
flew to the standards of freedom, and thought she could be still defended.

An American army again took the field, and the enemy found they had the war to
begin anew.

Near the close of this year, the Almighty, "who had not given us as a prey to
their teeth," remarkably helped us, and gave Burgoyne and all his army into the
hands of the United States.

Let a recollection of the mercies of the next year begin with a declaration of
the alliance of America with the magnanimous Lewis XVI. The illustrious hero,
and friend to the rights of mankind, heard the fame of our cause, and joined
the interest of his kingdom to the support of our independence, and has spared
neither blood nor wealth to establish us in the possession of our freedom.

From this subject, let the operations of our army, numerous and gallant,
demand our attention. Consider their formidable movements to the fields of
Monmouth. There, my fellow soldiers, you remember the fortune of the day was
torn from the hands of the victorious enemy, and the flower of their army.
Methinks I shall not do amiss, by leaving you to apply the words, of the poet,
where they were deserved on that day:

"To fainting squadrons sent the timely aid, Inspired repulsed battalions to
engage, And taught the doubtful battle where to rage."

From the battle of Monmouth, and the various operations of the army within the
fourth year of this war, we pass on to the succeeding campaign. No small
success favored our arms that year. Paulus-Hook and Stoney-Point taught our
enemies that their strong fortresses were not impregnable to the intrepid
resolution and the impetuous assaults of the American forces. In the same year
an important expedition was directed against the five nations of hostile
indians. That expedition, though attended with immense toil and difficulty, and
rendered exceedingly precarious by a great number of hazardous circumstances, a
few of which, in their operations, could have destroyed the troops on that
service: That expedition was not without success; and what men could perform,
was done.

But I hasten to the sixth campaign, and remind you of what happened on the
25th of September in the year past. That day should have a place in the
calendars of all ages, to inform mankind what human nature can attempt. Then
were disclosed, as it were, the secret plots of hell; and treason too big to be
any longer confined, burst from its concealment. Let that day be numbered among
the days of mercy; let it constitute an annual festival of grateful joy; and
let liberty and the glad angels of America, hover round the assembled sons of
freedom, and inspire them with a love of virtue and honor, and a lasting
remembrance of the goodness of God, who with scarcely any human means, and by
very little human sagacity, discovered treasonable plots when they were upon
the very point of execution. Then did the Almighty save the commander of our
armies, and the most important fortress and a part of our troops, from the very
jaws of treason and our enemies. On this subject, I know you will anticipate
me, and think sooner than I can say, "Hitherto has the Lord helped us." How
wonderful and mysterious the just and merciful ways of heaven." We have been
suffered to stand upon the very precipice of ruin, before we were delivered
from our danger. This, we ought to believe, was mercifully intended to teach us
our dependence upon him, who alone can make a nation flourish; this was to make
us grateful, that we might be happy. But how many subjects of gratitude have I
omitted! How many which I cannot bring into view on this day! The grateful
heart will recollect more than I can utter. How various have been the conflicts
between us and the enemy, superior to us in strength or numbers in almost every
instance? But though in various places success has not attended us; yet the
conquests of the enemy have been few, and of short duration. Nay, the very
victories they have boasted of, only hastened their ruin. For the confirmation
of this truth, let us bring examples from the southern part of the continent.
We will admire the enterprizing and persevering spirit of our southern army,
who in the midst of the enemy's victories have destroyed their army. North and
South Carolina shall proclaim the military sagacity and intrepidity of general
Green, and his faithful band of worthies. Those states shall repeat the
victories which have been gained by that army; they shall remember how many
fortresses have been wrested out of the hands of an insulting enemy, vainly
elated with their visionary success. The late important victory obtained by the
troops under the command of general Green, shall aid the joy and praise of this
day, and increase our gratitude.

But here let me pause a moment. Perhaps upon reflection I may find reason to
say, that I have aimed at more than can be performed in the short time that is
allotted to the public worship of this day. Pardon me then, my dearly beloved
brethren, if I have detained you too long from what appears to be the more
immediate intention of this assembly. I imagined my text meant more than to
acknowledge only one victory, or one instance of the goodness of God, however
great the blessing might be. When our hearts are truly grateful, they are also
generous and enlarged. We wish to know how much heaven has bestowed upon us,
and how much the debts of gratitude are accumulated; and even when we find that
the computation will rise infinitely above our abilities to make any equal
compensation; and that every new mercy will render us more eternally insolvent;
yet still the grateful soul is most delighted, when the contemplation of the
mercy and goodness of God is most extensive; and must, after all we can say or
do, end with this pathetic and thankful enquiry, which it will not be easy to
answer, "What shall I render unto the Lord, for all his benefits toward me?"

This shall prepare our hearts for a new subject of gratitude. We will now
enter upon the pleasing employment of impressing our minds with a pleasing
remembrance of the last national blessing, which heaven has vouchsafed unto us.

Shall I not venture to say, that no expedition which depended, in the first
plan of it, upon forces so much disjoined, and events so precarious, was ever
blessed with a more seasonable and harmonious junction of prosperous
circumstances, or ended with more substantial glory and complete success. The
first transient view of that expedition seems to impose upon us the
presumptuous notion of having in our hands the command of the winds and the
waves, the rains and the tempests, any of which, under the orders of heaven,
would have rendered our plans of operation altogether ineffectual.

O Clinton! did your tory spies, those evil geniuses of America, who are
employed in "going to and fro in the earth, seeking whom they may devour;" did
they fail to announce to you the early destination of the combined army? Alas!
was there no friend to Britain able to inform Cornwallis of his approaching
danger? To us this is a happy consideration, it is a mark of military skill.
Secresy! thou life and soul of every warlike enterprise, ever deign to envelop
the designs of our army in a cloud, which, as of old, shall be darkness to the
enemy, but, like a pillar of fire, shall give light to the children of America.

But I come to observe, that from the time our army was ordered on the
expedition into Virginia, until the day on which the enemy surrendered,
scarcely any circumstances attended the allied forces which could be deemed
unfavourable. The cheerfulness and patience of the troops under the fatigue of
long and rapid marches; the spirit of enterprise; the willingness to endure
labors and hardships of every kind, in order to promote the service of this
country, and subdue the enemy; these were all favorable omens, and are worthy
of our attention and regard. The critical and seasonable arrival of the fleet
under the command of his excellency the count de Grass; and this before the
enemy entered the Chesapeak, and by their prior possession of the bay made the
junction of our army and the French fleet very difficult, if not altogether
impracticable. But the situation of the fleet under count de Barras, yet at
sea, was very critical and dangerous. The enemy appeared at the entrance of the
Chesapeak to intercept his arrival. This was the time for the count de Grass
to display his abilities, and to prove how much can be done by a seasonable,
well directed, and impetuous attack. By a most gallant maneuver, he defeated
the enemy, destroyed some of their men of war, and drove the rest in flight far
to sea. By this happy victory, a junction of the two French fleets was
accomplished, and under the divine auspices, future success was insured to our
united forces.

I will next speak of that harmony, that emulation, and that equal love of
danger which subsisted among the allied troops; as if the same generous fire of
true glory glowed in their bosoms, or one patriot soul animated them to the
cheerful performance of every military duty, and to encounter every danger.
Witness the emulation of those French and American troops, who at the same time
entered the trenches of the enemy, and with equal intrepidity and vigor of
attack, stormed some of their redoubts.

That only a few of our troops have fallen in the reduction of the enemy, is a
pleasing consideration, and should contribute to make us thankful. The
favourableness of the season shall be remembered, and -- But short be my
narration of this glorious victory, for short were the operations of the siege.
A strong and numerous army of our enemy have surrendered themselves prisoners
of war: and this signal instance of the goodness of divine providence, demands
a repetition of those words which you have already often heard; "Hitherto has
the Lord helped us."

O Virginia! highly favored of the Lord, rejoice and be glad, for the spoiler
is taken captive! Turn your fears and lamentations into grateful songs of
praise, and forget not to love and adore that Almighty Being who says to the
rage and cruelty of men, "Hitherto shall thou go, and no farther."

O! all ye inhabitants of the united states, let your thankfulness appear by
the piety of your hearts, and the purity of your lives. Every new instance of
the goodness of the Creator, calls upon us to give new signs of our love and
obedience to him. We should endeavor to show ourselves as worthy of the
mercies of God, as human nature is capable, by being more virtuous, more
dutiful, and more benevolent.

What will all the most pompous appearances of gratitude avail, if the manners
and customs of our country are not pure; or the vices not reformed? Believe it,
my friends, a sinful people cannot be a grateful people! For be assured that a
people who cannot be moved by the mercy, and goodness of God to do what is
their duty, and to examine by what means they may please their Maker and
bountiful Benefactor, are truly unworthy of his mercy and protection: Nay,
every part of their conduct which is vicious, seems very loudly to declare,
that they are weary of the very goodness of God, and all the blessings of
heaven.

Having now finished what I proposed in the first grand division of my
discourse, I proceed to what I said should solicit our attention in the second
place.

"Then Samuel took a stone, and set it between Mizpeh and Shen." I have already
hinted, that by this monumental stone, the children of Israel intended, not
only to express their present gratitude, for favors conferred upon them by
divine providence, but also to perpetuate the remembrance of a very
extraordinary mercy, to nations long after to be born. That this was the manner
of perpetuating the memory of signal success, or extraordinary events, is made
evident by the testimony of every ancient historian, whether sacred or
profane. This custom, however, has not been altogether confined to the
ancients. Many are the pillars and monuments which stand, this day, as
witnesses of great success or of illustrious merit: and America is not without
her monuments of great and worthy men, who have generously shed their blood in
the defense of their country. I therefore think it not difficult to show that
public and lasting signs of praise to God, as well as marks of respect for
worthy men, have been authorized by the examples of all nations. Let then the
enemy to religion; let the enemy to his country; nay, let the vicious infidel,
and the debauched libertine, let them all cease to stigmatize public and devout
homage to almighty God with the name of unnecessary and unprofitable parade. If
they will neither hear the voice of reason, nor hearken to the sublime and
charming instructions of the inspired writings; let them, however, be taught
some reverence for the Deity even from the customs of heathens and pagans,
where nature spoke, in part, what nature's God has showed to all his rational
creatures. Let them ask what meant those costly sacrifices of whole hecatombs;
what meant those large and expensive libations; and what meant those solemn
processions to the temples of devotion? Were not all these things expressions
of gratitude for the mercies they had received? However, not to say all that
can be offered, on this subject, from the customs of polished nations; I can
derive examples of this most rational duty, from the very original inhabitants
of this continent. I can avail myself of their customs to plead for those signs
and expressions of gratitude, which are due to the Almighty Disposer of all
events.

But we may be more happy than they, we are more enlightened in the knowledge
and service of the blessed and good God. Our gratitude should be more pure and
more spiritual than theirs. We are instructed, that he delights more in the
humble and thankful heart, than in the most costly sacrifices. Instead then of
erecting altars, as of old was done, for offerings to ascend in costly incense,
to represent our gratitude and praise; let pure and virtuous hearts be the
altars, and love and obedience be the incense, which shall better please the
Deity. Gratitude shall be written on our hearts; for this also will be more
pleasing to our Divine Benefactor, than all the pomp of praise which ever was
inscribed, in the largest characters, on the towering pyramid, or the solemn
temple.

O blessed day this, which calls us to the pleasing duty of praising God for so
many mercies conferred upon us! O happy day, whose sun rises not to
compassionate us in some deplorable exilement from our habitations, or more
miserable flight from our victorious enemies! Happy sun, that rises not to
light us by his sickly beams to some dire and lonely retreat; but bright shines
this day, to show the blessings of heaven and the triumphs of victory! Let us
collect all the generous efforts of our souls, to form one humble and grateful
offering, and let it be laid on the public altar of our united and open
acknowledgement of the goodness of HIM who has helped us! In the language of
the Psalmist, I will say, "Bless the Lord, O my soul; and all that is within
me, bless his holy name, and forget not all his benefits." O just and blessed
God, has it pleased thee to check the sword of the destroyer; yes, and in a
great measure to wrest it out of the hands of the oppressor and the tyrant!
Methinks if men uttered no songs of praise to their deliverer, this continent
itself would reprove their ingratitude; it would break its long silence, and
become vocal in high sounding songs of praise! But our gratitude shall rise
high! high as the mercy seat of heaven! O for glowing words! words from warm
and glowing hearts! for words from lukewarm hearts can never ascend to heaven!
Incense must be inflamed before it can rise to the skies! On this day, the
enthusiasm of the grateful heart is pardonable, and a passion of praise may not
be displeasing to that all-wise and merciful Being, who is acquainted with the
upright intentions of the heart.

Great are our blessings, and many and public should be our acknowledgements of
them. This I am justified in saying, not only by our own sentiments; but also
by the voice of that venerable body of men, who have Recommended to the several
states to set apart this day to be religiously observed as a day of
THANKSGIVING and PRAYER. This well corresponds with the conduct of Samuel and
the elders of Israel. Samuel sustaining a public character, and being at the
head of the elders and people, called their attention to acts of religious
worship, and in the sight of all Israel raised a monument of praise to almighty
God. "And after this, the hand of the Lord was against the Philistines all the
days of Samuel."

How dignified and venerable do great men appear, when they acknowledge the
Supreme Being as the author of all their wisdom, greatness, and success; and
lay all their shining laurels of victory at the feet of the Great Disposer of
all the events of the world: And suffer me to say, that men who are endowed
with the most distinguished abilities, are under the greatest obligations of
gratitude to that good God, who formed them capable of serving the interests of
mankind, and being his ministers to support justice and mercy among the
inhabitants of the earth. Happy that nation, where these vicegerents of heaven
are a pure and living example of their most virtuous RECOMMENDATIONS. Who will
give weight and energy to their laws and resolutions, by their first and most
steady personal observation of them; and show mankind, "that virtue alone is
happiness below."

Since then, my friends, "it has pleased almighty God to assist and support
the United States of America, in their important struggle for liberty against
the long and continued efforts of a powerful nation;" it must be not only our
indispensable duty, but our greatest interest, to perpetuate our gratitude, by
learning righteousness. Under the invoked assistance of the same merciful God,
let us prosecute this war with more unanimity and unabating resolutions. Divine
providence has pointed out our duty, and calls us by the most signal instance
of interposition, to perform his work, and to give our enemies no rest, until
they be forced to see the injustice of their intentions, and the cruelty of
their warfare. Could my influence reach as far as my wishes are extended; could
I appear before the inhabitants of the United States in all the irresistible
majesty of ancient elocution; could I wield the thunder of Demosthenes, and
arrest the lightning of Pericles; how should the nerves of opposition to our
country be withered, and every American be fired into a patriot or a soldier.

Ye American friends to your country, this is a year of glory and public
felicity! you can now with the calm and dignified triumph of freemen look back,
and smile on the toils and dangers you have sustained in this righteous
conflict! You can with a pious pleasure and awe mark the goodness and wisdom of
Providence! You can add pleasure and delight to all these affections of the
mind by a more animated gratitude and a purer zeal! This day brings you nearer
the full possession of those earthly blessings for which you have so ardently
panted! Your prospects are fairer and brighter than they have ever been! and if
you are not wanting to yourselves, all the blessings of freedom are yours! The
Lord helps you and invites you by every national blessing to renew your
exertions; to press on and gain a complete conquest over the tyranny of your
enemies! But should you be disobedient to the calls and smiles of heaven;
should you neglect the interest of your country; remember, you may have reason
to curse your indolence and impiety when it is too late! Consider the numerous
inhabitants of Europe. Do they not all wish you to be free and independent?
They will date their days of unmolested freedom in trade and commerce from the
Era of your independence! The three potent nations of France and Spain and the
United Provinces are all on our side; they have commenced hostilities against
Britain and are preparing to humble the pride of that nation. These
considerations should be motives of encouragement and new zeal; but not the
grounds of sloth and inaction. Honor, justice and our national character
demands our utmost exertions to prove that we are worthy to be allied to a
nation who have bravely fought and generously bled in this war.

Oh Louis the XVI live forever! Oh that my words were like the words of an
angel! I would wing them to thy ears! Or could I borrow from some guardian
angel of America his swift pinions! I would hover round thy person and guard
thee from all danger! I would stand before thy majesty, and in the name of
America offer thee the sincerest thanks of this continent, for thy fleets and
thy armies, for the wisdom, and the zeal, and the bravery of thy officers and
soldiers in the service of America! There shall be men who, like the bards and
poets of old, in heroic style, shall rehearse the immortal deeds of the allied
nations and of THE DEFENDER OF THE RIGHTS OF MANKIND, LOUIS THE GRAND MONARQUE.
There shall be Miriams and Deborahs; there shall be virgins and daughters in
France and America who, as among the ancient people of God, shall sing of the
glorious achievements of our combined arms; they shall praise the Lord with
instruments of music and with the sweet melody of joyful voices. Some Moeonides
shall enrich his verse with the honorable names of those who commanded the
combined army: Or after the example of David the renowned king of Israel, it
shall be said "These be the names of the mighty men" who led forth the allied
troops to subdue our enemies. Their names shall be familiar to us; they shall
be sounded with pleasure. Old men shall remember them; they shall report them
to their children. The gray headed soldier shall beguile the heavy hours of
night with his animating history of those battles in which he fought: He shall
warm his cold blood with the names of Washington, and Rochambeau, De Grass,
Barras, and St. Clair; B. Viominil, and Lincoln, Chattelux, and La Fayette, C.
Viominil, St. Simon, and Steuben, Lauzun, and Knox, The reader is requested to
observe that these names and some sentences have been added since the discourse
was first written.
and -- Oh were it possible! I would with pleasure and gratitude repeat the
name of every worthy officer and soldier of that army; they should stand side
by side and hand in hand emblematic of our friendship and union! I would have
them written in capitals of gold! Aid me, all Ye, who with a composed joy stood
on the plains of York and saw the British host lay down their arms; stamp on
your faithful minds the characters of every brave officer and soldier, and hand
their names down to posterity. Thus far have I endeavored to assist you in
celebrating that divine Providence which has given success to our arms; and in
thanking God, who has raised up great and worthy men to aid us in this war.
What you have heard has flowed I hope from an honest and lively gratitude both
to God, and every friend to my country. However if, upon reflection, any one is
piously fearful that I have arrogated too much, to the skill and valor of men;
if any one thinks I have forgotten the more express business of this day which
is to give thanks to God and to glorify his name; to these intimations suffer
me to say; all men of merit are entitled to the approbation of their fellow
men; and while we pay them the debt which is justly due to their usefulness and
abilities, with a constant dependence on the influence and government of God I
hope we shall not do wrong. We came hither with a view to reverence the king of
heaven and earth; to adore his wisdom, his justice, and his unmerited goodness;
but more especially we have been called to acknowledge the past mercies of
Providence; and I hope we most humbly and most earnestly supplicate his future
protection and goodness. These duties we have been engaged in, and these are
delightful employments to every rational and pious mind. With these serious and
pleasing words I end my discourse after beseeching you to unite with me in
ardently praying that it may please the Almighty governor of the universe to
hasten the time when the use of hostile weapons shall cease, and the doctrine
of the blessed Redeemer effectually influence the minds of all men. Now to
Father, Son, and Holy Spirit be ascribed, as is most due, all power, might,
majesty and dominion for ever and ever Amen.

"We have counted the cost of this contest, and find nothing so dreadful as
voluntary slavery." The CONGRESS.
STANZAS, adapted to the preceding discourse, and addressed to the American
army.
To him who led in ancient days
The Hebrew tribes, your anthems raise;
The God who spoke from Sinai's hill
Protects his chosen people still.
Not to ourselves success we owe
By help divine we crushed the foe,
In sword or shield who vainly trust
Shall soon be humbled to the dust.
How vain all arms, the shield or spear,
Unless the soul disdains to fear;
But terror must their hearts annoy
Who came to murder and destroy.
Those leaders famed, untaught to bow --
Where are those hostile captains now? --
The soldier rough, in steel arrayed,
Where is the sleeping soldier laid?
Lost! -- to the lands of darkness fled,
Or captive to your standards led,
Behold that boasting, bloody band
Who came to waste your native land:
Praise him who gives us to repel
The powers of Britain and of Hell,
With thankful hearts his goodness own,
And bow before Jehovah's throne.
Soli Deo Gloria.

