THE DOCTRINE OF Universal Salvation EXAMINED and REFUTED. CONTAINING, A
concise and distinct Answer to the Writings of Mr. RELLY, and Mr. WINCHESTER,
upon that Subject.

BY ISAAC BACKUS, Preacher of the Gospel.

Earnestly contend for the Faith which was once delivered unto the Saints --

Building up yourselves on your most holy Faith.

Apostle JUDE. PROVIDENCE: Printed and sold by JOHN CARTER. Also sold by PHILIP
FREEMAN, in Union-Street, Boston.

* With this Discourse may be had, the Author's HISTORY of NEW ENGLAND; and a
Piece entitled, TRUTH IS GREAT, AND WILL PREVAIL.

THE Doctrine of Universal Salvation Examined and Refuted.
SOLOMON, after a vast and extensive search into the nature of things, says,
lo, this only have I found, that God made man upright; but they have sought out
many inventions. How many he could not tell, nor any other man. Had the
inhabitants of New England been told, ten years ago, that said doctrine would
soon be preached up, and have an extensive spread among them, who could have
believed it? Yet this is now become a notorious fact, by the following means:
Mr. John Murray, from England, having preached for some time in places south of
New York, came from thence into New England in the fall of the year 1772; and
has preached in these parts to the present time. For a while he concealed his
design under many good words and fair speeches; and when he began plainly to
preach general salvation, his greatest admirers rather wished than believed the
doctrine to be true. At length they procured the re-printing of a pamphlet from
London, in 1779, which was privately dispersed in the country, and has
entangled many souls. Since which Mr. Elhanan Winchester, who was born near
Boston, and, by his itinerations from thence to South Carolina, had obtained an
extensive fame for being a powerful and successful preacher of the gospel, has
fallen in with said doctrine, under another form, which has caused its
influence to extend much farther than it had before. And its advocates now
glory in it as unanswerable, because a distinct answer thereto has not appeared
among us. A sight of this, and not hearing that any others were engaged
therein, has constrained me to offer my mite in the affair; hoping that it may
encourage and excite others to step forward in the cause of truth to better
purpose.

The pamphlet referred to, which was reprinted at Boston, is entitled, UNION:
Or, a Treatise of the Consanguinity and Affinity between Christ and his Church.
By James Relly. UNION is the life of the universe, and to act against it is an
infinite evil; but though his title is so important, yet if the treatise should
be found to contain a scene of disunion and confusion, all lovers of truth and
peace will see cause to reject it. Whether it be so or not, we are now to
enquire. The rule he prescribes for us to go by is thus expressed: Says he, if
mankind have any true notion of justice and equity, though but in the smallest
degree, then what is contrary to this, is much more so to God, whose justice
and truth is infinite, pure and eternal. Preface, p. 9. This simple voice of
nature differs from revelation only as the lesser light which rules the night,
differs from the greater which rules the day. If it is possible those our ideas
of the divine perfections should be wrong, then have we no rule, whereby to
discern between good and evil. Book, p. 45. If he meant that, like the moon, we
are always to receive light from the sun, and to let the same shine before
others, in word and practice, Jesus has inculcated this duty upon us in a clear
manner. But to imagine that our ideas of the divine perfections may not be
entirely wrong, or that, if they were so, we should have no rule left to
correct and direct us, is a most dangerous delusion. Mat. vi. 23. 1 John ii. 4
-- 11, and iii. 20, 21. Jude 10. All men of sense know, that written laws and
contracts, which shall be their own interpreters, are very necessary in the
administration of justice; and that a discretionary power ought not to be
allowed to the best of judges, without great caution and circumspection. And if
a gift does blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the righteous,
how can debtors and criminals be suitable judges in their own causes? And these
are the cases before us.

Protestants, as this author observes, generally hold, that man, being a debtor
and transgressor, and unable to save himself, Jesus Christ became his surety,
under an engagement to pay his debts, and to bear his punishment; the equity of
which is generally resolved into the sovereignty of God, or accounted for from
the willingness of Christ (as an independent DIVINE PERSON) to suffer in the
sinner's stead. Preface, p. 9. These ideas Relly rejects, 1. Because (says he)
contrary to truth, which declares that every man shall die for his own sin. 2.
It is contrary to justice to afflict the innocent: To punish and destroy him is
cruelty and injustice. Book, p. 3.4. To confirm these strange assertions, he
says, I know not of any human laws, which admit of suretyship in capital
offenses; and sin is not only a debt, for which suretyship is sometimes
admitted, but a transgression, a crime, capital in the highest sense, only
atoned for by the shedding of blood; by the death, yea, by the eternal death of
the sinner; which justice must inflict, before it can be properly satisfied;
nor can it possibly admit of a surety here. P. 5. Truth is here held in
unrighteousness to a most surprising degree! The nature of sin, and its just
desert, are well expressed; but how daring is it for a guilty criminal to
assert, that JEHOVAH cannot possibly admit of a surety here! Did he never read,
that Jesus was made a SURETY? Wherefore he is able also to save them to the
uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them. Heb. vii. 23, 25. If men should admit of sureties in
capital cases, a double injury would ensue; namely, the loss of an innocent
person out of the community, and the continuance of a guilty one therein, who
would be likely to do more mischief himself, and also to encourage the like in
others; which are sufficient reasons why they do not admit of sureties in such
cases. But infinite wisdom has caused mercy and truth, righteousness and peace,
so to meet in Jesus, who had power to lay down his life, and power to take it
again (John x. 18.) that no loss is sustained to the community; while the evil
of sin appears greater in his sufferings, than it could have done in the
eternal damnation of all the human race. O! how gloriously does a true fight of
him relieve the guilty polluted criminal, raising his soul up to union and
grateful obedience, while it demonstrates that sin cannot go unpunished, since
it could not escape the vengeance of the Father, when found upon his darling
Son! But how far was our opponent from such views, union, or obedience?

Because Adam was created with the whole of human nature in him, and after Eve
was formed she became one flesh with him, called by one name, and under one
law, Relly says, similar with this, the church existed in Christ; according as
he has chosen us in him, before the foundation of the world, having this
purpose and grace given us in him, before the world began. The man and woman,
under this consideration, had but one name: He called their name Adam. So
Christ and his church in this union bear one name; both are called the Lord our
righteousness. He, Jer. xxiii. 6; she, Jer. xxxiii. 16: We the righteousness of
God in him. 2 Cor. v. 21. The Lord God covenanting with Adam, as the head of
the earthly creation, as having the woman in himself, drew a figure of his
covenant with Christ, as having the church existing in him, he as the head
engaging for his members; as the husband for his wife, as the king for his
subjects, as the root for its branches, etc. P. 11, 12.

How surprising is this! Union in nature, prior to choice, and union by choice
and free contracts, are as distinct things as any in the world; yet here they
are confounded together, and his whole scheme is built upon this confusion. The
original of all union is the SACRED THREE, who are eternally one in nature,
prior to any idea of choice, and ever freely act according to that nature. In
six days he created the heavens and the earth, and all things therein, by the
word of his power. Of the earth it is well said, that, ever since the week of
creative wonders, God has ordered all these creatures to fill the world with
inhabitants of their own kind; and they have obeyed him in a long succession of
almost six thousand years. And it is evident, that he has kept a reserve of
sovereignty to himself, and has displayed the ensigns of it in some important
hours. Nature is the art of God, and it must forever be unrivalled by the sons
of men. Yet man can produce a man. Admirable effect, but artless cause! A poor,
limited, inferior agent! The plant and the brute in this matter are his rivals,
and his equals too. The human parent and the parent-bird form their own images
with equal skill, and are confined each to his work. -- Let the atheist then
exert his utmost stretch of understanding, let him try the force of all his
mechanical powers, to compose the wing of a butterfly, or the meanest feather
of a sparrow; let him labor and sweat, and faint, and acknowledge his own
weakness; then let him turn his eye, look at those wondrous composures, his son
or his little daughter; and when their infant tongues shall enquire of him, and
say, father, who made us? let him not dare to assume the honor of that work to
himself, but teach the young creatures that there is a God, and fall down on
his face, and repent and worship Wa^ts's Philosophical Essay
.

The man I am answering was very far from such distinct views or dispositions;
for having quoted 1 Cor. xi. 11, and 1 Timothy ii. 14, he says of Adam and Eve,
his union unto her made it equitable for the curse and condemnation of her
folly to fall upon him; and that without the consideration of his consent and
compliance with her. In like manner, Christ the husband was not deceived; but
his wife, the church, being deceived, was in the transgression. Yet as the
union was such, that Christ was not without the church, nor the church without
him Had the creature a real existence from eternity!
, at any time, it was equitable for her curse and condemnation to fall upon
him. P. 13. To which I answer, that to pretend that after Eve was formed she
became one flesh with Adam, without mutual choice, is unscriptural and
irrational; and it is more so, to imagine that her sin could have become his
without his consent; and to declare, that our sin and its curse could have
fallen upon Christ, without his free choice, is such an absurdity and such
blasphemy as will forever want a name! A man cannot be made one flesh with a
harlot without his consent; but he that is joined to the Lord is one spirit. 1
Cor. ii. 16, 17. And though men commit adultery, yet Christ never will. No soul
can ever be married to him, till it is delivered from pre-engagements.
Naturally we are all wedded to do and live, as much as ever a wife was to an
husband; but we must become dead to that, and that to us, in order to be
married to Christ. The conceit of some life in us, at least to make an honest
cry for mercy in distress, is never given up, till the holy Spirit demonstrates
to the soul, that the law is holy, and the commandment holy, and just, and
good; and that in us there is no good thing. In this way sin revives, and we
die. By the body of Christ, that also becomes dead wherein we were held.
Viewing how he bear our sins in his own body on the tree, our imaginary life
expires; and the process against us is also at an end; since Christ is the end
of the law for righteousness, to every one that believes. Thus we become dead
to the law by the body of Christ, that we should be married to him who was
raised from the dead, that we should bring forth fruit unto God; we are
delivered from the law, that being dead wherein we were held, that we should
serve in newness of spirit, and not in the oldness of the letter. Romans vii. 1
-- 12, and x. 4. The oldness of the letter gives no encouragement to come to
God, without holiness and obedience in ourselves; the newness of the spirit
teaches souls to come through Jesus, for pardon, cleansing and strength to
live to him. According to the oldness of the letter, every defect in us lays a
bar in the way of coming; but by the newness of the spirit, every sin and every
enemy are so many reasons to move us to come boldly to the throne of grace,
that we may obtain mercy; and find grace to help in time of need. Heb. iv. 16.

The powers of thinking and choosing are essential to the nature of all
immortal spirits; without which no idea can be formed of their existence;
therefore two spirits cannot possibly become one without choice; and it is but a
filthy dream for any to entertain such a notion. Yet Relly says; man being the
vessel marred between the potter's hands, was not rejected, but here was made
another and better vessel; where the nature, once spoiled by sin, was born into
the world pure and spotless, and called the Son of God. P. 27. As the head was
never without the body, nor the body without the head, in the Lord, the body
has always been, by union with the head, entitled unto all the blessings,
honors, and glories thereof. If it is not true until our believing, and by
means thereof, then does believing make that a truth which was not a truth, and
faith creates its own object, and then embraces it. This looks like the heathen
idolatry, first making their gods, and then trusting in them. P. 35. This is a
darling topic with him; but I am quite willing to meet him, and to try the
matter out fairly upon his own ground; in order whereto we must remember the
difference there is betwixt faith and hope. Hope is fixed upon promised
blessings; but faith regards all revealed truth, be the same desirable or
terrible to us. The creation, support, government, and final dissolution of
this world, by the word of God, are all objects of faith; as also are
everlasting punishments to the wicked, and eternal life to the righteous. But
of this the scoffers of these last days are willingly ignorant. Heb. i. 3, and
xi. 1 -- 6. 2 Pet. ii. 3 -- 7. Because the word gospel signifies good news,
they imagine that none preach it, but such as prophecy smooth things, and cry,
peace, peace, to carnal men. Isai. xxx. 8 -- 11. Jer. viii. 11. The latter part
of the pamphlet before us turns entirely upon this point; the deceit whereof is
easily discovered.

For to hear of the heaven serpent was very good news to the poisoned
Israelites, and so was the city of refuge to the manslayer; as pardon also was
to criminals justly condemned, and free forgiveness to debtors who had nothing
to pay. But, according to the above reasoning, they must have been told, that
health was as really theirs before they looked as afterward, or else looking
made the object they looked to! John iii. 14, 15. Safety is as truly yours
before you fly as afterward, or else fleeing to the city, makes the city you
fly to, which had no existence before! Heb. vi. 18. Pardon and forgiveness were
as really yours before you received them as since, or else giving in to the
equity of the indictment and the accounts, and receiving a discharge therefrom,
created the whole affair, which had no existence before! Psalm li. 3 -- 8. Luke
vii. 41, 42. Yet, speaking of Adam and his posterity, Relly says, his sin, its
curse and fruit, was theirs, before they felt it, knew it, or ever were
conscious of existence. Thus, by one man's disobedience, many were made
sinners. In like manner, Christ's righteousness is upon all his seed, by his
single act, before they had any capacity of obeying, after the similitude of
his obedience, or of assenting to what he did, or suffered: This manifests such
an union to him, such an inclusion of the whole seed in him, as renders his
condition theirs, in every state which he passes through -- For as in Adam all
die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive. P. 14.

The words of the text contradict the position he would prove by it. For it
speaks of our concern in Adam's sin as a past event, but of life by Christ as
what shall be hereafter. And in Romans v. 12 -- 20, while the sacred writer
declares a likeness between our two public heads in some things, he repeatedly
asserts an unlikeness in others. What they each did as public heads, belongs to
all their seed; but as to what they did, and the way how it comes to their
seed, there is an infinite disparity betwixt them. By one offense Adam brought
us all into a state of revolt from God, so that as we come into the world we
all love the creature more than the Creator, love self above him, till we are
born again, and death comes upon us by law as a just debt; but righteousness
and abundance of grace are received as a free gift. As soon as Adam fell, he
ceased to be our covenant head, so that we are not answerable for any of his
after sins, any more than for the sins of other men that we allow of; but
Christ is the unchangeable surety of all his chosen, and is able to save them
to the uttermost. From a state of union and communion with God, and lordship
over the earth, Adam by one act rushed into rebellion and misery; but by freely
assuming our nature, and taking our law-place, Jesus saves from the dreadful
guilt and power of many offenses. By one act a fire might be kindled, enough to
lay a city in ruins, and a little infection might spread the plague through a
kingdom; but how great must the work be to stop the conflagration or contagion,
and to restore health and prosperity again? Therefore it is strictly true, that
where sin abounded, grace DID MUCH MORE abound. The word as, in 1 Cor. xv. 22,
plainly points to the two heads, and the influence that proceeds therefrom. As
by Adam's sin a corrupt nature is communicated to his posterity, which causes
the dissolution of our bodies; even so is the gift of righteousness, a new
nature, and the resurrection of the body, communicated by Christ to his seed.
For since by man came death, by man came also the resurrection of the dead. And
let it never be forgotten, that death comes upon all as our just wages; but
eternal life as a free gift. Romans vi. 23. No two ideas are more distinct, nor
more easily understood by common people. All the blessings of salvation were
provided by covenant in Christ, before the world began; but the only way for
any to enjoy them, is by receiving them freely by faith.

Upon this Relly says, believe and thou shall be saved, is certainly similar
unto, do this and live; man, in himself, being as capable of doing the one as
the other. P. 42. I am sensible that many would have it so; but they can never
accomplish their desire, till they can make wages and a free gift to be the
same thing; nor till partaking freely of a rich feast, can be the same as
working hard to earn it. Neither can the plea of inability excuse those who
make light of the gospel call, till their natural faculties of hearing, seeing
and tasting, are gone, instead of being fixed upon objects opposite to what
they should be. Mat. xiii. 15, and xxii. 1 -- 12. Luke xiv. 16 -- 24. Natural
inability often excuses from blame; but moral inability is the very soul of
iniquity. The cause why we cannot love God supremely, is because we love the
creature above him, which is the essence of idolatry; and the reason why we
cannot believe his truth, is because it reproves our evil deeds, the works of
darkness, which we love rather than light. Hence moral impotency to love God,
and to believe the record he has given of his Son, is the condemnation which
all unbelievers are under; and his wrath abides on them; from which nothing
but a receiving his testimony, and setting to their seal that he is true, can
deliver any soul. John iii. 18 -- 21, 34 -- 36. Our personal interest is not
the direct object of faith, but the consequence and privilege which is received
by believing, as looking is the way of enjoying the light, and looking to the
object that Moses set up by divine direction, was the way whereby the poison of
the fiery serpents was expelled. If any who were bitten refused to look to that
object, the poison killed them, while the nature and efficacy of the remedy was
as good to those who looked, as if none had refused it.

Material bodies are dark things, and are often made use of to shut out the
light, by such as hate it, and love darkness rather than light. And is not this
the labor of the writer I am answering? The head, says he, was never without
the body in the Lord; as if the creature was co-existent with the Son of God!
David says, Thine eyes did see my substance, yet being IMPERFECT, and in thy
book all my members were written, which in continuance WERE fashioned, when as
yet there was NONE OF THEM. Psalm cxxxix. 16. The whole plan of all his works
and dispensations, and their ultimate end, is absolutely perfect. Nothing can
be put to it, nor any thing taken from it; and God does it, that men should
fear before him. Eccl. iii. 14. Should serve him acceptably, with reverence and
godly fear. Heb. xii. 28. But Relly's scheme is so contrary hereto, that he
says, the obedience of fear is diametrically opposite to the obedience of
faith, -- for where the fear of punishment is judged necessary to obedience,
unbelief is established. -- But the obedience of faith is genuine, free from
artifice, without fear, Jude 12, dependent on the perfect amity of God. -- The
true obedience of faith, is so far from being urged by fear, Heb. xi. 7, that
it would annihilate it. P. 38, 39. He knew this to be contrary to the plain
language of revelation; but says he, unto the right understanding of the
scriptures, it is necessary to know, that they consist of two parts, letter and
spirit, or law and gospel. P. 39. The gospel gives us all, without requiring
aught of us The truth is, that the gospel requires all, and gives all; it says,
I will* -- and they shall. Heb. viii. 8 -- 12.
; but the law, giving us nothing, requires all of us. And thus distinguishing
them in the scriptures, we appeal from the law unto the gospel; our authority
for so doing is founded on what follows; whatsoever the law says, it says
unto them that are under it: But Jesus was made of a woman, made under the law,
therefore the law speaks to him, and commands him to perfect obedience. But,
the law can only curse the sinner: God sent his Son in the likeness of sinful
flesh, he was made sin for us, Christ has delivered us from the curse of the
law, being made a curse for us: The equity of which proceeding, appears from
the union subsisting between Christ and the church, of which I have
sufficiently spoken. Nor dare we read any one threatening in the scriptures,
against the sinner and ungodly, unto ourselves, out of him, because we Heb.
xii. 20.
cannot endure it. P. 40. And speaking of the sword of the spirit, he says,
Jesus, sheathing it in his own heart's blood, the divine glutinating power
thereof has rendered it impossible to draw it again to another execution: God
is just and true, and will not; men or devils cannot. P. 48. In this light we
can read the scriptures with pleasure -- we also read them profitably,
forasmuch as speaking thus of Christ, they hush and banish the fears arising
from nature or temptation. P. 49. Did men but know what safety and peace we
have here, they would despair of terrifying us, as they hope to do, by their
writings and preachments; loading us with opprobrious names, and ignorantly
levelling the threatenings and curses in the scripture against us; beholding
him to be the death of death, and victory of hell. P. 48.

This is the object of his worship, the faith he has eagerly embraced; but the
difference between his god and the God of Israel, is very great. For the God of
Israel connected his precepts and promises together, and called it presumption,
and tempting of him, to expect the latter without regarding the former. And
when the god of this world came to tempt our Savior, he made just such a
distinction in the scriptures as this writer does; but he had nothing in Jesus
that could reconcile him to such an object of worship. No, Jesus still kept to
what was written, comparing one part with the other, and said, the scripture
cannot be broken. Deuteronomy. i. 43, and vi. 16, 17. Psalm xci. 11, 12. Mat. iv. 6,
7. John x. 35. 2 Cor. iv. 4. Therefore, their rock is not our rock, even our
enemies themselves being judges. Deuteronomy. xxxii. 31 -- 33. This more plainly
appears in what follows.

Truth says,
1. Jesus was made a surety -- wherefore he is able also to save them to the
uttermost, that come unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make
intercession for them. Heb. vii. 22, 25.

2. I saw thee polluted in thine own blood, and I said unto thee when thou wast
in thy blood, live -- behold, thy time was a time of love. Ezekiel. xiv. 6, 8.

3. The grace of God that brings salvation -- teaches us, that denying
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, we should live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present world. He shall reward every man according to his works. Titus
ii. 11, 12. Mat. xvi. 27.

Truth says,
4. If any man be in Christ he is a new creature. According to his mercy he
saved us, by the washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost.
Hereby we know that he abides in us, by the spirit which he has given us. 2
Cor. v. 17. Titus iii. 5. 1 John iii. 24.

5. If we say that we have no sin, we deceive ourselves. If we confess our
sins, he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from
all unrighteousness. 1 John i. 8, 9.

6. Thou stand by faith; be not high-minded, but fear. If any man draw back,
my soul shall have no pleasure in him. But we are not of them who draw back
unto perdition; but of them that believe, to the saving of the soul. Romans xi.
20. Heb. x. 38, 39.

7. Out of his mouth goes a sharp sword, that with it he should smite the
nations; and he shall rule them with a rod of iron; and he treads the
wine press of the fierceness and wrath of Almighty God. Rev. xix. 15.

8. The carnal mind is enmity against God. Without faith, it is impossible to
please him. Romans viii. 7. Heb. xi. 6.

Truth says,
9. We worship God in the spirit. This is good and acceptable in the sight of
God. With such sacrifices God is well pleased. Phil. iii. 3. 1 Timothy ii. 3. Heb.
xiii. 16.

10. Examine yourselves whether ye be in the faith, prove your own selves. Let
every man prove his own work, and then shall he have rejoicing in himself
alone, and not in another. Hereby we do know that we know him, if we keep his
commandments. For this is the love of God, that we keep his commandments, and
his commandments are not grievous. 2 Cor. xiii. 5. Gal. vi. 4. 1 John ii. 3,
and v. 3.

11. Giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue, etc. Beware lest ye also,
being led away with the error of the wicked, fall from your own stedfastness;
but grow in grace. Unto them that look for him, shall he appear the second
time, without sin, unto salvation. I press toward the mark. 2 Pet. i. 5 -- 11.
and iii. 17, 18. Heb. ix. 28. Phil. iii. 13, 14.

12. While they promise them liberty, they themselves are the servants of
corruption. If any man have not the spirit of Christ, he is none of (...) 2
Pet. ii. 19. Romans viii. 9.

Relly says,
1. Truth declares that every man shall die for his own sin, -- nor can
justice possibly admit of a surety here; because it can only punish him whom it
first finds guilty. P. 3, 5.

2. If God loved them, he certainly saw them in a sinless state; for it is
contrary to the holiness of his nature to love the unclean. P. 34.

3. The gospel gives us all, without requiring aught of us. If the promise only
rewards the man whom the law approves of, as holy, just and true, it is easy to
perceive that Jesus only is the man -- whilst every member, by union with the
head, partakes of his honors. P. 40, 41.

Relly says,
4. Antichrist, or a false spirit, seeks not the glory of Jesus; but speaks of
himself, of in own operations; of joys, sorrows, hatred to the evil, and
languishment after goodness, by him wrought in the heart; and teaches his
anointed ones to conclude thence that they are favorites of heaven -- by what
they call inherent holiness. P. 57, 58.

5. By Jesus we inherit, by him we have atoned; we claim no good out of him,
nor will we acknowledge the evil, for as much as in him we have been purged. P.
53.

6. Your unbelief cannot make his grace of none effect; and though you have
denied him, yet he cannot deny himself. -- In him we are always as he is,
according to which similitude God always beholds us, and accepts us. He beholds
no iniquity in Jacob, nor perverseness in Israel These were Balaam's words.
Numb. xxiii. 21.
. P. 52.

7. The sword of the spirit -- Jesus sheathing it in his own heart's blood, the
divine glutinating power thereof has rendered it impossible to draw it again
to another execution: God will not, men or devils cannot. P. 48.

8. I am not, cannot possibly be, an enemy to good works; but then I must have
some incontestible proof of goodness. Preface, p. 14.

Relly says,
9. Spiritually good works, which merit the divine complacency, mankind are
incapable of performing at any time. Preface, p. 14.

10. Where mankind are ignorant of the scriptures -- they look into themselves;
thus enquiring, have I Christ? do I love God, and hate iniquity? am I changed?
am I humble, heavenly-minded, thirsting to be more holy, and lamenting my
faults? do I increase in light, knowledge and understanding? If I do, then I
have Christ. The disciples of the false Christ cry -- I have the marks of grace
in me. P. 56.

11. Assuming the character of righteous, meek, faithful, holy, etc. according
to the works of our own hands, or habits of the heart, is flying in the face of
God, and giving the lie to the divine perfections. The Jew maintains the
necessity of inward and outward holiness in every man, and looks for a Christ
to come; the Christian, especially the reformed, with superior ardour, declares
for the same way of holiness, and looks also for a Christ to come. P. 54.

12. O, what grace is this! that we in whom, according to the strongest
testimony of our senses and reason, there is yet found the motions, life and
love of sin, should have a right to reckon ourselves dead unto sin. P. 49.



These are not remote and uncertain consequences, but the express language of
each party: And can Relly's system be any other than a filthy dream! He tries
hard to persuade the world, that the doctrine of the inward sanctification of
the spirit, and of looking to the fruits thereof as evidences of our good
estate, has introduced gross enthusiasm, self-righteousness, bigotry and
superstition, among the more zealously religious part of mankind; and among
such who are less concerned, deism, with all the pride of moral virtues. This
(says he) is that spirit which I set my face against. P. 58. Upon which I would
observe, that when John sent two of his disciples to Jesus, to enquire whether
he was the Messiah or not? though Jesus had the best right to be believed of
any man in the world, yet he referred them to evidence, instead of strong
assertions. Mat. xi. 4 -- 6. Which is a precious example for us all to follow;
and if we do so, will not the characters Relly has cast upon others turn back
upon himself! What is enthusiasm, but a conceit of knowing the will of God
better than he has declared it in his written word, and an obstinate and
unreasonable attachment to inward imaginations and suggestions of a contrary
nature? And what is deism, but the setting up of our reason above divine
revelation, so as to receive nothing for truth but what suits this inward rule?
And is not Mr. Relly guilty of these evils? He glories in the system he has
published, as being a new discovery, the like whereto he had never before seen;
and he denies the possibility of his being an enemy to morally good works,
while in the same place he asserts that mankind are incapable of performing
works spiritually good at any time. Preface, p. 4, 5, 14. And he has discovered
such meekness, humility, and freedom from bigotry, toward some of his
opponents, that he says, they did not understand the matter they wrote against,
and therefore treated that with contempt which was above them, being not afraid
to speak evil of dignities. I would always (unprovoked by their petulancy)
answer those with silence, as being beneath MY attention. I would harden my ear
against the roarings of ignorance, and be utterly insensible of their
invectives; it being ridiculous to fret at the barkings of a our, when it is
the nature of the animal to be noisy. -- For my part, after having abjured the
Pope of Rome, I can never submit to any infallible chair of an inferior sort.
-- Respecting the matter and scope of the following treatise, I AM ABOVE
UNCERTAINTY THEREIN. Preface, p. 5, 6, 20. But if those who think themselves as
much above their neighbors, as champions for wisdom and virtue are above noisy
curs, should sleep on till they are arrested by HIM who says, behold, I come as
a thief! how will they then look upon their dumb dogs, that were sleeping,
lying down, loving to slumber! Isai. lvi. 10. Rev. xvi. 15.

Their scheme is so far from UNION, that these be they who separate themselves,
sensual, having not the spirit. They reject his operations, and turn off into
sensuality; being so opposite to union with Jesus, that they turn all the
precepts and penalties of the scriptures upon him, while they claim all the
promises as their own; and so would make him to serve with their sins, and
weary him with their iniquities. Isai. xliii. 24. They despise government. For
authority to command, and subjects to obey, or to suffer for their
disobedience, is the essence of all government. No government can be maintained
in civil states, without appeals to God to avenge injustice, perjury and
unfaithfulness; therefore the teaching that his sword cannot be drawn to
another execution, is an attempt to tear up all government by the root. Woe unto
them; for they have gone in the way of Cain, and ran greedily after the error
of Balaam for reward, and perished in the gainsaying of Core. These, and other
parts of their character, are to be seen in the second epistle of Peter, and in
that of Jude. Wherein are also plain directions to believers, how to guard
against them, to build up themselves on their most holy faith, and to labor
earnestly to pull sleepy souls out of the fire. The unlearned and unstable
wrest the scriptures unto their own destruction. 2 Pet. iii. 16. And who they
are may be clearly gathered from other passages. For to love God supremely, and
to love our neighbors as ourselves, are the two points whereon hang all the
law and the prophets. And to cover self-love with a form of godliness, is the
practice of those who are ever learning, and never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth. Mat. xxii. 37 -- 40. 2 Timothy iii. 2, 5, 7. When Felix
the governor sent for a prisoner, and heard him concerning the faith in Christ,
the scene was suddenly changed in such a manner, that the governor was arrested
as a prisoner of divine justice, by a warrant which was served (so to speak) by
his prisoner. Felix felt himself unable to yield thereto, which doubtless
proved his ruin. Acts xxiv. 24 -- 27. Such inability is so far from affording
any just excuse, that it is a soul-damning crime. John iii. 18, 19, and v. 44
-- 47. Christ says, if thine eye be evil, thy whole body shall be full of
darkness. If therefore the light that is in thee be darkness, how great is that
darkness! Mat. vi. 23. In a very dark night glowworms and box-fire will shine
to a considerable distance; which in the daylight are found to be nothing but
dark insects and rotten wood. And is Relly's scheme any better?

Truth says, there is one God, and one mediator between God and man, the man
Christ Jesus. 1 Timothy ii. 5. Man is the offending party, and the only way for
reconciliation is through this mediator, whom God made sin for us, who knew no
sin; that we might be made the righteousness of God in him. 2 Cor. v. 18 -- 21.
And by him all that believe are justified from all things, from which they
could not be justified by the law of Moses. Acts xiii 39. Him that believes on
him that justifies the UNGODLY, HIS faith is counted for righteousness. Romans
iv. 5. But the faith taught by Relly is opposite thereto, in the essential
points following. 1. The faith of the gospel is built upon the free mercy of
the Father, through the merits of the Son, by the influences of the Holy
Spirit; which is the only way of access to God. John xiv. 6. Ephesians. ii. 18. But
Relly says, the nature and property of justice is always its own rule of
acting; and it cannot admit of the innocent's being punished, nor of the
transgressor's being acquitted. P. 4. If so, then Christ could not have
suffered for sins, the just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God. 1
Pet. iii. 18. Therefore, 2, the faith of the gospel moves the believer to take
all the shame to himself, and ever to give all the glory of his salvation to
God, in practice as well as pretense. But while Relly pretends to do so, he in
reality would have people crucify to themselves the Son of God afresh, and put
him to an open shame. For if justice cannot punish the innocent, he would have
people treat Jesus as a guilty person from day to day, since he teaches them,
as I have proved, to turn all the precepts, threatenings and curses of
scripture upon him. And, under pretense of ascribing great honor to Jesus,
Relly mentions Noah, Lot, Abraham, Sarah, Moses, David, Solomon, and Job, who
are honorably spoken of in scripture, while still their imperfections are
exposed; and says thereon, those men were all types of Jesus, their characters
figurative of his. P. 53. But lest he should be accused from hence of making
their virtues no more than figures, he says, those persons were really what the
scriptures say they were, that is, righteous, faithful, meek, holy, wise,
patient, etc. without any exception; they were so in Christ. P. 54. That is, as
they were imperfect, they were types of Christ; but at the same time they were
really perfect in him! I challenge all Relly's admirers to make any better
sense of his words than this if they can; which is so opposite to the truth
that no priest in Israel, who had any blemish in his birth or person, might
approach to God's altar. Levit. xxi. 9 -- 23. Nehem. vii. 64, 65. And those who
offered any creature upon it that was defective, were cursed deceivers. Mal. i.
13, 14. 3. The faith of the gospel teaches ministers rightly to divide the word
of truth, and to give each of their hearers their portion of meat in due
season. 2 Timothy ii. 15. Luke xii. 42. But Relly, through his whole treatise,
takes passages of scripture which are peculiar to the saints, or the church of
God which he has chosen out of the world, and applies them to all the human
race without distinction; and his main strength lies in this confusion,
together with an appearance of opposing many dangerous errors. And says he,
where people are taught to distinguish between saints and sinners, and to think
themselves holier than their neighbors, it is not strange that they use them
ill. -- And to talk of practice, without keeping the whole law, is such a
deception, where scripture authority is admitted, yea or even what reason
suggests of the nature of the divine Being, as cannot be accounted for, but by
the pride, bewitchery and madness, which we are naturally involved in. Preface,
p. 13.

But one short question may turn these characters back upon him who cast them
out; which is this; are souls reconciled to God as his subjects, or not? While
he remains the Sovereign of the Universe, no rational soul can ever think,
speak, or act contrary to his holy law, without contracting guilt to itself;
which can only be removed by the atonement of Christ, applied by the Holy
Spirit; who calls us daily to pray, forgive us our debts, as we forgive our
debtors. But Relly says, we claim no good out of him, nor will we acknowledge
the evil, forasmuch as in him we have been purged. P. 53. This may well remind
us of them who speak evil of the things which they know not; but what they know
naturally as brute beasts; in those things they corrupt themselves. Jude 10.
Oxen know their owners, and not only come daily to their masters for food, but
also do them great service; and some will come many rods at a call or motion,
and put their necks under the yoke. A loud reproof to our disobedient souls.
Isai. i. 3, 4. Jer. xxxi. 18 -- 20. The last of these passages plainly opens
the way of repentance, and how mercy is received and enjoyed. Again it is said,
he that believes not God, has made him a liar, because he believes not the
record that God gave of his Son. And this is the record, that God has given to
us eternal life; and this life is in his Son. 1 John v. 10, 11. From whence it
is plain (says Relly) that he who believes not, has eternal life given him in
the Son of God, as fully as him who believes; else it does not appear how he
could make God a liar, by not believing; nor how the unbeliever can be censured
for not believing what was not true. P. 67. His whole scheme turns upon this
point; therefore let the following things be carefully observed. 1. That all
our righteousness and strength is in the Son; and he that has the Son, has
life; and he that has not the Son of God, has not life. 2. He who has it,
receives it by faith as a free gift. 3. There are three that bear witness in
earth, the spirit, the water, and the blood: -- And he that believes on the
Son of God, has the witness IN HIMSELF. 1 John v. 8 -- 12. Where then is the
proof that Relly would draw from hence? Is not he a liar, in asserting that
eternal life is as fully given to the unbeliever, as to the believer! Sin is
the worst of poison, and can only be expelled by looking to the antetype of the
brazen serpent; and it is the spirit only that enables any to look thereto; and
no other water could remove filth, or blood remove guilt, like the change which
is now wrought in the believer. 2 Cor. iii. 14 -- 18. And the spirit itself
bears witness with our spirit that we are the children of God. But how came
any to be so? Answer, ye were the servants of sin; but ye have obeyed from the
heart that form of doctrine which was delivered you. Romans vi. 17, and viii. 16.
Such are the only persons that Paul speaks to when he says, reckon ye
yourselves to be dead indeed unto sin. Romans vi. 11. Which words Relly applies
to such as have a full consciousness of the "life and love of sin" in
themselves, p. 49, while he declares those to be the disciples of the false
Christ, who say, I am converted, I believe, I bear the fruits of the spirit, I
have the marks of grace in me. P. 56. That many speak so, who have not the
truth in them, is readily granted; and also that great modesty and caution are
called for in such affairs. Yet God himself warns men against glorying in their
wisdom, might, or riches; and requires his children to glory in this, that they
understand and know him. Jer. ix. 23, 24. 1 Cor. i. 31.

Relly would be thought to be exceeding evangelical, and for that end he
exposes many dark legal things in others; and yet he was so opposite to the
gospel way of salvation, as to declare that God could not love any, but such as
he saw in a sinless state -- as branches hidden in the stock -- before their
believing, to render and preserve them objects worthy of the divine love and
favor. P. 34. This may do for dreamers; but to souls well awake, it is harder
to be receiv^^ ^han the belief of transubstantiation: For a wounded spirit
(...) bear? Such an one could more easily believe, that what tastes like bread
is really flesh and blood, than to believe that God sees him to be in a sinless
state, worthy of the divine favor. Those who thus teach, like the Jewish
lawyers, take away the key of knowledge. Let the store be ever so full of
blessings, if the creature must see something to render him worthy of the
divine love before it is opened, those who see sin as it is must sink in
despair. But when the soul is brought to know that God has mercy on whom he
will have mercy; and has proclaimed the same to the chief of sinners, and that
Christ died for his enemies, and while they were such, 1 Timothy i. 15, 16. Romans
v. 8 -- 10, this opens a glorious door of hope. Sin first came into our world
by calling in question the verity of God's sayings; and it has prevailed by the
same means ever since. Genesis iii. 1. Deuteronomy. xxix. 19. Romans iii. 4, and xi. 20.
More of which we are now to consider in another pamphlet.

An Answer to Mr. Winchester.
In March, 1781, we were surprised with a report, that Mr. Elhanan Winchester,
who went from hence the autumn preceding, had fallen in with Murray's doctrine.
This report he contradicted in letters to some of his friends, which held many
in suspense about the matter, till he published a pamphlet upon it at
Philadelphia in September. I soon had a glance of it, but no opportunity
deliberately to peruse it till February, after which was the first sight I had
of Relly's treatise. By comparing them together, an essential difference
appears betwixt them, though tending to much the same end; for Relly builds
upon an imaginary union with Jesus, but Winchester upon the benevolent nature
of the Deity. Relly declares sin to be an infinite evil, deserving of infinite
punishment; but Winchester treats it as a natural, and not a moral evil; as a
calamity rather than a crime. Relly holds that salvation is already complete in
Christ, so as to exempt men from all future punishment; but Winchester denies
the need of Christ's blood to appease any wrath in the Deity, and holds it as a
medicine to purge away disorders in nature, which are so great as to require
the sufferings of many ages before all will be removed. Relly rather takes it
for granted that all men are in Christ, than attempting any fair proof of it;
but Winchester states plain arguments upon it, and answers objections. Relly's
scheme did not permit him to speak of salvation for devils; but Winchester's
points thereto. Relly glories in his performance as a new discovery, of which
he had not seen the like; but Winchester makes no such pretense, it being a
collection out of mystic writers; and indeed it is in nature the same with the
philosophy and vain deceit of the second and third centuries, which brought on
the antichristian apostasy.

Origin, in the third century, went a step further therein than any in our land
have yet done, as I have heard of. Enchanted by the charms of the Platonic
philosophy, he set it up as the test of all religion. Said he, the source of
many evils lies in adhering to the carnal or external part of scripture. Those
who do so, shall not attain to the kingdom of God. Let us, therefore, seek
after the spirit and substantial fruit of the word, which are hidden and
mysterious. The scriptures are of little use to those who understand them as
they are written. One of the errors that this carried him into was to say, that
the torments of the damned will have an end; and that as Christ has been
crucified in this world to save mankind, he is to be crucified in the next to
save the devils Mosheim's Eccl. Hist. vol. 1. p. 219, 223, 476. Dublin edition.
. From this source came the doctrine of monkery, purgatory, prayers for the
dead, and all the rest of the corruptions and tyrannies of Rome. Well therefore
did the apostle say, to the chaste spouse of Christ, I fear lest by any means,
as the serpent beguiled Eve through his subtilty, so your minds should be
corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. 2 Cor. xi. 3. To admit of a
duplicity of meanings in his word, which cannot be learned from what is
written, by comparing one place with another, spiritual things with spiritual,
raises such mists and clouds in the minds of men, as intercept between them and
the light of truth. And when any are resolved to proceed in that way, disputes
with them are as vain as it would be to dispute with clouds carried about of
winds, or with raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame. 1 Cor. ii.
13, 14. Jude 12, 13. It is also forbidden, because it genders strifes; and the
servant of the Lord must not strive, but be gentle unto all men, apt to teach,
patient, in meekness instructing those that oppose themselves, etc. 2 Timothy ii.
23 -- 26. No wonder then that an inspired apostle cried, who is sufficient for
these things! May all our eyes be to heaven for direction, while we attempt
something of this nature.

Ye shall not surely die, said the serpent to our mother Eve: Which the Baptist
church in Philadelphia published as an objection against Mr. Winchester's
scheme, four months before his pamphlet came out. Yet he passed it over, till
he came near to a close, and then said, I hardly think that those who make this
objection think it is any thing to the purpose. P. 53. And after some reasoning
upon it he says, now let the candid unbiassed reader judge, who most imitate
the serpent, those who believe and teach that all the promises of God shall be
fulfilled as they are spoken, or those who explain away almost all their
apparent meaning. P. 54. This is a proper key, to open the nature of the mystic
scheme. All promises that suit them, must be taken as they are spoken; their
literal apparent meaning must be carried beyond any restrictions; and those who
would explain and limit the sense, by the precepts they are connected with, or
by the historical and prophetical parts of scripture, will soon be censured as
not having "candid and unbiassed minds." Of this the reader may take the
following specimen.

Truth says,
1. In the beginning God created the heaven and the earth. And the earth was
without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep. Genesis i. 1,
2.

2. Through faith we understand that the worlds were framed by the word of God,
so that things which are seen were not made of things which do appear. Heb. xi.
3.

3. Let all the earth fear JEHOVAH; let all the inhabitants of the world stand
in awe of him: For he spoke, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast.
He stretches out the north over the empty place, and hangs the earth upon
nothing. Psalm xxxiii. 8, 9. Job xxvi. 7.

4. I am JEHOVAH, and there is none else. I form the light, and create
darkness; I make peace, and create evil; I JEHOVAH do all these things. Isai.
xlv. 6, 7.

Truth says,
5. And the Lord God formed man of the dust of the ground, and breathed into
his nostrils the breath of life. The first man was of the earth, earthy. Genesis
ii. 7. 1 Cor. xv. 47.

6. Male and female created he them; and God blessed them, and said unto them
be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth. And they were both naked,
the man and his wife, and were not ashamed. Genesis i. 27, 28, and ii. 25.

7. Out of the ground made the Lord God to grow every tree -- the tree of life
also -- and the tree of knowledge of good and evil. Genesis ii. 9.

8. Of the tree of knowledge of good and evil, thou shall not eat of it; for in
the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall surely die. Genesis i. 17.

9. Marriage is honorable in all, and the bed undefiled; but whoremongers and
adulterers God will judge. Take heed to your spirit, and let none deal
treacherously against the wife of his youth. Heb. xiii. 4. Mal. ii. 15.

10. God works all things after the counsel of his own will. Why do thou
strive against him? for he gives not account of any of his matters. Ephesians. i. 3,
11.

Truth says,
11. I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy, and I will have compassion on
whom I will have compassion. My counsel shall stand, and I will do all my
pleasure. Romans ix. 15. Isai. xlvi. 10.

12. The wrath of God is revealed from heaven against all ungodliness, and
unrighteousness of men, who hold the truth in unrighteousness. Romans i. 18.

Winchester says,
1. When Elohim manifested nature at first, it was pure, transparent, heavenly
substantiality, described as a sea of glass mingled with fire; into which all
matter must finally return, through various processes of refinement. P. 4.

2. Out of this nature God created hosts of angels. -- They were glorious
images of the Deity -- manifested in nature, by the threefold properties of
fire, light, and spirit. P. 4.

3. Lucifer, turning his strong will toward the first properties of life,
awakened wrath in nature; and found himself shut up in his own chains of
darkness, together with his legione, who joined with him in his rebellion. P. 4.

4. Thus we can account for the earth being without form, and void; and
darkness covering the deep; a state which had no possibility of existence, till
the fall of angels had introduced it into their kingdom. P. 4.

Winchester says,
5. As his soul was pure, so was his body -- luminous, agile, spiritual, as the
resurrection bodies shall be. Fire could not burn, nor water drown him. P. 5.

6. The pure virgin of the wisdom of God, that was the wife of his youth, from
whom by his fall he was separated. -- He should have set his will entirely
toward the divine virgin, and not have lusted after the animal life. P. 5.6.

7. Strong lusting, by virtue of the great power Adam had over the earth --
brought forth the tree of death. P. 6.

8. No sooner had this tree sprung up, but the merciful God gave him warning of
it, charging him not to touch it. P. 6.

9. To prevent (if possible) his falling into the beastial life, or in case of
the completion of his fall, to provide a remedy, God separated the female part
from him, and formed a woman. P. 6.

10. His trial was not arbitrarily imposed by God. -- After setting before them
the state into which they had fallen, and the consequences, which were
inevitable, and not arbitrarily denounced; he proceeded to this -- I will put
enmity, etc. P. 5, 7.

Winchester says,
11. Here we see there is nothing arbitrary; all is natural throughout the
whole process; nothing can rise up but according to the possibilities of
nature. -- Punishment is never an arbitrary infliction upon the sinner. P. 9,
16.

12. Fury, wrath, or anger, can never dwell in the fountain of love, but are
only to be found in fallen nature, separated from the life of God. P. 3.



How could any man talk at this rate, who pretended to regard the truth of
scripture, if he was not involved in a great mist of darkness! And since his
design led him to say so much about the original of things in general, and of
darkness in particular, a few questions that God once put to a better man than
he is, call for his notice. Says God, Who is this that darkeneth counsel, by
WORDS WITHOUT KNOWLEDGE! Where wast thou when I laid the foundations of the
earth? declare, if thou have understanding. Where is the way where light
dwells? and as for darkness, where is the place thereof? Job xxxviii. 2 --
19. Such questions brought Job to cry, I abhor myself, and repent in dust and
ashes. And may the writer before us soon meet with so happy a change! To
promote which, or if not, to hold up light to others, I shall attempt briefly
and plainly to explain the nature of this mystery of iniquity. Some may think
that what he has written is so absurd, that it deserves no notice; and did all
see the same as it is, I should be of their mind. But the case is far
otherwise. The turning points in both of these pamphlets have caused the
greatest controversies that the world or the church have ever been perplexed
with.

The word arbitrary signifies whatever depends upon one's own will and
pleasure, any thing that may be done without giving an account of to another
Dyche's Dictionary, at the word arbitrary.
. And for men to assume such a power one over another, is very odious and
pernicious; and why? because darkness and corruption prevail most terribly in
fallen nature. Fury, wrath and anger, make most horrid work in the world; and
the ruling powers of the earth have often acted more like beasts than men, for
these fifteen hundred years; yea, like the worst sort of beasts; leopards,
bears, and lions. Rev. xiii. 2. And who can think of attributing any thing of
like nature unto God! Our feeble minds shrink away, and would rather believe
almost any thing else, than to entertain such thoughts within us. How can a
Being of infinite goodness and love make any creature, who shall be miserable
without end? How can any, who receive great favors from the mediation and
merits of Christ, be eternally lost? And how can it be just with God to damn
men forever for not believing his gospel, when Adam in innocence could have no
idea of atonement for the guilty, or cleansing for the filthy? Rather than
answer either of these questions in the affirmative, men will rack their
invention, and strain their thinking powers to such a degree, that, like our
straining our sight by looking upon the sun, we cannot see the plainest
objects. This is often the case with mystic writers, and is very conspicuous in
Mr. Winchester. And, while he has broken himself against the rock most
terribly, many serious persons feel a trembling about the matter, not knowing
what will be the consequence.

Having read his text, which is Genesis iii. 15, he says, these words contain the
first opening of the glorious gospel day to poor lost man. -- In order to have
proper ideas of the glorious Deity, we must consider him as a Being possessed
of infinite wisdom, power, and goodness. But immediately goes on to deny that
fury, wrath, or anger, could ever dwell in him; for, says he, wherever fury is
found, selfishness, envy and pride; are joined therewith: These are the four
elements of hell, or fallen nature, and mutually generate each other. P. 3. All
this is in one page, at his beginning. But as we must look cautiously toward
the sun, if we would enjoy its light and benefits, instead of being so hasty in
determining what is not in God, let us look a little into ourselves. Is it
possible for a man to love his wife, children or friends, without hating the
wretch that would murder them? And is it possible for any soul to love truth
and goodness, without hating deceit and cruelty? And are not love and hatred
acts of will? And when we are enabled to accomplish any work we engage in, are
we not pleased with it? Yea, and if the work be right, is it not right to be
pleased with it? And, if wicked wretches oppose what is right, is it not right
to hate such opposition? How then could a man read those words of God, I will
put enmity, and then go on and assert four times over in his sermon, that there
was nothing arbitrary, that is, nothing of will or pleasure in the whole
affair! Adam's trial was not arbitrary, the threatening was not arbitrary, the
remedy was not arbitrary, and punishment upon sinners is not arbitrary!
Immediately after the last of these assertions, he says, Oh, would they
consider that the scripture never represents the atonement of Christ, as
intended to quench or put out a wrath that was risen in the Deity; but to break
the power of death in us, and to overcome the wrath of fallen nature; to raise
a new life in our souls, and to bring both fallen nature and creatures back
into their first state of purity and perfection. To confirm which he says, it
was evident when our Savior died, that his blood had a physical power over
nature, by the effects it produced, in causing the earth to shake, the rocks to
rend, and the graves to open. P. 16. Before this he had mentioned our Savior's
warning against deceivers, who cried, lo, here, or lo, there. Luke xvii. 20,
21. Upon which Winchester says, here Christ himself called the Pharisees to
behold, that the kingdom of God was within them; and if within those, who are
elsewhere called serpents and vipers, and threatened with the damnation of
hell, then certainly in all mankind. This divine seed is the only beginning and
possibility of a new life; and unless the means of grace can reach that hidden
spark, they can do us no good. And it is also certain, that unless there was a
seed hidden in our souls, capable of being raised up by the power and
attraction of Christ, nothing from without could take any effect upon us, or
raise up the divine life in us, any more than the sun, air and water, of this
world, could cause a flint to vegetate like a corn of wheat, or any other seed.
P. 8, 9. He is so far from denying that God has a will, that he says he
continually manifests a will of infinite goodness toward all his creatures,
according to their various circumstances; seeking their recovery and complete
restoration. P. 3. Without which he says, the good news which Christ commanded
to be preached to every creature is mockery, insult, and insincerity. P. 17.

Here is a lively specimen of mystic philosophy, and mystic divinity. And it
has two things in it, that are very charming to many. One is, that it is
calculated to guard against thinking that either God or man act with bad
designs toward each other. The other is, that it raises a hope that they will
all be reconciled, and come into perfect agreement and happiness at last;
notwithstanding very bad things have inevitably interrupted their peace, and
made dreadful works between them, which are not likely to be all removed for
many ages to come. If so great a good can be obtained, who would not exert all
his powers to promote it, and to guard against things that contradict it, and
would obstruct it? As I take it, these are the principal causes for the
prevalence of that system in the world, for so long a time, and to so great a
degree; and also why those who appear against it are called noisy curs, and by
many other hard names. But when men have done their best, and done their worst,
one great difficulty has still lain in their way, which they never could
remove, and it is not likely that they ever will. And that is, that God has
said, I will put enmity between the two seeds; and there it remains, in such a
fixed manner, that the labors of near six thousand years have not removed it,
nor brought the two parties a whit nearer together than they were when the war
began. Neither is it within my power to believe, that the enmity will ever be
removed to eternity. And I think that Paul was of the same mind. Romans ix. 13 --
23. And it appears that the same objections were then made against his
doctrine, as are often made in this day; which all center to this point, why
does he yet find fault? for who has ever resisted his will? If he does his
will and pleasure through the universe, and is not obliged to give us any
better reason therefore than because so it seemed good in his sight, Mat. xi.
26, then why does he find fault with any for acting as they please? Since these
things have perplexed the greatest minds, and puzzled the greatest capacities
upon earth, it certainly becomes so poor a creature as the writer is to proceed
with great reverence and caution.

In the first place I take notice, that the arguments upon this sublime subject
are generally from the less against the greater; but that there have been a few
in every age, who have argued from the less to the greater; and the latter
appears the preferable way to me, especially when I see what approbation my
Savior gave to it. When he was personally upon earth, a Roman captain had a
servant that was dear to him, who was taken sick; therefore the captain sent to
Jesus for his help, which he was ready to grant; upon information whereof the
captain sent again, saying, Lord, trouble not thyself, for I am not worthy that
thou should enter under my roof. Wherefore neither thought I myself worthy
to came unto thee: But say in a word, and my servant shall be healed. For I
also am a man set under authority, having under me soldiers, and I say unto
one, go, and he goes; and to another, come, and he comes; and to my servant,
do this, and he does it. Luke vii. 6 -- 8. Now it appears to me that the
captain, like other rational men, received the thinking reasoning faculty in a
natural way; but I am persuaded that he had not so much as the seed of this way
of reasoning, till it was given him from above. And the foregoing treatise of
Mr. Relly confirms this sentiment; since, as has been observed, after all his
high notions of union, he denies the possibility of God's loving any but such
as he saw worthy of it. If so, the Roman captain could not have been highly
commended by Jesus, for twice over denying that himself was worthy of God's
free favors. And I remember that a person of good credit in old times said, O
Lord, I know that the way of man is not IN HIMSELF. Jer. x. 23. And that
another, by good authority, called the sinner to forsake his way and thoughts,
and to turn to HIM, whose thoughts and ways are as high above ours, as the
heavens are above the earth. Isai. lv. 7 -- 9. And, if I mistake not, the very
nature of faith carries us off from self, to the truth of another; from
trusting in an arm of flesh, to trust wholly in the Lord. And persons of a
contrary character see not when good comes. Jer. xvii. 5, 6.

This was the case with the Pharisees. Though they were at the head of the only
church of God then in the world, yet they were ready to listen to the lo, here,
or lo, there, of deceivers, at the time when the promised Messiah was within
them; or in the midst of them, as others render the words. He was then within
that church, perfectly obeying all the laws which God had given to it, and
fulfilling the prophecies concerning him. By his kingly power he daily caused
the blind to see, the lame to walk, lepers to become clean, the deaf to hear,
the dead to live, and the poor to have the gospel preached to them. All which
gave offense to those who imagined that they had an inherent power to walk to
the temple, to cleanse themselves, to hear and live. Mat. xi. 3 -- 19. If the
seed spoken of in the first promise of salvation, meant any intellectual power
in every man, no reason can be given for its being called the seed of the
woman, the weaker vessel. But when we see Jesus, who was born of a virgin,
without the knowledge of man, the words appear full of important meaning. To
prepare his way in Israel, all flesh was cried down as fading-grass; yea, as
less than nothing, and vanity, before him. And Peter assures us, that souls are
born again of this seed. Isai. xl. 6 -- 17. 1 Pet. i. 23 -- 25. The change is
wrought by receiving with meekness the ingrafted word. James i. 21. Each
metaphor bespeaks and vital union with the truth we were stangers to before
Relly seems to be fond of the similitude of the vine and its branches; but his
ideas rose no higher than "native branches." P. 22. Whereas we can have no good
hope through grace, without being ingrafted contrary to nature, so as to stand
by faith. Romans xi. 20, 24. No branch can grow and be fruitful, but by union and
communion with the vine; and Christ assures us how that is. For, says he, if ye
keep my commandments, ye shall abide in my love; even as I have kept my
Father's commandments, and abide in his love. This is holding the head.
Professors of a contrary character will be cast into the flames. Isai. xxvii. 4
-- 11. John xv. 6, 10. Col. ii. 10, 19.
. And it might as well be argued, that a woman may bear children without the
knowledge of man, or that a rich soil can bear wheat without sowing any
therein, as that any soul can be saved without supernatural revelation. The
angels of light saw much more of God, after he was manifest in the flesh, than
they ever did before. 1 Timothy iii. 16. Ephesians. iii. 10; 11. What madness must it
then be in fallen men, to set up reason against the word of God! But,

1. How can it be, that a God of infinite love should give existence to any
creatures who shall be miserable without end? If any ask this question without
due fear and reverence, let them turn and consider how they can answer God's
questions to them. Isai. xl. 12 -- 28. Romans ix. 20 -- 23. The command is, let
all things be done decently and in order; but this word has often been
perverted, to promote the greatest disorders upon earth. Glass is the best
medium we have to let light into our dwellings, and fire will penetrate into
rocks, and break them to pieces. Therefore these metaphors are made use of to
represent the excellency of the word of God. 2 Cor. iii. 18, and iv. 2 -- 4.
Jer. xxiii. 29. When the earth intercepts between us and the sun, it is dark in
our windows, as well as elsewhere. And such is the effect, when human
inventions, or any earthly object, gets between our souls and the Son of
righteousness. The number of the beast is the number of a man; and John saw as
it were a sea of glass mingled with fire; and those who had gotten a complete
victory over that number standing thereon, having the harps of God. And they
sing the song of Moses, lawgiver to Israel, and the song of the Lamb, who is
our lawgiver, judge, and king. Rev. xiii. 18, and xv. 2, 3. Isai. xxxiii. 22.
As it were, plainly shows that the words are to be taken in a figurative sense;
but the mystics take them literally, for the matter that angels and men were
made out of* This confounding of matter and mind together, is no little part of
mystery Babylon. Though a still more horrid part is, their confounding of
creatures with their Creator! Fire, light, and animal spirits, are all objects
of sense: Yet the mystics assert, that they are images of the Triune God. P. 4.
This is so opposite to truth, that he said to Israel, ye saw no manner of
similitude on the day that the Lord spoke unto you in Horeb, out of the midst
of the fire; take heed therefore lest ye corrupt yourselves. Deuteronomy. iv. 15, 16.
Yet men, even to this day, are bewitched with such corruptions. The conceit
that divine wisdom was Adam's first wife, and that meats and a woman were
afterward given him to satisfy his lusts, and to prevent worse evils, carried
many gloomy heads, in eastern climes, away from human society, and the duties
thereof, into solitary places, in search after that wisdom. By degrees this was
improved into nunneries, celibacy of the clergy, and their arbitrary
prohibition of meats -- Canons which were often dispensed with for money; and
meats and women were allowed of, to prevent worse evils. Thus many departed
from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and doctrines of devils;
speaking lies in hypocrisy, having their conscience feared with a hot iron:
Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God has
created to be received with thanksgiving of them who believe and know the
truth. 1 Timothy iv. 1 -- 3.

A spirit can think, speak and act; and the actions or works of God are
evidently intended by his back parts, which are plainly seen by believers,
though no man can see his face and live. Exodus xxxiii. 20 -- 23. When a
creature's thoughts, words and actions, exactly agree together, he exhibits the
brightest image of God that we know of; but to talk one thing, while they think
and act the reverse, is precisely the image of the devil. A notable instance
hereof appears in a company from Europe, with a woman at their head, who began
openly two years ago to propagate the above doctrine of devils in the county of
Albany, with great power, signs, and lying wonders. 2 Thessalonians. ii. 7 -- 12. They
prevailed so far thereby last summer, as to make their headquarters at
Harvard, in Worcester county, at a house where Shadrach Ireland had been at the
head of a like delusion for many years before. The doctrine, both of Balaam and
Jezebel, was to draw people into sensuality, and worship objects of sense. To
seduce my servants, says Jesus, to commit fornication, and to eat things
sacrificed unto idols. Rev. ii. 14 -- 20. The reason why God has so exactly
described these, and all other events, in his word, even from the beginning of
time, is this, says he, because I knew thee that thou wast obstinate, and thy
neck an iron sinew, and thy brow brass. Lest thou should say, mine idol has
done them, etc. Isai. xlviii. 4, 5. In general their idols are their own
inventions. Some have gain for their god, others their belly; and, to ease
their consciences, many have their idol shepherds; trust other men to see for
them. Ephesians. v. 5. Phil. iii. 19. Zech. xi. 16, 17. And the farthest that human
invention could ever go in this respect, was to sacrifice their sons and their
daughters unto devils. Psalm cvi. 35 -- 39. Mic. vi. 7. And it is a mean piece
of dishonesty for any to steal a finer dress than this for human wisdom, from
the divine oracles, and then to use the same against the infallible inspiration
of the book they took it from. These things being premised, I come to offer a
direct answer to the above question.

As the powers of thinking and choice are essential to all immortal spirits,
they must necessarily desire the knowledge and enjoyment of the best good; and
as all finite knowledge is bounded by certain limits, they would ever be liable
to err, if they had not some sufficient guard against it. And the best guard
which we can conceive of, is to have the infinite excellency of all God's
perfections displayed before us in the clearest light, so as fully to
demonstrate, that every desirable good is to be enjoyed in the way of
obedience; and that disobedience to him is infinitely hateful and dreadful. The
more deeply these ideas are fixed, and the stronger the persuasion is that he
cannot err. and that all his requirements are holy, just and good, the more
earnest will be the desire to know and do his will continually. Mutual esteem
and confidence constitute the strength and happiness of any community. Delusion
has often done much this way; but what discord and resentment has ensued, when
the deceit has been detected! Who then can tell how strong the bond of peace
is, where a full assurance is granted of eternal security against any such
thing! As I take it, all the sacred volume, and every event that has ever
happened in the universe, have been ordered so by infinite wisdom, as forever
to fix these ideas in every believing mind, and the endless torments of the
wicked answer the same end; and reason most surely teaches, that none could
desire to break God's laws, or to neglect his grace, if they did not imagine to
get some good, or to avoid some present evil, by so doing.

2. Since Adam in innocence could have no idea of atonement for the guilty, or
cleansing for the filthy, how can his fallen children be justly damned for not
believing the gospel? Answer, divine revelation was the only means whereby Adam
knew that he ought not to eat of the forbidden tree; and nothing is more
contrary to the law of supreme love to God, than a disbelief of his testimony.
And in every nation where his gospel has come, he has given sufficient
witnesses of its verity; and if we receive the witness of men, the witness of
God is infinitely greater. His witnesses, it is true, have long prophesied in
sackcloth; that is, men and devils have cast a disagreeable covering over them;
but I trust the time is hastening, when it shall be taken entirely off. Permit
me therefore to make a little attempt toward so desirable an end. Though many
pretend that the doctrine of the Trinity is such as we can have no intelligible
ideas of; yet believers know the contrary. For, take away the succession of
time, and the mode wherein earthly relations commence, which have no place in
the Deity, and we may easily conceive of a Father and Son perfectly equal in
capacity and excellency, with such an oneness in nature, and peculiarity of
relation, as no others have; and also that they have their breath or spirit by
which they act. And when the Jews pretended that Jesus had but one witness,
which is not a sufficient proof in law, he answered them, by appealing to the
works done by him and his Father, which demonstrated his divine mission; and
which were done for this end, that all men should honor the Son, EVEN as they
honor the Father. John v. 17 -- 37. Those works were all effected by the Holy
Spirit, which I take to be the reason why those who, against light, with a
despiteful mind, ascribed his good works to a bad cause, could never have
forgiveness, neither in this world nor in the world to come. Mat. xii. 24 --
32. Heb. x. 29, which, by the way, is a most explicit testimony against the
conceit of universal salvation.

Witnesses are to prove points that are disputed; and ever since the serpent
beguiled Eve, the greatest contest has been upon these two points, viz. whether
all that God says is true? or if true, how it can be equal? Now the clearest
light which has ever been held up in this dark world about these matters, has
been in and by the church of God, represented in the old testament by one
candlestick, and in the new testament by two. The twelve patriarchs constituted
the first, and the twelve apostles the other; and both incorporated together
seem to be intended by the twenty-four elders; as the four beasts or living
creatures mean their ministers in the four quarters of the earth. This united
candlestick stands upon the holy writings; and the apostles appear to be put
first, because they explain the prophets; which order appears both in the first
building of the Christian church, and also in her triumph over mystery Babylon.
Ep. ii. 20. Rev. xviii. 20. The veil that Babylon has drawn over the nations,
has been principally by darkening the truth with old testament figures, instead
of explaining them by new testament light. That none can see Christ's kingdom
without regeneration, and that no striving about who shall be greatest can be
allowed of therein, are two of the most essential articles in his kingdom.
Every thing therefore of a contrary nature, which any have called religion, has
been a veil and covering over the nations, to shut out the light of truth. The
Father's love is as free as water, and as beneficial too; and the obedience and
blood of the Son demonstrate that it flows to men in a way of perfect truth and
equity; and it is the Holy Ghost that discovers and communicates these infinite
blessings; these I take to be intended by the three witnesses in 1 John v. 8.
And the works of the Father and the Son, wrought by the Holy Ghost, I believe
are intended by the two witnesses, and the golden oil, which they empty into
the church out of themselves. For it is not by might, nor by power, but by MY
SPIRIT, says the Lord of hosts. Zech. iv. 3 -- 14. Rev. xi. 3 -- 19. And every
unbeliever strives against, and resists this spirit; for which therefore the
finally impenitent will justly be damned. Genesis vi. 3. Acts vii. 51. For, says
God, they hold fast deceit, they refuse to return. Through deceit they refuse
to know me. Jer. viii. 5, and ix. 6. They love darkness rather than light. And
when a regard to truth and equity is entirely shut out by men in power, the
witnesses appear to be killed. Isai. lix. 8.

3. But how can any perish who have received great benefits by Christ's
mediation and merits? Can he lose any that he has bought? 2 Pet. ii. 1. This is
a text that Mr. Winchester lays stress upon. P. 32. But let him remember that
the same word is used in the prophetic song of Moses, concerning some who did
not escape divine vengeance, which Paul applies to such as sin wilfully and
spitefully, after receiving the knowledge of the truth, etc. Deuteronomy. xxxii. 6,
35. Heb. x. 26 -- 29. And those whom God saved out of Egypt, and yet afterward
destroyed for their unbelief, are named as a leading evidence against men who
turn grace into lasciviousness. Jude 5. Indeed what good is there in this lower
world which does not come by the mediation and merits of Christ? By sin every
favor was forfeited, and he is the Savior of all men, especially of those
that believe. 1 Timothy iv. 10. The rock which all Israel drank of was Christ. 1
Cor. x. 4, 5. And it was the spirit of Christ that preached in Noah, when the
long suffering of God waited upon the old world; who were spirits in prison,
when Peter wrote his first epistle. 1 Pet. i. 11, and iii. 19, 20. Which words
were perverted by antichrist, to prove the doctrine of purgatory, and are now
brought to prove general salvation. But Christ assures us, that if any one is
not reconciled before he be cast into prison, he shall by no means come out
thence, till he has paid the uttermost farthing. Mat. v. 25, 26. Common
salvations to all, as well as special ones to believers, are all from Christ;
and to conceit that the former are to be looked for elsewhere, has ruined
multitudes. We are warned against opposition of science, falsely so called. The
conceit, that science for time, and science for eternity, are opposite things,
is a most fatal delusion. 1 Timothy iv. 7 -- 9, and vi. 1 -- 21. Do not err, my
beloved brethren, every good gift comes from the Father of lights. Jam. i. 16,
17, and iv. 13 -- 17. The prince of darkness could not touch a hoof of Job's
cattle, nor of the Gadarenes swine, without divine permission; and that was
exactly limited, and also overruled for great good. Job i. 10, 12, and xlii.
10 -- 12. Luke viii. 32 -- 39. What fools then are all they who yield to deceit
and cruelty (which is worshipping the devil) to obtain any earthly good! In the
second and third centuries he prevailed with Christian teachers to adopt it as
a maxim, that it was a virtue to deceive and lie for a good end. And in the
fourth century Constantine was drawn into this scheme; when they added, that it
was a virtue to inflict temporal penalties, and corporal tortures, for the same
end. And this veil has been spread over the nations ever since. Indeed it would
have spoiled the design, to have proclaimed it to all the people. Much pains
were taken to keep it as a secret, betwixt civil and religious officers. But
the terrible shakings that have lately taken place, in earthly states, and
religious communities, have discovered this deceit, and caused men's hearts to
fail them. For if a man may lie for a good end, he must necessarily be the
judge of that end; therefore when it is perceived that he acts upon such a
principle, others never know when to believe him, nor how to trust him. And
what distress does this now cause through the world! This leads me to a
glorious promise, which Mr. Winchester builds much upon, in his arguments
against us, viz. death shall be swallowed up in victory.

God being the fountain of life, the first sense of the word death is loss of
union and communion with him. Three points are most strongly asserted of his
character, which are, that it is impossible for him to lie, to deny himself, or
to entice any into sin. 2 Timothy ii. 13. Heb. vi. 18. James i. 13. Every thing
that happens of this nature proceeds from fallen angels, and fallen men, who
are much alike. The second sense of the word death is the dissolution of our
bodies, including the means of it, as disorders in ourselves, and violence from
others. Murder and lying form the character of the devil and his children. John
viii. 44. And the infliction of just punishment therefore, compleats the full
sense of those dreadful terms, death and hell, as they are used in scripture.
And the indulgence of known deceit and cruelty appears to be the covenant with
death, and agreement with hell, that scornful men in power have often imagined
to secure themselves by. Such have frequently treated the warnings of truth
with mockery; and thereby the bands of many have been made strong. They reason
thus, is not the Lord among us? none evil can come upon us. From a negative
proposition they form a positive conclusion. For any soul to profess that
Christ is in him, and that he has the witness of it in himself, this they
cannot endure, and why? because, if that be necessary and attainable, I am
condemned without it, and in neglect of it. Self-defence, therefore, moves them
to oppose such things, and to say, when the overflowing scourge shall pass
through, it shall not come unto us. But God has promised to establish the
mountain of his house above all such powers, and to make a glorious feast
there. Even a feast which shall cause many nations to flow thereto, as freely
as the waters ever ran; with this language, come and let us go up to the
mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach
us of HIS ways, and we will walk in HIS paths. The effect whereof will be the
turning of swords into instruments of agriculture, and bringing wars to an end.
The covering and veil over the nations shall be destroyed, and death swallowed
up in victory. 1 John ii. 21, and iii. 14. Prove. viii. 36. Isai. xxv. 6, 7, and
xxviii. 14 -- 22. Micah iii. 11, and iv. 1 -- 5. The only lawful use of the
sword before is to defend the injured against those who would hurt or destroy.
Isai. xi. 9, 10. Romans xiii. 1 -- 10. To the redeemed death will then be
entirely swallowed up; their enemies all be disarmed and subdued, and their
sorrows turned into joy. Mal. iv. 1 -- 3. 1 Cor. xv. 54 -- 58. But at the same
time God will lay judgment to the line, and righteousness to the plummet, in
such a manner, that impenitent scorners will have neither covering nor rest;
but a perpetual vexation, only to understand the report. Which report plainly
intends the gospel that they rejected. Isai. liii. 1. Romans x. 16. Victory and
triumph mean honor and joy to the victors; but when were the words ever used,
either for the annihilation or for the happiness of all enemies? Can such a
sense of those terms be found in language? If not, it is arbitrary with a
witness to impose such a sense upon the word of God. See 2 Cor. ii. 14 -- 17.
Col. ii. 15. Psalm xlvii. 1 -- 3, and lxviii. 18. If Isai. xxviii. 14 -- 22, be
compared with Mat. vii. 24 -- 27, it appears, that while believers who hear
Christ's sayings, and do them, will enjoy eternal security, all that are of the
opposite character will be overthrown by the storm.

The misery of fallen men lies greatly in this; they first set up the idol in
their heart, and then come to enquire of God. This was the error of Balaam. But
if we were willing to learn of Jesus, and to do his sayings; to take all our
ideas from the word of truth, and to act accordingly, how happy should we be?
Christ calls us this day to work, as much as ever Moses did; but the latter
stipulates the price for it; the other promises the soul that it shall receive
what is right, he being the judge. Debt is a reward promised for a certain
service; and which may be claimed when the service is performed, whatever
difference there may be in value betwixt the service and the reward. God, as
the moral Governor of the world, never fails to pay all his debts; that is, to
reward every one for any service that is in any sense good; but man would claim
more, and, like Cain, are often filled with wrath, because others are accepted
and they not. But in the great day he will stop every mouth with this question;
Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? Is thine eye evil,
because I am good? Mat. xx. 1 -- 16. All the contest turns upon that point. To
name such a thing as his chosen, or his elect, as intending a certain number of
the human race that he will save, while he inflicts deserved punishment upon
the rest, this many cannot endure; and why? because if his will, his choice,
must determine the whole matter, it is infinitely dangerous for me to set up my
will against him. And it is also certain from hence, that if I do so, I cannot
possibly succeed; and when I am entirely defeated, it will lie wholly with him
whether he will show me any mercy or not. Dreadful thought! Who can bear it!
Any thing must be listened to rather than this. In July, 1780, I heard Mr.
Winchester preach in Boston, from Romans x. 4; when he spoke against universal
salvation, and observed, that if men ran to such horrid extravagances as they
did, in times when it was not disputed but that such as died in sin would have
endless misery, what would they do if they were taught that every one should
finally be saved? Among the many objections that he has now attempted to
answer, I think he has passed this over in silence, which is no clear proof
that he thought it could be answered. But if God is continually seeking to make
every creature happy, why does he not do it? If obstructions thereto have arose
that he did not foresee, where was his wisdom? If he foresaw them, and could
not prevent them, where was his power? And if he could have prevented them, and
did not, where was his goodness? A fair answer to these questions will settle
the whole controversy.

A clear right to property, and a good right to govern, are two very plain
ideas. And it is also well known, that property cannot be holden, nor
government maintained, without some token of acknowledgment is paid, by the
tenant and the subject. For this token from Adam, God reserved but one tree to
himself; therefore by eating of it man rebelled against heaven, and seized upon
the earth for his own. And when God had used such other methods as he pleased,
he sent his only begotten Son, to demand his due; but the tenants said, this is
the heir, come let us kill him, and let us seize on his inheritance. Mat. xxi.
38. And the same disposition of robbery and violence is visible through the
world to this day. And now it is openly declared, that God did not act
arbitrarily in those affairs. If he could have had his own will and pleasure,
he would never have put man to such a trial; and does not arbitrarily inflict
punishment upon him, poor creature, now he has fallen, and has got into such a
terrible labyrinth! However, he intends yet to deliver him before he quits his
pursuit, though it will be "ages of ages before the work is perfected!" If this
does not discover an infinite malignity in sin, what can it be!

We must deny that there is an infinite dignity in the person of Jesus, or else
allow that there was an infinite merit in his death. And to deny his right to
bestow the fruits thereof upon whom he pleases, would be to deny him that
right to property, which is claimed by every freeman upon earth. To say that he
owes us those fruits, is the height of madness! And he declares to all what
will be the issue of the contest, with those who say, we will not have this man
to reign over us. Luke xix. 14 -- 27. Let all wake up then, and see where we
are! The whole dispute that we have been upon is about the extent of promised
salvation. Who has promised any such thing? Answer, all the promises of God are
in Jesus Christ, yea, and in him amen, to the glory of God, by his church. Did
why prince ever issue a proclamation of grace to rebels, without any
restrictions? And was it ever thought among men, that it was inconsistent with
justice, truth or mercy, to give exact descriptions of some particular
characters of rebels, and to except such out of the general act of grace? and
was it ever called mockery, insult, and insincerity, to call all the rest to
come in, with a free promise of pardon and life, if they came in by the certain
time that was see? Is not justice and truth as much concerned in vindicating
the rights and honor of government, by exemplary punishment upon the contemners
thereof, as in showing mercy to penitents? And can there be any dependence made
upon what Christ has said, if he has not excepted some sort of sinners out of
his gospel proclamation? yea, and declared that such will have a much sorer
punishment than sinners against the light of nature, or the law of Moses? Luke
x. 11 -- 16. Heb. vi. 6, and x. 28, 29, and xii. 25, 26. No pardon was ever
promised to men who presumptuously and despitefully acted against the light.
Number. xv. 27 -- 31. Psalm xix. 13. Mat. xii. 31, 32. And the cause why Paul
obtained mercy was his sinning ignorantly, and not presumptuously. 1 Timothy i.
13. Now it has been proved, that to expect and claim promised blessings, in a
way of disregard to his precepts, is presumption, and tempting of God.
Concerning such, he swore that they should not enter into his rest. A chief
leader in this way said to Moses and Aaron, all the congregation are holy,
every one of them; wherefore then lift you up yourselves? But the command to
the people was, depart from the tents of these wicked men, and touch nothing of
theirs. Number. xvi. 3 -- 26. Which things are recorded for a warning to all. Jude
11.

Fury in men often operates unreasonably; of this there is nothing in God. And
his debates with his vineyard are in exact measure, and to purge away sin. But
withered boughs will be cast into the fire; for it is a people of no
understanding; therefore he that made them will not have mercy on them; and he
that formed them will show them no favor. Isai. xxvii. 4 -- 11. This appears
to be the only place in the bible where fury is said not to be in God; while
the word is applied to his righteous vengeance upon the wicked near fifty times
therein. And though Winchester has referred us to above sixty places, to prove
that the words everlasting, forever, etc. are used in a limited sense, p. 37,
38, yet all but two of them are in the old testament, when they were under
shadows which were to end, while the substances they typified were to continue.
And his two proofs out of the new testament are these, viz. Paul speak to
Philemon of receiving his servant forever. But how? not now as a servant, But
as a beloved brother; and will that relation ever end? Again, in Rev. xiv. 6.
the word everlasting is evidently connected with the word gospel, and not with
the preaching it upon earth; and is not the gospel of an endless nature? These
are his only proofs from the new testament, to limit the sense of those words.
And his party are forced to confess that the duration of misery, and the
continuance of happiness, are both expressed by the same Greek word in Mat.
xxv. 46. And if the words used in Rev. xx. 10, to express the continuance of
punishment in the burning lake, do not mean endless duration, Dr. Doddrige
says, it is hard to say what words can do it. And by suffering sinners, in
various ways, to exert themselves as far as creature power can possibly go, how
will their defeat and confusion demonstrate the folly of not following divine
direction entirely! And while their defeat, confusion and misery, are ever
visible to the blessed, what reverence, esteem, joy, and praise to their God
and Savior, will it ever excite in redeemed souls! And angels will join their
song. Isai. lxvi. 24. Luke xiii. 27 -- 29. Rev. xiv. 10, and xix. 1 -- 6.

In a word, if any one of the human race is finally lost, the scheme we oppose
must be false. And he who cannot err says of one of them, good were it for that
man if he had never been born. The way Winchester takes here, is to prove that
Job and Jeremiah wished that they had not been born, whose sufferings were
light and short to what Judas's will be. P. 42, 43. But will he lift up his
head, and argue again, that because good men were mistaken, that therefore
Christ was also! In the next page he mentions what Solomon says, about an
extraordinary long life, and large family, to a wicked man; and that an
untimely birth would be better than his. Eccl. vi. 3 -- 6. From whence he
argues, that Christ's meaning was, that if Judas had died in the womb, it would
have been good for him; that then he would have been at rest, where the wicked
cease from troubling, and where the weary are at rest. But as certainly as the
Bible is true, all things do work together for the good of all the objects of
God's love. Romans viii. 28. Therefore if Judas had been an object of that love,
it would have been good for him to have been born, and to go through all that
he did; as it really was for Job and Jeremiah, though they once thought
otherwise. Till a fair answer can be given to this argument, I think it
needless to follow my opponent any further. And shall close with naming a few
plain scripture rules of decency and gospel order, with some motives to enforce
them.

1. Christ is head of all principality and power, and the church is complete in
him; and every soul who truly receives him, receives him as such; and is
commanded to walk in Christ as he received him, as he has been taught.
Therefore we are required, not to let men or angels intrude their commands or
judgments betwixt the believer and his glorious head. Gal. 1.8, 9. Col. ii. 6
-- 23.

2. In admission of members, let every church be careful that they receive none
but such as give a personal credible profession of a saving union to Christ by
faith. Luke vi. 45. John i. 12 -- 14. Acts ii. 47. Romans x. 10.

3. Let all teachers endeavor to use sound speech, which cannot be condemned;
words easy to be understood, and which give a distinct and certain sound; and
be as willing that others should judge, as they are to speak. 1 Cor. xiv. 7 --
40. Titus ii. 7, 8.

4. In public communities, let men ever have the lead and government; so that
when women are heard, and all due regard is paid to them in their places, it
may be done in such a manner, that it shall still be evident that they are not
heads and governors of public assemblies, but under covert. Luke ii. 38. 1 Cor.
xi. 3 -- 16, xiv. 34, 35. 1 Timothy ii. 11, 12.

5. Exclude all striving about who shall be the greatest, and by love serve one
another. Let due esteem and assistance be given to officers in their places;
while all are subject one to another, and be clothed with humility: For God
resists the proud, but gives grace unto the humble. Luke ix. 46 -- 50. Heb.
xiii. 7, 17. 1 Pet. v. 1 -- 5.

6. Let all be upon their guard against teachers who are fond of addressing the
passions, and putting animal nature into motion, without enlightening the
understanding, convincing the conscience, and establishing the judgment. Jer.
iii. 15. Acts xxv. 18. 2 Cor. iv. 2. Ephesians. iv. 14 -- 16. Heb. xiii. 9.

7. Be not slothful in business, but fervent in spirit, serving the Lord; and
indulge not the disposition of eating any man's bread for naught. Romans xii. 2 Thessalonians. iii. 6 -- 12.

With regard to this last rule, two great extremes have long served to uphold
each other. Ministers who have been supported by tax and compulsion have
frequently eat other men's bread for naught. Seeing of which has carried many
into the opposite extreme. Some have gone so far as to elect pastors, and to
partake of the fruit of their labors from year to year, without thinking
themselves under obligation to support them in their work, or to reward them
therefore. Neither honor nor conscience would have permitted either party to act
as they have done, if it had not been in religious affairs. When believers view
the glory and authority of their Lord and Savior, it moves them most freely
and faithfully to attend to the duties of their station, be they in office or
out of it, in church or state. They choose the things that please him; and to
fill up their places with duty and usefulness is their greatest concern;
knowing that such labor cannot be in vain in the Lord. But violence has so
long been connected with authority, on one hand, and licentiousness with the
word freedom on the other, that it is not an easy matter to separate them in
the minds of men. But what worship must it be, that can influence any to lay
such a claim to the goods or labors of others, as truth and equity between man
and man will not give! Much light in these things is already granted in our
land, and it is hoped that a greater reformation is before us. To promote
which, the following considerations may be serviceable.

1. Only by pride comes contention, and the love of money is the root of all
evil. Prove. xiii. 10. 1 Timothy vi. 10. Which evidently are imaginations that we
can do better for ourselves, than God would do for us, if we were entirely
directed by him; and that we have a better right to power and property, than
our neighbors have. But how great is this delusion! When souls are reconciled
to God, and act in union and communion with him, their greatest trials and
afflictions work together for their everlasting good. Whereas each man who
regards self above God, all that he gets in that way increases his misery: For
the more he has got of a separate interest of his own, the more he has to take
care of and defend, both against God and man; a woeful task indeed! The great
events of a seven years war now hold up a striking demonstration of this truth
to all the world.

2. Self-condemnation of all things is the most opposite to happiness. And
though men have various ways to blind or bribe their consciences now, in
violating the golden rule, yet the day is hastening that will remove all such
coverings forever. It will then be said, to such as die in their sins, remember
that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things; but now -- a great gulf
is fixed. How much she has glorified herself, and lived deliciously, so much
torment and sorrow give her. Luke xvi. 25, 26. Rev. xviii. 7. And never will
they be again able either to conceal their shame, or to be insensible of their
guilt. In vain do some pretend that the rich man had a good seed within him,
because he was so earnest that his brethren might not come to that place of
torment; which, they say, is contrary to the temper of devils. For the devils
are deceived, as well as men; and pray as earnestly as they against torment,
when in their immediate view. Luke viii. 28 -- 31. And it is as vain to argue,
that there cannot be different degrees of punishment, if hell torments are
without end.

3. Every soul now is either a slave to sin, or a servant of righteousness;
either under the bondage of corruption, or in the liberty of God's children, in
a greater or less degree. Romans vi. 16, and viii. 9 -- 21. Our present as well
as eternal welfare is therefore what immediately concerns this present
argument. The more we can obtain of victory over corruption, and of real
conformity to the will of God, the happier we are here. Great peace have all
they who love his law, and nothing shall offend them; but they who walk after
their own lusts, are murmurers and complainers. Jude 16. Could it therefore be
possible, that the torments of the damned would have an end, yet we are
certainly as safe as our opponents; but, on the other hand, what a risk do they
run in their way! If reason can be heard, it will make every one in earnest to
know and live to GOD.

THE END.

