A HISTORY Of the WORK of REDEMPTION.

CONTAINING, The Outlines of a Body of Divinity, In a Method entirely new.

By the late REVEREND Mr. JONATHAN EDWARDS, President of the College of New
Jersey

EDINBURGH PRINTED: BOSTON: Reprinted by DRAPER and FOLSOM, near the Market.

M.DCCLXXXII.

PREFACE.
IT has long been desired by the friends of Mr. Edwards, that a number of his
manuscripts should be published; but the disadvantage under which all
posthumous publications must necessarily appear, and the difficulty of getting
any considerable work printed in this infant country, hitherto have proved
sufficient obstacles to the execution of such a proposal. The first of these
obstacles made me doubt, for a considerable time after these manuscripts came
into my hands, whether I could consistently with that regard which I owe to the
honor of so worthy a parent, suffer any of them to appear in the world. However
being diffident of my own sentiments, and doubtful whether I were not
over-jealous in this matter, I determined to submit to the opinion of
gentlemen, who are friends both to the character of Mr. Edwards and to the
cause of truth. The consequence was, that they gave their advice for publishing
them.

The other obstacle was removed by a gentleman in the church of Scotland, who
was formerly a correspondent of Mr. Edwards. He engaged a bookseller to
undertake the work, and also signified his desire that these following
d^scourses in (...) might be made public.

Mr. Edwards had planned a body of divinity, in a new method, and in the form
of a history; in whch he was first to show, how the most remarkable events, in
all ages from the fall to the present times, recorded in sacred and profane
history, were adapted to promote the work of redemption; and then to trace, by
the light of scripture-prophecy, how the same work should be yet further
carried on even to the end of the world. His heart was so much set on executing
this plan, that he was considerably averse to accept the presidentship of
Prince-town college, lest the duties of that office should put it out of his
power.

The out lines of that work are now offered to the public, as contained in a
series of sermons, preached at Northampton in 1739 (...) nec^ssary to be
remem^ered by the reader* in order to (...) in the following work*
, without any view to publication. On that account, the reader cannot
reasonably expect all that from them, which he might justly have expected, had
they been written with such a view, and prepared by the Authors own hand for
the press.

As to elegance of composition, which is now esteemed so essential to all
publications, it is well known, that the author did not make that his chief
study. However, his other writings, though destitute of the ornaments of fine
language, have it seems that solid merit, which has procured both to themselves
and to him a considerable reputation in the world, and with many an high
esteem. It is hoped that the reader will find in these discourses many traces
of plain good sense, sound reasoning, and thorough knowledge of the sacred
oracles, and real unfeigned piety: and that, as the plan is new, and many of
the sentiments uncommon, they may afford entertainment and improvement to the
ingenious, the inquisitive, and the pious reader; may confirm their faith in
God's government of the world, in our holy Christian religion in general, and
in many of its peculiar doctrines; may assist in studying with greater pleasure
and advantage the historical and prophetical books of scripture; and may excite
to a conversation becomeing the gospel.

That this volume may produce these happy effects in all who shall peruse it,
is the hearty desire and prayer of

The reader's most humble servant, JONATHAN EDWARDS.
Newhaven, Feb. 25. 1773.
ADVERTISEMENT.
THEY who have a relish for the study of the scriptures, and have access to
peruse the following sheets, will, I am persuaded, deem themselves much
indebted to the Reverend Mr. Edwards of Newhaven for consenting to publish
them. Though the acute philosopher and deep divine appears in them, yet they
are in the general better calculated for the instruction and improvement of
ordinary Christians, than those of President Edward's writings, where the
abstruse nature of the subject, or the subtle objections of opposers of the
truth, led him to more abstract and metaphysical reasonings. The manuscript
being entrusted to my care, I have not presumed to make any change in the
sentiments or composition. I have, however, taken the liberty to reduce it from
the form of sermons, which it originally bore, to that of a continued treatise;
and I have so altered and diversified the marks of the several divisions and
subdivisions, that each class of heads might be easily distinguished.

Edinburgh, April 29. 1774. JOHN ERSKINE.

CONTENTS.
General introduction, Page: 6. PERIOD I. From the fall to the incarnation of
Christ, Page: 18 PART I. From the fall to the flood, ^9. PART II. From the
flood to the calling of Abraham, Page: 34. PART III. From the calling of
Abraham to Moses, Page: 41. PART IV. From Moses to David, Page: 53. PART V.
From David to the Babylonish captivity, Page: 73. PART VI. From the Babylonish
captivity to the coming of Christ, Page: 100. IMPROVEMENT. Inspiration,
excellency, and usefulness of the bo^ks of the Old Testament, etc. Page: 118.
PERIOD II. The time of Christ's humiliation, Page: 1^7. PART I. Of Christ's
becoming incarnate to capacitate himself for the purchase of redemption, Page:
138 PART II. Of the purchase itself, Page: 144* SECT. I. What is intended by
Christ's purchasing redemption, Page: 145. SECT. II. General observations
concerning those things by which this purchase was made, Page: 145. SECT. III.
The obedience and sufferings by which Christ purchased redemption particularly
considered, Page: 148.
IMPROVEMENT. SECT. I. Reproof of unbelief, self righteousness* and careless
neglect of salvation, Page: 163 SECT. II. Encouragement to burd^ned souls to
trust in Christ for salvation, Page: 170

PERIOD. III. From Christ's resurrection to the end of the world, Page: 171
INTRODUCTION. General observations concerning this period* Page: 173 PART I. Of
th^se things whereby Christ was put into an immediate capacity for
accomplishing the ends of his purchase, Page: 181 PART II. How Christ
accomplished this success, Page: 184 SECT. I. How this success is accomplished
by God's grace here, Page: 184 I. The means of this success established after
Christ's resurrection. Page: 184 II. The success itself. Page: 190 FIRST, In
the suffering state of the church from the resurrect^on of Christ to the fall
of Antichrist* Page: 190 I. From Christ's resurrection till the destruction of
Jerusalem, Page: 192 II. From the destruction of Jerusalem to the destruction
of the Heathen empire in the time of Constantine the Great, Page: 200
INFERENCE, Truth of Christianity argued from the success of the gospel in both
these periods, Page: 208 III. Success of redemption from the time of
Constantine the Great till the fall of Antichrist, Page: 211 1st, From
Constantine till the rise of Antichrist, Page: 219 2dly, From the rise of
Antichrist till the Reformation, Page: 219 3dly From the Reformation till the
present time, Page: 222 1. Of the Reformation itself, Page: 222 2. Of the
opposition which the devil has made to the interests of religion in the
churches of the Reformation. Page: 224 3. What success the g^spel has lately
had in these churches, Page: 230 4. Present state of things with regard to the
success of the gospel, Page: 233

APPLICATION. 1. Truth of Christianity argued from the events of this period,
Page: 237 2 The spirit of true Christians a spirit of suffering, Page: 245 3
What reason we have to expect that events foretold in scripture not yet
fulfilled, shall be accomplished, Page: 246 4thly* How the success of
redemption shall be carried on from the present time till Antichrist is fallen,
Page: 247

SECONDLY Success of redemption through that space wherein the Christian church
shall for the most part enjoy prosperity Page: 261 I. Prosperity of the church
through the greater part of this period, Page: 261 II. The great apostasy that
shall take place* and the danger that shall threaten the church toward the end
of this period, Page: 267


SECT. II. How the success of redemption shall be accomplished in glory, Page:
270 General remarks on this success, Page: 270 The particular manner in which
this success is accomplished, Page: 271

IMPROVEMENT OF THE WHOLE. I. How great a work the work of redemption is, Page:
283 II. God the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and ending of all things, Page:
285 III. Christ in all things has the pre eminence. Page: 287 IV. The
consistency, order, and beauty of providence, Page: 288 V The scriptures the
word of God. Page: 289 VI. The majesty and power of God in the work of
redemption, Page: 291 VII The glorious wisdom of God in the work of redemption,
Page: 292 VIII The stability of God's mercy and faithfulness to his people,
Page: 293 IX. How happy a s^ciety the church of Christ is, Page: 294 X. The
misery of those that are not interested in Christ, Page: 294


A HISTORY Of the WORK of REDEMPTION.
ISAIAH li.8. For the ^^th shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall
eat them like w^^l: but my righteousness shall be for ever, and my salvation
from generation to generation.


THE design of this chapter is to comfort the church under her sufferings, and
the persecutions of her enemies; and the argument of consolation insisted on
is, the constancy and perpetuity of God's mercy and faithfulness toward her,
which shall be manifest in continuing to work salvation for her, protecting her
against all assaults of her ene^^ies, and carrying her safely though all the
changes of the world, and finally ^^owning her with victory and deliverance.

In the text, this happiness of the church of God is set forth by comparing it
with the contrary fate of her enemies that oppress her. And therein we may
observe,

1. How short lived the power and prosperity of the church's enemies are: The
moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool;
i. e. however great their prosperity i^, and however great their present glory,
they shall by degrees consume and vanish away by a secret curse of God, till
they come to nothing; and all their power and glory, and so their persecutions,
eternally cease, and they be finally and irrecoverably ruined, as the finest
and most glorious apparel will in (...) wear away, and be consumed by moths and
rottenness. We learn who those are that shall thus consume away, by the
foregoing verse, viz. those that are the enemies of God's people: Hearken unto
(...), ye that know righteousness, the people in whose heart is my law, fear ye
not the reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings.

2. The contrary hap^y lot and portion of God's church, expressed in these
words, My righteousness shall be for ever, and my salvation from generation to
generation. Who are meant as those that shall have the benefit of this, we also
learn by the preceding verse, viz. They that know righteousness, and the people
in whose heart is God's law; or, in one word, the church of God. And concerning
this happiness of theirs here spoken of, we may observe two things, viz. 1.
Wherein it consists; 2. In continuance.

(1) Wherein it consists, viz. In God's righteousness and salvation toward
them. By God's righteousness here, is meant his faithfulness in fulfilling his
covenant promises to his church, or his faithfulness toward his church and
people in bestowing the benefits, of the covenant of grace upon them; which
benefits though they are bestowed of free and sovereign grace, as being
altogether undeserved; yet as God has been pleased, by the promises of the
covenant of grace, to bind himself to bestow them, so they (...) bestowed in
the exercise of God's righteousness or justice. Therefore the apostle says,
Heb. vi.10. God is not unrighteous, to forget your work and labor of love. And
so, 1. John i.9. If (...) confess our sins, he is faithful, and just to forgive
us our sins, and to cleanse us from all our unrighteousness. So the word
righteousness is very often used in scripture for God's covenant-faithfulness
so it is used in Nehem. ix.8. Thou have performed thy words, for thou art
righteous. So we are often to understand righteousness and covenant-mercy for
the same thing; as Psalm. xxiv.5. He shall receive the blessing from the Lord,
and righteousness from the God of his salvation. Psalm. xxxvi.10 Continue thy
loving kindness to them that know thee, and thy righteousness to the upright in
heart. And Psalm. li.14. Deliver me from blood-guiltiness, O God, thou God of my
salvation: and my tongue shall sing aloud of thy righteousness. Dan. ix.16. O
Lord, according to thy righteousness, I beseech thee, let thine anger and thy
fury be turned away. -- And so in innumerable other places.

The other word here used is salvation. Of these two, God's righteousness and
his salvation, the one is the cause, of which the other is the effect. God's
righteousness, or covenant-mercy, is the root of which his salvation is the
faith. Both of them relate to the covenant of grace. The one is God's
covenant-mercy and faithfulness, the other intends that work of God by which
this covenant-mercy is accomplished in the fruits of it. For salvation is the
sum of all those works of God by which the benefits that are by the covenant of
grace are procured and bestowed.

(2) We may observe its continuance, signified here by two expressions; for
ever, and from generation to generation. The latter seems to be explanatory of
the former. The phrase for ever, is variously used in scripture. Sometimes
hereby is meant as long as a man lives. So it is said, the servant that has his
ear bored through with an awl to the door of his master, shall be his for ever.
Sometimes thereby is meant during the continuance of the Jewish state. So of
many of the ceremonial and Levitical laws it is said that they should be
statues for ever. Sometimes it means as long as the world shall stand, or to
the end of the generations of men. So it is said, Eccles. i.4. "One generation
passes away and another comes; but the earth abides forever." Sometimes
thereby is meant to all eternity. So it is said, "God is blessed for ever,"
Romans i 15. And so it is said, John vi, 51. "If any man eat of this bread, he
shall live for ever." -- Which of these senses is here to be understood, the
next words determine, viz. to the end of the world, or to the end of the
generations of men. It is said in the next words, "and my salvation from
generation to generation." Indeed the fruits of God's salvation shall remain
after the end of the world, as appears by the 6th verse: "Lift up your eyes to
the heavens, and look upon the earth beneath: for the heavens shall vanish away
like smoke, and the earth shall wax old like a garment, and they that dwell
therein shall die in like manner, but my salvation shall be for ever, and my
righteousness shall not be abolished." But the work of salvation itself toward
the church shall continue to be wrought till then: till the end of the world,
God will go on to accomplish deliverance and salvation for the church, from all
her enemies; for that is what the prophet is here speaking of; till the end of
the world; till her enemies cease to be, as to any power to molest the church.
This expression, from generation to generation* may determine us as to the time
which God continues to carry on the work of salvation for his church, both with
respect to the beginning and end. It is from generation to generation, i. e.
throughout all generations; beginni^g with the ge^eration^ of men on earth, and
not ending till these generations end, at the end of the world. -- Therefore we
deduce from these words th^^

DOCTRINE. The work of redemption is a work that God carries on from the fall
of man to the end of the world.

The generations of mankind on the earth did not begin till after the fall. The
beginning of the posterity of our first parents was after the fall; for all
their posterity, by ordinary generation, are partakers of the fall, and of the
corruption of nature tha^ followed from it; and these generations, by which the
human race i^ propagated, shall continue to the end of the world: so these two
are the limits of the generations of men on the earth; the fall of man, the
beginning; and of the end of the world, or the day of judgment, the end. The
same are the limits of the work of redemption as to those progressive works of
God, by which that redemption is brought about and accomplished, though not as to
the fruits of it; for they, as was said before, shall be to all eternity.

The work of redemption and the work of salvation are the same thing. What is
sometimes in scripture c^lled God's saving his people, is in other places
called his redeeming them. So Christ is called both the Savior and the
Redeemer of his people.

BEFORE entering on the proposed History of the Work of Redemption, I would,

1. Explain the terms made use of in the doctrine, -- and,

2. Show what those things are that are designed to be accomplished by this
great work of God.

First, I would show in what sense the terms of the doctrine are used. -- And,
1. I would show how I would be understood when I use the word redemption; --
and, 2. how I would be understood when I say, this work is a work of God
carried on from the fall of man to the end of the world.

I. I would show how I would be understood when I use the word redemption. --
Here it may be observed* that the work of redemption is sometimes understood in
a mere limited sense, for the purchase of salvation; for so the word strictly
signifies, a purchase of deliverance; and if we take the word in this
restrained sense, the work of redemption was not so long in doing. But it was
begun and finished with Christ's humilation. It was all wrought while Christ
was upon earth. It was begun with Christ's incarnation, and carried on through
Christ's life, and finished with his death, or the time of his remaining under
the power of death, which ended in his resurrection: and so we say, that the
day of Christ's resurrection is the day when Christ finished the work of
redemption, i e then the purchase was finished, and the work itself, and all
that appertained to it, was virtually done and finished, but not actually.

But then sometimes the work of redemption is taken more largely, including all
that God works or accomplishes tending to this end; not only the purchasing the
redemption, but also all God's works that were properly preparatory to the
purchase, or as applying the purchase and accomplishing the success of it: so
that the whole dispensation, as it includes the preparation, and the purchase,
and the application and success of Christ's redemption, is here called the work
of redemption. All that Christ does in this great aff^ir as mediator, in any of
his offices, either of prophet, priest, or king; either when he was in this
world, in his human nature, or before or since; and not only what Christ the
mediator has done, but also what the Father and the Holy Ghost, have done, as
united or confederated in this design of redeeming sinful men; or, in one word,
all that is wrought in execution of the eternal covenant of redemption; this is
what I call the work of redemption in the doctrine; for it is all but one work,
one design. The various dispensations or works that belong to it, are but the
several parts of one scheme. It is but one design that is formed to which all
the offices of Christ do directly tend, and in which all the persons of the
Trinity do conspire, and all the various dispensations that belong to it are
united; and the several wheels are one m^chine, to answer one end, and produce
one effect.

II. When I say, this work is carried on from the fall of man to the end of the
world; in order to the full understanding of my meaning in it, I would desire
two or three things to be observed.

I. That it is not meant, that nothing was done in order to it before the fall
of man. There were many things done in order to this work of redemption before
that. Some things were done before the world was created, yea from all
eternity. The persons of the Trinity were as it were confederated in a design
and covenant of redemption; in which covenant the Father had appointed the Son,
and the Son had undertaken the work; and all things to be accomplished in the
work were stipulated and agreed. Besides these, there were things done at the
creation of the world, in order to that wo^k, before man fell; for the world
itself seems to have been created in order to it. The work of creation was in
order to God's works of providence: So that if it be enquired, which of these
kinds of works is the greatest, the works of creation or the works of
providence? I answer, the works of providence; because God's works of
providence are the end of his works of creation, as the building an house, or
the forming an engine or machine, is for its use. But God's main work of
providence is this great work of God that the doctrine speaks of, as may more
fully appear hereafter.

The creation of heaven was in order to the work of redemption: it was to be an
habitation for the redeemed: Matthew. xxv.34. "Then shall the King say unto them
on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared
for you from the foundation of the world." Even the angels were created to be
employed in this work. Therefore the apostle calls them, " ministering spirits,
sent forth to minister for them who shall be heirs of salvation," Heb. i.14. As
to this lower world, it was doubtless created to be a stage upon which this
great and wonderful work of redemption should be transacted: and therefore, as
might be shown, in many respects this lower world is wisely fitted, in the
formation, for such a state of man as he is in since the fall, under a
possibility of redemption; so that when it is said, that the work of redemption
is carried on from the fall of man to the end of the world, it is not meant,
that all that ever was done in order to redemption has been done since the
fall. Nor,

2. Is it meant that there will be no remaining fruits of this work after the
end of the world. The greatest fruits of all will be after that. That glory and
blessedness that will be the sum of all the fruits, will remain to all the
saints after that. That work of redemption is not an eternal work, i. e. it is
not a work always a doing and never accomplished. But the fruits of this work
are eternal fruits. The work has an issue. But in the issue the end will be
obtained; which end will never have an end. As those things that were in order
to this work before the beginning of the world, as God's electing love, and the
covenant of redemption, never had a beginning; so the fruits of this work, that
shall be after the end of the world, never will have an end. therefore,

3. When it is said in the doctrine, that this is a work that God is carrying
on from the fall of man to the end of the world, what I mean is* that those
things that belong to this work itself, and are parts of this scheme, are all
this while accomplishing. There are things that are in order to it that are
before the beginning of it, and fruits of it that are after it is finished. But
the work itself is so long a doing, even from the fall of man to the end of the
world, it is all this while a carrying on. It was begun immediately upon the
fall and will continue to the end of the world, and then will be finished. The
various dispensations of God that are in this space, do belong to the same
work, and to the same design, and have all one issue; and therefore are all to
be reckoned but as several parts of one work, as it were several successive
motions of one machine, to bring about in the conclusion one great event.

Here also we must distinguish between the parts of redemption itself, and the
parts of the work by which that redemption is wrought out. There is a
difference between the parts of the benefits procured and bestowed, and the
parts of the work of God by which those benefits were procured and bestowed.
As, for example, there is a difference between the parts of the benefit that
the children of Israel received, consisting in their redemption out of Egypt,
and the parts of that work of God by which this was wrought. The redemption of
the children of Israel out of Egypt, considered as the benefit which they
enjoyed, consisted of two parts, viz. their deliverence from their former
Egyptian bondage and misery, and their being brought into a more happy state,
as the servants of God, and heirs of Canaan. But there are many more things
which are parts of that work of God which is called his work of redemption of
Israel out of Egypt. To this belongs his calling of Moses, his sending him to
Pharaoh, and all the signs and wonders he wrought in Egypt, and his bringing
such terrible judgments on the Egyptians, and many other things.

It is this work by which God effects redemption that we are speaking of. This
work is carried on from the fall of man to the end of the world; and it is so
in two respects.

(1) With respect to the effect wrought on the souls of the redeemed; which is
common to all ages from the fall of man to the end of the world. This effect
that I here speak of, is the application with respect to the souls of
particular persons, in converting, justifying, sanctifying, and glorifying
them. By these things the souls of particular persons are actually redeemed,
and do receive the benefit of the work of redemption in its effect in their
souls. And in this sense the work of redemption is carried on in all ages of
the world, from the fall of man to the end of the world. The work of God in
converting so^ls opening blind eyes, unstopping deaf ears, raising dead souls
to life, and rescueing the miserable captivated souls out of the hands of
Satan, was begun soon after the fall of man, has been carried on in the world
ever since to this day and will be to the end of the world. God has always,
ever since the first erecting of the church of the redeemed after the fall, had
such a church in the world. Though oftentimes is has been reduced to a very
narrow compass, and to low circumstances; yet it has never wholly failed.

As God carries on the work of converting the souls of fallen men through all
these ages, so he goe^ on to justify them, to blo^ out all their sins, and to
accept them as righteous in his fight, through the righteousness of Christ, and
adopt and receive them from being the children of Satan, to be his own
children; so also he goes on to sanctify, or to carry on the work of his grace,
which he has begun in them, and to comfort them with the consolations of his
Spirit, and to glorify them, to bestow upon them, when their bodies die, that
eternal glory which is the fruit of the purchase of Christ. What is said, Romans
viii.30. "Whom he did predestinate, them he also called; and whom he called,
them he also justified; and whom he justified, them he also glorified:" I say
this is applicable to all ages, from the fall, to the end of the world.

The way that the work of redemption, with respect to these effects of it on
the souls of the redeemed, is carried on from the fall to the end of the world,
is by repeating and continually working the same work over again, though in
different persons, from age to age. But,

(2) The work of redemption with respect to the grand design in general, as it
respects the universal subject and end, is carried on from the fall of man to
the end of the world in a different manner, not merely by repeating or renewing
the same effect in the different subjects of it, but by many successive works
and dispensations of God, all tending to one great end and effect, all united
as the several parts of a scheme, and all together making up one great work.
Like an house or temple that is building; first, the workmen are sent forth,
then the materials are gathered, then the ground fitted, then the foundation is
laid, then the super-structure is erected, one part after another, till at
length the top-stone is laid, and all is finished. Now the work of redemption
in that large sense that has been explained, may be compared to such a
building, that is carrying on from the fall of man to the end of the world. God
went about it immediately after the fall of man. Some things were done toward
it immediately, as may be shown hereafter; and so God has proceeded, as it
were, getting materials and building, ever since; and so will proceed to the
end of the world; and then the time will come when the top-stone shall be
brought forth, and all appear complete and consummate. The glorious structure
will then stand forth in its proper perfection.

This work in the former respect that has been mentioned, viz. as to the effect
on the souls of particular persons that are redeemed, by its being an effect
that is common to all ages. The work in this latter respect, viz. as it
respects the church of God, and the grand design in general* is carried on, not
only by that which is common to all ages, but by successive works wrought in
different ages, all parts of one whole, or one great scheme, whereby one work
is brought about by various steps, one step in one age, and another in another.
It is this carrying on of the work of redemption that I shall chiefly insist
upon, though not excluding the former; for one necessarily supposes the other.

Having thus explained what I mean by the terms of the doctrine: that you may
the more clearly see how the great design and work of redemption is carried on
from the fall of man to the end of the world; I say, in order to this,

I now proceed, in the second place, to show what is the des^gn of this great
work, or what things are designed to be done by it. In order to see how a
design is carried on, we must first know what the design is. To know how a
workman proceeds, and to understand the various steps he takes in order to
accomplish a piece of work, we need to be informed what he is about, or what
the thing is that he intends to accomplish; otherwise we may stand by, and see
him do one thing after another, and be quite puzzled and in the dark, seeing
nothing of his scheme, and understanding nothing of what he means by i^. If an
architect, with a great number of hands, were a building some great palace, and
one that was a stranger to such things should stand by, and see some men
digging in the earth, others bringing timber, others hewing stones, and the
like, he might see that there was a great deal done; but if he knew not the
design, it would all appear to him confusion. Therefore, that the great works
and dispensations of God that belong to this great affair of redemption may not
appear like confusion to you, I would set before you briefly the main things
designed to be accomplished in this great work, to accomplish which God began
to work presently after the fall of man, and will continue working to the end
of the world, when the whole work ^ill appear completely finished. The main
things designed to be done by it are these that follow.

I. It is to put all God's enemies under his feet, and that the goodness of God
should finally appear triumphing over all evil. Soon after the world was
created, evil entered into the world in the fall of the angels and man.
Presently after God had made rational creatures, there were enemies who rose up
against him from among them; and in the fall of man evil entered into this
lower world, and God's enemies rose up against him here. Satan rose up against
God, endeavoring to frustrate his design in the creation of this lower world,
and to destroy his workmanship here, and to wrest the government of this lower
world out of his hands, and usurp the throne himself, and set up himself as god
of this world instead of the God that made it. To these ends he introduced sin
into the world; and having made man God's enemy, he brought guilt on man, and
brought death and the most extreme and dreadful misery into the world.

Now one great design of God in the affair of redemption was, to reduce and
subdue those enemies of God, till they should all be put under God's feet: 1
Cor. xv.25. "He must reign till he has put all enemies under his feet." Things
were originally so planned and designed, that he might disappoint and confound,
and triumph over Satan, and that he might be bruised under Christ's feet, Gen
iii.15. The promise was given, that the feed of the woman should bruise the
serpent's head. It was a part of God's original design in this work, to destroy
the works of the devil, and confound him in all his purposes: 1 John iii 8.
"For this purpose was the Son of God manifested, that he might destroy the
works of the devil." It was a part of his design, to triumph over sin, and over
the corruptions of men, and to root them out of the hearts of his people, by
conforming them to himself. He designed also, that his grace should triumph
over man's guilt, and that infinite demerit that there is in sin. Again, it was
a part of his design, to triumph over death; and however this is the last enemy
that shall be destroyed, yet that shall finally be vanquished and destroyed.

God thus appears gloriously above all evil; and triumphing over all his
enemies, was one great thing that God intended by the work of redemption; and
the work by which this was to be done, God immediately went about as soon as
man fell; and so goes on till he fully accomplishes it in the end of the world.

II. In doing this, God's design was perfectly to restore all the ruins of the
fall, so far as concerns the elect part of the world, by his Son; and therefore
we read of the restitution of all things, Acts iii.21. "Whom the heaven must
receive, until the times of the restitution of all things;" and of the times
of refreshing from the presence of the Lord Jesus, Acts iii.19. "Repent ye
therefore and be converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times
of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord."

Man's soul was ruined by the fall; the image of God was ruined; man's nature
was corrupted and destroyed, and man became dead in sin. The design of God was,
to restore the soul of man; to restore life to it, and the image of God, in
conversion, and to carry on the restoration in sanctification, and to perfect
it in glory. Man's body was ruined; by the fall it became subject to death. The
design of God was, to restore it from this ruin, and not only to deliver it
from death in the resurrection, but to deliver it from mortality itself, in
making it like unto Christ's glorious body* The world was ruined, as to man, as
effectually as if it had been reduced to chaos again; all heaven and earth were
overthrown. But the design of God was, to restore all, and as it were to create
a new heaven and a new earth: Is. lxv.17. "Behold, I creat new heavens, and a
new earth; and the former shall not be remembered* nor come into mind." 2 Pet.
iii.13. "Nevertheless we, according to his promise, look for new heavens, a new
earth, wherein dwells righteousness."

The work by which this was to be done, was begun immediately after the fall,
and so is carried on till all is finished at the end, when the whole world,
heaven and earth, shall be restored; and there shall be, as it were, new
heavens, and a new earth, in a spiritual sense, at the end of the world. Thus
it is represented, Rev. xxi.1. "And I saw a new heaven, and a new earth; for
the first heaven and the first earth were passed away."

III. Another great design of God in the work of redemption, was to gather
together in one all things in Christ, in heaven and in earth, i. e. all elect
creatures; to bring all elect creatures, in heaven and in earth, to an union
one to another in one body, under one head, and to unite all together in one
body to God the Father. This was begun soon after the fall, and is carried on
through all ages of the world, and finished at the end of the world.

IV. God designed by this work to perfect and complete the glory of all the
elect by Christ. It was a design of God to advance the elect to an exceeding
pitch of glory, "such as the eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor has ever
entered into the heart of man." He intended to bring them to perfect excellency
and beauty in his image, and in holiness, which is the proper beauty of
spiritual beings; and to advance them to a glorious degree of honor, and also
to an ineffable pitch of pleasure and joy; and thus to glorify the whole church
of elect men in soul and body, and with them to bring the glory of the elect
angels to its highest pitch under one head. The work which tends to this, God
began immediately after the fall, and carries on through all ages, and will
have perfected at the end of the world.

V. In all this God designed to accomplish the glory of the blessed Trinity in
an exceeding degree. God had a design of glorifying himself from eternity; to
glorify each person in the Godhead. The end must be considered as first in
order of nature, and then the means; and therefore we must conceive, that God
having professed this end, had then as it were the means to choose; and the
principal mean that he pitched upon was this great work of redemption that we
are speaking of. It was his design in this work to glorify his only begotten
Son, Jesus Christ; and it was his design, by the Son to glorify the Father:
John xiii.31.32. "Now is the Son of man glorified, and God is glorified in him.
If God be glorified in him, God also shall glorify him in himself, and shall
straightway glorify him." It was his design that the Son should be glorified,
and should glorify the Father by what should be accomplished by the Spirit to
the glory of the Spirit, that the whole Trinity, conjunctly, and each person
singly, might be exceedingly glorified. The work that was the appointed means
of this, was begun immediately after the fall, and is carried on till, and
f^nished at, the end of the world, when all this intended glory shall be fully
accomplished in all things.

HAVING thus explained the terms made use of in the doctrine, and shown what
the things are which are to be accomplished by this great work of God, I
proceed now to the proposed History; that is, to show, how what was designed by
the work of redemption has been accomplished, in the various steps of this
work, from the fall of man to the end of the world.

In order to this, I would divide this whole space of time into three periods:
-- the

1st, reaching from the fall of man to the incarnation of Christ; -- the

2d, from Christ's incarnation till his resurrection; or the whole time of
Christ's humiliation; -- the

3d, from thence to the end of the world.

It may be some may be ready to think this a very unequal division: and it is
so indeed in fou^^ respects. It is so, because the second period is so much the
greatest: for although it be so much shorter than either of the other, being
but between thirty and forty years, whereas both the other contain thousands;
yet in this affair that we are now upon, it is more than both the others. -- I
would therefore proceed to show distinctly how the work of redemption is
carried on from the fall of man to the end of the world, through each of these
periods in their order; which I would do under three propositions; one
concerning each period.

I. That from the fall of man till the incarnation of Christ, God was doing
those things that were preparatory to Christ's coming, and working out
redemption, and were forerunners and earnests of it.

II. That the time from Christ's incarnation, till his resurrection, was spent
in procuring and purchasing redemption.

III That the space of time from the resurrection of Christ to the end of the
world, is all taken up in bringing about or accomplishing the great effect or
success of that purchase.

In a particular consideration of these three propositions, the great truth
taught in the doctrine may perhaps appear in a clear light, and we may see how
the work of redemption is carried on from the fall of man to the end of the
world.

PERIOD I. From the Fall to the Incarnation.
MY first task is, to show how the work of redemption is carried on from the
fall of man to the incarnation of Christ, under the first prop^sition, viz.

That the space of time from the fall of man to the incarnation of Christ, was
taken up in doing those things that were forerunners and earnests of Christ's
coming, and working out redemption, and were preparatory to it.

The great works of God in the world during this whole space of time, were all
preparatory to this. There were many great changes and revolutions in the
world, and they were all only the turning of of the wheels of providence in
order to this, to make way for the coming of Christ, and what he was to do in
the world. They all pointed hither, and all issued here. Hither tended
especially all God's great works towa^ds his church. The church was under
various dispensations of providence, and in very various circumstances, before
Christ came. But all these dispensations were to prepare the way for his
coming. God wrought salvation for the souls of men through all that space of
time, though the number was very small to what it was afterward; and all this
salvation was, as it were, by way of anticipation. All the souls that were
saved before Christ came, were only as it were the earnests of the future
harvest.

G^d wrought many lesser s^lvations and deliverances for his church and people
before Christ come. These salvations were all but so many images and
forerunners of the great salvation Christ was to work out when he should come.
God revealed himself of old, from time to time, from the fall of man to the
coming of Christ. The church during that space of time enjoyed the light of
divine revelation, or God's word. They had in a degree the light of the gospel.
But all these revelations were only so many forerunners and earnests of the
great light that he should bring who came to be the light of the world That
whole space of time was as it were the time of night, wherein the church of God
was not indeed wholly without light: but it was like the light of the moon and
stars that we have in the ^ight; a dim light in comparison of the light of the
sun, and mixed with a great deal of darkness. It had no glory, by reason of the
glory that excels, 2 Cor. iii.10. The church had indeed the light of the
sun* but it was only as reflected from the moon and stars. The church all that
while was a minor. This the apostle evidently teaches in Gal. iv.1.2.3. "Now I
say, that the heir as long as he is a child, differs nothing from a servant,
though he be lord of all; but is under tutors and governors, until the time
appointed of the father. Even so we, when we were children, were in bondage
under the elements of the world."

But here, for the greater clearness and distinctness, I would subdivide this
period from the fall of man to the coming of Christ into six lesser periods, or
parts: -- The 1st, extending from the fall to the flood; -- the 2d, from thence
to the calling of Abraham; -- the 3d, from thence to Moses; -- the 4th, from
thence to David; -- the 5th, from David to the captivity into Babylon; -- and
the 6th, from thence to the incarnation of Christ.


PART I. From the fall to the flood.
THIS was a period farthest of all distant from Christ's incarnation; yet then
this great work was begun to be carried on; then was this glorious building
begun, that will not be finished till the end of the world, as I would now show
you how. To this purpose I would observe,

I. As soon as ever man fell, Christ entered on his mediatorial work. Then it
was that Christ first took on him the work and office of a mediator. He had
undertaken it before the world was made. He stood engaged with the Father to
appear as man's mediator, and to take on that office when there should be
occasion, from all eternity. But now the time was come. When man fell, then the
occasion came; and then Christ immediately, without further delay, entered on
his work, and took on him that office that he had stood engaged to take on him
from eternity. As soon as ever man fell, Christ the eternal Son of God clothed
himself with the mediatorial character, and therein presented himself before
the Father. He immediately stepped in between an holy, infinite, offended
Majesty, and offending mankind* and was accepted in his interposition; and so
wrath was prevented from going forth in the full execution of that amazing
curse that man had brought on himself.

It is manifest that Christ began to exercise the office of mediator between
God and man as soon as ever man fell, because mercy began to be exercised
toward man immediately. There was mercy in the forbearance of God, that he did
not destroy him, as he did the angels when they fell. But there is no mercy
exercised toward fallen man but through a mediator. If God had not in mercy
restrained Satan, he would immediately have seized on his pr^y. Christ began to
do the part of an intercessor for man as soon as he fell. There is no mercy
exercised toward man but what is obtained through Christ's intercession: so
that now Christ was entered on his work that he was to continue in throughout
all ages of the world. From that day forward Christ took on him the ca^e of the
church of the elect: he took on him the care of fallen man in the exercise of
all his offices; he undertook thenceforward to teach mankind in the exercise of
his prophetical office; and also to intercede for fallen man in his priestly
office; and he took on him, as it were, the care and burden of the government
of the church, and of the world of mankind, from this day forward. He from that
time took upon him the care of the defense of his elect church from all their
enemies. When Satan, the grand enemy, had conquered and overthrown man, the
business of refining and conquering him was committed to Christ. He
thenceforward undertook to manage that subtle powerful adversary. He was then
appointed the Captain of the Lord's hosts, and the Captain of their salvation,
and always acted as such thenceforward: and so he appeared from time to time,
and he will continue to act as such to the end of the world. Henceforward this
lower world, with all its concerns, was, as it were, d^volved upon the Son of
God; for when man had sinned, God the Father would have no more to do with man
immediately; he would no more have any immediate concern with this world of
mankind, that had apostatized from and rebelled against him. He would
henceforward have no concern with man, but only through a mediator, either in
teaching men, or in governing or bestowing any benefits on them.

Therefore, when we read in sacred history what God did from time to time
toward his church and people, and what he said to them, and how he revealed
himself to them, we are to understand it especially of the second person of the
Trinity. When we read of God's appearing after the fall, from time to time, in
some visible form or outward symbol of his presence, we are ordinarily, if not
universally, to understand it especially of the second person of the Trinity;
which may be argued from John i.18. "No man has seen God at any time; the only
begotten Son, which is in the bosom of the Father, he has declared him." He is
therefore called "the image of the invisible God," Col. i.15.; intimating, that
though God the Father be invisible, yet Christ is his image or (...)
presentation, by which he is seen, or by which the church of God has often had
a representation of him, that is not invisible* and in particular that Christ
has after appeared in an human form.

Yea not only was this lower world devolved on Christ, that he might have the
care and government of it, and order it agreeably to his design of redemption,
but also in some respect the whole universe. The angels from that time were
committed to him, to be subject to him in his mediatorial office, to be
ministering spirits to him in this affair; and accordingly were so from this
time forward, as is manifest by the scripture-history, wherein we have accounts
from time to time of their acting as ministering spirits in the affairs of the
church of Christ.

Therefore we may suppose, that immediately on the fall of man, it was made
known in heaven among the angels, that God had a design of redemption with
respect to fallen man, and that Christ had now taken upon him the office and
work of a mediator between God and man, that they might know their business
henceforward, which was to be subservient to Christ in this office. As Christ,
in this office, has since that, as God-man, Mediator, been solemnly exalted and
enstalled the King of heaven, and is thenceforward as God-man, Me^iator, the
Light, and as it were, the Sun of heaven, agreeable to Rev. xxi.23. "And the
city had no need of the sun, neither of the moon, to shine in it; for the glory
of God did lighten it, and the Lamb is the light thereof;" so this revelation
that was made in heaven among the angels, of Christ's now having taken on him
the office of a mediator between God and man, was as it were the first dawning
of this light in heaven. When Christ ascended into heaven after his passion,
and was solemnly installed in the throne as King of heaven, then this sun rose
in heaven, even the Lamb that is the light of the new Jerusalem. But the light
began to dawn immediately after the fall.

II. Presently upon this the gospel was first revealed on the earth, in these
words, Genesis iii.15. "And I will put enmity between thee and the woman, and
between thy seed and her seed: it shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise
his heel." We must suppose, that God's intention of redeeming fallen man was
first signified in heaven, before it was signified on earth, because the
business of the angels as ministering spirits of the Mediator required it; for
as soon as ever Christ had taken on him the work of a mediator, it was
requisite that the angels should be ready immediately to be subservient to him
in that office; so that the light first dawned in heaven; but very soon after
the same was signified on earth. In those words of God there was an intimation
of another surety to be appointed for man, after the first surety had failed.
This was the first revelation of the covenant of grace; this was the first
dawning of the light of the gospel on earth.

This lower world before the fall enjoyed noonday light; the light of the
knowledge of God* the l^ght of his glory, and the light of his favor. But when
man (...) all this light was at once extinguished, and the world reduced back
^g^in to total darkness; a worse darkness than that which was in the beginning
of the world that we read of Genesis i.2 "And the earth was without form, and
void, and darkness (...) upon the ^ace of the deep." This was a darkness a
thousand times more remediless than that. Neither man nor angels could find out
any way whereby this darkness might be scattered. This darkness appeared in its
blackness then, when Adam and his wife saw that they were naked, and ^ewed fig
leaves, and when they heard the voice of the Lord God walking in the garden,
and hid themselves among the trees of the garden; and when God first called
them to an account, and said to Adam, What is this that thou have done? "Have
thou eaten of the tree, whereof I commanded thee, that thou should not eat?"
Then we may suppose that their hearts were filled with shame and terror. But
these words of God, Genesis iii.15. were the first dawning of the light of the
gospel after this darkness. Now first appeared some glimmering of light after
this dismal darkness, which before this was without one glimpse of light, any
beam of comfort, or any the least hope. It was an obscure revelation of the
gospel; and was not made to Adam or Eve directly, but it was in what God said
to the serpent. But yet it was very comprehensive, as might be easily shown,
would it not take up too much time.

Here was a certain intimation of a merciful design by "the seed of the woman,"
which was like the first glimmerings of the light of the sun in the east when
the day first dawns. This intimation of mercy was given them even before
sentence was pronounced on either Adam or Eve, from tenderness to them, to whom
God designed mercy, lest they should be overborn with a sentence of
condemnation, without having any thing held forth whence they could gather any
hope.

One of those great things that were intended to be done by the work of
redemption, is more plainly intimated here than the rest, viz. God's subduing
his enemies under the feet of his Son. This was threatened now, and God's
design of this was now first declared, which was the work Christ had now
undertaken, and which he soon began, and carried on henceforward, and will
perfectly accomplish at the end of the world. Satan probably had triumphed
greatly in the fall of man, as though he had defeated the design of God in the
creation of man and the world in general. But in these words God gives him a
plain intimation, that he should not finally triumph, but that a complete
victory and triumph should be obtained over him by the seed of the woman.

This revelation of the gospel in this verse was the first thing that Christ
did in his prophetical office. You may remember that it was said in the first
of those three propositions that have been mentioned, that from the fall of man
to the incarnation of Christ, God was doing those things that were preparatory
to Christ's coming and working out redemption, and were forerunners and
earnests of it. And one of those things which God did in this time (...)
Christ's coming into the world, was to foretell and promise it, as he did from
time to time, from age to age, till Christ came. This was the first promise
that ever was given of it, the first prediction that ever was made of it on
earth.

III. Soon after this, the custom of sacrificing was appointed, to be a steady
type of the sacrifice of Christ till he should come, and offer up himself a
sacrifice to God. Sacrificing was not a custom first established by the
Levitical law of Moses; for it had been a part of God's instituted worship long
before, even from the beginning of God's visible church on earth. We read of
the patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, offering sacrifice, and before them
Noah, and before him Abel. This was by divine appointment; for it was part of
God's worship in his church, that was offered up in faith, and that he
accepted: which proves that it was by his institution; for sacrificing is no
part of natural worship. The light of nature does not teach to offer up beasts
in sacrifice to God; and seeing it was not enjoined by the law of nature, if it
was acceptable to God, it must be by some positive command or institution; for
God has declared his abhorrence of such worship as is taught by the precept of
men without his institution: Is. xxix.13. "Wherefore the Lord said, Forasmuch
as this people draw near me with their mouth, and with their lips do honor me,
but have removed their hearts far from me, and their fear tow^rds me is taught
by the precept of men; therefore behold, I will preceed to do a mavelous
work," etc. And such worship as has not a warrant from divine institution,
cannot be offered up in faith, because faith has no foundation where there is
no divine appointment. It cannot be offered up in faith of God's acceptance;
for men have no warrant to hope for God's acceptance, in that which is not of
his appointment, and in that to which he has not promised his acceptance: and
therefore it follows, that the custom of offering sacrifices to God was
instituted soon after the fall; for the scripture teaches us, that Abel offered
"the firstlings of his flock, and of the fat thereof," Genesis iv.4.; and that he
was accepted of God in his offering, Heb. xi.4. And there is nothing in the
story that looks as though the institution was first given then when Abel
offered up that sacrifice to God; but it appears as though Abel only therein
complied with the custom already established.

It is very probable that it was instituted immediately after God had revealed
the covenant of grace, in Genesis iii.15.; which covenant and promise was the
foundation on which the custom of sacrificing was built. That promise was the
first stone that was laid toward this glorious building, the work of
redemption, which will be finished at the end of the world. And the next stone
which was laid upon that, was the institution of sacrifices, to be a type of
the great sacrifice.

The next thing that we have an account of after God had pronounced sentence on
the serpent, on the woman and on the man, was, that God made them coats of
skins and clothed them; which by the generality of divines, are thought to be
the skins of beasts slain in sacrifice; for we have no account of any thing
else that should be the occasion of man's slaying beasts, but only to offer
them in sacrifice, till after the flood. Men were not wont to eat the flesh of
beasts for their common food till after the flood. The first food of man in
paradise before the fall was the fruit of the trees of paradise; and when he
was turned out of paradise after the fall then his food was the herb of the
field: Genesis iii, 18. "And thou shall eat of the herb of the field." The first
grant that he had to eat flesh as his common food was after the flood: Genesis ix,
3. Every moving thing that lives shall be meat for you; even as the green herb
have I given you all things." So that it is likely that these skins that Adam
and Eve were clothed with, were the skins of their sacrifices. God's clothing
them with these was a lively figure of their being clothed with the
righteousness of Christ. This clothing was no clothing of their own obtaining;
but it was God that gave it them. It is said, "God made them coats of skins,
and clothed them;" as the righteousness our naked souls are clothed with, is
not our righteousness but the righteousness which is of God. It is he only
clothes the naked soul.

Our first parents, who were naked* were clothed at the expense of life. Beasts
were slain, and resigned up their lives a sacrifice to God, to afford clothing
to them to cover their nakedness. So does Christ, to afford clothing to our
naked souls. The skin signifies the life: So Job ii.4. "Skin for skin, yea all
that a man has will he give for his life;" i. e. life for life, Thus our first
parents were covered with skins of sacrifices, as the tabernacle in the
wilderness, which signified the church, was, when it was covered with r^ms
skins died red, as though they were dipped in blood, to signify that Christ's
righteousness was wrought out through the pains of death, under which he shed
his precious blood.

We observed before, that the light that the church enjoyed from the fall of
man, till Christ came, was like the light which we enjoy in the night; not the
light of the sun directly* but as reflected from the moon and stars; which
light did foreshow Christ, the Sun of righteousness that was afterward to
arise. This light of the Sun of righteousness to come they had chiefly two
ways: one was by predictions of Christ to come, whereby his coming was foretold
and promised; the other was by types and shadows, whereby his coming and
redemption were prefigured. The first thing that was done to prepare the way
for Christ in the former of these ways, was in that promise that was just taken
notice of in the foregoing particular; and the first thing of the latter kind,
viz. of types, to fore^how Christ's c^ming, was that institution of sacrifices
that we are now upon. As that promise in Genesis iii.1^. was the first dawn of
gospel light after the fall in prophecy; so the institution of sacrifices was
the first hint of it in types. The giving of that promise was the first thing
that was done after the fall, in this work, in Christ's prophetical office;
institution of sacrifices was the first thing that we read of after the fall,
by which especially Christ exhibited himself in his priestly office.

The institution of sacrificer was a great thing done toward preparing the way
for Christ's coming, and working out redemption. For the sacrifices of the Old
Testament were the main of all the Old Testament types of Christ and his
redemption; and it tended to establish in the minds of God's visible church the
necessity of a propitiatory sacrifice, in order to the Deity's being satisfied
for sin; and so prepared the way for the reception of the glorious gospel, that
reveals the great sacrifice in the visible church, and not only so, but through
the world of mankind. For from this institution of sacrifices that was after
the fall, all nations derived the custom of sacrificing. For this custom of
offering up sacrifices to the gods, to atone for their sins, was common to all
nations. No nation, however barbarous, was found without it any where. This is
a great evidence of the truth of the Christian religion; for no nation, but
only the Jews, could tell how they came by this custom, or to what purpose it
was to offer sacrifices to their deities. The light of nature did not teach
them any such thing. That did not teach them that the gods were hungry, and fed
upon the flesh which they burnt in sacrifice; and yet they all had this custom;
of which no other account can be given, but that they derived it from Noah, who
had it from his ancestors, on whom God had enjoined it as a type of the great
sacrifice of Christ. However, by this means all nations of the world had their
minds possessed with this notion, that an atonement or sacrifice for sin was
necessary; and a way made for their more readily receiving the great doctrine
of the gospel of Christ, which teaches us the atonement and sacrifice of Christ.

IV. God did soon after the fall begin actually to save the souls of men
through Christ's redemption. In this Christ, who had lately taken upon him the
work of Mediator between God and man, did first begin that work, wherein he
appeared in the exercise of his kingly office, as in the sacrifices he was
represented in his priestly office, and in the first prediction of redemption
by Christ he had appeared in the exercise of his prophetical office. In that
prediction the light of Christ's redemption first began to dawn in the
prophecies of it; in the institution of sacrifices it first began to dawn in
the types of it; in this, viz. his beginning actually to save men, it first
began to dawn in the fruit of it.

It is probable, therefore, that Adam and Eve were the first fruits of Christ's
redemption; it is probable by God's manner of treating them, by his comforting
them as he did, after their awakenings and terrors. They were awakened, and
ashamed with a sense of their guilt, after their fall, when their eyes were
opened, and they saw that they were naked, and sewed fig leaves to cover their
nakedness; as the sinner, under the first awakenings, is wont to endeavor to
hide the nakedness of his soul, by patching up a righteousness of his own. Then
they were further terrified and awakened, by hearing the voice of God, as he
was coming to condemn them. Their coverings of fig leaves do not answer the
purpose; but, notwithstanding these, they ran to hide themselves among the
trees of the garden, because they were naked, not d^ring to trust to their fig
leaves to hide their nakedness from God. Then they were further awakened by
God's calling of them to a strict account. But while their terrors were raised
to such a height, and they stood, as we may suppose, trembling and astonished
before their judge, without any thing to catch hold of, whence they could
gather any hope, then God took care to hold forth some encouragement to them,
to keep them from the dreadful effects of despair under their awakenings, by
giving a hint of a design of mercy by a Savior, even before he pronounced
sentence against them. And when after this he proceeded to pronounce sentence,
whereby we may suppose their terrors were further raised, God soon after took
c^re to encourage them, and to let them see, that he had not wholly cast them
off, by taking a fatherly care of them in their fallen, naked, and miserable
state, by making them coa^^ of skins and clothing them. Which also manifested
an acceptance of those sacrifices that they offered to God for sin, that those
were the skins of, which were types of what God had promised, when he said,
"The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent's head:" which promise, there
is reason to think, they believed and embraced. Eve seems plainly to express
her hope in and dependence on that promise, in what she says at the birth of
Cain, Genesis iv.1. "I have gotten a man from the Lord;" i. e. as God has
promised, that my seed should bruise the serpent's head; so now has God given
me this pledge and token of it, that I have a seed born. She plainly owns, that
this her child was from God, and hoped that her promised seed was to be of this
her eldest son; though she was mistaken, as Abraham (...) with respect to
Ishmael, as Jacob was with respect to Esau, (...) Samuel was with respect to
her first born of Jesse. Especially does what she said at the birth of Seth,
express her hope and depend^nce on the promise of God; see ver. 25. "For God
has appointed me another seed, instead of Abel, whom Cain slew."

Thus it is exceeding probable, if not evident, that as Christ took on him the
work of mediator as soon as man fell; so that he now immediately began his work
of redemption in its effect, and that he immediately encountered his great
enemy (...) devil, whom he had undertaken to conquer, and rescued those two
first captives out of his hands; therein hassling him, soon after his triumph
for the victory he had obtained over them, whereby he had made them his
captives. Though he was, as it were, sure of them and all their posterity,
Christ the Redeemer soon showed him, that he was mistaken, and that he was able
to subdue him, and deliver fallen man. He let him see it, in delivering those
first captives of his; and so soon gave him an instance of the fulfillment of
that threatening, "The seed of the woman shall bruise the serpent's head;" and
in this instance a presage of the fulfillment of one great thing he had
undertaken, viz. his subduing all his enemies under his feet.

After this we have another instance of redemption in one of their children,
viz. in righteous Abel, as the scripture calls him, whose soul perhaps was the
first that went to heaven through Christ's redemption. In him we have at least
the first instance of the death of a redeemed person that is recorded in
scripture. If he was the first, then as the redemption of Christ began to dawn
before in the souls of men in their conversion and justification, in him it
first began to dawn in glorification; and in him the angels began first to do
the part of ministering spirits to Christ, in going forth to conduct the souls
of the redeemed to glory. In him the el^ct angels in heaven had the first
opportunity to see so wonderful a thing as the soul of one of the fallen race
of mankind, that had been sunk by the fall into such an abyss of sin and
misery, brought to heaven, and in the enjoyment of heavenly glory, which was a
much greater thing than if they had seen him return to the earthly paradise.
Thus they by this saw the glorious effect of Christ's redemption, in the great
honor and happiness that was procured for sinful, miserable creatures by it.

V. The next remarkable thing that God did in the farther carrying on of this
great affair of redemption, that I shall take notice of, was the first
remarkable pouring out of the Spirit through Christ that ever was, which was in
the days of Enos. This seems to have been the next remarkable thing that was
done toward erecting this glorious building that God had begun and laid the
foundation of in Christ the Mediator. We read, Genesis iv.26. "Then began men to
call upon the name of the Lord." The meaning of these words has been
considerably controverted among divines. We cannot suppose the meaning is, that
that time was the first that ever man performed the duty of prayer. Prayer is a
duty of natural religion, and a duty to which a spirit of piety does most
naturally lead men. Prayer is as it were the very breath of a spirit of piety;
and we cannot suppose therefore, that those holy men that had been before for
above ^ hundred years, had lived all that while without any prayer. Therefore
some divines think that the meaning is, that then men first began to perform
public worship, or to call upon the name of the Lord in public assemblies.
Whether it be so to be understood or no, yet so much must necessarily be
understood by it, viz. that there was something new in the visible church of
God with respect to the duty of prayer, or calling upon the name of the Lord;
that there was a great addition to the performance of this duty; and that in
some respect or other it was carried far beyond what it ever had been before,
which must be the consequence of a remarkable pouring out of the Spirit of God.

If it was now first that men were stirred up to get together in assemblies to
help and assist one another in seeking God, so as they never had done before,
it argues something extraordinary as the cause; and could be from nothing but
uncommon influences of God's Spirit. We see by experience, that a remarkable
pouring out of God's Spirit is always attended with such an effect, viz. a
great increase of the performance of the duty of prayer. When the Spirit of God
begins a work on men's hearts, it immediately sets them to calling on the name
of the Lord. As it was with Paul after the Spirit of God had laid hold of him,
then the next news is, "Behold, he prays!" so it has been in all remarkable
pourings out of the Spirit of God that we have any particular account of in
scripture; and so it is foretold it will be at the great pouring out of the
Spirit of God in the latter days. It is foretold, that it will be poured out as
a spirit of grace and supplication, Zech. xii 10. See also Zeph. iii, 9. "For
then will I turn to the people a pure language, that they may all call upon the
name of the Lord, to serve him with one consent."

When it is said, "Then began men to call upon the name of the Lord," no more
can be intended by it, than that this was the first remarkable season of this
nature that ever was. It was the beginning, or the first, of such a kind of
work of God, such a pouring out of the Spirit of God. After such a manner such
an expression is commonly used in scripture: so, 1 Samuel xiv.35. "And Saul built
an altar unto the Lord, the same was the first altar that he built unto the
Lord." In the Hebrew it is, as you may see in the margin, "that altar he began
to build unto the Lord*" Heb. ii.3. "How shall we escape if we neglect so great
salvation, which first began to be spoken by the Lord?"

It may here be observed, that from the fall of man to this day wherein we
live, the work of redemption in its effect has mainly been carried on by
remarkable pourings out of the Spirit of God. Though there be a more constant
influence of God's Spirit always in some degree attending his ordinances; yet
the way in which the greatest things have been done toward carrying on this
work, always has been by remarkable pourings out of the Spirit at special
seasons of mercy, as may fully appear hereafter in our further prosecution of
the subject we are upon. This pouring out of the Spirit in the days of Enos,
was the first remarkable pouring out of the Spirit of God that ever was. There
had been a saving work of God on the hearts of some before; but now God was
pleased to grant a more large effusion of his Spirit, for the bringing in an
harvest of souls to Christ; so that in this we see that great building that is
the subject of our present discourse, which God laid the foundation of
immediately after the fall of man, carried on further, and built higher, than
ever it had been before.

VI. The next thing I shall take notice of, is the eminently holy life of
Enoch, who we have reason to think was a saint of greater eminency than any
ever had been before him; so that in this respect the work of redemption was
carried on to a greater height than ever it had been before. With respect to
its effect in the visible church in general, we observed just now how it was
carried higher in the days of Enos than ever it had been before. Probably Enoch
was one of the saints of that harvest; for he lived all the days that he did
live on earth, in the days of Enos. With respect to the degree to which this
work was carried in the soul of a particular person, it was raised to a greater
height in Enoch than ever before. His soul, as it was built on Christ, was
built up in holiness to a greater height than there had been any instance
before. He was a wonderful instance of Christ's redemption, and the efficacy of
his grace.

VII. In Enoch's time, God did more expressly reveal the coming of Christ than
he had done before, in the prophecy of Enoch that we have an account of in the
14th and 15th verses of the epistle of Jude: "And Enoch also, the seventh from
Adam, prophesied of these, saying, Behold, the Lord comes with ten thousand of
his saints, to execute judgment upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly
among them, of their ungodly deeds which they have ungodly committed, and of
all their hard speeches which ungodly sinners have spoken against him" Here
Enoch prophesies of the coming of Christ. It does not seem to be confined to
any particular coming of Christ; but it has respect in general to Christ's
coming in his kingdom, and is fulfilled in a degree in both the first and
second coming of Christ; and indeed in every remarkable manifestation Christ
has made of himself in the world, for the saving of his people, and the
destroying of his enemies. It is very parallel in this respect with many other
prophecies of the coming of Christ, that were given under the Old Testament;
and, in particular, it seems to be parallel with that great prophecy of
Christ's coming in his kingdom that we have in the 7th chapter of Daniel,
whence the Jews principally took their notion of the kingdom of heaven* see
ver. 10. "A fiery stream issued, and came forth from before him: Thousand
thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before
him: the judgment was set, and the books were opened." And ver. 13.14. "I saw
in the night-visions, and behold, one like the son of man, came with the clouds
of heaven, and came to the ancient of days, and they brought him near before
him. And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom, that all
people, nations, and languages, should serve him: his dominion is an
everlasting dominion, which shall not pass away, and his kingdom that which
shall not be destroyed." Though it is not unlikely that Enoch might have a more
immediate respect in this prophecy to the approaching destruction of the old
world by the flood, which was a remarkable resemblance of Christ's destruction
of all his enemies at his second coming, yet it doubtless looked beyond the
type to the antitype.

As this prophecy of Christ's coming is more express than any had been before;
so it is an instance of the increase of that gospel light that began to dawn
presently after the fall of man; and is an instance of that building that is
the subject of our present discourse, being yet further carried on, and built
up higher than it had been before.

Here, by the way, I would observe, that the increase of gospel light, and the
carrying on the work of redemption, as it respects the elect church in general,
from the first erecting of the church to the end of the world, is very much
after the same manner as the carrying on of the same work and the same light in
a particular soul, from the time of its conversion, till it is perfected and
crowned in glory The work in a particular soul has its ups and downs; sometimes
the light shines brighter, and sometimes it is a dark (...); sometimes grace
seem^ to prevail, at other times it seems to languish for a great while
together, and corruption prevails, and then grace revives again. But in
general, grace is growing: from it^ first infusion, till it is perfected in
glory, the kingdom of Christ is building up in the soul.

So it is with respect to the great affair in general, as it relates to the
universal subject of it, as it is carried on from the first beginning of it
after the fall, till it is perfected at the end of the world, as will more
fully appear by a particular view of this affair from beginning to end, in the
prosecution of this subject, if God give opportunity to carry* it through as I
propose.

VIII. The next remarkable thing toward carrying on this work, we have an
account of in scripture, is the translation of Enoch into heaven. The account
we have of it is in Genesis v.24. "And Enoch walked with God, and he was not; for
God took him." Here Moses, in giving an account of the genealogy of those that
were of the line of Noah, does not say concerning Enoch, he lived so long and
he died, as he does of the rest; but, he was not, for God took him; i. e. he
translated him; in body and soul carried him to heaven without dying, as it is
explained in Heb. xi.5. "By faith Enoch was translated that he should not see
death." By this wonderful work of God, the work of redemption was carried to a
greater height in several respects, than it had been before.

You may remember* that when I was showing what were the great things that God
aimed at in the work of redemption, or what the main things were that he
intended to bring to pass; I among other things mentioned (p. 12.) the perfect
restoring the ruins of the fall with respect to the elect, and restoring man
from that destruction that he had brought on himself, both in soul and body.
Now this translation of Enoch was the first instance that ever was of restoring
the ruins of the fall with respect to the body. There had been many instances
of restoring the soul of man by Christ's redemption, but none of redeeming and
actually saving the body till now. All the bodies of the elect are to be saved
as well as their souls. At the end of the world, all the bodies of the saints
shall actually be redeemed; those that then shall have been dead, by a
resurrection; and others, that then shall be living, by causing them to pass
under a glorious change. There was a number of the bodies of saints (...) and
glorified at the resurrection and ascension of Christ; and before that there
was an instance of a body glorified in Elijah. But the first instance of all
was this of Enoch, that we are now speaking of.

The work of redemption by this was carried on further that ever it had been
before; as, by this wonderful work of God, there was a great increase of gospel
light to the church of God, in this respect, that hereby the church had a
clearer manifestation of a future state and of the glorious reward of the
saints in heaven. We are told, 2 Timothy 1.10. "That life and immortality are
brought to light by the gospel." And the more of this is brought to light, the
more clearly does the light shine In that respect. What was said in the Old
Testament of a future state, is very obscure, in comparison with the more full,
plain, and abundant revelation given of it in the New. But yet even in those
early days, the church of God, in this instance, was favored with an instance
of it set before their eyes, in that one of their brethren was actually taken
up to heaven without dying; which we have all reason to think the church of God
knew then, as they afterward knew Elijah's translation. And as this was a
clearer manifestation of a future state than the church had had before, so it
was a pledge or earnest of that future glorification of all the saints which
God intended through the redemption of Jesus Christ.

IX. The next thing that I shall observe, was the upholding the church of God
in the family of which Christ was to proceed, in the time of that great and
general defection of the world of mankind that was before the flood. The church
of God, in all probability, was small, in comparison with the rest of the
world, from the beginning of the time that mankind first began to multiply on
the face of the earth, or from the time of Cain's defection, and departing from
among the people of God; the time we read of, Genesis iv.16. "When Cain went out
from the presence of the Lord, and dwelt in the land of Nod;" which being
interpreted, is the land of banishment: I say, from this time of Cain's
departure and separation from the church of God, it is probable that the church
of God was small in comparison with the rest of the world. The church seems to
have been kept up chiefly in the posterity of Seth; for this was the seed that
God appointed instead of Abel, whom Cain slew. But we cannot reasonably
suppose, that Seth's posterity were one fiftieth part of the world: "For Adam
was one hundred and thirty years old when Seth was born." But Cain, who seems
to have been the ringleader of those that were not of the church, was Adam's
eldest child, and probably was born soon after the fall, which doubtless was
soon after Adam's creation; so that there was time for Cain to have many sons
before Seth was born, and besides many other children, that probably Adam and
Eve had before this time, agreeably to God's blessing that he gave them, when
he said, "Be fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth:" and many of
these children might have children. The story of Cain before Seth was born,
seems to represent as though there were great numbers of men on the earth: Genesis
iv.14.15. "Behold, thou have driven me out this day from the face of the earth:
and from thy face shall I be hid, and I shall be a fugitive and a vagabond in
the earth; and it shall come to pass, that every one that finds me shall slay
me. And the Lord said unto him, "Therefore whosoever slays Cain, vengeance
shall be taken on him sevenfold. And the Lord set a mark upon Cain lest any
finding him should kill him." And all those that were then in being when Seth
was born, must be supposed then to stand in equal capacity of multiplying their
posterity with him; and therefore, as I said before, Seth's posterity were but
a small part of the inhabitants of the world.

But after the day^ of (...) and Enoch, (for Enoch was translated before Enos
died); I say, after their days, the church of God greatly diminished, in
proportion as multitudes that were of the line of Seth, and had been born in
the church of God, fell away, and joined with the wicked world, principally by
means of intermar^iages with them: as Genesis vi.1.2. and 4. "And it came to pass,
when men began to multiply on the face of the earth, and daughters were born
unto them, that the sons of God saw the daughters of men, that they were fair;
and they took them wives of all which they chose* -- There were giants in the
earth in those days; and also after that, when (...) of God came in unto the
daughters of men, and they bare children to them, the same became mighty men,
which were of old men of renown." By the sons of God here, are doubtless meant
the children of the church. It is a denomination often given them in scripture.
They intermarried with the wicked world, and so had their hearts led away from
God; and there was a great and continual defection from the church. The church
of God, that used to be a restraint on the wicked world, diminished
exceedingly, and so wickedness went on without restraint. And Satan, that old
serpent the devil, that (...) our first parents, and set up himself as God of
this world, raged exceedingly; and every imagination of the thoughts of man's
heart was only evil continually, and the earth was filled with violence. It
seemed to be deluged with wickedness now, as it was with water afterward: and
mankind in general were drowned in this deluge; almost all were swallowed up in
it. Now Satan made a most violent and potent attempt to swallow up the church
of God; and had almost done it. But yet God preserved it in the midst of all
this flood of wickedness and violence. He kept it up in that line of which
Christ was to proceed. He would not suffer it to be destroyed* for a blessing
was in it. The Lord the Redeemer was in this branch of mankind, and was
afterward to proceed from it. There was a particular family that was a root in
which the great Redeemer of the world was, and whence the branch (...)
righteousness afterward was to shoot forth. Therefore, however the branches
were lopped off, and the tree seemed to destroyed: yet God in the midst of all
this, kept alive this root, by his wonderful redeeming power and grace, so that
the gates of hell could not prevail against it.

Thus I have shown how God carried on the great affair of redemption; how the
building went on that God began after the fall, during this first period of the
times of the Old Testament, viz. from the fall of man, till God brought the
flood on the earth. And I would take notice upon it, that though the history
which Moses gi^es of the great works of God during that space be very short*
yet it is exceeding comprehensive and instructive. It may also be profitable
for us here to observe, the efficacy of that purchase of redemption that had
such great effects even in the old world so many ages before Christ appeared
himself to purchase redemption, that his blood should have such great efficacy
so long before it was (...).

PART II. From the flood to the calling of Abraham.
I PROCEED now to show how the same work was carried on through the second
period of the Old Testament, that from the beginning of the flood till the
calling of Abraham: for though that mighty, overflowing, universal deluge of
waters overthrew the world; yet it did not overthrow this building of God, the
work of redemption. But this went on yet* and instead of being overthrown,
continued to be built up, and was carried on to a further preparation for the
great Savior's coming into the world, and working out redemption for his
people. Here,

I. The flood itself was a work of God that belonged to this great affair, and
tended to promote it. All the great and mighty works of God from the fall of
man to the end of the world, are reducible to this great work, and, if seen in
a right view of them, will appear as parts of it, and so many step^ that God
has taken in order to it, or as carrying it on; and doubtless so great a work,
so remarkable and universal a catastrophe, as the deluge was, cannot be
excepted. It was a work that God wrought in order to it, as thereby God removed
out of the way the enemies and obstacles of (...), that were ready to overthrow
it.

Satan seems to have been in a dreadful rage just before the flood, and his
rage then doubtless, was, as it always has been, chiefly against the church of
God to overthrow it; and he had filled the earth with violence and rage against
it. He had drawn over almost all the world to be on his side, and they listed
under his banner against Christ and his church. We read, that the earth "was
filled with violence;" and doubtless that violence was chiefly against the
church, in fulfillment of what was foretold, I will put enmity between thy ^eed
and her seed. Their enmity and violence was so great, and the enemies of the
church so numerous, the whole world being against the church, that it was come
to the last extremity. Noah's reproofs, and his preaching of righteousness,
were utterly disregarded. God's spirit had striven with them an hundred and
twenty years, and all in vain; and the church was almost swallowed up. It seems
to have been reduced to so narrow limits, as to be confined to one family. And
there was no prospect of any thing else but of their totally swallowing up the
church, and that in a very little time; and so wholly destroying that small
root that had the blessing in it, or whence the Redeemer was to proceed.

Therefore, God's destroying those enemies of the church by the ^^ood, belongs
to this affair of redemption: for it was one thing that was done in fulfillment
of the covenant of grace, as it was revealed to Adam: "I will put enmity
between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed; it shall bruise
thy (...)." This destruction was only a destruction of the seed of the serpent
in the midst of their violent rage against the seed of the woman, and so
delivering the seed of the woman from them, when in utmost peril by them.

We read of scarce any great destruction of nations any where in Scripture, but
that one main reason given for it is, their enmity and injuries against God's
church; and doubtless this was one main reason of the destruction of all
nations by the flood. The giants that were in those days, in all likelihood,
got themselves their renown by their great exploits against Heaven, and against
Christ and his church, the remaining sons of God that had not corrupted
themselves.

We read, that just before the world shall be destroyed by fire, the nations
that are in the four quarters of the earth, shall gather together against the
church as the sand of the sea, and shall go up on the breadth of the earth, and
compass the camp of the saints about* and the beloved city: and then fire shall
come down from God out of Heaven, and devour the^, Rev. xx.8.9. And it seems as
though there was that which was very parallel to it just before the world was
destroyed by water. Therefore their destruction was a work of God that did as
much belong to the work of redemption, a^ the destruction of the Egyptians
belonged to the redemption of the children of Israel out of Egypt, or as the
destruction of Sennacherib's mighty army, that had compassed about Jerusalem to
destroy it, belonged to God's redemption of that city from them.

By means of this flood, all the enemies of God's church, against whom that
little handful had no strength, were swept off at once. God took their part,
and appeared for them against their enemies, and drowned those of whom they had
been afraid in the flood of water, as he drowned the enemies of Israel that
pursued them in the Red sea.

Indeed God could have taken other methods to deliver his church: he could have
converted all the world instead of drowning it; and so he could have taken
another method than drowning the Egyptians in the Red sea. But that is no
a^gument, that the method that he did take, was not a method to show his
redeeming mercy to them.

By the wicked world's being drowned, the wicked, the enemies of God's people,
were dispossessed of the earth, and the whole earth given to Noah and his
family to possess in quiet: as God made room for the Israelites in Canaan, by
casting out their enemies from before them. And God's thus taking the
possession of the enemies of the church, and giving it all to his church, was
agreeable to that promise of the covenant of grace: Psalm. xxxvii.9.10.11. "For
evil doers shall be cut off: but those that wait upon the Lord, they shall
inherit the earth. For yet a little while and the wicked shall not be: yea thou
shall diligently consider his place, and it shall not be. But the meek shall
inherit the earth, and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace."

II. Another thing here belonging to the same work, was God's so wonderfully
preserving that family of which the Redeemer was to proceed, when all the rest
of the world was drowned. God's drowning the world, and saving Noah and his
family, both were works reducible to this great work. The saving Noah and his
family belonged to it two ways. As that family was the family of which the
Redeemer was to proceed, and as that family was the church that he had
redeemed, it was the mystical body of Christ that was there saved. The manner
of God's saving those persons, when all the world besides was so overthrown,
was very wonderful and remarkable. It was a wonderful and remarkable type of
the redemption of Christ, of that redemption that is sealed by the baptism of
water, and is so spoken of in the New Testament, as 1 Pet. iii, 20.21. "Which
some time were disobedient, when once the long-suffering of God waited in the
days of Noah, while the ark was preparing, wherein few, that is eight souls,
were saved by water. The like figure whereunto, even baptism, does also now
save us, (not the putting away of the filth of the flesh, ^ut the answer of a
good conscience toward God) by the resurrection of Jesus Christ." That water
that washed away the filth of the world, that cleared the world of wicked men,
was a type of the blood of Christ, that takes away the sin of the world. That
water that delivered Noah and his sons from their enemies, is a type of the
blood that delivers God's church from their sins, their worst enemies* That
water that was so plentiful and abundant, that it filled the world, and reached
above the tops of the highest mountains, was a type of that blood, the
sufficiency of which is so abundant, that i^ is sufficient for the whole world;
sufficient to bury the highest mountains of sin. The ark, that was the refuge
and hiding place of the church in this time of storm and flood, was a type of
Christ, the true hiding plac^ of the church from the storms and floods of God's
wrath.

III. The next thing I would (...) is, the new grant of the earth God made to
Noah and his family immediately after the flood, as founded on the covenant of
grace. The sacrifice of Christ was represented by Noah's building an alter to
the Lord and offering a sacrifice of every clean beast and fowl. And we have an
account of God's accepting this sacrifice: and thereupon he blessed Noah, and
established his covenant with him, and with his seed, promising to destroy the
earth in like manner no more; signifying how that it is by the sacrifice of
Christ that God's favor is obtained, and his people are in safety from God's
destroying judgments, and do obtain the blessing of the Lord. And God now, on
occasion of this sacrifice that Noah offered to God, gives him and his
posterity a new grant of the earth; a new power of dominion over the creatures,
as founded on that sacrifice, and so founded on the covenant of grace. And so
it is to be looked upon as a diverse grant from that which was made to Adam,
that we have, Genesis i.28. "And God blessed them, and God said unto them, Be
fruitful, and multiply, and replenish the earth, and subdue it; and have
dominion over the fish of the sea, and over the fowl of the air, and over every
living thing that moves upon the earth." Which grant was not founded on the
covenant of grace; for it was given to Adam while he was under the covenant of
works, and therefore was antiquated when that covenant ceased. The first grant
of the earth to Adam was founded on the first covenant; and therefore, when
that first covenant was broken, the right conveyed to him by that first
covenant was forfeited and lost. Hence it came to pass, that the earth was
taken away from mankind by the flood: for the first grant was forfeited; and
God had never made another after that, till after the flood. If the first
covenant had not been broken, God never would have drowned the world, and so
have taken it away from mankind: for then the first grant made to mankind would
have stood good. But that was broken; and so God after a while, destroyed the
earth, when the wickedness of man was great.

But after the flood, on Noah's offering a sacrifice that represented the
sacrifice of Christ, God, in smelling a sweet savor, or accepting that
sacrifice, as it was a representation of the true sacrifice of Christ, which is
a sweet savor indeed to God, he gives Noah a new grant of the earth, founded
on that sac^ifice of Christ, o^ that covenant of grace which is by that
sacrifice of Christ, with a promise annexed, that now the earth should no more
be destroyed, till the consummation of all things; as you may see in Genesis
viii.20.21.22. and chapter ix.1.2.3.7. The reason why such a promise, that God
would no more destroy the earth, was added to this grant made to Noah, and not
to that made to Adam, was because this was founded on the covenant of grace, of
which Christ was the surety, and therefore could not be broken. Therefore it
comes to pass now, that though the wicked^ess of man has dreadfully raged, and
the earth been filled with violence and wickedness thousands of times, and one
age after another, and much more dreadful and aggravated wickedness than the
world was (...) of (...) the ^^ood, being against so much greater light and
mercy; especially in these days of the gospel: yet God's patience holds our;
God does not destroy the earth; his mercy and forbearance abides according to
his promise; and his grant established with Noah and his sons abides firm and
good, being founded on the covenant of grace.

IV. On this God renews with Noah and his sons the covenant of grace, Genesis
ix.9.10. "And I, behold, I establish my covenant with you, and with your seed
after you, and with every living creature that is with you," etc.; which was
the covenant of grace; which even the brute creation have this benefit of, that
is shall never be destroyed again till the consummation of all things. When we
have this expression in scripture, my covenant, it commonly is to be understood
of the covenant of grace. The manner of expression, "I will establish my
covenant with you, and with your seed after you," shows plainly, that it was a
covenant already in being, that had been made already, and that Noah would
understand what covenant it was by that denomination, viz. the covenant of
grace.

V. God's disappointing the design of building the city and tower of Babel.
This work of God belongs to the great work of redemption. For that building was
undertaken in opposition to this great building of God that we are speaking of.
Men's going about to build such a city and ^ower was an effect of the corruption
that mankind were now soon fallen into. This city and tower was set up in
opposition to the city of God, as the god that they built it to, was their
pride. Being sunk into a disposition to forsake the true God, the first idol
they set up in his room, was themselves, their own glory and fame. And as this
city and tower had their foundation said in the pride and vanity of men, and
the haughtiness of their minds, so it was built on a foundation exceedingly
contrary to the nature of the foundation of the kingdom of Christ, and his
redeemed city, which has its foundation laid in humility.

Therefore God saw that it tended to frustrate the design of that great
building that was founded, not in the haughtiness of men, but Christ's blood:
and therefore the thing that they did displeased the Lord, and he baffled and
confounded the design, and did not suffer them to bring it to perfection; as
God will frustrate and confound all other buildings, that are set up in
opposition to the great building of the work of redemption.

In the second chapter of Isaiah, where the prophet is foretelling God's
setting up the kingdom of Christ in the world, he foretell^ how God will, in
order to it, bring down the haughtiness of men, and how the day of the Lord
shall be on every high tower, and upon every f^^^ed well, etc. Christ kingdom
is established, by bringing down every high thing to ma^^ way for it, 2 Cor.
2.4.5. "For the weapons of our warfare are mighty through God to the pulling
down of strong holds, casting ^own imaginations, and every high thing that
exalts itself against ^he knowledge of God." What is done in a particular
soul, to make way for the setting up of Christ's kingdom, is to destroy Babel
in that soul.

They intended to have built Babel up to heaven. That building that is the
subject we are upon, is a building that is intended to be built so high, its
top shall reach to heaven indeed, as it will to the highest heavens at the end
of the world, when it shall be finished: and therefore God would not suffer the
building of his enemies, that they designed to build up to heaven in opposition
to it, to prosper. If they had gone on and prospered in building that city and
tower, it might have kept the world of wicked men, the enemies of the church,
together, as that was their design. They might have remained united in one
vast, powerful city; and so they might have been too powerful for the city of
God, and quite swallowed it up.

This city of Babel is the same with the city of Babylon; for Babylon in the
original is Babel. But Babylon was a city that is always spoken of in scripture
as chiefly opposite to the city of God. Babylon, and Jerusalem, or Zion, are
opposed to each other often both in the Old Testament and New. This city was a
powerful and terrible enemy to the city of God afterward, notwithstanding this
great check put to the building of it in the beginning. But it might have been,
and probably would have been vastly more powerful, and able to vex and destroy
the church of God, if it had not been thus checked.

Thus it was in kindness to his church in the world, and in prosecution of the
great design of redemption, that God put a stop to the building of the city and
tower of Babel.

VI. The dispersing of the nations, and dividing the earth among its
inhabitants, immediately after God had caused the building of Babel to cease.
This was done so as most to suit that great design of redemption. And
particularly, God therein had an eye to the future propagation of the gospel
among the nations. They were so placed, the bounds of their habitation so
limited round about the land of Canaan, the place laid out for the habitation
of God's people, as most suited the design of propagating the gospel among
them: Deuteronomy. xxxii.8 "When the Most High divided to the nations their
inheritance, when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the bounds of the
people according to the number of the children of Israel." Acts xvii.26.27.
"And has made of one blood all nations of men, for to dwell on all the face of
the earth, and has determined the times before appointed, and the bounds of
their habitations; that they should seek the Lord, if happily they might feel
after him, and find him." The land of Canaan was the most conveniently situated
of any place in the world for the purpose of spreading the light of the gospel
thence among the nations in general. The inhabited world was chiefly in the
Roman empire in the times immediately after Christ, which was in the countries
round about Jerusalem, and so properly situated for the purpose of diffusing
the light of the gospel among them from that place. The devil seeing the
advantage of this situation of the nations for promoting the great work of
re^emption, and the disadvantage of it with respect to the interests of his
kingdom, afterward led away many nations into the remotest parts of the world,
to that end* to get them out of the way of the gospel. Thus he led some into
America; and others into northern cold regions, that are almost in accessible.

VII. Another thing I would mention in this period, was God's preserving the
true religion in the line of which Christ was to proceed, when the world in
general apostatized to idolatry, and the church were in imminent danger of
being swallowed up in the general corruption. Although God had lately wrought
so wonderfully for the deliverance of his church, and had shown so great mercy
toward it, as for its sake even to destroy all the rest of the world, and
although he had lately renewed and established his covenant of grace with Noah
and his sons; yet so prone is the corrupt heart of man to depart from God, and
to ^ink into the depths of wickedness, and so prone to darkness, delusion, and
idolatry, as that the world soon after the flood ^ell into gross idolatry; so
that before Abraham the distemper was become almost universal. The earth was
become very corrupt at the time of the building of Babel; and even God's people
themselves, even that line of which Christ was to come, were corrupted in a
measure with idolatry: Josh. xxiv.2. "Your fathers dwelt on the other side of
the flood in old time, even Terah the father of Abraham, and the father of
Nahor; and they served other gods." The other side of the flood means beyond
the river Euphrates, where the ancestors of Abraham lived.

We are not to understand, that they were wholly drawn off to idolatry, to
forsake the true God. For God is said to be the God of Nahor: Genesis xxxi.53.
"The God of Abraham, and the God of Nahor, the God of their father, judge
betwixt us." But they only partook in some measure of the general and almost
universal corruption of the times; as Solomon was in a measure infected with
idolatrous corruption; and as the children of Israel in Egyp^ are said to serve
other gods, though yet there was the true church of God among them; and as
these were images kept for a considerable time in the family of Jacob; the
corruption being brought from Padan-Aram, whence he fetched his wives.

This was the second time that the church was almost brought to nothing by the
corruption and general defection of the world from true religion. But still the
true religion was kept up in the family of which Christ was to proceed. Which
is another instance of God's remarkably preserving his church in a time of a
general deludge of wickedness; and wherein, although the god of this world
raged, and had almost swallowed up God's church, yet God did ^ot suffer the
gates of hell to prevail against it.

PART III. From the calling of Abraham to Moses.
I PROCEED now to show how the work of redemption was carried on through the
third period of the times of the O^d-Testament, beginning with the calling of
Abraham, and extending to Moses. Here,

I. It pleased God now to separate that person of whom Christ was to come* from
the rest of the world, that his church might be upheld in his family and
posterity till Christ should come; as he did in calling Abraham out of his own
country, and from his kindred, to go into a distant country, that God should
show him, and bringing him first out of Ur of the Chaldees to Charran, and then
(...) the land of Canaan.

It was before observed, that the co^ruption of the world with idolatry was now
become general; mankind were almost wholly overrun with idolatry: God therefore
saw it necessary, in order to uphold true religion in the world, that the^^
should be a family separated from the rest of the wo^ld. It proved to be high
time to take this course, lest the church of Christ should wholly be carried
away with the apostasy. For the church of God itself, that had been upheld in
the line of Abraham's ancestors, was already considerably corrupted. Abraham's
own country and kindred had most of them fallen off; and without some
extraordinary interposition of Providence, in all likelihood, in a generation
or two more, the true religion in this line would have been extinct. Therefore
God saw it to be time to call Abraham, the person in whose family he intended
to uphold the true religion, out of his own country, and from his kindred, to a
far distant country, that his posterity might there remain a people separate
from all the rest of the world; that so the true religion might be upheld
there, while mankind besides were swallowed up in Heathenism.

The land of the Chaldees, that Abraham was called to go out of, was the
country about Babel; Babel, or Babylon, was the chief city of the land of
Chaldea. Learned men suppose, by what they gather from some of the most ancient
accounts of things, that it was in this land that idolatry first began; that
Babel and Chaldea were the original and chief seat of the worship of idols,
whence it spread into other nations. Therefore the land of the Chaldeans, or
the country of Babylon, is in scripture called the land of graven images: as
you may see, Jer. 1.35. together with ver. 38. "A sword is upon the Chaldeans,
says the Lord, and upon the inhabitants of Babylon, and upon her princes, and
upon her wise men. -- A drought is upon her waters, and they shall be dried up;
for it is the land of graven images, and they are mad upon their idols." God
calls Abraham out of this idolatrous country, to a great distance from it. And
when he came there, he gave him no inheritance in it, no not so much as to set
his foot on; but he remained a stranger and a sojourner, that he and his family
might be kept se^arate from all the world.

This was a new thing: God had never taken such a method before. His church had
not in this manner been separated from the rest of the world till now, but were
wont to dwell with them, without any bar or fence to keep them separate; the
mischievous consequences of which had been found once and again. The effect
before the flood of G^d's people living intermingled with the wicked world,
without any remark^ble wall of separation, was, that the s^ns of the church
joined in marriage with others, and thereby almost all soon became in^ected,
and the church was almost bro't to nothing. The method that God took then to
fence the church was, to drown the wicked world, and save the church in the
ark. And now the world, before Abraham was called, was become corrupt again.
But now God took another method. He did not ^est by the wicked world, and save
Abraham, and his wife, and Lot, in an ark; but he calls these persons to go and
live separate from the rest of the world.

This was a new thing, and a great thing, that God did toward the work of
redemption. This thing was done now about the middle of the space of time
between the fall of man and the coming of Christ* and there were about two
thousand years yet to come before Christ the great Redeemer was to come. But by
this calling of Abraham, the ancestor of Christ, a foundation was laid for the
upholding the church of Christ in the world, till Christ should come. For the
world having bec^me idolatrous, there was a necessity that the seed of the
woman should be thus separated from the idolatrous world in order to that.

And then it was needful that there should be a particular nation separated
from the rest of the world, to receive the types and prophecies that were
needful to be given of Christ, to prepare the way for his coming; that to them
might be committed the oracles of God; and that by them the history of God's
great works of creation (...) providence might be upheld; and that so Christ
might be born of this nation; and that from hence the light of the gospel (...)
forth to the rest of the world. These ends could not well be obtained, if God's
people, through all these two thousand years, had lived intermixed with the
heathen world. So that this calling of Abraham may be looked upon as a kind of
a new foundation laid for the visible church of God, in a more distinct and
regular state, to be upheld and built up on this foundation from henceforward,
till Christ should actually come, and then through him to be propagated to all
nations. So that Abraham being the person (...) whom this foundation is laid,
is represented in scripture as though he were the father of all the church, the
father of all them that believe; a^ i^ were a root whence the^ visible church
thenceforward through Christ, Abraham's root and offspring, rose as a tree,
distinct from all other plants; of which tree Christ was the branch of
righteousness; and from which tree after Christ came, the natural branches were
broken off, and the Gentiles were grafted into the same tree. So that Abraham
still remain^ the father of the church, or root of the tree, through Christ his
seed. It is the same tree that flourishes from that small beginning, that was
in Abraham's time, and has in these days of the gospel spread its branches over
a great part of the earth, and will fill the whole earth in due time, and at
the end of the world shall be transplanted from an earthly soil into the
paradise of God.

II. There accompanied this a more particular and full revelation and
confirmation of the covenant of grace than ever had been before. There had
before this been, as it were, two particular and solemn editions or
confirmations of this covenant; one at the beginning of the first period, which
was that whereby the covenant of grace was revealed to our first parents, soon
after the fa^l; the other at the beginning of the second period, whereby God
solemnly renewed the covenant of grace with Noah and his family soon after the
flood: and now there is a third at the beginning of the third period, at and
after the calling of Abraham. And it now ^eing much nearer the time of the
coming of Christ ^han when the covenant of grace was first revealed, it being,
as it was said before, about half way between the fall and the coming of
C^^ist* the revelation of the covenant now was much more f^ll then any that had
been before. The covenant was now more particularly revealed. It was now
revealed, not only that Christ should be; but it was revealed to Abraham, that
he should be his seed; and it was now promised, that all the families of the
earth should be blessed in him. God was much in the promises of this to
Abraham. The first promise was when he first called him, Genesis xii.2. "And I
will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee and make thy name
great; and thou shall be a blessing." Again the same promise was renewed after
he came into the land of Canaan, (...) 14. etc. The covenant was again renewed
after Abraham and returned from the slaughter of the kings, chap. xv.5.6. Again
after his offering up Isaac, chap. xxii.16.17.18.

In this renewal of the covenant of grace with Abraham, several particulars
concerning that covenant were revealed more fully (...) ever had been before;
not only that Christ was to be of Abraham's seed, but also, the calling of the
Gentiles, and the bringing all nations into the church, that all the families
of the earth were to be blessed, was now made known. And then the great
condition of the covenant of grace, which is faith, was now more fully made
known. Genesis xv.5.6 "And he said unto him, So shall thy seed he. And Abraham
believed God, and it was counted unto him for righteousness." Which is much
taken notice of in the New Testament as that whence Abraham was called the
father of them that believe.

As there was now a further revelation of the covenant of grace, so there was a
further confirmation of it by seals and pledges, the^ ever had been before; as,
particularly, God did now institute a certain sacrament, to be a steady seal of
this covenant in the visible church, till Christ should come* viz.
circumcision. Circumcision was a seal of this covenant of grace, as appears by
the first institution, as we have an account of it in the 17th chapter of
Genesis. It there appears to be a seal of that covenant by which God promised
to make Abraham a father of many nations, as appears by the 5th verse, compared
with the 9th and 10th verses. We are expressly taught, that it was a seal of
the righteousness of faith, Romans 4.11. Speaking of Abraham, the apostle says,
"he received the sign of circumcision, a seal of the righteousness of faith."

As I observed before, God called Abraham, that his family and posterity might
be kept separate from the rest of the world, till Christ should come, which God
saw to be necessary on the forementioned accounts. And this sacrament was the
principal wall of separation; it chiefly distinguished Abraham's seed from the
world, and kept up a distinction and separation more than any other particular
observance whatsover.

Besides this, there were other occasional seals, pledges, and confirmations,
that Abraham had of this covenant; as, particularly, God gave Abraham a
remarkable pledge of the fulfi^ment of the promise he had made him, in his
victory over Chedorlaomer and the kings that were with him. Chedorlaomer seems
to have be^^ a great emperor, that reigned over a great part of the world at
that day; and though he had his seat at Elam, which was not much if any thing
short of a thousand miles distant from the land of Canaan, yet he extended his
empire so as to reign over many parts of the land of Canaan, as appears by
chap* xiv.4.5.6.7. It is supposed by learned men, that he was a king of the
Assyrian emp^re at that day, which had been before begun by Nimrod at Babel. A^
it was the honor of kings in those days to build new cities (...) be made the
seat of their empire, as appears by Genesis x.10.11.12.^ so it is conjectured,
that he had gone forth and built him a city (...) Elam, and made that his seat;
and that those other kings, who came with him, were his deputies in the several
cities and countries where they reigned. But yet a^ mighty an empire (...) he
had, and as great an army as he now came with into the land where Abraham was,
yet Abraham, only with his trained servants, that were (...) in his own house,
conquered, subdued, and baffled this mighty emperor, and the kings that came
with him, and all their army. This he received of God as a pledge of what he
had promised, viz. The victory that Christ his seed should obtain over the
nations of the earth, whereby he should possess the gates of his enemies. It is
plainly spoken of as such in the 41st of Isaiah. In that chapter is foretold
the future glorious victory the church shall obtain over the nations of the
world; as you may see in the 1st, 10th, and 15th verses, etc. But here this
victory of Abraham over such a great emperor and his mighty forces, is spoken
of as a pledge and earnest of this victory of the church, as you may see in 2d
and 3d verses. "Who raised up the righteous man from the east, called him to
his foot, gave the nations before him, and made him rule over kings* He gave
them as the dust to his sword, and as driven stubble to his bow. He pursued
them, and passed safely; even by the way that be had not gone with his feet."

Another remarkable confirmation Abraham received of the (...) of grace, was
when he returned from the slaughter of the kings; when Melchisedec the king of
Salem he the priest of the Most High God, that great type of Christ, met him,
and blessed him, and brought forth bread and wine. The bread and wine signified
the same blessings of the covenant of grace, that the bread and wine does in
the sacrament of the Lord's supper. So that as Abraham had a seal of the
covenant in circumcision that was equivalent to baptism, so now he had a seal
of it equivalent to the Lord's supper. Melchisedec's coming to meet him with
such a seal of the covenant of grace, on the occasion of this victory of his
over the kings of the north, confirm^, that the victory was a pledge of God's
fulfil^^nt of the same covenant; for that is the mercy that Melchisedec with
his bread and wine takes notice of; as you may see by what he says in Genesis
xiv.19.20.

Another confirmation that God gave Abraham of the covenant of grace, was the
vision that he had in the deep sleep that fell upon him, of the smoking
furnace, and burning lamp, that passed between the parts of the sacrifice, as
in the latter part of the 15th chapter of Genesis. The sacrifice, as all
sacrifices do, signified the sacrifice of Christ. The smoking furnace that
passed through the midst of that sacrifice first, signified the sufferings of
Christ. But the burning lamp that followed, which shone with a clear bright
sight, signifies the glory that followed Christ's sufferings, and was procured
by them.

Another remarkable pledge that God gave Abraham of the fulfillment of the
covenant of grace, was his giving of the child of whom Christ was to come, in
his old age This is spoken of as such in scripture; Heb. xi.11.12. and also
Romans iv.18 etc.

Again, another remarkable pledge that God gave Abraham of the fulfillment of
the covenant of grace, was his delivering Isaac, after he was laid upon the
wood of the sacrifice to be slain. This was a confirmation of Abraham's faith
in the promise that God had made of Christ, that he should be of Isaac's
posterity; and was a representation of the resurrection of Christ; as you may
see, Heb. xi.17.18.19. And because this was given as a confirmation of the
covenant of grace, therefore God renewed that covenant with Abraham on this
occasion, as you may see, Genesis xxiv* 15. etc.

Thus you see how much more fully the covenant of grace was revealed and
confirmed in Abraham's time than ever it had been before; by means of which
Abraham seems to have had a more clear understanding and sight of Christ the
great Redeemer, and the future things that were to be accomplished by him, than
any of the saints that had gone before. Therefore Christ takes notice of it,
that Abraham rejoiced to see his day, and he saw it and was glad, ^ohn viii.56.
So great an advance did it please God now to make in this building, which he
had been carrying on from the beginning of the world.

III. The next thing that I would take notice of here, is God's preserving the
patriarchs for so long a time in the midst of the wicked inhabitants of Canaan,
and from all other enemies. The patriarchs Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, were
those of whom Christ was to proceed; and they were now separated from the
world, that in them his church might be upheld. Therefore, in preserving them,
the great design of redemption was uph^ld and carrried on. He preserved them,
and kept the inhabitants of the land where they sojourned from destroying them;
which was a remarkable dispensation of providence. For the inhabitants of the
land were at that day exceeding wicked, though they grew more wicked
afterward. This appears by Genesis xv.16. "In the fourth generation they shall
come hither again; for the iniquity of the Canaanites is not yet full:" As much
as to say, Though it be very great, yet it is not yet full. Their great
wickedness also appears by Abraham and Isaac's aversion to their child^en
marrying any of the daughte^s of the land. Abraham, when he was old, could not
be content till he had made his servant swear that he would not take a wi^e for
his son of the daughters of the land. And Isaac and Rebecca were content to
send away Jacob to so great a distance as Padan-Ara^, to take him a wife
thence. And when Esau married some of the daughters of the land, we are told,
that they were a grief of mind to Isaac and Rebecca.

Another argument of their great wickedness, is the instance we have of Sodom
and Gomorrah, Admah and Zeboim, which were some of the cities of Canaan though
they were probably distinguishingly wicked.

They being thus wicked, were likely to have the most bitter en^ity against
these holy men: agreeable to what was declared at first, "I will put e^mity
between thee and the woman, and between thy seed and her seed." Their holy
lives were a continual condemnation of their wickedness. Besides, it could not
be otherwise, but that they must be much in reproving their wickedness, as we
find Lot was in Sodom; who, we are told, vexed his righteous soul with their
unlawful deeds, and was a preacher of righteousness to them.

They were the more exposed to them, being strangers and sojourners in the
land, and having no inheritance there as yet. Men are more apt to find fault
with strangers, and be irritated by any thing in them that offends them, as
they were with Lot in Sodom. He very gently reproved their wickedness; and they
say upon it, "This fellow came in to sojourn, and he will needs be a ruler and
a judge*" and theatened what they would do to him.

But God wonderfully preserved Abraham and Lot, Isaac and Jacob, and their
families, amongst them, though they were few in number, and they might quickly
have destroyed them; which is taken notice of as a wonderful instance of God's
preserving mercy toward his church, Psalm. cv.12. etc. "When they were but few
men in number; yea, very few, and strangers in it. When they went from one
nation to another, from one kingdom to another people. He suff^red no man to do
them wrong; yea, he reproved kings for their sakes, saying, Touch not mine
anointed, and do my prophets no harm."

This preservation was in some instances especially very remarkable; those
instances that we have an account of, wherein the people of the land were
greatly irritated and provoked; as they were by Simeon and Levi's treatment of
the Shechemites, as you may see in Genesis xxxiv.30. etc. God then strangely
preserved Jacob and his family, restr^ining the provoked people by an unusual
terror on their minds, as you may see in Genesis xxxv.5. "And the terror of God
was upon the cities that were round about them, and they did not pursue after
the son^ of Jacob."

God's preserving them, not only from the Canaanites, is (...) to be taken
notice of, but his preserving them from all others that intended mischief to
them; as his preserving Jacob and his company, when pursued by Laban, full of
rage, and ^ disposition to overtake him as an enemy: God met him, and rebuked
him and said to him. "Take heed that thou speak not to Jacob either good or
bad." How wonderfully did he also preserve him from Esau his brother, when he
came forth with an army, with a full design to cut him off! how did God in
answer to his prayer, when he wrestled with Christ at Penuel, wonderfully turn
Esau's heart, and make him, instead of meeting him as an enemy with slaughter
and destruction, to meet him as a friend and brother, doing him no harm*

Thus were this handful, this little root that had the blessing of the Redeemer
in it, preserved in the midst of enemies and dangers, which was not unlike to
the preserving the ark in the midst of the tempestuous deluge.

IV. The next thing I would mention is, the awful destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrah, and the neighboring cities. This tended to promote the great design
and work that is the subject of my present undertaking, two ways. It did so, as
it tended powerfully to restrain the inhabitants of the land from injuring
those holy strangers that God had brought to sojourn amongst them. Lot was one
of those strangers; he came into the land with Abraham; and Sodom was destroyed
for their abusive disregard of Lot, the preacher of righteousness, that God had
sent among them. And their destruction came just upon their committing a most
injurious and abominable insult on Lot, and the strangers that were come into
his house, even those angels, whom they probably took to be some of Lot's
former acquaintance come from the country that he came from* to visit him. They
in a most outrageous manner beset Lot's house, intending a monstrous abuse and
act of violence on those strangers that were come thither, and threatening to
serve (...) worse than them.

But in the midst of this God smote them with blindness; and the next morning
the city and the country about it was overthrow^ in a most terrible storm of
f^re and brimstone; which dreadful destruction, as it was in the sight of the
rest of the inhabitants of the land, therefore greatly tended to restrain them
from hurting those holy strangers any more; doubtless struck a dread and terror
on their minds, and made them afraid to hurt them, and probably was one
principal means to restrain them, and preserve the patriarchs. And when that
reason is given why the inhabitants of the land did not pursue after Jacob,
when they were so provoked by the destruction of the Shechemites, viz. "that
the terror of the Lord was upon them*" it is very probable, that this was a
terror that was set home upon them. They remembered the amazing destruction of
Sodom, and the cities of the slain, that came upon them, upon their abusive
treatment of Lot* and so cursed (...) hurt Jacob and his family, though they
were so much provokes to it.

Another way that this awful destruction tended to promote this great affair of
redemption, was, that hereby God did remarkably exhibit the terrors of this
law, to make men sensible of their need of redeeming mercy. The work of
redemption never was carried on without this. The law, from the beginning, is
made use of as a schoolmaster to bring men to Christ.

But under the Old Testament there was much more need of some extraordinary,
visible, and sensible manifestation of God's wrath against sin, than in the
days of the gospel; sine^ a future s^a^e, and the eternal misery of hell, is
more clearly revealed, and since the awful justice of God against the sins of
men has been so wonderfully displayed in the sufferings of Christ. Therefore
the revelation that G^d gave of himself in those days, used to be accompanied
with much more terror than it is in these days of the gospel. So when God
appeared at Mount Sinai to give the law, it was with thunders and lightnings,
and a thick cloud, and the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud. But some
external, awful manifestations of God's wrath against sin were on some accounts
especially necessary before the giving of the law: and therefore, before the
flood, the terrors of the law handed down by tradition from Adam served. Adam
lived nine hundred and thirty years himself, to t^ll the church of God's awful
threatenings denounced in the covenant made with him, and how dreadful the
consequences of the (...), as he was an eye witness and subject; and others,
that conversed with Adam, lived till the flood. And the destruction of the
world by the flood served to exhibit the terrors of the law, and manifest the
wrath of God against sin; and so to make men sensible of the absolute necessity
of redeeming mercy. And some that s^w the flood were alive in Abraham's time.

But this was now in a great me^sure forgotten; now therefore God was pleased
again, in a most amazing manner to show his wrath against sin, in the
destruction of these cities; which was (...) such a manner as to be the
liveliest ^mage of hell of any thing that ever had been; and therefore the
apostle J^de says, "They suffer the vengeance of eternal fire," Jude 7. God
rained storms of fire and brimstone upon them. The way that they were destroyed
probably was by thick flashes of lightning. The st^eams of brimstone were so
thick as to bu^^ up all these cities: so that they perished in the flames of
divine ^^ath. By this might he seen the dread^ul wrath of God against the
ungodliness and unrighteousness o^ men; which tended to show men the necessity
of redemption, and so to promote that great work.

V. God again renewed and confirmed the covenant of grace to Isaac and to
Jacob. He did so to Isaac, as you may see, Genesis xxvi 3.4. "And I will perform
the oath which I swear unto Abraham thy father; and I will make thy seed to
multiply as the stars of heaven, and will give unto thy seed all these
countries; and in thy seed shall all the nations of the earth be blessed."
Afterward it was renewed and confirmed to Jacob; first in Isaac's blessing of
him, wherein he acted and spoke by extraordinary divine direction. In that
blessing, the blessings of the covenant of grace were established with Jacob
and his seed; as Genesis xxvii.29. "Let people serve thee, and nations bow down to
thee; be lord over thy brethren, and let thy mother's sons bow down to thee:
Cursed be every one that curses thee, and blessed be he that blesses thee."
Therefore Esau, in missing of this blessing, missed of being blessed as an heir
of the benefits of the covenant of grace.

This covenant was again renewed and confirmed to Jacob at Bethel, in his
vision of the ladder that reached to heaven; which ladder was a symbol of the
way of salvation by Christ. For the stone that Jacob rested on was a tie of
Christ, the stone of Israel, which the spiritual Israel or Jacob rests upon; as
is evident, because this stone was on this occasion anointed, and was made use
of as an alter. But we know that Christ is the anointed of God, and is the only
true altar of God. While Jacob was resting on this stone, and saw this ladde^,
God appears to him as his covenant God, and renew^ the covenant of grace with
him; as in Genesis xxviii.14. "And thy seed shall be as the dust of the earth; and
thou shall spread abroad to the west, and to the east, and to the north, and to
the south; and in thee and in thy seed shall all the families of the earth be
blessed."

Jacob had another remarkable confirmation of this covenant at Penuel, where he
wre^tled with God, and prevailed; where Christ appeared to him in a human form,
in the form of that nature which he was afterward to receive into a personal
union with his divine nature.

God renewed his covenant with him again, after he was come out of Padan-aram,
and was come up to Bethel, to the stone that he had rested on, and where he had
the vision of the ladder; as you may see in Gen xxxv.10 etc.

Thus the covenant of grace was now often renewed, much oftener than it had
been before. The light of the gospel now began to shine much brighter, as the
time drew nearer that Christ should come.

VI. The next thing I would observe, is God's remarkably preserving the family
of which Christ was to proceed from perishing by famine, by the instrumentality
of Joseph. When there was a seven-years famine approaching, God was pleased, by
a wonderful providence, to send Joseph into Egypt, there to provide for, and
feed Jacob and his family, and to keep the holy seed alive, which otherwise
would have perished. Joseph was sent into Egypt for that end, as he observes,
Genesis l.^0. "But as for you, ye thought evil against me; but God meant it unto
good, to save much people alive." How often had this holy root, that had the
future branch of righteousness, the glorious Redeemer, in it, been in danger of
being destroyed! But God wonderfully preserved it.

This salvation of the house of Israel by the hand of Joseph, was upon some
accounts very much a resemblance of the salvation of Christ. The children of
Israel were saved by Joseph their kinsman and brother, from perishing by
famine; as he that saves the souls of the spiritual Israel from spiritual
famine is their near kinsman, and one that is not ashamed to call them
brethren. Joseph was a brother, that they had hated, and sold, and as it were
killed; for they had designed to kill him. So Christ is one that we naturally
hate, and, by our wicked lives, have sold for the vain things of the world, and
that by our sins we have slain. Joseph was first in a state of humiliation; he
was a servant, as Christ appeared in the form of a servant* and then was cast
into a dungeon, as Christ descended into the grave; and then when he rose out
of the dungeon, he was in a state of great exaltation, at the king's right hand
as his deputy, to reign over all his kingdom, to provide food, to preserve
li^e; and being in this state of exaltation, he dispenses food to his brethren,
and so gives them life; as Christ was exalted at God's right hand to be a
prince and savior to his brethren, and received gifts for men, even for the
rebellious, and them that hated, and had sold him.

VII. After this there was a prophecy given forth of Christ, on some accounts,
more particular than ever any had been before ^ven that which was in Jacob's
blessing his son Judah. This was (...) particular than ever any had been
before, as it showed of whose posterity he was to be. When God called Abraham,
it was revealed that he was to be of Abraham's posterity. Before, we have no
account of any revelation concerning Christ's Pedigree confined to narrower
limits than the posterity of Noah: after this it was confined to still narrower
limits; for though Abraham had many sons, yet it was revealed, that Christ was
to be of Isaac's posterity. And then it was limited more still; for when Isaac
had two sons it was revealed that Christ was to be of Israel's posterity. And
now though Israel had twelve sons, yet it is revealed that Christ should be of
Judah's Posterity: Christ in the (...) of the tribe of Judah. Respect is
chiefly had to his great acts, when it is said here, Genesis xlix 8. "Judah, thou
art he whom t^y brethren shall praise; thy hand shall be in the neck of thine
enemies; thy father's children shall bow down before thee. Judah is a lion's
whel^^; from the prey, my son* thou are gone up; he (...) down, (...) couched
as a lion, and as an old lion* who shall (...) him up?" And then this
prediction is more particular concerning the time (...) Christ's coming* than
any had been before: as in verse. 10. "The sc^pter shall not depart from Judah,
nor a lawgiver from between his feet, u^ till S^i^oh come; and unto him shall
the gathering of the people be." The prophecy here, of the calli^g of the
Gentiles consequent on Christ's coming, seems to be more plain than any had
been before* in the expression, to him shall the gathering of the people be.

Thus you see how that gospel light which dawned immediately after the fall of
man* gradually increases.

VIII. The w^rk of redemption was carried on in this period, in God's
wonderfully preserving the children of Israel in Egypt, when the power of Egypt
was engaged utterly to destroy them. They seemed to be wholly in the hands of
the Egyptians; they were their servants and were subject to the power of
Pharaoh: and Pharaoh set himself to weaken them with hard bondage. And when he
saw (...) did not do, he set h^mself to extirp^te the race of them, by
commanding that every male c^ild should be drowned. But us^er all tha^ Pharao^
could do G^d wonderf^lly preserved them; and not only so, but increased then
exceedingly; so that instead of being exti^pated, they greatly multiplied.

IX. Here is to be observed, not only the preservation of the nation, but God's
wonderfully preserving and upholding his visible church in that nation, when in
danger of being overwhelmed in the idolatry of Egypt. The children of Israel
being lon^ among the Egyptians, and being servants under them, and so not under
advantages to keep God's ordinances among themselves, and maintain any public
worship or public instruction, whereby the true religion might be upheld, and
there being now no written word of God, they, by degrees, in a great measure
lost the true religion, and borrowed the idolatry of Egypt; and the greater
part of the people fell away to the worship of their gods. This we learn by
Ezekiel. xx 6 7.8 and by chap. xxiii.8.

This now was the third (...) that God's church was almost swallowed up (...)
carried away with the wickedness of the world; once before the flood; the other
time, before the calling of Abraham; and now the third time, in Egypt. But yet
God did not suffer his church to be quite overwhelmed; ^e, still saved it, like
the ark in the flood, and as he saved Moses in the midst of the waters, in an
ark of bulrushes, where he was in the utmost danger of being swall^wed up. The
true religion was still kept up with some; and God had still a people among
them, even in this miserable, corrupt, and dark time. The parents of Moses were
true servants of God, as we may learn by Heb xi.23. "By faith Moses, when he
was born, was hid three months of his parents, because they saw that he was a
proper child; and they (...) not afraid of the king's commandment."

I have now gone through the third period of the Old Testament time; an^ have
shown how the work of redemption was carried on from the calling of Abraham to
Moses; in which we have seen many great things done toward this work, and a
great advancement of this building, beyond what had been before.

PART IV. From Moses to David.
I PROCEED to the fourth period, which reaches from Moses to David. -- I would
show how the work of redemption was carried on through this also.

I. The first thing that offers itself to be considered it the redemption of
the church of God out of Egypt; the most remarkable of all the Old Testament
^edemptions of the church of God, and that which was the greatest pledge and
forerunner of the redemption of Christ, of any; and is much more insisted on in
scripture than any other of those redemptions. Indeed it was the greatest type
of Christ's redemption of any providential event whatsoever. This red^mption
was by Jesus Christ, as is evident from this, that it was ^rought by him that
appeared to Moses in the bush; for that was the person that sent Moses to
redeem that people. But that was Christ, as is evident, because he is called
the angel of the Lord, Exodus iii.2.3. The bush represented the human nature of
Christ, that is called the branch. This bush grew on mount Sinai or Horeb,
which is a word that signifies a dry place, as the human nature of Christ was a
root out of a dry ground. The bush burning with fire, represented the
sufferings of Christ, in the fire of God's wrath. It burned, and was not
consumed; so Christ, though he suffered extremely, yet perished not; but
overcame at lai^, and rose from his sufferings. Because this great mystery of
their carnation and sufferings of Christ was here represented, therefore, Moses
says, "I will turn aside, and behold this great sight." A great sight he might
well call it, when there was represented God manifest in the f^esh, and
suffering a dreadful death, and rising from the dead.

This (...) wa^ he that redeemed the church out of Egypt, from under the hand
of Pharaoh; as Christ, by his death and suffering^, ^^deemed his people from
Satan, the spiritual Pharaoh. He redeemed them from (...) service and cruel
drudgery; a^ Christ redeem* his (...) f^^m the cruel slavery of sin and Satan.
He redeemed them, as it is said, from the iron furnace^; as Christ redeems his
church from a furnace of fire and everlasting burnings. He redeemed them with a
strong hand and out stretched arm, and great and terrible judgments on their
enemies; as Christ with mighty power triumphs over principalities and powers,
and executes terrible judgments on his church's enemies, bruising the
serpent's head. He saved them, when others were de^^royed, by the sprinkling of
the blood of the paschal lamb; as God's church is saved from death by the
sprinkling of the blood of Christ, when the rest of the world is destroyed. God
brought forth the people sorely against the will of the Egyptians, when they
could not bear to let them go; so Christ rescues his people out of the hands of
the devil, sorely against his will, when his proud heart cannot bear to be
overcome.

In that redemption, Christ did not only redeem the people from the Egpytians,
but he redeemed them from the devils, the gods of Egypt; for before, they had
been in a state of servitude to the gods of Egypt, as well as to the men. And
Christ, the seed of the woman, did now, in a very remarkable manner, fulfill the
curse on the serpent, in b^uising his head* Exodus xii.12. "For I will pass
through the land of Egypt this night, and will smite all the first born in the
land of Egypt, both man and beast, and against all the gods of Egypt will I
execute judgment." Hell was as much and more engaged in that affair, than
Egypt was. The pride and cruelty of Satan, that old serpent, was more concerned
in it than Pharaoh's. He did his utmost against the people, and to his utmost
opposed their redemption. But it is said, that when God redeemed his people out
of Egypt, he broke the heads of the dragons in the waters, and broke the head
of leviathan in pieces, and gave him to be meat for the people inhabiting the
wilderness, Psalm. lxxiv.12.13.14. God forced their enemies to let them go, that
they might serve him; as also Z^charias observes with respect to the church
under the gospel, Luke i 74.75.

The people of Israel went out with an high hand, and Christ went before them
in a pillar of cloud and fire. There was a gloriou^ triumph over earth and hell
in that deliverance. And when Pharaoh and his hosts, and Satan by them pursued
the people, Christ overthrew them in the Red sea; the Lord triumphed
gloriously; the horse and his rider he cast into the sea, and there they slept
their last sleep, and never followed the children of Israel any more; as all
Christ's enemies are overthrown in his blood, which by its abundant
sufficiency, and the greatness of the sufferings with which it was shed, may
well be represented by a sea. The Red sea did represent Christ's blood, a^ is
evident, because the apostle compares the children of Israel's passage through
the Red sea to baptism, 1 Cor. x.1.2. But we all know that the water of baptism
represents Christ's blood.

Thus Christ, the angel of God's presence, in his love and his pity, redeemed
his people, and carried them in the days of old as on eagle'^ wings, so that
none of their proud and spiteful enemies, neither Egyptian^ nor devils, could
^ouch them.

This was quite a new thing that God did toward this great work of redemption.
God never had done any thing like it before* Deuteronomy. iv.32.33.34. This was a
great advancement of the work of redemption, that had been begun and carried on
from the fall of man; a great step taken in divine providence toward a
preparation for Christ's coming into the world, and working out his great and
eternal redemption: for this was the people of whom Christ was to come. Now we
may see how that plant flourished that God had planted in Abraham. Though the
family of which Christ was to come, had been in a degree separated from the
rest of the world before, in the calling of Abraham; yet that separation that
was then made, appeared not to be sufficient, without further separation. For
though by that separation, they were kept as strangers and sojourners, kept
from being united with other people in the same political societies; yet they
remained mixed among them, by which means, as it had proved, they had been in
danger of wholly losing the true religion, and of being overrun with the
idolatry of their neighbors. God now, therefore, by this redemption, separated
them as a nation from all other nations, to subsist by themselves in their own
political and ecclesiastical state, without having any concern with the Heathen
nations, that they might so be kept separate till Christ should come; and so
that the church of Christ might be upheld and might keep the oracles of God,
till that time; that in them might be kept up those types and prophecies of
Christ, and those histories, and other divine previous instructions, that were
necessary to prepare the way for Christ's coming.

II. As this people were separated to be God's peculiar people, so all other
people upon the face of the whole earth were wholly rejected and given over to
Heathenism. This, so far as the providence of God was concerned in it, belongs
to the great affair of redemption that we are upon, and was one thing that God
ordered in his providence to prepare the way for Christ's coming, and the great
salvation he was to accomplish in the world; for it was only to prepare the way
for the more glorious and signal victory and triumph of Christ's power and
grace over the wicked and miserable world, and that Christ's salvation of the
world of mankind might become the more sensible. This is the account the
scripture itself gives us of the matter, Romans xi.30.31.32. The apostle there
speaking to the Gentiles that had formerly been Heathens, says, "As ye in times
past have not believed God, yet have now obtained mercy through their unbelief;
even so have these also now not believed, that through your mercy they also may
obtain mercy. For God has concluded them all in unbelief, that he might have
mercy upon all." i. e. It was the will of God, that the whole world, Jews, and
Gentiles, should be concluded in visible and professed unbelief, that so God's
mercy and Christ's salvation toward them all might be visible and sensible.
For the apostle is not speaking only of that unbelief that is natural to all
God's professing people as well as others, but that which appears, and is
visible; such as the Jews fell into, when they openly rejected Christ, and
ceased to be a professing people. The apostle observes, how that first the
Gentiles, even the Gentile nations, were included in a professed unbelief and
open opposition to the true religion, before Christ came, to prepare the way
for the calling of the Gentiles, which was soon after Christ came, that God's
mercy might be the more vis^ble to them; and that the Jews were rejected, and
apostati^ed from the visible church, to prepare the way for the calling of the
Jews, which shall be in the latter days: So that it may be seen of all nations,
Jews and Gentiles, that they are visibly redeemed by Christ, from being ^isibly
aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, without hope, and without God in the
world.

We cannot certainly determine precisely at what time the apostasy of the
Gentile nations from the true God, or there being concluded in visible
unbelief, became universal. Their falling away was a gradual thing, as we
observed before. It was general in Abraham's time, but not universal; for then
we find Melchizedec, one of the kings of Canaan, was priest of the most high
God. After this the true religion was kept (...) for a while among some of the
rest of Abraham's posterity, besides ^he family of J^c^b; and also in some of
the posterity of Nahor, as we have instances in Job, and his three friends, and
Elihu. The land of Uz, where Job lived was a land possessed by the posterity of
U^, or H^z. the son of Nahor, Abraham's brother, of whom we read, Genesis xxii.21.
Bildad the Shuhire was of the offspring of S^^u^b, Abraham's son by K^truah,
Genesis xxv.1.2.: and Elihu the Buzit^, was of (...) the son of Nahor, the brother
of Abraham. So the true religion lasted among some other people, besides the
Israelites, a while after Abraham. But it did not l^st long: and it is probable
that the time of their total rejection, and giving up to idolatry, was about
the time when God separated the children of Israel from Egypt to serve him; for
they are often put in m^nd on that occasion* that God had now separated them to
be his peculiar people; or to be distinguished from all other people upon
earth, to be his people alone; to be his portion, when others were rejected.
This seems to hold forth thus much to us, that God now chose them in such a
manner, that this visible choice of them was accompanied with a visible
rejection of all other nations in the world; that God visibly come, and took up
his residence with them, as forsaking all other nations.

And as the first calling of the Gentiles after Christ came, was accompanied
with the rejection of the Jews; so the first calling of the Jews to be God's
people, when they were called out of Egypt, was accompanied with a rejection of
the Gentiles.

Thus all the Gentile nations, throughout the whole world, all nations, but
only the Israelites, and those that embodied themselves with them* were left
and given up to idolatry; and so continued a great many ages, even from this
time till Christ came, which was about fi^teen hundred years. They were
concluded so long a time in unbelief, that there might be a thorough proof of
the necessity of a savior; that it might appear by so long a trial, past all
contradiction, that mankind were utterly insufficient to deliver themselves
from that gross darkness and misery, and subjection to the devil, that they had
fallen under; that it might appear that all the wisdom of the philosophers, and
the wisest men that the Heathen had among them, could not deliver them from
their darkness, for the greater glory to Jesus Christ, who, when he came,
enlightened and delivered them by his glorious gospel. Herein the wonderful
wisdom of God appeared, in thus preparing the way for Christ's redemption. Th^s
the scripture teaches us, as in 1 Cor. i.21. "For after that, in the wisdom of
God, the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of
preaching to save them that believe."

Here I might consider as another work of God, whereby the general work of
redemption was carried on, that wonderful deliverance which he wrought for the
children o^ Israel at the Red sea, when they were pursued by the hosts of the
Egyptians, and were just ready to be swallowed up by them, there being, to
human appearance, no possibility of an escape. But as this may be referred to
their redemption out of Egypt, and considered as a part of that more general
work, I shall not further enlarge upon it.

III. The next thing that I shall take notice of here, what was done toward
the work of ^edemption, is God's giving the moral law in so awful a manner at
Mount Sinai. This was another new thing that God did, a new step taken in this
great affair. Deuteronomy. iv.33. "Did ever a people hear the voice of God speaking
out of the midst of the fire, as thou have heard, and live?" And it was a great
thing that God did toward this work, and that whether we consider it as
delivered as a new exhibition of the covenant of works, or given as a rule of
life.

The covenant of works was here exhibited to be as a schoolmaster to lead to
Christ, not only for the use of that nation in the ages of the Old Testament,
but for the use of God's church throughout all ages of the world; as an
instrument that the great redeemer makes use of to convince men of their sin
and misery, and helpless state, and of God's awful and tremenduous majesty and
justice as a lawgiver, and so to make men sensible of the necess^ty of Christ
as a savior. The work of redemption* in its saving effect on men's souls, in
all the progress of it to the end of it, is not carried on without the use of
this law that was now delivered at Sinai.

It was given in an awful manner, with a terrible voice, exceeding loud an
awful, so that all the people that were in the camp trembled; and Moses
himself, though so intimate a friend of God* yet said, I exceedingly fear and
quake; the voice being accompanied with thunders and lightnings, the mountain
burning with fire to the midst of heaven, and the earth itself shaking and
trembling; to make all sensible how great that authority, power, and justice
was, that stood engaged to exact the fulfillment of this law, and to see it
fully executed; and how strictly God would require the fulfillment: and how
terrible his wrath would be against every breaker of it; that men being
sensible of those things, might have a thorough trial of themselves, and might
p^ov^ their own hearts, and know how impossible it is for them to have
salvation by the works of the law, and might see the absolute necessity they
stood in of a mediat^r.

If we regard this law now given at Mount Sinai, not as the covenant of works,
but as a rule of life* so it is made use of by the Redeemer, from that time to
the end of the world, as a directory to his people, to show them the way in
which they must walk, as they would go to heaven: for a way of sincere and
universal obedience to this law i^ the narrow way that leads to life.

IV. The next thing that is observable in this period, is God's giving the
typical law, in which I suppose to be included most or all those precepts that
were given by Moses, that did not properly belong to the moral law; not only
those laws that are commonly called ceremonial, in distinction from judicial
laws, which are the laws prescribing the ceremonies and circumstances of the
Jewish worship, and their ecclesiastical state; but also many, if not all those
divine laws that were political, and for regulating the Jewish commonwealth*
commonly called judicial laws; these were at best many of them typical. The
giving this typical law was another great thing that God did in this period,
tending to build up this glorious structure of redemption that God had been
carrying on from the beginni^g of the world. There had been many typical events
of providence before, that represented Christ and his redemption, and some
typical ordinances, as particularly those two of sacrifices and circumcision:
but now, instead of representing the great redeemer in a few institutions, God
gives forth a law full of nothing else but various and innumerable typical
representations of good things to come, by which that nation were directed how,
every year, month, and day, in their religous actions, and in their conduct of
themselves, in all that appertained to their ecclesiastical and civil state, to
show forth something of Christ; one observance showing one thing, exhibiting
one doctrine, or one benefit; another, another: so that the whole nation by
this law was, as it were, constituted in a typical state. Thus the gospel was
abundantly held forth to that nation; so that there is scarce any doctrine of
it, but is particularly taught and exhibited by some observance of this law;
though it was in shadows, and under a vail, as Moses put a vail on his ^^ce
when it shone.

To this typical law bel^ng all the precepts that relate to building the
tabernacle, that was set up in the wilderness, and all the form, circumstances,
and utensils of it.

V. About this time was given to God's church the first written word of God
that ever was enjoyed by God's people. This was another great thing done
toward the affair of redemption, a new and glorious advancement of the
bui^ding Not far from this time, was the beginning of the great written rule,
which God has given for the regulation of the faith, worship, and practice of
his church in all ages henceforward to the end of the world; which rule gr^w,
and was added to from that time, for many ages, till it was finished, and the
canon of scripture completed by the apostle John. It is not very material,
whether the first written word that ever was, was the ten commandments written
on the tables of stone with the finger of God, or the book of Job; and whether
the book of Job was written by Moses, as some suppose, or by Elihu, as others.
If it was written by Elihu, it was written before (...) period that we are now
upon; but yet could not be far from it, as appears by consi^ering whose
posterity the persons were that are spoken of in it, together with Job's great
age, that was passed before this was written.

The written word of God is the main instrument Christ has made use of to carry
on his work of redemption in all ages since it was given. There was a necessity
new of the word of God's being committed to writing, for a steady rule of God's
church. Before this, the church had the word of God by tradition, either by
immediate tradition from eminent men that were ^^spired, that were then living,
(for it was a common thing in those days, before there was a written word, for
God to reveal himself immediately to eminent persons, as appears by the book of
Job, and many other things that might be mentioned, in the book of Genesis), or
else they had it by tradition from former generations, which might be had with
tolerable certainty in ages pr^ceeding this* (...) reason of the long lives of
men. Noah might converse with A^am, and receive traditions from him; and Noah
lived till about Abraham's time: and the sons of Jacob lived a considerable
time to deliver the revelations made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, to their
posterity in Egypt. But the distance from the beginning of things was become so
great, and the lives of men become so short, being brought down to the present
standard about Moses's time, and God having now separated a nation to be a
peculiar people, partly for that end to be the keepers of the oracles of God;
God saw it to be a needful and convenient time now to commit his word to
writing, to remain henceforward ^or a steady rule throughout all ages.
Therefore, besides the book of Job, Christ wrote the ten commandments on tables
of stone, with his own finger; and after this the whole law, as containing the
substance of the five books of Moses, was by God's special command committed to
writing, which was called the book of the law, and was laid in the tabernacle,
to be kept there for the use of the church; as you may see, Deuteronomy. xxxi.24 25 26.

VI. God was pleased now wonderfully to represent the progress of his redeemed
church through the world to their eternal inheritance, by the journey of the
children of Israel through the wilderness, from Egypt to Canaan. Here all the
various steps of the redemption of the church by Christ were represented from
the beginning to its cons^mmation in glory. The state they are redeemed from is
represented by Egypt, and their bondage there, which they lost. The purchase of
their redemption was represented ^y the sacrifice of the paschal lamb, which
was offered up that night that God slew all the firstborn of Egypt. The
beginning of the application of the redemption of Christ's church in their
conversion, was represented by Israel's going out of Egypt, and passing through
the Red sea in so extraordinary and miraculous a manner. The travel of the
church through this evil world, and the various changes through which the
church passes, in the different stages of it, was represented by the journey of
the Israelite^ through the wilderness. The manner of their being conducted by
Christ, was represented by the Israelites being led by the pillar of cloud by
day, and the pillar of fire by night. The manner of the church's being
supported in their progress, and supplied from the beginning to the end of it,
with spiritual food, and continual daily communications from God, was
represented by God's supplying the children of Israel with bread, or man^^ from
heaven, and water out of the rock. The dangers that the saints must meet with
in their course through the world, were represented by the fiery s^ying
serpents which the children of Israel met with in the wilderness. The conflicts
the church has with her enemies, were represented by their battle with the
Amale^ites, and others they met with there. Innumerable other things might be
mentioned, wherein the things they met with were lively images of things which
the church and saints meet with in all ages of the world. That these things are
typical of things that pertain to the Christian church, is manifest from 1 Cor.
x.11. "Now all these things happened unto them for ensampler, and they were
written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come." Here the
apostle is speaking of those very things which we have now mentioned, and he
says expressly, that they happened unto them for types; so it is in the
original.

VII. Another thing here must not be omitted, which was a great and remarkable
dispensation of Providence, respecting the whole world of mankind, which was
finished in this period; and that was, the shortening the days of man's life,
whereby it was brought down from being between nine hundred and a thousand
years, to be but about seventy or eighty. The life of man began to be shortened
immediately after the flood: it was brought down the first generation to 600
years, and the next to between four and 500 years; and so the life of man
gradually gr^w shorter and shorter, 'till a^out the time of the great mortality
that was in the congregation of Israel, after they had murmured at the report
of the spies, and their carcasses fell in the wilderness, whereby all the men
of war died; and then the life of man was reduced to its present standard, as
Moses observes in that psalm that he wrote on occasion of that mortality: psalm.
10.10. "The days of our years are threescore years and ten; and if by reason of
strength they be fourscore years, yet is their strength labor and sorrow: for
it is soon cut off, and we fly away."

This great dispensation of God tended to promote the grand design of the
redemption of Christ. Man's life being cut so very short in this world, tended
to prepare the way for poor, mortal, short-lived men, the more joyfully to
entertain the glad tidings of everlasting life in another world, that are
brought to light by the gospel; and more readily to embrace a savior, that
purchases and offers such a blessing* if men's lives were still commonly about
nine hundred years, how much less would they have to move them to regard the
proffers of a future life; how much greater temptation would they have to rest
in the the things of this world, they being of such long continuance, and to
neglect any other life but this? This probably contributed greatly to the
wickedness of the antedeluvians. But now how much greater motives have men to
seek redemption, and a better life than this, by the great Redeemer, since the
life of man is not one twelfth part of what it used to be, and men now
universally die at the age when men formerly used to be but as it were setting
out in the world?

VIII. The same work was carried on in preserving that people, of whom Christ
was to come, from totally perishing in the wilderness, by a constant miracle of
forty years continuance. I observed before many times, how God preserved those
of whom the Redeemer was to proceed in a very wonderful manner; as he preserved
Noah and his family from the flood; and as he p^eserved Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, with their families, from the wicked inhabitants of Canaan; and as he
preserved J^cob and his family from perishing by the famine, by Joseph in
Egypt. But this preservation of the children of Israel for so long a time in
the wilderness, was on some accounts more remarkable than any of them; for it
was by a continual miracle of so long duration. There was, as may be fairly
computed, at first two millions of souls in that congregation, that could not
subsist any better without meat and drink than other men. But if this had been
with held, they must all have perished, every man, woman, and child, in less
than one month's time, so there would not have been one of them left. But yet
this vast multitude subsisted for forty years together, in a dry barren
wilderness, without sowing or reaping, or ^illing any land, having their bread
daily rained down to them out of heaven, and being furnished with water to
satisfy them all, out of a rock; and the same clothes with which they came out
of Egypt, lasting, without wearing out all that time. Never was any instance
like this, of a nation being so upheld for so long a time together. Thus God
upheld his church by a continual miracle, and kept alive that people in whom
was the blessing, the promised seed, and great Redeemer of the world.

IX. God was pleased, in this time of the children of Israel's being in the
wilderness, to give a further revelation of Christ the Redeemer in the
predictions of him, than had been before. Here are three prophecies given at
this time that I would take notice of. The first is that of Balaam, Numb.
xxiv.17.18.19. "I shall see him, but not now; I shall behold him* but not nigh:
There shall come a Star out of Jacob, and a Scepter shall rise out of Israel,
and shall smite the corners of Moab, and destroy all the children of Sheth. And
Edom shall be a possession, S^ir also shall be a possession for his enemies,
and Israel shall do valiantly. Out of Jacob shall come he that shall have
dominion, and shall destroy him that remains of the city." This is a plainer
prophecy of Christ, especially with regard to his kingly office, than any that
had been before. But we have another, that God gave by Moses, that is plainer
still, especially with regard to his prophetical office, in Deuteronomy. xviii.18.
etc. "I will raise up a prophet from among their brethren, like thee, and will
put my words into his mouth, and he shall speak unto them all that I command
him," etc. This is a plainer prophecy of Christ than any that had been before,
in this respect, that all the prophecies that had been before of Christ, were
in figurative mystical language. The first prophecy was so, That the seed of
the woman should bruise the serpent's head. The promises made to Abraham,
Isaac, and Jacob, "That in their seed all the families of the earth should be
blessed," were also mystical; which prophecy is not so particular, because the
expression, thy seed, is general, and not plainly limited to any particular
person. The prophecy of Jacob in blessing Judah, Gen* xlix.8. is in mystical
language; and so is (...) of Balaam, which speaks of Christ under the
figurative expression of a star. But this is a plain prophecy, without being
veiled in any mystical language at all.

There are several things contained in this prophecy of Christ. Here is hi^
mediatorial office in general, ver. 16. Here it is revealed how he should be a
person to stand between them and God, that was so terrible a being* a being of
such awful majesty, holiness, and justice, that they could not have come to
him* and have intercourse with him immediately, without a mediator to stand
between them; because, if they came to such a dreadful sin-revenging God
immediately, they should die; God would prove a consuming fire to them. And
then here is a particular revelation of Christ with respect to his prophetical
office: "I will raise them up a prophet from among their brethren, like unto
thee," etc. Further, it is revealed what kind of a prophet he should be, a
prophet like Moses, who was the head and leader of all the people, and who,
under God, had been their redeemer, to bring them out of the house of bondage,
was as it were their shepherd by whom God led them through the Red sea and
wilderness, and was an intercessor for them with God, and was both a prophet
and a king in the congregation; for Moses had the power of a king among them.
It is said of him, Deuteronomy. xxxiii.5. he was king in Jeshurun, and he was the
prophet by whom God as it were built up his church, and delivered his
instructions of worship. Thus Christ was to be a prophet like unto Moses; so
that this is both the plainest and fullest prophecy of Christ that ever had
been from the beginning of the world to this time.

The next prophecy that I shall take notice of, respects only the calling of
the Gentiles, which should be after Christ's coming, of which God gave a very
plain prophecy by Moses in the wilderness, Deuteronomy. xxxil 21. Here is a very plain
prophecy of the rejection of the Jews and calling the Gentiles. They moved God
to jealousy, by that which was not a god* by casting him off* and taking other
gods, that were no gods, in his room. So God declares that he will move them to
jealousy in the like manner, by casting them off, and taking other people, that
had not been his people, in their room. The Apostle Paul takes notice of this
prophecy, as foretelling the calling of the Gentiles, in Romans x.19 20 "But I
say, Did not Israel know? "First, Moses says, I will provoke you to jealousy
by them that are no people, and by a foolish nation I will anger you. But
Es^ias is very bold, and says, I was found of them that sought me not; I was
made manifest to them that asked not after me."

Thus you see how the light of the gospel, which first began to dawn and
glimmer immediately after the fall, gradually increases the nearer we come to
Christ's time.

X. Another thing by which God carried on (...) work in this time, was a
remarkable pouring out of his spirit on the young generation in the wilderness.
The generation that was grown up when they came out of Egypt, from twenty years
old and upward, was a very froward and perverse generation. They were tainted
with the idolatry and wickedness of Egypt, and were not weaned from it, as the
Prophet Ezekiel takes notice, Ezekiel. xx.6.7.8. Hence they made the golden calf
in imitation of the idolatry of Egypt, that was wont to worship a bull or an
ox; and therefore cattle are called the abomination of the Egyptians, i. e.
their idol. This generation God was exceeding angry with, and swore in his
wrath, that they should not enter into his rest. But the younger generation
were not so; the generation that were under twenty years old when they came out
of Egypt, and those that were born in the wilderness, the generation spoken of
Numb. xiv.31. "But your little ones, whom ye said should be a prey, them will I
bring in; and they shall know the land that ye have despised." This was the
generation with whom the covenant was renewed, as we have an account in
Deuteronomy, and that entered into the land of Canaan. This generation God was
pleased to make a generation to his praise, and they were eminent for piety; as
appears by many things said in scripture about them; as, particularly, Jer.
ii.2.2. "I remember thee, the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine
espousals, when thou wentest after me in the wilderness, in a land that was not
sown. Israel was holiness to the Lord, and the first fruits of his increase."
Here the generation that went after God in the wilderness is spoken of with
very high commendations, as eminent for holiness: Israel was holiness to the
Lord, and the first fruits of his increase. Their love to God is spoken of as
distinguished like the love of a bride at her espousals. The going after God in
the wilderness that is here spoken of, is not the going of the children of
Israel out of Egypt into the wilderness of Sinai, but their following God
through that dreadful wilderness, that the congregation long w^ndered in, after
they went back from Kadesh-Barnea, which is spoken of, Deuteronomy. viii.15. "Who led
thee through the great and terrible wilderness, wherein were fiery serpents and
scorpions, and drought, where there was no water." Though this generation had a
much greater trial, than the generation of their fathers had before they came
to Kadesh-Barnea, yet they never murmured against God in any wise, as their
fathers had done: But their trials had a contrary effect upon them, to awaken
them, convince, and humble them, and fit them for great mercy. They were
awakened by those awful judgments of God that he inflicted on their fathers,
whereby their carcasses fell in the wilderness. And God poured out his spirit
with those awakening providenc^^ toward their fathers, and their own travel in
the wilderness, and the word preached to them by Moses; hereby they were
greatly awakened, and made to see the badness of their own hearts, and were
humble^, and at length multitudes of them savingly converted; as Deuteronomy. viii 2
3. "And thou shall remember the way which the Lord thy God led thee these forty
years in the wilderness, to humble thee and to prove thee, and to know what was
thine heart, whether thou would keep his commandments, or no. And he humbled
thee, etc. And, verse 15. "Who led thee through that great and ter^i^le
wildernes^ -- that he might humble thee, and that he might p^ove thee* to do
thee good at thy latter end." And therefore it is said, Hos. xiii.5. "I did
know thee in the wilderness, in the land of great drought." God allured them,
and brought them into that wilderness, and spoke c^mfortably to them, as it was
foretold that he would do afterward, Hos. ii.14.

Those terrible judgments that were executed in the congregation after their
turning back from K^desh B^rnea, in the matter of K^^ah, and the matter of
Poor, were chiefly on the old generation* whom God consumed in the wilderness.
Those rebellions were chiefly among the elders of the congregation, who were of
the older generation, that God had given up to their hearts lust; and they
walked in their own counsels, and God was grieved with their manners forty
years in the wilderness.

But that this younger congregation were eminent for piety, appears by all
their history. The former generation were wicked, and were followed with
cu^ses; but this was holy, and wonderful blessings followed them. God did
great things for them; he sough^ for them, and gave them the possession of
Canaan. And it is God'^ manner, when he has very great mercies to bestow on a
visible people, first to fit them for them, and ^hen to bestow them on them. So
it was here: They believed in God, and by (...) overcame (...) and Og, and the
giants of Canaan; and are commended for cleaving unto the Lord: Josh xxiii.8.
Joshua says unto them, "Cleave unto the Lord, as ye have done unto this day"
And so Israel did all the while that generation lived. But when J^shua and all
that generation were de^d, there arose another (...) that knew not the Lord.
This pious generation showed ^ laudable and fervent (...) for God on s^veral
occasions; on occasion o^ Achan's sin; but especially when they suspected the
two tribes and a half had set up an altar in opposition to the altar of bur^t
offering. There never was any generation of Israel that so much good and so
little evil is mentioned of* as this generation. It is further observeable,
that in the time of this generation was the second general circumcision*
whereby the reproach of Israel was fully rolled away, and they became pure; and
when afterward they were polluted by Archan* ^hey purged themselves again.

The men of the former generation being dead, and God having sanctified this
younger generation to himself, he solemnly renewed his covenant with them, as
we have a particular account in the 29th chapter of Deuteronomy. We find that
such solemn renovations of the covenant commonly accompanied any remarkable
pouring out of the Spirit, causing a general reformation: So we find it was in
Hezekiah's and Josiah's times. It is questionable whether there ever was a time
of so great a flourishing of religion in the Israelitis^^ church, as in that
generation; and as, in the Christian church, religion was in its most
flourishing circumstances in the day of its espousals, or first setting up of
that church, in the days of the apostles, so it seems to have been with the
Jewish church in the days of its first establishment in Moses's and Joshua's
times.

Thus God at this time did gloriously advance the work of redemption, both by
his word and Spirit. By this pouring out of the Spirit of God, the work of
redemption was promoted, not only as it was in itself a glorious instance of
the carrying on of that redemption in the application of it, but as this was
what God made use of as a means of the good and orderly establishment of the
church of Israel at its first beginning, when it was first settled in the
regular observance of God's ordinances in Canaan: Even as the pouring out of
the Spirit, in the beginning of the Christian church, was a great means God
made use of for the well establishing the Christian church in the world in all
succeeding ages.

XI. The next thing I would observe, is God's bringing the people of Israel
under the hand of Joshua, and settling them in that land where Christ was to be
born, and which was the great type of the heavenly Canaan, which Christ has
purchased. This was done by Joshua, who was of Joseph's posterity, and was an
eminent type of Christ, and is therefore called the shepherd, the stone of
Israel, in Jacob's blessing of Joseph, Genesis xlix.24. Being such a type of
Christ, he bore the name of Christ. Joshua and Jesus are the same name, only
the one is Hebrew, the other is Greek: And therefore, in the New Testament,
which was originally written in G^eek, Joshua is called Jesus, Acts vii.45.
"Which also our fathers brought in with Jesus," i. e. Joshua; Heb. iv.8. If
Jesus had given them rest* he would not have spoken of another day;" (...) if
J^shua had given them rest.

God wonderfully possessed his people of this land, conquering the former
inhabitants of it, and the mighty glants, as Christ conquering the devil; first
conquering the great kings of that part of the land that was on the eastern
side of Jordan, Sihon king of the Amorites, and Og king of Bashan; and then
dividing the river Jordan, as before he had done the Red sea; causing the walls
of Jericho to fall down at the sound of the trumpets of the priests* that sound
typifying the sound of the gospel by the preaching of gospel ministers, the
walls of the accursed city Jericho signifying the walls of Satan's kingdom; and
after this wonderfully destroying the mighty host of the Amorites under the
five kings, causing the sun and moon to stand still, to help the people against
their enemies, at the prayer of the typical Jesus; plainly holding this forth,
that God would make the whole course of nature to be subservient to the affair
of redemption; so that every thing should yield to the purposes of that work,
and give place to the welfare of God's redeemed people.

Thus did Christ show his great love to his elect, that he would make the
course of nature, in the frame of the world, that he had made, and that he
governed, to give place to their happiness and prosperity; and showed that the
sun and moon, and all things, visible and invisible, were theirs by his
purchase. At the same time, Christ fought as the Captain of their host, and
cast down great hail stones upon their enemies, by which more were slain than
by the sword of the children of Israel. After this Christ gave the people a
mighty victory over a yet greater army in the northern part of the land, that
were gathered together at the waters of Merom, as the sand of the seashore, as
it is said Josh. xi.4.

Thus God gave the people whence Christ was to proceed, the land where he was
to be born, and live, and preach, and work miracles, and die, and rise again,
whence he was to ascend into heaven, as the land which was a great type of
heaven: Which is another thing whereby a great advance was made in the affair
of redemption.

XII. Another thing that God did toward carrying on this affair, was his
actually setting up his stated worship among the people, as it had been before
instituted in the wilderness. This worship was appointed at Mount-Sinai, wholly
in subserviency to this great affair of redemption. It was to make way for the
coming of Christ; and the innumerable ceremonial observance^ of it were typical
of him and his redemption. This worship was chiefly instituted at Mount Sinai;
but it was gradually set up in practice. It was partly set up in the
wilderness, were the tabernacle and its vessels were made; but there were many
parts of their instituted worship that could not be observed in the wilderness,
by reason of their unsettled* itineran^ state there: and then there were many
precepts that respect the land of Canaan, and their cities and places of
habitation there: which therefore could not be put in practice, till they came
into that land. But now, when this was brought to pass, God see up his
tabernacle in the midst of his people* as he had before promised them. Lev
xxvi.11. "I will s^t up my tabernacle among you" The tabernacle was set up at
Shiloh. Josh. xviii.1. and the priests and Levites had their offices appointed
them, and the cities of refuge were appointed; and now ^he people were in a
condition to observe their (...) of the first fruits, and their feasts of
ingathering and to bring all their tithes and appointed offerings to the Lord:
and most parts of God's wo^ship were set up, though there were some things that
were not observed till afterward.

XIII. The next thing I would take notice of, was God's wonderfully preserving
that people, from this time forward, when all the ma^es went up* three times in
the year, to the place were God's ark was. The people of Israel were generally
surrounded with enemies, that sought all opportunities to destroy them, and
dispossess them of their land; and till David's time there were great numbers
in the land of the remains of the Canaanites, and the other former inhabitants
of the land, that were b^^ter enemies to the people of Israe^: and these had
from year to year, three times in the year, a fair opportunity of overrunning
their country, and getting possession of their cities, when all the ma^es were
gone, and only the women, and those who were not able to go up, were left
behind. Yet they were remarkably preserved throughout all generations at such
seasons, agreeable to the promise that God had made Exodus xxxiv 24. "Neither
shall any man desire thy land, when thou shall go up to appear before the Lord
thy God thrice in the year." So wonderfully did God order affairs, and
influence the hearts of their enemies, that though they were so full of enmity
against Israel, and desired to dispossess them of their land, and had so fair
an opportunity so often in their hands, that the whole country was left naked
and empty of all that could resist them, and it would have been only for them
to have gone and taken possession, and they could have had it without
opposition, and they were so eager to take other opportunities against them;
yet we never read, in all their history, of any of their enemies taking these
opportunities against them: which could be no less than a continual miracle,
th^^ God, for the pr^servation of his church, kept up for so many generations
even throughout the ages of the Old Testament. It was surely a wonderful
dispensation of divine providence to maintain and promote God's great design of
redemption.

XIV. God's preserving his church and the true religion from being wholly
extinct in the frequent apostasies of the Israelites in the time of the judges.
How prone was that people to forsake the true God, that had done such wonderful
things for them, and to fall into idolatry* and how did the land, from time to
time, seem to be almost over run with idolatry! But yet God never suffered his
true worship to be totally rooted out: his tabernacle stood, the ark was
p^eserved the book of the law was kept from being destroyed, God's priesthood
was upheld, and God still had a church ^^ong the people; and time after time,
when religion seemed to be almost gone, and it was come to the last extremity,
then God granted a revival, and sent some angel or prophet, or raised up some
eminent person, to be an instrument of their reformation.

XV. God's preserving that nation from being destroyed, and delivering them
from time to time, although they were so often subdued and b^ought under the
dominion of their enemies. It is a wonder, not on^y that the true religion was
not wholly rooted out, and so the church destroyed that way; but also that the
very nation in which that church was, was not utterly destroyed; they were so
often brought under the power of their enemies. One while they were subdued by
(...) rishataim king of Mesopotamia, another while they were brought under the
Moabites; and then they were sold into the hand of J^bin king of Canaan; and
then they were under the dominion of the Midianites; and then were sorely
distressed by the children of Ammon; and then by the Philistines. But yet God,
in all these dangers, preserved them, and kept them from being wholly
overthrown; and from time to time, when it was come to extremity, and God saw
that they were upon the very brink of ruin, then God raised up a deliverer,
agreeable to Deuteronomy. xxxii, 36. "For the Lord shall judge his people, and repent
himself for his servants; when he ^eeth their power is gone, and there is none
shut up or left."

Those remarkable despensations of Providence are very livelily and elegantly
set forth by the Psalmist, Psalm. cvi.34. etc.

These deliverers that God raised up from time to time were all types of
Christ, the great redeemer and deliverer of his church; and some of them very
remarkably so; as, particularly, Barak, Jepht^ah, Gideon, and Samson, in very
many particulars; and above all in the act^ of Samson, as might be shown, were
it not that this would take up too much time.

XVI. It is observable, that when Christ appeared to manage the affairs of his
church in this period, he often appeared in the form of that nature that he
took upon him in his incarnation. So he seems to have appeared to Moses from
time to time, and particularly at that time when God spoke to him face to face,
as a man speaks to his friend, and he beh^ld the similitude of the Lord
(Numb. xii.8.), after he had besought him to show him his glory; which was the
most remarkable vision that ever he had of Christ. There was a twofold
discovery that Moses had of Christ: one was spiritual, made to his mind, by the
word that was proclaimed, when he proclaimed his name, saying, "The Lord, the
Lord God, merciful and gracious, long suffering, and abundant in goodness and
truth, keeping mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity and transgression and
sin, and that will by no means clear the guilty; visiting the iniquity of the
fathers upon the children, and upon the childrens children, unto the third and
to the fourth generation," Exodus xxxiv.6. etc. Another was external; which was
that which Moses saw, when Christ passed by, and put him in a cleft of the
rock, and covered him with his hand, so that Moses saw his back parts. What he
saw was doubtless the back parts of a glorious human form, in which Christ
appeared to him, and in all likehood the form of his glorified human nature, in
which he should afterward appear. He saw not his face; for it is not to be
supposed that any man could subsist under a fight of the glory of Christ's
human nature as it now appears.

So it was an human form in which Christ appeared to the seventy elders, of
which we have an account. Exodus xxiv.9 10.11. "Then went up Moses and Aaron,
Nadab and Abihu, and seventy of the elders of Israel. And they saw the God of
Israel: and there was under his feet, as it were a paved work of a
sapphire-stone, and as it were the body of heaven in his clearness. And upon
the nobles of the children of Israel he laid not his hand: also they saw God,
and did eat and drink." So Christ appeared afterward to J^shua in the form of
the human nature* J^sh. v.13.14, "And it came to pass when J^shua was by
Jericho, he lift up his eyes, and looked, and behold, there stood a man over
against him, with a sword drawn in his hand: and Joshua went unto him, and said
unto him, Art thou for us or for our adversaries? And he said Nay, but a^
captain or the host of the Lord am I now come" And so he appeared to Gideon,
Judge. vi.11. etc. and so also to Manoah Judge. xiii.17. -- 21. Here Christ
appeared to Manoah in a representation both of his incarnation and death; of
his incarnation, (...) that he appeared in a human form; and of his death and
sufferings, represented by the sacrifice of a kid, and by his ascending up in
the flame of the sacrifice; intimating that it was he that was the great
sacrifice, that must be offered up to God for a sweet savor, in the fire of
his wrath, as that kid was burned and ascended up in the flame. Christ thus
appeared, time after time, in the form or that nature he was afterward to take
upon him; because he now appeared on the same design, and to carry on the same
work, that he was to appear in that nature to work out and carry on.

XVII. Another thing I would mention, done in this period toward the work of
redemption, is the beginning of a succession of prophets, and erecting a school
of the prophets, in Samuel's time. There was something of this spirit of
prophecy in Israel after Moses, before Samuel. Joshua and many of the Judges
had a degree of it. Deborah was a prophetess; and some of the high priests were
informed with this spirit; particularly Eli: and that space of time was not
wholly without instances of those that were set app^^^ of God especially to
this office, and so were called prophets. Such on one we read of, Judge. vi.8.
"The Lord sent a porphet unto the children of Israel, which said unto them,"
etc. Such an one it seems to have been that we read of, 1 Samuel ii.27. "and
there came a man of God to Eli," etc.

But there was no such order of men upheld in Israel for any constancy, before
Samuel; the want of it is taken notice of in 2 Samuel iii 1. "And the word of the
Lord was precious in those days* there was no open vision." But in Samuel there
was begun a succession of prophets, that was maintained continually from that
time, at least with very little interruption, till this spirit of prophecy
ocased, about Malachi's time: and therefore Samuel is spoken in the New
Testament as the beginning of the succession of prophets. Acts iii.24. And all
the prophets from Samuel, and those that follow after, as many as have spoken,
have foretold of these days." After Samuel was Nathan, and Gad and Iddo, and
Heman, and Asaph, and others. And afterward, in the latter and of Solomon's
reign, we read of Ahijah; and in Jeroboam and Rehoboam's time we read of
prophets; and so continually one prophet succeeded another, till the captivity:
We read in the writings of those prophets that are inserted into the canon of
the sciptures, of prophets as being a constant order of men uph^ld in the land
in those days: and in the time of the captivity there were prophets still, as
Ezekiel and Daniel; and after the captivity there were prophets, as Zechariah,
Higgai, and Malachi.

Because God intended a constant succession of prophets from Samuel's time,
therefore in his time was begun a school of the prophets; that is, a school of
young men, that were trained up under some great prophet, who was their master
and teacher in the study of divine things, and the practice of holiness, to fit
them for this office as God should call them to it. Those young men that
belonged to these schools, were called the sons of the prophets; and oftentimes
they are called prophets. These at first were under the tuition of Samuel. Thus
we read of Samuel's being appointed over them, 1 Samuel xix.20. "And when they
saw the company of prophets prophesying, and Samuel standing as appointed over
them." The company of prophets that we read of 1 Samuel x.5. were the same*
Afterward we read of their being under Elijah. Elisha was one of his sons; but
he desired to have a double portion of his spirit, as his successor, as his
firstborn, as the eldest son was wont to have a double portion of the estate
of his father; and therefore the sons of the prophets, when they perceived that
the spirit of Elijah re^ted on Elisha, submitted themselves to him, and owned
him for their master, as they had done Elijah before him; as you may see, 2
Kings ii.15. "And when the sons of the prophets which were to view at Jericho,
saw him, they said, The spirit of Elijah ^oth rest on Elisha. And they bowed
themselves to the ground before him."

After this Elisha was their master or teacher; he had the care and instruction
of them; as you may see, 2 Kings iv.38. "And Elisha came again to Gilgal, and
there was a dearth in the land, and the sons of the prophets were ^i^ting
before him: and he sai^ unto his servant, Set on the great pot, and seethe
pottage for the sons of the prophets." In Elijah's and Elisha's time, there
were several places where there resided companies of these sons of the
p^ophets; as there was one at Bethel, and another at Jericho, and another at
Gilgal, unless that at Gilgal and Jericho were the same: and possibly that
which is called the college, where the prophetess Huldah resided, was another
at Jerusalem; see 2 Kings xxii.14. It is there said of Huldah the prophetess,
that "she dwelt in Jerusalem, in "the college." They had houses built, where
they used to dwell together; and therefore those at Jericho bing multiplied,
and finding their house too little for them, desired leave of their master and
teacher Elisha, that they might go and he^ timber (...) build a bigger; as you
may see, 2 Kings vi.1.2.

At some times there were numbers of these sons of the prophets in Israel; for
when Jezebel cut off the prophets of the Lord, it is said, that Obadiah took an
hundred of them, and hid them by (...) in a cave, 1 Kings xviii.4.

These schools of the prophets being set up by Samuel, and afterward kept up
by such great prophets as Elijah and Elisha, must be of divine appointment; and
accordingly we find, that those sons of the prophets were often favored with a
degree of inspiration, while they continued under tuition in the schools of the
prophets; and God commonly, when he called any prophet to the constant exercise
of the prophetical office, and to some extraordinary service, took them out of
these schools, -- though not universally. Hence the prophet (...), speaking of
his being called to the prophetical office, says, that he was one that had not
been educated in the schools of the prophets, and was not one of the sons of
the prophets. Amos vii.14 15. But Amos's taking notice of it as remarkable,
that he should be called to be a prophet that had not been educated at the
schools of the prophets, shows that it was God's ordinary manner to take his
prophets out of these schools; for therein he did but bless his own institution.

Now this remarkable dispensation of Providence that we are upon, viz. God's
beginning a constant succession of prophets in in Samuel's time, that was to
last many ages; and to that end* establishing a school of the prophets under
Samuel, thenceforward to be continued in Israel, was a step that God took in
that great affair of redemption that we are upon. For the main business of this
succession of prophets was, to foreshow Christ, and the glorious redemption
that he was to accomplish, and so to prepare the way for his coming; as appea^s
by that forementioned place, Acts iii.24. and by Acts x.43. "To him give all
the prophets witness^" and by Acts iii.18. "But those things which God before
(...) showed by the mouth of all his prophets, that Christ should suffer, he
has so fulfilled."

As I observed before, the Old Testament time was like a time of night, wherein
the church was not wholly without light, but had not the light of the sun
di^ectly, but as reflected from the stars. N^w th^s^ proph^ts were the stars
that reflected the light of the sun; on ac^ordingly they spoke abundantly of
Jesus Christ, as appears by what we have of their prophecies in writing. And
they made i^ very much their business, when they studied in their schools or
colleg^s, and elsewhere, to search out the work of redemption; agreeable to
what the apostle Peter says of them, 1 Pet. i.10.11. "Of which salvation the
prophets have en^^ired, and searched diligently, who prophesied of the grace
that should come unto you; searching what, or what manner of time the Spirit of
Christ that was in them did signify, when it testified beforehand the
sufferings of Christ, and the glory that should follow." We are told, that the
church of the Redeemer is built on the foundation of the prophets and apostles,
the Redeemer himself being the chief corner stone, Ephesians. ii.20.

This was the first thing of the nature that ever was done in the world; and it
was a great thing that God did toward further advancing this great building of
redemption. There had been before occasional prophecies of Christ, as was
shown; but now the time drawing nearer when the Redeemer should come, it
pleased God to appoint a certain order of men, in constant succession, whose
main business it should be, to foreshow Christ and his redemption, and as his
forerunners to prepare the way for his coming; and God established schools,
wherein multitudes were ins^ructed and t^ained up to that end, Rev. xix.10 "I
am thy fellow servants, and of t^y brethren that have the testimony of Jesus;
for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy."

PART V. From David to the Babylonish captivity.
I COME now to the fifth period of the times of the Old Testament, beginning
with David, and extending to the Babylonish captivity; and would now proceed to
show how the work of redemption was carried on through this period also. -- And
here,

I. The first thing to be taken notice of, is God's anointing that person that
was to be the ancestor of Christ, to be king over his people. The dispensations
of Pro^idence that have been taken notice of through the last period, from
Moses to this time, respect the people whence Christ was to proceed. But now
the scripture^ history leads us to consider God's providence toward that
particular ^^rson whence Christ was to proceed, viz. David. It pleased God
(...) this time remarkably to select out that person of whom Christ was to
come, from all the thousands of Israel, and to put a most honorable mark of
distinction upon him, by anointing him to be king over his people. It was only
God that could find him out. His father's house is spoken of as being little in
Israel, and he was the youngest of all the sons of his father, and was least
expected to be the man that God had chosen* by Samuel. God had before, in the
former ages of the world, remarkably distinguished the persons from whom Christ
was to come; as he did Seth, and Noah, and Abraham, and Isaac, and Jacob. But
the last we have any account of God's marking out in any notable manner, the
very person of whom Christ was to come, was in Jacob's blessing his son Judah;
unless we reckon Nahshon's advancement in the wilderness to be the (...) of the
tribe of Judah. But this distinction of the person of whom Christ was to come,
in David, was very honorable; for it was God's anointing him to be king over
his people. There was something further denoted by David's anointing, than was
in the anointing of Saul. God anointed Saul to be king personally; but God
intended something further by sending Samuel to anoint David, viz. to establish
the crown of Israel in him and in his family, as long as Israel continued to be
a kingdom; and not only so, but what was infinitely more still, establishing
the crown of his universal church, his spiritual Israel, in his seed, to the
end of the world, and throughout all eternity.

This was a great dispensation of God, and a great step taken toward a further
advancing of the work of redemption, according as the time drew near wherein
Christ was to come. David, as he was the ancestor of Christ, so he was the
greatest personal type of Christ of all under the Old Testament. The types of
Christ were of three sorts; types of institution, or instituted types, and
providential and personal types. The ordinance of sacrificing was the greatest
of the instituted types; and the redemption out of Egypt was the greatest of
the providential types; and David the greatest of the personal types. Hence
Christ is often called David in the prophecies of scripture; as Ezekiel.
xxxiv.23.24. "And I will set up one shepherd over them, and he shall feed them,
even my servant David; -- My servant David a prince among them" and so in many
other places: and he is very often spoken of as the seed of David, and the son
of David.

David being the ancestor and great type of Christ, his being solemnly anointed
by God to be king over his people, that the kingdom of his church might be
continued in his family for ever, may in some respects be looked on as an
anointing of Christ himself. Christ was as it were anointed in him; and
therefore Christ's anointing and David's anointing, are spoken of under one in
scripture, as Psalm. lxxxix.20. "I have found David my servant; wi^^ my holy oil
have I anointed him." And David's throne and Christ's are spoken of as one:
Luke i* 32. "And the Lord shall give him the throne of his father David*" Acts
li, 30. "David -- knowing that God had sworn with an oath to him, that of the
fruit of his loins, according to the flesh, he would raise up Christ to set on
his throne." Thus God's beginning of the kingdom of his church in the house of
David, was, as it were, a new establishing of the kingdom of Christ; the
beginning of it in a state of such visibility as it thenceforward continued in.
It was as it were God's planting the root, whence that branch of righteousness
was afterward to spring up, that was to be the everlasting king of his church;
and therefore this everlasting king is called the branch from the stem of
Jesse. Is. xi.1. "And there shall come forth a rod out of the stem of Jesse,
and a branch shall grow out of his roots." Jer. xxiii.5, "Behold, the days
come, says the Lord, that I will raise up unto David a righteous branch, and a
king shall reign and prosper." So chap. xxxiii.15, "In those d^ys, and at that
(...)* I will cause the branch of righteousness to grow up to David, and he
shall execute judgment and righteousness in the land." So Christ in the New
Testament, is called the root and offspring of David, Rev. xxii.1^.

It is observable, that God anointed David after Saul to reign in his room. He
took away the crown from him and his family, who was higher in stature then any
of his people, and was in their eyes fittest to bear rule, to give it to David,
who was low of stature, and in comparison, of despicable appearance: so God was
pleased to show how Christ, who appeared despicable, without form or
comeliness, and was despised and rejected of men, should take the kingdom from
the great ones of the earth. And also it is observable, that David was the
youngest of Jesse's sons, as Jacob the younger brother supplanted Esau, and got
the birthright and blessing from him: and as Pharez, another of Christ's
ancestors, supplanted Zarah in the birth; and as Isaac, another of the
ancestors of Christ, cast out his elder brother Ishmael; thus was that frequent
saying of Christ fulfilled, "The last shall be first, and the first last."

II. The next thing I would observe, is God's so preserving David's life, by a
series of wonderful providence, till Readiness death. I before took notice of the
wonderful preservation of other particular persons that were the ancestors of
Christ; as Noah, Abraham, Isaac, Jacob; and have observed how, in that Christ
the great Redeemer was to proceed from them, that in their preservation, the
work of redemption itself may be looked upon as preserved from being defeated,
and the whole church, which is redeemed through (...) from being overthrown.
But the preservation of David was no (...) remarkable than that of any others
that have been already taken notice of. How often was it so, that there was but
a step between ^im and death. The first instance of it we have in his
encountering a lion and a bear, when they had caught a lamb out of his flock,
which, without miraculous assistance, could at once have ^ent this young
stripling in pieces, as they could the lamb that he delivered from them: so
afterward the root and offspring of David was preserved from the roaring lion
that goes about seeking whom he may devour, and conquered him, and rescued the
poor souls of men, that were as lambs in the mouth of this lion. Another
remarkable instance was, in preserving him from that mighty giant Goliath, who
was strong enough to have taken him, and picked him to pieces with his fingers,
and given his flesh to the beasts of the field, and to the ^owl^ of the air, as
he threatened him: but God preserved him from him, and gave him the victory
over him, so that he cut off his head with his own sword, and made him therein
the deliverer of his people; as Christ slew the spiritual Goliath with his own
weapon, the cross, and so delivered his people. And how remarkably did God
preserve him from being slain by Saul, when he first sought his life, by giving
him his daughter to be a snare to him, that the hand of the Philistines might
be upon him, requiring him to pay for her by an hundred foreskins of the
Philistines, that so his life might be exposed to them; and in preserving him
afterward, when Saul spoke to Jonathan, and to all his servants, to kill
David; and in inclining Jonathan, instead of his killing him, as his father
bade him, to love him as his own soul, and to be a great instrument of his
preservation, even so as to expose his own life to preserve David; though one
would have thought that none would have been more willing to have David killed
than Jonathan, seeing that he was competitor with him for his father's crown;
and again saving him, when Saul threw a javelin at him, to smite him even to
the wall; and again preserving him when he ^ent messengers to his house, to
watch him, when Michal Readiness daughter let him down through a window; and when
he afterward sent messengers to his house, to watch him, and to kill him* when
Michal Readiness daughter let him down through a window* and when he afterward sent
messengers, once and again, to Naioth in Ramah, to take him, and they were
remarkably prevented time after time, by being seized with miraculous
impressions of the spirit of God; and afterward when Saul, being resolute in
the affair, went himself, he also was among the prophets: and after this, how
wonderfully was David's life preserved at Gath among the Philistines, when he
w^nt to Achish the king of Gath, and was there in the hands of the Philistines,
who, one would have thought, would have dispatched him at once, he having so
much provoked them by his exploits against them (...) was ^gain wonderfully
(...) reserved at Keilah, when he had entered into (...) town, where Saul
thought he was sure of him. How wonderfully was he preserved from Saul, when he
pursued and hunted him in the mountains? How remarkably did God deliver him in
the wilderness of Maon, when Saul and his army were compassing David about? How
was he delivered in the cave of Engedi, when, instead of Readiness killing David,
God delivered Saul into his hands in the cave, and he cut off his skirt, and
might as easily have cut off his head; and afterward delivering him in like
manner in the wilderness of Ziph; and afterward again preserving him in the
land of the Philistines, though David had fought against the Philistines, and
conquered them at Keilah, since he was last among them; which one would think,
would have been sufficient warning to them not to trust him, or let him escape
a second time, if ever they had him in their hands again; but yet now, when
they had a second opportunity, God wonderfully turned their hearts to him to be
friend and protect him, instead of destroying him.

Thus was the precious seed that virtually contained the Redeemer, and all the
blessings of his redemption, wonderfully preserved, when hell and earth were
conspired against it to destroy it. How often does David himself take notice of
this, with praise and admiration, in the book of Psalms?

III. About this time, the written word of God, or the cannon of scripture, was
added to by Samuel. I have before observed, how that the canon of scripture was
begun, and the first written word of God, the first written rule of faith and
manners that ever was, was given to the church about Moses's time: and many,
and I know not but most divines, think it was added to by Joshua, and that he
wrote the last chapter of Deuteronomy, and most of the book of Joshua. Others
think that Joshua, Judges, Ruth, and part of the first book of Samuel, were
written by Samuel. However that was, this we have good evidence of, that Samuel
made an addition to the canon of scripture; for Samuel is manifestly mentioned
in the New Testament, as one of the prophets whose writings we have in the
scriptures, in that forementioned Acts iii.24. "Yea and all the prophets from
Samuel, and those that follow after, as many as have spoken, have likewise
foretold of those days." By that expression, "as many as have spoken," cannot
be meant, as many as have spoken by word of mouth; for never was any prophet
but what did that: but the meaning must be, as many as have spoken by writing,
so that what they have spoken has come down to us, that we may see what it is.

The way that Samuel spoke of these times of Christ and the gospel, was by
giving the history of those thing* that typified them, an^ pointed to them,
particularly the things concerning David that he wrote. The Spirit of God moved
him to commit those things to writing, chiefly for that reason, because they
pointed to Christ, and the times of the gospel; and, as was said before, this
was the main business of all that succession of prophets, that began in Samuel,
to foreshow those times.

That Samuel added to the canon of the scriptures seems further to appear from
1 Chronicles. xxix.29. "Now the acts of David the king, first and last, behold, they
are written in the book of Samuel the seer."

Whether the book of Joshua was written by Samuel or not, yet it is the general
opinion of divines, that the books of Judges, and Ruth, and part of the first
book of Samuel, were penned by him. The book of Ruth was penned for that
reason, because though it seemed to treat of private affairs, yet the persons
chiefly spoken of in that book were of the family whence David and Christ
proceeded, and so pointed to what the apostle Peter observed of Samuel and the
other prophets, in the 3d chapter of Acts. The thus adding to the canon of the
scriptutes, the great and main instrument of the application of redemption, is
to be looked upon (...) a further carrying on of that work, and an addition
made to that great building.

IV. Another thing God did toward this work, at that time, was his inspiring
David to show forth Christ and his redemption, in divine songs, which should be
for the use of the church, in public worship, throughout all ages. David was
himself endued with the spirit of prophecy. He is called a prophet, Acts
ii.29.30. "Let me freely speak to you of the patriarch David, that he is both
dead and buried, and his sepluchre is with us unto this day: therefore being a
prophet, and knowing that God ^ad sworn with an oath," etc. So that herein he
was a type of Christ, that he was both a prophet and king. We have no certain
account of the time when David was first endued with the spirit of prophecy;
but it is manifest, that it either was at the time that Samuel anoi^ted him, or
very soon after; for he appears soon after acted by this spirit, in the affair
of Goliath: and then great part of the psalms were penned in the time of his
troubles, before he came to the crown; as might be made manifest by an
induction of particulars.

The oil that was used in anointing David was a type of the spirit of God; and
the type and the antetype were given both together; as we are told, 1 Samuel
xvi.13. "Then Samuel took the horn of oil, and anointed him in the midst of his
brethren; and the spirit of the Lord came down upon David from that day
forward:" and it is probable, that it now came upon him in its prophetical
influences.

The way that this spirit influenced him was, to inspire him to show forth
(...), and the glorious things of his redemption, in divine songs, sweetly
expressing the breathings of a pious (...), fu^l of admiration of the glorious
things of the Redeemer, inflamed with divine love, and lifted up with praise;
and therefore he is called the sweet psalmist of Israel. 2 Samuel xxiii.1. "Now
th^se be the last words of David: David the son of Jesse said, and the man who
was raised up on high, the anointed of the God of Jacob, and the sw^et psalmist
of Israel." The main subjects of these sweet songs were the glorious things of
the gospel; as is evident by the interpretation that is often put upon them,
and the use that is made of them in the New Testament; for there is no one book
of the Old Testament that is so often quoted in the New, as the book of Psalms.
Joyfully did this holy man sing of those great things of Christ's redemption,
that had been the hope and expectation of God's church and people from the
beginning of the church of God on earth; and joyfully did others follow him in
it, as Asaph. Heman, Ethan, and others; for the book of Psalms was not all
penned by D^vid, though the greater part of it was. Hereby the canon of
scripture was further added to; and an excellent portion of divine writ was it
that was added.

This was a great advancement that God made in this building; and the light of
the gospel, which had been gradually growing from the fall, was exceedingly
increased by it: for whereas before there was but here and there a prophecy
given of Christ in a great many ages, now here Christ is spoken of by his
ancestor David abundantly, in multitudes of songs, speaking of his incarnation,
life, death, resurrection, ascension into heaven, his satisfaction,
intercession; his prophetical, kingly, and priestly office; his glorious
benefits in this life and that which is to come; ^is union with the church, and
blessedness of the church in him; the calling of the Gentiles, the future glory
of the church near the end of the world, and Christ's coming to the final
judgment. All these things, and many more, concerning Christ and his
redemption, are abundantly spoken of in the book of Psalms.

This was also a glorious advancement of the affair of redemption, as God
hereby gave his church a book of divine songs for their use in that part of
their public worship, viz. singing his praises, throughout all ages to the end
of the world. It is manifest the book of Psalms was given of God for this end.
It was used in the church of Israel by God's appointment: this is manifest by
the title of many of the psalms, in which they are inscribed to the chief
musician. i. e. to the man that was appointed to be the leader of divine songs
in the temple, in the public worship of Israel. So David is called, the sweet
psalmist of Israel, because he penned psalms for the use of the church of
Israel; and accordingly we have an account that they were actually made use of
in the church of Israel for that end, even ages after David was dead; as ^
Chron. xxix.30. "Moreover, Hezekiah the king, and the princes, commanded the
Levites to sing praises unto the Lord, with the wo^ds of David, and of Asaph
the seer." And we find that the same are appointed in the New Testament to be
made use of in the Christian church, in their worship: Ephesians. v.19. "Speaking to
yourselves in psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs." Col. iii.16. "Admonishing
one another in psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs." And so they have been, and
will to the end of the world be made use of in the church to celebrate the
praises of God. The people of God were wont sometimes to worship God by singing
songs to his praise before; as they did at the Red sea; and they had Moses's
prophetical song, in the (...) chapter of Deuteronomy, committed to them (...),
and Barak, and Hannah, sung praises to God: but now first did God commit to his
church a book of divine songs for their constant use.

V. The next thing I would take notice of, is God's actually exalting David to
the throne of Israel, notwithstanding all the opposition made to it. God was
determined to do it, and he made every thing give place that stood in the way
of it. He removed Saul and his ^ons out of the way; and first set David over
the tribe of Judah; and then, having removed (...), set him over all Israel.
Thus did God fulfill his word to David. He took him from the sheep cote, and
made him king over his people Israel, Psalm. lxxxiii.70.71. And now the throne
of Israel was established in that family in which it was to continue for ever,
even for ever and ever.

VI. Now first it was that God proceeded to choose a particular city out of all
the tribes of Israel to place his name there. There is several times mention
made in the law of Moses, of the children of Israel's bringing their oblations
to the place which God should choose; as Deuteronomy. xii.5.6.7. and so in many other
places; but God had never proceeded to do it till now. The tabernacle and ark
were never fixed, but sometimes in one place, and sometimes in another; but now
God proceeded to choose Jerusalem. The city of Jerusalem was never thoroughly
conquered, or taken out of the hands of the Jebusites, till David's time. It is
said in Joshua xv.63. "As for the Jebusites, the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the
children of Judah could not drive them out: but the Jebusites dwell with the
children of Judah at Jerusalem unto this day." But now David wholly subdued it,
as we have an account in 2 Samuel v. And now God proceeded to choose that city to
place his name there, as appears by David's bringing up the ark thither soon
after; and therefore this is mentioned afterward (...) the first time God
proceeded to choose a city to place his name there, 2 Chronicles. vi.5.6. and chap.
xii.13 Afterward God proceeded to show David the (...) he would have his
temple built, viz. (...) the Je^u^ite.

This city of Jerusalem is therefore called the holy city; and it was the
greatest type of the church of Christ in all the Old Testament. It was redeemed
by David, the captain of the hosts of Israel, out of the hands of the
Jebuzites, to be God's city, the holy place of his rest forever, where he would
dwell; as Christ, the captain of his people's salvation, redeems his church out
of the hands of devils, to be his holy and beloved city. Therefore how often
does the scripture, (...) speaking of Christ's redemption of his church, call
it by the names of Zion and Jerusalem? This was the city that God had appointed
to be the place of the first gathering and erecting of the Christian church
after Christ's resurrection, of that remarkable pouring out of the Spirit of
God on the apostles and primitive Christians, and the place whence the gospel
was to sound forth into all the world; the place of the first Christian church,
that was to be, as it were, the mother of all other churches through the world;
agreeable to that prophecy, Is. ii.3.4. "Out of Zion shall go forth the law,
and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem: and he shall judge among the nations,
and shall rebuke many people," etc.

Thus God chose Mount Sion when the gospel was to be sounded forth, as the law
had been from Mount Sinai.

VII. The next thing to be observed here, is God's solemnly renewing the
covenant of grace with David, and promising that the Messiah should be of his
seed. We have an account of it in the 7th chapter of the second book of Samuel.
It was done on occasion of the thoughts David entertained of building God an
house. On this occasion God sends Nathan the prophet to him, with the glorious
promises of the covenant of grace. It is especially contained in these words in
the 16th verse: "And thy house and thy kingdom shall be established forever
before thee; thy throne shall be established forever." Which promise has
respect to Christ, the seed of David, and is fulfilled in him only: for the
kingdom of David has long since ceased, any otherwise than as it is upheld in
Christ. The temporal kingdom of the house of David has now ceased for a great
many ages; much longer than ever it stood.

That this covenant that God now established with David by Nathan the prophet,
was the covenant of grace, is evident by the plain testimony of scripture, in
Is. lv.1.2.3. There we have Christ inviting sinners to come to the waters, etc.
And in the 3d verse, he says, "Incline your ear, come unto me; hear, and your
souls shall live; and I will make with you an everlasting covenant, (...) the
sure mercies of David." Here Christ offers to poor (...) they will come to him,
to give them an interest in the same (...) covenant that he had made with
David, conveying to them (...) ^^me sure mercies. But what is that covenant
that sinners obtain an interest in, when they come to Christ, but the covenant
of grace?

This was the fifth solemn establishment of the covenant of grace with the
church after the fall. The covenant of grace was revealed and established all
along. But there had been particular seasons, wherein God had in a very solemn
manner renewed this covenant with his church, giving forth a new edition and
establishment of it, revealing it in a new manner. This was now the fifth
solemn establishment of that covenant. The first was with Adam, the second was
with Noah, the third was wi^h the patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the
fourth was in the wilderness by Moses, and now the fifth is this made to David.

This establishment of the covenant of grace with David, David always esteemed
the greatest smile of God upon him, the greatest honor of all that God had put
upon him; he prized it, and rejoiced in it above all the other blessings of his
reign. You may see how joyfully and thankfully he received it, when Nathan came
to him with the glorious message. in 1* Sam. vii.18. etc. And so David, in his
last words, declares this to be all his salvation, and all his desire; as you
may see, 2 Samuel xxiii.5. "He has made with me an everlasting covenant, ordered
in all things and sure: For this i^ all my salvation, and all my desire."

VIII. It was by David that God first gave his people Israel the possession of
the whole promised land. I have before shown, how God's giving the possession
of the promised land belonged to the covenant of grace. This was done in a
great measure by Joshua, but not fully. Joshua did not wholly subdue that part
of the promised land that was strictly called the land of Canaan, and that was
divided by lot to the several tribes; but there were great numbers of the old
inhabitants lest unsubdued, as we read in the books of Joshua and Judges; and
there were many left to prove Israel, and to be thorns in their sides, and
pricks in their eyes. There were the Jeb^sites in Jerusalem, and many of the
Canaanites, and the whole nation of the Philistines, who all dwelt in that part
of the land that was d^vided by lot, and chiefly in that part of the land that
belonged to the tribes of Judah and Ephraim.

Thus these remains of the old inhabitants of Canaan continued unsubdued till
David's time; but he wholly subdued them all. Which is agreeable to what St.
Stephen observes, Acts vii.45. "Which also our fathers brought in with Jesus (
i. e. Joshua) into the possession of the Gentiles, whom God drove out before
the face of our fathers* unto the days of David." They were till the days of
David in driving them out, before they had wholly subdued them. But D^vid
^^tirely brought them under. He subdued the Jebusites, and he subdued the whole
nation of the Philistines, and all the rest of the remains of the seven nations
of Canaan: 1 Chronicles. xviii.1. "Now after (...) ^ame to pass, that David (...)
the Philistines, and subdued (...) and took Gath and her towers out of the
hands of the Philistines."

After this, all the remains of the former inhabitants of Canaan were made
bond-servants to the Israelites. The posterity of the Gibeonites became
servants before, ^e were of wood, and drawers of water, for the house of God.
But Solomon, David's son and successor, put all the other remains of the seven
nations of Canaan to bond-service; at least made them pay a tribute of
bond-service, as you may see. 1 Kings ix.20.21.22. And hence we read of the
children (...) Solomon's servants, after the return from the Babylonish
captiv^^y. Ezra ii.55. and Neh. xi.3. They were the children or posterity of
the seven nations of Canaan, that Solomon had subjected to bond-service.

Thus David subdued the whole land of Canaan, strictly so called. But then that
was not one half, nor quarter, of the land God had promised to their fathers.
The land that God had often promised to their fathers, included all the
countries from the river o^ Egypt to the river Euphrates. These were the bounds
of the land promised to Abraham, Genesis xv.18. "In that same day the Lord made a
covenant with Abraham, saying, Unto thy seed have I given this land, (...)
river of Egypt, unto the great river, the river Euphrates* So again God
promised at Mount Sinai, Exodus xxiii.31. "And I will set thy bounds from the
Red sea even unto the sea of the Philistines, and from the desert unto the
river: for I will deliver the inhabitants of the land into your hand; and thou
shall drive them out before thee." ^o again. Deuteronomy. xi.24. "Every place whereon
the soles of your feet shall ^read, shall be yours: from the wilderness, and
Lebanon from the river, the river Euphrates, even unto the uttermost sea, shall
your coast be." Again, the same promise is made to Joshua: Josh. i.3.4. "Every
place that the soul of your feet shall tread upon, have I given unto you, as I
said unto Moses; from the wilderness and this Lebanon, even or to the great
river, the river Euphrates, all the land of the (...), and unto the great sea,
toward the going down of the sun, shall be your coast." But the land that
Joshua gave the people the possession of, was but a little part of this land.
And the people never had had the possession of it, till now when God gave it
them by David.

This large country did not only include that Canaan that was divided by lot to
those who came in with Joshua, but the land of the Moabites and Ammonites, the
land of the Amal^^^^es, and the rest of the Edomites, and the country of Z^bah.
All these nations were subdued and brought under the children of Israel by
David. And he put garrisons in the several countries, and they became David's
servants, as we have a particular account in the 8th chapter of 2d Samuel: and
David extended their border to the river Euphrates, as was promised; see the 3d
verse: "And David smo^^ also H^dadeger the son of Rehob, king of Zobah, as he
went to recover his border at the river Euphrates." Accordingly we read, that
Solomon his son reigned over all the region on this (...) the river, 1 Kings
iv.24. "For he had dominion over all the region on this side the river, from
Tiphsah even unto Azzah, over all the kings on this side the river." This
Artaxerxes king of Persia takes notice of long after: Ezra iv.20. "There have
been mighty kings also over Jerusalem, which have ruled over all countries
beyond the river; and tol^, tribute, and custom was paid unto them."

So that Joshua, that type of Christ, did but begin the work of giving Israel
the possession of the promised land; but left it to be finished by that much
greater type and ancestor of Christ, even David, who subdued far more of that
land than ever Joshua had done. In this extent of his and Solomon's dominion
was some resemblance of the great extent of Christ's kingdom; and therefore the
extent of Christ's kingdom is set forth by this very thing, of its being over
all lands from the Red sea, to the sea of the Philistines, and over all lands
from thence to the river Euphrates; as Psalm. lxxii.8. "He shall have dominion
also from sea to sea, and from the river unto the ends of the earth." See also
1 Kings viii.56.

IX. God by David perfected the Jewish worship, and added to it several new
institutions. The law was given by Moses, but yet all the institutions of the
Jewish worship were not given by Moses; some we^e a^^ed by divine direction. So
this greatest of all personal types of Christ did not only perfect Joshua's
work, in giving Israel the possession of the promised land, but he also
finished Moses's work, in perfecting the instituted worship of Israel. Thus
there must be a number of typical prophets, pri^^e, and princes, to complete
one figure or shadow of Christ the antetype, he being the substance of all the
types and shadows. Of so much more glory was Christ accounted worthy, than
Moses, Joshua, David, and Solomon, and all the great prophets, priests, and
princes, judges, and saviors of the Old Testaments put together.

The ordinances of David are mentioned as of parallel validity with those of
Moses, 2 Chronicles. xxiii.18. "Also Jehoiada appointed the offices of the house of
the Lord by the hand of the priests the Levites, whom David had distributed in
the house of the Lord, to offer the burnt-offerings of the Lord, as it is
written in the law of Moses, with rejoicing and with singing, as it was
ordained by David." The worship of Israel was perfected by David, by the
addition that he made to the ceremonial law, which we have an account of in the
23d, 24th, 25th, and 26th chapters of the first book of Chronicles, consisting
in the several orders and courses into which David divided the Levites, and the
work and business to which he appointed them, different from what Moses had
appointed them to; and also in the divisions of the priests the sons of Aaron
into four and twenty courses, assigning to every course their business in the
house of the Lord, and their particular (...) times of attendance there; and
appointing some of the Levites to a new office, that had not been appointed
before; and that was the office of fingers, and particularly ordering and
regulating of them in that office, as you may see in the 25th chapter of 1st
Chronicles; and appointing others of the ^^vites by law to the several services
of porters, treasurers, officers, and judges: and ^hese ordinances of David
were kept up henceforth in the church of (...) as long as the Jewish church
lasted. Thus we find the several orders of ^riests and the Levites, the
porters, and fingers, after the (...). So we find the courses of the priests
appointed by David still continuing in the New Testament; so Zacharias the
father of John the Baptist was a priest of the course of Abia; which (...) wi^h
the course of Abijah appointed by David, that we rea^ (...) 1 Chronicles. xxiv.10.

Thus David as well as Moses was made like to Christ the (...) of David, in
this respect, that by him God gave a new ecc^esiastical establishment, and new
institutions of worship. David did not only add to the institutions of Moses,
but by those additions he abolished some of the old ^onstitutions of Moses that
had been in force till that time; particularly those laws of Moses that
appointed the business of the Levites, which we have in the 3d and 4th chapters
of Numbers, which very much consisted in their charge of the several parts and
utensils of the tabernacle, there assigned them, and in carrying those several
parts of the tabernacle. But those laws were now abolished by David; and they
were no more to carry those things, as they had been used to do till David's
time. But David appointed them to other work instead of it; see 1 Chronicles.
xxiii.26. "And also unto the Levites, they shall no more carry the tabernacle,
nor any vessels of it for the service thereof:" A sure evidence that (...)
c^^^monial law given by Moses is not perpetual, as the Jews supposed: but might
be wholly abolished by Christ: for i^ David, a type of the Messiah, might
abolish the law of Moses in part, much more might the Messiah himself abolish
the whole.

David, by God's appointment, aboli^^ed all use of the tabernacle, that was
built by Moses, and of which he had the pattern from God: for God now revealed
it to David to be his will, that a temple should be built* that should be
instead of the tabernacle: A great presage of what Christ, the son of David,
should do, when he should come, viz. abolish the whole Jewish ecclesiastical
constitution, which was but as a moveable tabernacle, to set up the spiritual
gospel-temple, which was to be far more glorious, and greate^^ extent, and was
to last for ever. David had the pattern of all things pertaining to the temple
showed him, even in like man^er as Moses had the pattern of the tabernacle: and
Solomon built the temple according to that pattern which he had from his father
David, which he received from God. 1 Chronicles. xxviii.11* 12. "Then David gave to
Solomon his son the pattern of the porch, and of the houses thereof, and of the
treasuries thereof, and of the upper chambers thereof, and of the inner
parlours thereof, and of the place of the mercy-seat, and the pattern of all
that he had by the spirit, of the courts of the house of the Lord, and of all
the chambers round about, of the treasuries of the house of God, and of the
treasu^ies of the dedicate things." And, ver. 19. "All this, s^id David, the
Lord made me understand in writing by his hand upon me, even all the works of
this pattern."

X The canon of scripture seems at or after the close of David's reign to be
added to by the prophets Nathan and God. It appears pro^^ble by the scriptures,
that they carried on (...) history of the two books of Samuel from the place
where Samuel left it, and finished it. These two books of Samuel seem to be the
book that in scripture is called the book of Samuel the seer, and Nathan the
prophet, and G^d the seer, as in 1 Chronicles. xxix 2^ "N^w the acts of David the
king, first and last, behold, they are written in the book of Samuel the seer,
and in the book of Nathan the prophet, and in the book of Gad the seer."

XI. The next thing I would take notice of, is God's wonderfully continuing the
kingdom of his vis^ble people in the line of Christ's legal ancestors, as long
as they remained an independent kingdom. Thus it was without any inte^ruption
worth taking notice. Indeed the kingdom of all the tribes of Israel was not
kept in that line; but the dominion of that part of Israel in which the true
worship of God was upheld, and so of that part that were God's visible people,
was always kept in the family of David, as long as there was any such thing* as
an independent king of Israel; according to his promise to David: And not only
in the family of David but always in that part of David's posterity that was
the li^e whence Christ was legally descended; so that the very person th^^ was
Christ's legal ancestor was always in the throne, excepting J^hoa^az* who
reigned three months, and Zedekiah; as you may see in Matthew's genealogy of
Christ.

Christ was legally descended from the kings of Judah, though he was not
naturally descended from them. He was both legally and naturally descended from
David. He was naturally descended from N^than the son of D^vid; for Mary his
mother was one of the posterity of David by Nathan, as you may see in Luke's
genealogy ^ but Joseph, the reputed and leg^l father of Christ, was naturally
descended of Solomon and his successo^^ as we have an account (...) Matthew's
genealogy. Jesus Christ, though he was not the natural son of Joseph, yet, by
the law and constitution of the Jews, he was Joseph's heir; because he was the
lawful son of Joseph's lawful wife, conceived while she was his legally
espoused wife. The Holy Ghost raised up seed to him. A person, by the law of
Moses, might be the legal son and heir of another, whose natural son he was
not; as sometimes a man raised up seed to his brother: A brother, in some
cases, was to build up a brother's house; so the H^ly Ghost built up Joseph's
house.

Joseph being in the direct line of the kings of Judah, of the house of David,
he was the legal heir of the crown of David; and Christ being legally his
firstborn son, he was his heir; and so Christ, by the law, was the proper heir
of the crown of David, and is therefore said to fit upon the throne of his
father David.

The crown of God's people was wonderfully kept in the line of Christ's legal
ancestors. When David was old, and not able any longer to manage the affairs
of the kingdom, Adonijah, one of his sons, set up to be king, and seemed to
have obtained his purpose; all things for a while seemed fair on his side, and
he thought himself strong; the thing he aimed at seemed to be accomplished. But
so it was, Adonijah was not the son of David that was the ancestor of Joseph,
the legal father of Christ; and therefore how wonderfully did Providence work
here! what a strange and sudden revolution! all Adonijah's kingdom and glory
vanished away as soon as it was begun; and Solomon, the legal ancestor of
Christ, was established in the throne.

After Solomon's death, when Jeroboam had conspired against the family, and
Rehoboa^ carried h^mself so that it was a wonder all Israel was not provok^d to
fo^sake him, and ten tribes did actually forsake him* and (...) up Jeroboam in
opposition to him; and though he was a wicked man, who deserved to have been
rejected altogether from being king; yet he ^eing the legal ancestor of Christ*
God kept the kingdom of (...) two (...), in which the true religion was upheld,
in his possess^o^: An^ though he had been wicked, and his son Abijam was
another (...); yet they being legal ancestors of Christ, God still (...) crown
in the family, and gave it to Abijam's son Asa. A (...) though many of the
kings of Judah were very wicked men, and horridly provoked God, as particularly
Jeho^am, Ahazaiah, Ahaz, Manassah, and Amon; yet God did not take away the
crown from their family, but gave it to their sons, because they were the
ancestors of Christ. God's remembering his covenant that he had established
with David, is given (...) the reason why God did thus, notwithstanding their
wicked lives; (...) 1 Kings xv 4. speaking there of Abijam's wickedness, it is
said, "Nevertheless, for David's sake did the Lord his God give him a lamp in
Jerusalem, to set up his son after him, and to establish Jerusalem:" So, Chron.
xxi.7. speaking there of Jehoram's great wickedness, it is said, "Howbeit the
Lord would not destroy the house of David, because of the covenant that he had
made with David, and as he promised to give a light unto him, and to his sons
forever."

The crown of the ten tribes was changed from one family to another
continually. First, Jeroboam took it; but the crown remained in his family but
for one generation after his death; it only descended to his son Nadab: and
then Baasha, that was of another family, ^ook it; and it remained in his
posterity but one generation after his death: and then Z^mri, that was his
servant, and not of his posterity, took it; and then, without descending at all
to his posterity, Omri, that was of another family, took it; and the crown
continued in his family for three successions: and then Jehu, that was of
another family, took it; and the crown continued in his family for three or
four successions: and then Shall^^, that was of another family, took it: and
the crown did not descend at all to his posterity; but Menahem, that was of
another family, took it; and it remained in his family but one generation after
him: and then Pekah, that was of another family, took it; and after him Hoshea,
that was still of another family, took it: so great a difference was there
between the crown of Israel, and the crown of Judah; the one was continued
evermore in the same family, and with very little interruption, in one right
line; the other was continually tossed about from one family to another, as if
it were the sport of fortune. The reason was not, because the kings of Judah,
many of them, were better than the kings of Israel; but the one had the
blessing in them; they were the ancestors of Christ, whose right it was to sit
on the throne of Israel. But with the kings of Israel it was not so; and
therefore divine Providence exercised a continual care, through all the changes
that happened through so many generations, and such a long space of time, to
keep the crown of Judah in one direct line, in fulfillment of the everlasting
covenant he had made with David, the mercies of which covenant were sure
mercies; but in the other case there was no such covenant, and so no such care
of Providence.

Here it must not be omitted, that there was once a very strong conspiracy of
the kings of Syria and Israel, in the time of that wicked king of Judah, Ahaz,
to dispossess Ahaz and his family of the throne of Judah, and to set one of
another family, even the son of Tabeal, on it; as you may see in Is. vii.6.
"Let us go up against Judah, and v^x it, and let us make a breach therein for
u^, and set a king in the midst of it, even the son of Tabeal." And they seemed
very likely to accomplish their purpose. There seemed to be so great a
likelihood of it, that the hearts of the people sunk within them* they gave up
the cause. It is said, "The heart of Ahaz and his people was moved as the trees
of the wood are moved with the wind." On this occasion God sent the prophet
Isaiah to encourage the people, and tell them that it should not come to pass.
And because it looked so much like a gone cause, that Ahaz and the people would
very difficulty believe that it would not be, therefore God directs the p^^phet
to give them, this sign of it, viz. that Christ should be born of the legal
seed of Ahaz; as Is. vii.14. Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign:
Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, and shall call his name
Immanuel. This was a good sign, and a great confirmation of the truth of (...):
God promised by Isaiah, viz. that the kings of Syria and Israel should never
accomplish their purpose of dispossessing the family of Ahaz of the crown of
Judah, and setting up the son of Tabeal; for Christ the Immanuel was to be of
them.

I have mentioned this dispensation of Providence in this place, because though
it was continued for so long a time, yet it began in Solomon's succession to
the throne of his father David.

XII. The next thing I would take notice of is, the building of the temple: a
great type of three things, viz. of Christ, especially the human nature of
Christ; of the church of Christ; and of heaven. The tabernacle seemed rather to
represent the church in its moveable, changeable state, here in this world. But
that beautiful, glorious, costly structure of the temple, that succeeded the
tabernacle, and was a fixed, and not a moveable thing, seems especially to
represent the church in its glorified (...) in heaven. This temple was built
according to the pattern shown by the Holy Ghost to David, and by divine
dir^^tion given to David, in the place where was the threshing floor of Ornan
the Jebusi^e, in Mount Moriah, 2 Chronicles. iii.1. in the same mountain, and
doubtless in the very same place, where Abraham offered up his son Isaac; for
that is said to be a mountain in the land of Moriah, Genesis xx^i.2 which mountain
was called the mountain of the Lord, as this mountain of the temple was, Genesis
xxii.14. "And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovah-ji^^eh; as it is
said to this day, In the mount of the Lord it shall be seen."

This was the house where Christ dwelt, till he came to dwell in the temple of
his body, or human nature, which was the antetype of this temple; as appears,
because Christ, on occasion of showing him the temple of Jerusalem, says,
"Destroy this temple, and in three days will I raise it up," speaking of the
temple of his body, John ii.19.20. This house, or an house built in this place,
continued to be the house of God, the place of the worship of his church, till
Christ came. Here was the place that God chose, where all their sacrifices were
offered up, till the great sacrifice came, and made the sacrifice and oblation
to cease. Into his temple in this place the Lord came, even the messenger of
the covenant. Here he often delivered his heavenly doctrine, and wrought
miracles; here his church was gathered by the pouring out of the Spirit, after
his ascension. Luke xxiv.53. speaking of the disciples, after Christ's
ascension, it is said, "And they were continually in the temple, praising and
blessing God." And, Acts ii.46. speaking of the multitudes that were converted
by that great outpouring of the Spirit that was on the day of Pentecost, it is
said, "And they continued daily with one accord in the temple." And, Acts v.42.
speaking of the apostles, "And daily in the temple, and in every house, they
ceased not to teach and preach Jesus Christ." Hence the sound of the gospel
went forth, and the church spread into all the world.

XIII. It is here worthy to be observed, that at this time, in Solomon's reign,
after the temple was finished, the Jewish church was risen to its highest
external glory. The Jewish church, or the ordinances and constitution of it, is
compared to the moon, in Rev. xii.1. "And there appeared a great wonder in
heaven, a woman clothed with the sun, and the moon under her feet, and upon her
head a crown of twelve stars." As this church was like the moon in many other
respects, so it was in this, that it waxed and waned like the moon. From the
first foundation of it, that was laid in the covenant made with Abraham, when
this moon was now beginning to appear, it had to this time been gradually
increasing in its glory. This time, wherein the temple was finished and
dedicated, was about the middle between the calling of Abraham and the coming
of Christ, and now it was full moon. After this the glory of the Jewish church
gradually decreased, till Christ came; as I shall have occasion more
particularly to observe afterward.

Now the church of Israel was in its highest external glory: Now Israel was
multiplied exceedingly, so that they seemed to have become like the sand on the
sea shore, 1 Kings iv.20. Now the kingdom of Israel was firmly established in
the right family, the family of which Christ was to come: Now God had chosen
the city where he would place his name: Now God had fully given his people the
possession of the promised land; and they now possessed the dominion of it all
in quietness and peace, even from the river of Egypt* to the great river
Euphrates; all those nations that had formerly been their enemies, quietly
submitted to them; none pretended to rebel against them: -- Now the Jewish
worship in all its ordinances was fully settled: -- Now, instead of a moveable
tent and tabernacle, they had a glorious temple; the most magnificent,
beautiful, and costly structure, that there was then, ever had been, or ever
has been since: Now, the people enjoyed peace and plenty, and every man sat
under his vine and fig tree, eating and drinking, and making merry as 1 Kings
iv 20.: -- Now they were in the highest pitch of earthly prosperity, silver
being as plenty as stones, and the land full of gold and precious stones, and
other precious foreign commodities, which were brought by Solomon's ships from
Ophir, and which came from other parts of the world: -- Now they had a king
reigning over them that was the wisest of men, and probably the greatest
earthly prince that ever was: -- Now their fame went abroad into all the earth,
so that they came from the utmost parts of the earth to see their glory and
their happiness.

Thus God was pleased, in one of the ancestors of Christ, remarkably to shadow
forth the kingdom of Christ reigning in his glory. David, that was a man of
war, a man who had shed much blood, and whose life was full of troubles and
conflicts, was more of a representation of Christ in his state of humiliation,
his militant state, wherein he was conflicting with his enemies. But Solomon,
that was a man of peace, was a representation more especially of Christ
exalted, triumphing, and reigning in his kingdom of peace. And the happy
glorious state of the Jewish church at that time, did remarkably represent two
things: 1. That glorious state of the church on earth, (...) shall be in the
latter ages of the world; those days of peace, when nation shall not lift sword
against nation, nor learn war any more. 2. The future glorified state of the
church in heaven. The earthly Canaan never was so lively a type of the heavenly
Canaan, as it was then, when the happy people of Israel did indeed enjoy it as
a land flowing with milk and honey.

XIV. After this the glory of the Jewish church gradually declined more and
more till Christ came; yet not so but that the work of redemption still went
on. Whatever failed or declined, God still carried on this work from age to
age; this building was still advancing higher and higher. Things still went on,
during the decline of the Jewish church, toward a further preparation of
things for the coming of Christ, as well as during its increase; for so
wonderfully were things ordered by the infinitely wise governor of the world,
that whatever happened was ordered for good to this general design, and made a
means of promoting it. When the people of the Jews flourished, and were in
prosperity, he made that to contribute to the promoting this design; and when
they were in adversity, God (...) that also to contribute to the carrying on of
the same desig^^* While the Jewish church was in its increasing (...), the work
of redemption was carried on by their increase; and when they came to their
declining state, which they were in from Solomon's time till Christ, God
carried on the work of redemption by that. That decline itself was one thing
that God made use of as a further preparation for Christ's coming.

As the moon, from the time of its full, is approaching nearer and nearer to
her conjunction with the sun; so her light is still more and more decreasing,
till at length, when the conjunction comes, it is wholly swallowed up in the
light of the sun. So it was with the Jewish church f^^m the time of its highest
glory in Solomon's time. In the latter end of Solomon's reign, the state of
things began to darken, by Solomon's corrupting himself with idolatry, which
much o^scured the glory of this mighty and wise prince; and withal troubles
began to arise in his kingdom; and after his death the kingdom was divided, and
ten tribes revolved, and withdrew their subjection from the house of David,
withal falling away from the true worship of God in the temple at Jerusalem,
and setting up the golden c^lves of Bethel and Dan. Presently after this the
number of the ten tribes was greatly diminished in the battle of Jeroboam with
Abij^^, wherein there ^ell down slain of Israel five hundred thousand chosen
men; which loss the kingdom of Israel probably never in any measure recovered.

The ten tribes fi^ally apostatised from the true God under Jeroboam, and the
kingdom of Judah was greatly corrupted, and from that time forward were more
generally in a corrupt state than otherwise. In Ahab's time the kingdom of
Israel did not only worship the calves of Bethel and Dan, but the worship of
Baal was introduced. Before they pretended to worship the true God by these
images, the calves of Jeroboam; but now Ahab introduced gross idolatry, and the
direct worship of false gods in the room of the true God; and (...) after the
worship of Baal was introduced into the kingdom of Judah, viz. in Jehoram's
reign, by his marrying Athaliah, the daughter of Ahab. After this God began to
cut Israel short, by finally destroying and sending into captivity that part of
the land that was beyond Jordan, as you may see in 2 Kings x.32 etc. And then
after this Tigl^th-Pilezer subdued and captivated all the nort^ern parts of the
land; 2 Kings xv.29. and then at last all the land of the ten tribes was
subdued by Salmaneser, and they were (...) carried captive out of their own
land. After this also the kingdom of Judah was carried captive into Babylon,
and a great part of the nation never returned. Those that returned were but a
sm^ll number, compared with what had been carried captive: and for the most
part after this they were dependant on the power of other state^, being subject
one while to the kings of Persia, the ^o the monarchy of the Grecians, and then
to the Romans. And before Christ's time, the church of the Jews was become
exceeding corrupt, overrun with superstition and self-righteousness. How small
a flock was the church of Christ in the days of his incarnation!

God, by this gradual decline of the Jewish state and church from Solomon's
time, prepared the way for the coming of Christ several ways.

1. The decline of the glory of this legal dispensation, made way for the
introduction of the more glorious dispensation of the gospel. The decline of
the glory of the legal dispensation, was to make way for the introduction of
the evangelical dispensation, that was so much more glorious, that the legal
dispensation had no glory in comparison with it. The glory of the ancient
dispensation, such as it was in Solomon's time, consisting so much in external
glory, was but a childish glory, compared with the spiritual glory of the
dispensation introduced by Christ. The church, under the Old Testament, was a
child under tutors and governors, and God dealt with it as a child. Those
pompous externals are called by the apostle, weak and beggarly elements. It was
fit that those things should be diminished as Christ approached; as John the
Baptist, the forerunner of Christ, speaking of Christ, says, "He must
increase, but I must decrease." John iii.30. It is fit that the twinkling stars
should gradually withdraw their glory, when the sun is approaching toward his
rising. The glory of the Jewish dispensation must be gradually diminished, to
prepare the way for the more joyful reception of the spiritual glory of the
gospel. If the Jewish church, when Christ came, had been in the same external
glory that it was in, in the reign of Solomon, men would have had their eyes so
daz^led with it, that they would not have been likely joyfully to exchange such
great external glory, for only the spiritual glory of the poor despised Jesus.
Again*

2. This gradual decline of the glory of the Jewish state, tended to prepare
the way for Christ's coming another way, viz. as it tended to make the glory of
God's power, in the great effects of Christ's redemption, the more conspicuous.
God's people's being so diminished and weakened by one step after another, till
Christ came, was very much like the diminishing Gideon's army. God told Gideon,
that the people that was with him, was too many for him to deliver the
Midianites into their hands, lest Israel should vaunt themselves against him,
saying, "My own hand has saved me." Therefore all that were fearful were
commanded to return; and there returned twenty and two thousand, and there
remained ten thousand. But still they were too many; and then, by trying the
people at the water, they were reduced to three hundred men. So the people in
Solomon's time were too many, and mighty and glorous for Christ* therefore he
diminished them; first, by sending off the ten tribes; and then he diminished
them again by the captivity into Babylon; and then they were further diminished
by the great and general corruption that there was when Christ came; so that
Christ found very (...) godly persons among them: and with a small handful of
discip^es, Christ con^uered the world. Thus high things were brought down, that
Christ might be exalted.

3* This prepared the way for Christ's coming, as it made the salvation of
those Jews that were saved by Christ, to be more sensible and visible Though
the g^eater part of the nation of the Jews was rejected, and the Gentiles
called in their room; yet there were a great many thousand of the Jews that
were saved by Christ after his resurrection, Acts xxi.20 They being taken from
so low a state under temporal calamity in their bondage to the Romans, and from
a state of great superstition and wickedness, that the Jewish nation was then
fallen into; it made their redemption the more sensibly and visibly glorious.

I have taken notice of this dispensation of providence in the gradual decline
of the Jewish church in this place, because it began in the reign of Solomon.

XV. I would here take notice of the additions that were made to the canon of
scripture in or soon after the reign of Solomon. There were considerable
additions made by Solomon himself, who wrote the books of Proverbs and
Ecclesiastes, probably near the close of his reign. His writing the Song of
Songs, as it is called, is what is especially here to be taken notice of, which
is wholly on the subject that we are upon, viz Christ and his redemption,
representing the high and glorious relation, and union, and love, that is
between Christ and his redeemed church. And the history of the scripture seems,
in Solomon's reign, and some of the next succeeding reigns, to have been added
to by the prophets Nathan and A^ijah, and Shemaiah and (...). It is probable
that part of the history which we have in the first of Kings, was written by
them, by what is said 2 Chronicles. lx.29. and in chap. xli.15. and in chap. xiii.^2.

XVI. God's wonderfully upholding his church and the true religion through this
period. It was very wonderful, considering the many and great apostasies that
there were of that (...) to idolatry. When the ten tribes had generally and
finally forsaken the true worship of God, God kept up the true religion in the
kingdom of Judah; and when they corrupted themselves, as they very often did
exceedingly, and idolatry was ready totally to swallow all up, yet God kept the
lamp alive, and was often pleased when things seemed to be come to an
extremity, and religion at its last gasp, to grant blessed revivals by
remarkable out pourings of his Spirit, particularly in Hezekiah's and Jos^^h's
time.

XVII. God remarkably kept the book of the law from being lost in times of
gene^al and long continued neglect of and enmity against it. The most
remarkable instance of this kind that we have, was the preservation of the book
of the law in the time of the great apostasy during the greatest part of the
long reign of Manassah, which lasted fifty-five years, and then after that the
reign of Am^^ his son. This while the book of the law was so much neglected,
and such a careless and profane managment of the affairs of the temple
prevailed, that the book of the law, that use to be laid up by the side of the
a^k in the Holy of Holies, was lost for a long time; no body knew where it was.
But yet God preserved it from being finally lost. In Josiah's time, when they
came to repair the temple, it was found buried in rubbish, after it had been
lost so long that Josiah himself seems to have been much a stranger to it till
now. See 2 Kings xxii.8. etc.

XVIII. God's remarkably preserving the tribe of which Christ was to proceed,
(...) being ruined through the many and great dangers of this perio^. The
visible church of Christ from Solomon's reign, was mainly in the tribe of
Judah. The tribe of Benjamin, that was annexed to them, was but a very small
tribe, and the tribe of Judah exceeding large; and as Judah took Benjamin under
his covert when he went into Egypt to bring corn, so the tribe of Benjamin
seemed to be under the covert of Judah ever after: and though* on occasion of
Jeroboam's setting up the calves at Bethel and Dan, the Levites resorted to
Judah out of all the tribes of Israel, (2 Chronicles xi.13.); yet they were also
small, and not reckoned among the tribes: and though many of the ten tribes did
also on that occasion, for the sake of the worship of God in the temple, leave
their inheritances in their several tribes, and removed and settled in Judah,
and so were incorporated with them, as we have account in the chapter just
quoted, and 16th verse; yet the tribe of Judah was so much the prevailing part,
that they were called by one name, they were called Judah* therefore God said
to Solomon, 1 Kings xi.13. "I will not re^d away all the kingdom: but will give
one (...) to thy son, for David my servant's sake, and for Jerusalem's sake,
which I have chosen," and so ver. 32.36. So when the ten tribes were carried
captive, it is said, there was none left but the tribe of Judah only: 2 Kings
xvii.18 "Therefore the Lord was very wroth with Israel, and removed them out of
his sight; there was none left but the tribe of Judah only" Whence they were
all called Jews, which i^ a word that comes from Judah.

This was the tribe of which Christ was to come; and in this chiefly did God's
visible church consist, from Solomon's time: and this was the people over whom
the kings that were legal ancestors of Christ, and were of the house of David,
^^igned. This people was wonderfully preserved from destruction during this
period, when they often seemed to be upon the brink of ruin, and just ready to
be swallowed up. So it was in Rehoboam's time, when ^hishak king of Egypt came
against Judah with such a v^st force; yet then God manifestly preserved them
from being destroyed. Of this we read in the beginning of the 12th chapter of 2 Chronicles. So it was again in Abijah's time, when Jeroboam set the battle in array
against him with eight hundred thousand chosen men; a mighty army indeed. We
read of it, 2 Chronicles. xiii.3. Then God wrought deliverance to Judah, out of
regard to the covenant of grace established with David, as is evident by ver 4.
and 5.; and the victory they abtained was because the Lord was on their side,
as you may see, ver. 12 So it was again in Asa's time, when Z^rah the Ethiopian
came against him with a yet larger army of a thousand thousand and three
hundred chariots, 2 Chronicles. xiv.9. On this occasion Asa cried to the Lord, and
tru^ted in him, being sensible that it was nothing with him to help those that
had no power; ver. 11. "And Asa cried unto the Lord his God, and said, Lord, it
is nothing with thee to help, whether with many, or with those that have no
power." Accordingly God gave them a glorious victory over this mighty host.

So again it was in Jehoshaphat's time, when the children of Moab, and the
children of Ammon, and the inhabitants of Mount Seir, combined together against
Judah with a mighty army, a force vast^y superior to any that Jehoshaphat could
raise; and Jehoshaphat and his people were greatly afraid: yet they set
themselves to seek God on this occasion, and trusted in him; and God told them
by one of his prophets, that they need not fear them, nor should they have any
occasion to f^ight this battle, they should only stand still and see the
salvation of the Lord. According to his direction* they only stood still, and
sang praises to God, and God made their enemies do the work themselves, and set
them to killing one another; and the children of Judah had nothing to do, but
to gather the spell, which was more than they could carry away. We have the
story in 2 Chronicles. xx.

So it was again in Ahaz's time, when Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah the
son of Remaliah, the king of Israel, conspired against Judah, and seemed to be
sure of their purpose; of which we have spoken already. So it was again in
Hezekiah's time, when Sennacherib, that great king of Assyria, and head of the
greatest monarchy that was then in the world, came up against all the fenced
cities of Judah, after he had conquered most of the neighboring countries, and
sent Rabshakeh, the captain of his host, against Jerusalem, who came, and in a
very proud and scornful manner insulted Hezekiah and his people, as being sure
of victory; and the people were trembling for fear, like lambs before a lion.
Then God sent Isaiah the prophet to comfort them, and assure them that they
should not prevail; as a token of which he gave them this sign, viz that the
earth, for two years successively, should bring forth food of itself, from the
roots of the old stalks, without their plowing or sowing; and then the third
year they should sow and reap, and plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them,
and live on the fruits of their labor, as they were wont to do before. See a
Kings xix.29. This is mentioned as a type of what is promised in ver. 30.31.
"And the remnant that is escaped of the house of Judah, shall yet again take
root downward, and bear fruit upward. For out of Jerusalem shall go forth a
remnant, and they that escape, out of Mount Zion: the zeal of the Lord of hosts
shall do this." The corn's springing again after it had been cut off with the
fickle, and bringing forth another crop from the roots, that seemed to be dead,
and so once and again, represents the church's reviving again, as it were out
of its own ashes, and flourishing like a plant after i^ had seemingly been cut
down past recovery. When the enemies of the church have done their utmost, and
seem to have gained their point, and to have overthrown the church, so that the
being of it is scarcely visible, but like a living root hid under ground; yet
there is a secret life in it that will cause it to flourish again, and to take
root downward, and bear fruit upward. This was fulfille^ now at this time: For
the king of A^syria had already taken and carried captive the ten tribes; and
Sennacherib had also taken all the fenced cities of Judah, and ranged the
country round about, and Jerusalem only remai^ed* and R^^^shakeh had in his own
imagination already swallowed that up as he had also in the fearful
apprehensio^ (...) themselves But yet God wrought a wonderful deliverance.
(...), that in one night smote an hundred fou^score and fi^e t^ousand in the
enemy's camp.

XIX. In the reign of Uzz^^h, and the following reigns, God was pleased to
raise up a set of eminen^ p^ophets, who should commit their prophecies to
writing, and leave them for the use of his church in a^^ ages We before
observed, how that God began a constant succession of prophets in Israel in
Samuel's time, and many of these prophets wrote by divine inspiration, and so
added to the canon of scripture before U^ziah's time. But none of them are
supposed to have written books of prophecies till now. Several of them wrote
histories of the wonderful dispensations of God toward his church. This we
have observed already of Samuel, who is supposed to have written Judges and
Ruth, and part of the first of Samuel. ^f not the book of Joshua. And Nathan
and G^d (...) to have written the ^est of ^he tw^ books of Samuel: and Nathan,
with Ahijah and I^do, wrote the history of Solomon, which is probably that
which we have in the first book of Kings. The history of Israel seems to have
been further carried on by Iddo and Shemaiah: 2 Chronicles. xii.15. "Now the acts of
Rhehoboam, first and last, are they not written in the book of Shemaiah the
prophet, and Iddo the seer, concerning genealogies?" And after that the history
seems to have been further carried on by the prophet Jehu, the son of Hanani: 2 Chronicles. xx.34. "Now the rest of the acts of Jehoshaphat, first and last, behold
they are written in the book of Jehu the son of Hanani, who is mentioned in the
book of the kings of Israel," as we find him to be 1 Kings xvi.1.7. And then it
was further continued by the prophet Isaiah: 2 Chronicles. xxvi.22. "Now the rest of
the acts of Uzziah, first and last, did Isaiah the prophet the son of Amos
write." He probably did it as well in the second book of Kings, as in the book
of his prophecy. And the history was carried on and finished by other prophets
after him.

Thus the prophets, even from Samuel's time, had from time to time been adding
to the cannon of scripture by their historical writings. But now, in the days
of Uzziah, did God first raise up a set of great prophets, not only to write
histories, but to write books of their prophecies. The first of these is
thought to be Hosea the son of Beeri, and therefore his prophecy, or the word
of the Lord by him, is called the beginning of the word of the Lord; as Hos.
i.2. "The beginning of the word of the Lord by Hosea;" that is, the beginning,
or the first part, of the written word of that kind, viz. that which is written
in books of prophecy. He prophesied in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and
Hezekiah, kings of Judah, and in the days of Jeroboam, the son of Joash, king
of Israel. There were many other witnesses for God raised up about the same
time to commit their prophecies to writing, Isaiah, and Amos, and Jonah, and
Micah, and Nahum, and probably some others; and so from that time forward God
seemed to continue a succession of writing prophets.

This was a great dispensation of Providence, and a great advance made in the
affair of redemption, which appears, if we consider what was said before, that
the main business of the prophets was to foreshew Christ and his redemption.
They were all forerunners of the great prophet. The main and why the spirit of
prophecy was given them was, that they might give testimony to Jesus Christ,
the great Redeemer, that was to come; and therefore the testimony of Jesus, and
the spirit of prophecy, are spoken of as the same thing: Rev. xix.10. "And I
f^ll at his feet to worship him: and he said unto me, See thou do it not: I am
thy fellow servants, and of thy brethren that have the testimony of Jesus:
worship God: for the testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy." Therefore
we find, that the great and main thing that the most of the prophets in their
written prophecies insisted upon, is Christ and his redemption, and the
glorious times of the gospel, which should be in the latter days, according to
their manner of expression. Though many other things were spoken of in their
prophecies, yet it seems to be only as introductory to their prophecy of these
great things. Whatever they prophesy of, here their prophecies commonly
terminate, as you may see by a careful perusal of their writings.

These prophets were set to writing their prophecies by the Spirit of Christ
that was in them, chiefly for that end, to foreshow and prepare the way for the
coming of Christ, and the glory that should follow. In what an exalted strain
do they all speak of those things! Many other things they speak of in men's
usual language. But when they come upon this subject, what a joyful heaven
sublimity is there in the language they use about it! Some of them are very
particular and full in their predictions of these things, and above all the
Prophet Isaiah, who is therefore deservedly called the evangelical prophet. He
seems to teach the glorious doctrines of the gospel almost as plainly as the
Apostles did, who preached after Christ was actually come. The Apostle Paul
therefore takes notice, that the Prophet Esai^^ is very bold, Romans x.20. i. e.
as the meaning of the word, as used in the New Testament, is very plain, he
speaks out very plainly and fully; so being "very bold" is used 2 Cor. iii.12.
we use "great plainness of speech," or "boldness," as it is in the margin.

How plainly and fully does the Prophet Isaiah describe the manner and
circumstances, the nature and end, o^ the sufferings and sacrifice of Christ,
in the 53d chapter of his prophecy. There is scarce a chapter in the New
Testament itself which is more full on it! and how much, and in what a glorious
strain, does the same prophet speak from time to time of the glorious benefits
of Christ, the unspeakable blessings which shall redound to his church through
his redemption! Jesus Christ, the person that this prophet spoke so much of,
once appeared to Isaiah in the form of the human nature, the nature that he
should afterward take upon him. We have an account of it in the 6th chapter of
his prophecy at the beginning: "I saw also the Lord sitting on a throne, high
and lifted up, and his train filled the temple," etc. This was Christ that
Isaiah now saw, as we are expressly told in the New Testament. See John
xii.39.40.41.

If we consider the abundant prophecies of this and the other prophets, what a
great increase is there of the light of the gospel, which had been growing from
the fall of man to this day? How plentiful are the revelations and prophecies
of Christ now, to what they were in the first period of the Old Testament, from
Adam to Noah? or to what they were in the second, from Noah to Abraham? or to
what they were before Moses* or in the time of Moses, Joshua, and the Judges?
This dispensation that we are now speaking of, was also a glorious advance of
the work of redemption by the great additions that were made to the canon of
scripture. Great part of the Old Testament was written now from the days of
Uzziah to the captivity into Babylon. And how ^^^^llent are those portions of
it? What a precious treasure have those prophets committed to the church of
God, tending greatly to con^^^m the gospel of Christ? and which has been of
great comfort and benefit to God's church in all ages since, and doubtless will
be to the end of the world.

PART VI. From the Babylonish captivity to the coming of Christ.
I COME now to the last period of the Old Testament, viz. that which begins
with the Babylonish captivity* and extends to the coming of Christ, being the
greatest part of six hundred years, to show how the work of redemption was
carried on through this period.

BUT before I enter upon particulars, I would observe in three things wherein
this period is distinguished from the prec^ding periods of the times of the Old
Testament.

1. Though we have no account of a great part of this period in the
scripture-history, yet the events of this period are more the subject of
scripture-prophecy, than any of the preceding periods. There are two ways
wherein the scripture gives account of the events by which the work of
redemption is carried on; one is by history, and another is by prophecy: and in
one or the other of these way^ we have contained in the scriptures an account
how the work of redemption is carried on from the beginning to the end.
Although the (...) do not contain a p^^per history of the whole, yet there is
contained the whole chain of great events by which this aff^^^ has been
carried on from the foundation, soon after the (...) of man to the finishing
(...) it at the end of the world, either in histo^y or prophecy.

It is to be observed, that were the scripture is wanting in one of these ways,
it is made up in the other. Where scripture-history fails, the^e prophecy takes
place: so that the account is still carried on, and the chain is not broken,
till we come to the very last link of it in the consummation of all things.

Accordingly it is observable of this period or space of time that we are upon,
that though it is so much less the subject of scripture-history, than most of
the preceding periods, so that there is above ^our hundred years of it that the
scriptures gives us no history of; yet the events of this period are more the
subject of scripture-prophecy, than the events of all the preceding periods put
together. Most of those remarkable prophecies of the book of Daniel do refer to
events that were accomplished in this period: so most of those prophecies of
Isaiah, and Jeremiah, and Ezekiel, against Babylon, and Tyrus, and against
Egypt, and many other nations, were fulfilled in this period.

So that the reason why the scripture gives us no history of so great a part of
this period, is not because the events of this period were not so important, or
less worthy to be taken notice of, than the events of the foregoing periods?
for I shall hereafter show how great and distingushedly remarkable the events
of this period were. But there are several other reasons which may be given of
it. One is, that it was the will of God that the spirit of prophecy should
cease in this period, (for reasons that may be given hereafter); so that there
were no prophets to write the history of these times; and therefore God
designing this, took care that the great events of this period should not be
without mention in his word; and so ordered it, that the prophecies of
scripture should be more full h^re, than in the preceding periods. It is
observable, that that set of writing prophets that God raised up in Israel,
were raised up ^^at the latter end of the foregoing period, and at the
beginning of this; which it is likely was partly for that reason, that the time
was now approaching, of which the spirit of prophecy having ceased, there was
to be no scripture-history, and therefore no other scripture-account but what
was given in prophecy.

Another reason that may be given why there was so great a part of this period
left without an historical account in scripture, is, that God in ^^is
providence took care, that there should be authentic and full accounts of the
events of this period preserved in profane history. It is remarkable, and very
worthy to be taken notice of, that with respect to the events of the five
preceding periods, of which the scriptures give the history, profane history
gives us no account, or at least of but very few of them. There are many
fabulous and uncertain accounts of things that happened before; but the
beginning of the times of authentic profane history is judged to be but a
little before Nebuchadnezzar's time, about an hundred years before. The learned
men among the Greeks and Romans, used to call the ages before that the fabulous
age; but the times after that they called the historical age. From about that
time to the coming of Christ, we have undoubted accounts in profane history of
the principal events; accounts that wonderfully agree with the many prophecies
that we have in scripture of those times.

Thus did the great God, that disposes all things, order it. He took care to
give an historical account of things from the beginning of the world, though
all those former ages which profane history does not reach, and ceased not till
he came to those later ages in which profane history related things with some
certainty: and concerning those times, he gives us abundant account in
prophecy, that by comparing profane history with those prophecies, we might see
the agreement.

2. This period being the last period of the Old Testament, and the next to the
coming of Christ, seems to have been remarkably distinguished from all others
in the great revolutions that were among the nations of the earth, to make way
for the kingdom of Christ. The time now drawing ^igh, wherein Christ, the great
King and Savior of the world, was to come, great and mighty were the changes
that were brought to pass in order to it. The way had been preparing for the
coming of Christ from the (...) of man, through all the foregoing periods: but
now the time drawing nigh, things began to rip^n apace for Christ's coming; and
therefore divine providence wrought wonderfully now. The greatest revolutions
that any history whatsoever gives an account of, that ever had been from the
flood, fell out in this period. Almost all the then known world, i. e. all the
nations that were ^ound about the land of Canaan, far and near, that were
within the reach of their knowledge, were overturned again and again. All lands
were in their turns subdued, captivated, and as it were emptied, and turned
upside down, and that most of them repeatedly* in this period; agreeable to
that prophecy, Is. xxiv.1. "Behold, the Lord makes the earth empty; he makes
it wastes, and turns is upside down, and scatters abroad the inhabitants
thereof.

This emptying, and turning upside down, began with God's visible church, in
their captivity by the king of Babylon. Then the cup from them went round to
all other nations, agreeable to what God revealed to the Prophet Jeremiah,
xxv.15. -- 27. Here special respect seems to be had to the great revolutions
that there were on the face of the earth in the times of the Babylonish empire.
But after that there were three general overturnings of the world before Christ
came, in the succession of the three great monarchies of the world that were
after the Babylonish empire. The king of Babylon is represented in scripture as
overturning of the world; but after that, the Babylonish empire was overthrown
by Cyrus; who founded the Persian empire in the room of it; which was of much
greater extent than the Babylonish empire in its greatest glory. Thus the world
was overturned the second time. After that, the Persian empire was overthrown
by Alexander, and the Grecian empire was set up upon the ruins of it; which was
still of much greater extent than the Persian empire: and thus there was a
general overturning of the world a third time. After that, the Grecian empire
was overthrown by the Romans, and the Roman empire was established; which
vastly exceeded all the foregoing empires in power and extent of dominion. And
so the world was overturned the fourth time.

These several monarchies, and the great revolutions of the world under them,
are abundantly spoken of in the prophecies of Daniel. They are represented in
Nebuchadnezzer's image of gold, silver, brass, and iron, and Daniel's
interpretation of it in the second chapter of Daniel; and then in Daniel's
vision of the four beasts, and the angel's interpretation of it in the seventh
chapter of Daniel. And the succession of the Persian and Grecian monarchies is
more particularly represented in the eighth chapter in Daniel's vision of the
ram and the he-goat, and again in the 11th chapter of Daniel.

Besides these four general overturnings of the world, the world was kept in a
constant tumult between whiles: and indeed the world was as it were in a
continual convulsion through the whole period till Christ came. Before this
period, the face of the earth was comparatively in quietness: though they were
many great wars among the nations, yet we read of no such mighty and universal
convulsions and overturnings as there were in this period. The nations of the
world, most of them, had long remained on their lees as it were, without being
empted from vessel to vessel, as is said of Moab, Jer. xlviii.11. Now these
great overturnings were because the time of the great Messiah draw nigh. That
they were to prepare the way for Christ's coming, is evident by scripture
particularly by Ez^k. xxi.22. "I will overturn, overturn, overturn it, and it
shall be no more, until he come whose right it is, and I will give it him." The
prophet, by repeating the word overturn three times, has respect to the three
overturnings, as in the Revelation, viii.13 The repetition of the word woe three
times, signifies three distinct woes; as appears by what follows, ix.12. "One
woe is past;" and xi.14. "The second woe is past, and behold the third woe comes
^^^ckly."

It must be noted, that the Prophet Ezekiel prophesied in the time of the
Babylonish captivity; and therefore there were three great and general
overturnings of the world to come after this prophecy, before Christ came; the
first by the Persians, the second by the Grecians, the third by the Romans; and
then after that Christ, whose right it was to take the diadem, and reign,
should come. Here these great overturnings are evidently spoken of as
preparatory to the coming and kingdom of Christ But to understand the words
aright, we must note the particular expression, "I will overturn, overturn,
overturn it*" i. e. the diadem and crown of Israel, or the supreme temporal
dominion over God's visible people. This God said should be no more, i. e. the
crown should be taken off, and the diadem removed, as it is said in the
foregoing verse. The supreme power over Israel should be no more in the royal
line of David, to which it properly belonged, but should be removed away, and
given to others, and overturned from one to another: First the supreme power
over Israel should be in the hands of the Persians; and then it should be
overturned again; and then it should be in the hands of the Grecians; and then
it should be overturned again, and come into the hands of the Romans, and
should be no more in the line of David, till that very person should come, that
was the son of David, whose proper right it was, and then God would give it to
him.

That those great shakings and revolutions of the nations of the world, were
all to prepare the way for Christ's coming, and setting up his kingdom in the
world, is further manifest by Haggai, ii.6.7. "For thus says the Lord of
hosts, Yet once, it is a little while, and I will shake the heavens, and the
earth, and the sea, and the dry land; and I will shake all nations, and the
desire of nations shall come, and I will fill this house with glory, says the
Lord of hosts*" And again, verse 21.22. and 23. It is evident by this, that
these great revolutions and shakings of the nations, whereby the thrones of
kingdoms and armies were overthrown, and every one came down by the sword of
his brother, were to prepare the way for the coming of him who is the desire of
all nations.

The great changes and troubles that have sometimes been in the visible church
of Christ, are in Rev. xii.2. compared to the church's being in travail to
bring forth Christ: So these great troubles and mighty revolutions that were in
the world before Christ was born, were, as it were, the world's being in
travail to bring forth the Son of God. The Apostle, in the 8th of Romans,
represents the whole creation as groaning and travailing in pain together until
now, to bring forth the liberty and manifestation of the children of God. So
the world as it were travailed in pain, and was in continu^l convulsions, for
several hundred years together, to bring forth the firstborn child, and the
only begotten Son of God. And those mighty revolutions were as so many pangs
and throes in order to it, The world being so long a time kept in a state of
war and bloodshed, prepared the way for the coming of the Prince of peace, as
it showed a great need the world stood in of such a prince to deliver the world
from its miseries.

It pleased God to order it in his providence, that earthly power and dominion
should be raised to its greatest height, and appear in its utmost glory, in
those four great monarchies that succeeded one another, and that every one
should be greater and more glorious than the preceding, before he set up the
kingdom of his Son. By this it appear how much more glorious his spiritual
kingdom was than the most glorious temporal kingdom. The strength and glory of
Satan's kingdom in these four mighty monarchies, appeared in its greatest
height: for these monarchies were the monarchies of the Heathen world, and so
the strength of them was the strength of Satan's kingdom. God suffered Satan's
kingdom to rise to so great a height of power and magnificence before his Son
came to overthrow it, to prepare the way for the more glorious triumph of his
Son. Goliath must have on all his splendid armor when the stripling David
comes against him with a ^^ing and a stone, for the greater glory of David's
victory. God suffered one of those great monarchies to subdue another, and
erect itself on the other's rui^^, appearing still in greater strength, and the
last to be the strongest and mightiest of all; that so Christ, in overthrowing
that, might as it were overthrow them all at once; as the stone cut out of the
mountain without hands, is represented as destroying the whole image, the gold,
the silver, the brass, the iron, and the clay; so that all became as the chaff
of the summer threshing floor.

These mighty empires were suffered thus to overthrow the world, and might
destroy one another: and though their power was so great, yet they could not
uphold themselves, but fell one after another, and came to nothing, even the
last of them, that was the strongest, and had swallowed up the earth. It
pleased God thus to show in them the instability and vanity of all earthly
power and greatness; which served as a foil to set forth the glory of the
kingdom of his Son, which never shall be destroyed, as appears by Dan. ii.44*
"In the days of these kings shall the God of heaven set up a kingdom, which
shall never be destroyed: and the kingdom shall not be left to another people,
but it shall break in pieces, and consume all these kingdoms, and it shall
stand for ever." So greatly does this kingdom differ from all those kingdoms:
they vanish away, and are le^t to other people; but this shall not be left to
other people, but shall stand for ever. God suffered the devil to do his
utmost, and to establish his interest, by setting up the greatest, strongest,
and most glorious kingdoms in the world that he could, before the despised
Jesus overthrew him and his empire. Christ came into the world to bring down
the high things of Satan's kingdom, that the hand of the Lord might be on every
one that is proud and lofty, and every high tower, and every lofty mountain; as
the Prophet Isaiah says, chap. ii.12. etc. Therefore these things were suffered
to rise very high, that Christ might appear so much the more glorious in being
above them.

Thus wonderfully did the great and wise governor of the world prepare the way
for the erecting of the glorious kingdom of his beloved son Jesus.

3. Another thing for which this last period or space of time before Christ was
particularly remarkable, was the wonderful preservation of the church through
all those overturnings. The preservation of the church was on some accounts
more remarkable through this period, than through any of the foregoing. It was
very wonderful that the church, which in this period was so weak and in so low
a state, and mostly subject to the dominion of Heathen monarchies, should be
preserved for five or six hundred years together, while the world was so often
overturned, and the earth was (...) in pieces, and made so often empty and
waste, and the inhabitants of it came down so often every one by the sword of
his brother. I say it was wonderful that the church in its weak and (...)
state, being but a little handful of men* should be preserved in all these
great convulsions; especially considering that the land of Judea, the chief
place of the church's residence, lay in the midst of them, as it were in the
middle between the contending parties, and was very much the fear of war
amongst them, and was often overrun and subdued, and sometimes in the hands of
one people, and sometimes another, and very much the object of the envy and
hatred of (...) Heathen nations, and often almost ruined by them, often great
multitudes of its inhabitants being slain, and the land in a great measure
depopulated; and those who had them in their power, often intended the utter
destruction of the whole nation. Yet they were upheld; they were preserved in
their captivity in Babylon, and they were upheld again under all the dangers
they passed through, under the kings of Persia, and the much greater dangers
they were liable to under the empire of the Greeks, and afterward when the
world was trodden down by the Romans.

Their preservation through this period was also distinguishingly remarkable,
in that we never read of the church's suffering persecution in any former
period in any measure to such a degree as they did in this, under Antiochus
Epiphanes, of which more afterward. This wonderful preservation of the church
through all these overturnings of the world, gives light and confirmation to
what we read in the beginning of the 46th Psalm: "God is our refuge and
strength, a very present help in trouble. Therefore will not we fear, though
the earth be removed, and though the mountains be carried into the midst of the
sea; though the waters thereof roar, and be troubled; though the mountains
shake with the swelling thereof."

THUS I have taken notice of some general things wherein this last period of
the Old Testament times was distinguished. I come now to consider how the work
of redemption was carried on in particulars.

I. The first thing that here offers is the captivity of the Jews into Babylon.
This was a great dispensation of providence, and such as never was before. The
children of Israel in the time of the judges, had often been brought under
their enemies; and many particular persons were carried captive at other times.
But never had there been any such thing as destroying the whole land, the
sanctuary, and the city of Jerusalem, and all the cities and villages of the
land, and carrying the whole body of the people out of their own land into a
country many hundred miles distant, and leaving the land of Canaan empty of
God's visible people. The ark had once forsaken the tabernacle of Shiloh, and
was carried captive into the land of the Philistines: but never had there been
any such thing as the burning the sanctuary, and utterly destroying the ark,
and carrying away all the sacred vessels and utensils, and breaking up all
their stated worship in the land, and the land's lying waste and empty for so
many years together. How lively are those things set forth in the Lamentations
of Jeremiah!

The work of redemption was promoted ^y this remarkable dispensation in these
following ways.

1. It finally cured that nation of their itch after idolatry. The Prophet
Isaiah, speaking of the setting up of the kingdom of Christ, chap. ii.18.
speaks of the abolishing idolatry as one thing that should be done to this end:
"And the idols he shall utterly abolish." When the time was drawing near, that
God would abolish Heathen idolatry, through the greater part of the known
world, as he did by the preaching of the gospel after Christ came, it pleased
him first to abolish Heathenism among his own people; and he did it now by
their captivity into Babylon; a presage of that abolishing of idols* that God
was about to bring to pass by Christ through so great a part of the Heathen
world.

This nation that was addicted to idolatry before for so many ages, and that
nothing would cure them of, not all the reproofs, and warnings, and
corrections, that they had, and all the judgments God inflicted on them for
it; yet now were finally cured: so that however some might fall into this sin
afterward, as they did about the time of Antiochus's persecution, yet the
nation, as a nation, never showed any hankering after this sin any more. This
was a remarkable and wonderful change in that people, and what directly
promoted the work of redemption, as it was a great advancement of the interest
of religion.

2. It was one thing that prepared the way for Christ's coming, and setting up
the glorious dispensation of the gospel, as it took away many of those things
wherein consisted the glory of the Jewish dispensation. In order to introduce
the glorious dispensation of the gospel, the external glory of the Jewish
church must be diminished, as we observed before. This the Babylonish captivity
did many ways; it brought the people very low.

First, it removed the temporal diadem of the house of David away from them, i.
e. the supreme and independent government of themselves. It took away the crown
and diadem from the nation. The time now approaching when Christ, the great and
everlasting king of his church, was to reign, it was time for the typical kings
to withdraw. As God said by Ezekiel, chapter xxi.26. "He removed the crown and
diadem, that is might be no more, till he should come whose right it was." The
Jews henceforward were always dependent on the governing power of other
nations, until Christ came, for near six hundred years, excepting about 90
years, during which space they maintained a sort of independence, by continual
wars under the dominion of the Maccabees and their posterity.

Again, by the captivity, the glory and magnificence of the temple was taken
away, and the temple that was built afterward, was nothing in comparison with
it. Thus it was meet, that when the time dr^w nigh that the glorious antetype
of the temple should appear, that the typical temple should have in glory
withdrawn.

Again, another thing that they lost by the captivity, was the two tables of
the testimony delivered to Moses, written with the finger of God; the two
tables on which God with his own finger wrote the ten commandments on Mount
Sinai. These seem to have been preserved in the ark till the captivity. These
were in the ark when Solomon placed the ark in the temple, 1 Kings viii.9.
There was nothing in the ark, save the two tables of stone, which Moses put
there at Horeb. And we have no reason to suppose any other, but that they
remained there as long as that temple stood. But the Jews speak of these as
finally lost at that time; though the same commandm^n^^ were preserved in the
book of the law. Th^se tables also were withdrawn on the approach of their
antetype.

Again, another thing that was lost that the Jews had before, was the Urim and
Thummim. This is evident by Ezra, ii.63. "And the Ti^shat^^ said unto them,
that they should not eat of the most holy things, till there should stand up a
priest with Urim and Thummim." we have no account that this was ever restored;
but the ancient writings of the Jews say the contrary. What this Urim and
Thummim was, I shall not now enquire; but only observe, that it was something
by which the high priest enquired of God, and received immediate (...) from
him, or by which God gave forth immediate oracles on particular occasions. This
was now withdrawn, the time approaching when Christ, the antetype of the Urim
and Thummim, the great word and oracle of God, was to come.

Another t^ing that the ancient Jews say was wanting in the second temple, was
the Sh^chinah, or cloud of glory over the mercy-seat. This was promised to be
in the tabernacle: Levit. xvi.2. "For I will appear in the tabernacle upon the
mercy-seat." We read elsewhere of the cloud of glory descending into the
tabernacle, Exodus xl.35; and so we do likewise with respect to Solomon's
temple. But we have no account that this cloud of glory was in the second
temple. And the ancient accounts of the Jews say, that there was no such thing
in the second temple. This was needless in the second temple, considering that
God had promised that he would fill this temple with glory another way, viz. by
Christ's coming into it; which was afterward fulfilled. See Haggai, ii.7. "I
will shake all nations, and the desire of all nations shall come, and I will
fill this house with glory, says the Lord of hosts."

Another thing, that the Jews in their ancient writings mention as being now
withdrawn, was the fire from heaven on the altar. When Moses built the
tabernacle and altar in the wilderness, and the first sacrifices were offered
on it, fire came down from heaven, and consumed the burnt-offering, as in
Levit. ix.24.; and so again, when Solomon built the temple, and offered the
first sacrifices, as you may see in 2 Chronicles. vii.1. And this fire was never to
go out, but with the greatest care to be kept alive, as God commanded, Levit.
vi.13. "The fire shall ever be burning upon the altar: It shall never go out."
And there is no reason to suppose the fire in Solomon's time ever went out till
the temple was destroyed by the Babylonians. But then it was extinguished, and
never was restored. We have no account of its being given on the building of
the second temple, as we have at the building of the tabernacle and first
temple. But the Jews, after their return, were forced to make use of their
common fire instead of it, according to the ancient tradition of the Jews. Thus
the lights of the Old Testament go out on the approach of the glorious Sun of
righteousness.

3. The captivity into Babylon was the occasion of another thing which did
afterward much promote the setting up of Christ's kingdom in the world, and
that was the dispersion of the Jews through the greater part of the known
world, before the coming of Christ. For the whole nation being carried away far
out of their own land, and continuing in a state of captivity for so long a
time, they got them possessions, and built them houses, and settled themselves
in the land of their captivity, agreeable to the direction that Jeremiah gave
them, in the letter he wrote to them in the 29th chapter of Jeremiah.
Therefore, when Cyrus gave them liberty to return to the land where they had
formerly dwelt, many of them never returned; they were not willing to leave
their settlements and possessions there, to go into a desolate country, many
hundred miles distant, which none but the old men among them had ever seen; and
therefore they were but few, but a small number, that returned, as we see in
the accounts we have in the books of Ezra and Nehemiah. Great numbers tarried
behind, though they still retained the same religion with those that returned,
so far as it could be practiced in a foreign land. Those messengers that we
read of in the 7th chapter of Zechariah, that came to enquire of the priests
and prophets in Jerusalem, Sherezer and R^gem^m^lech, are supposed to be
messengers sent from the Jews that remained still in Babylon.

Those Jews that remained still in that country were soon, by the great changes
that happened in the world, dispersed thence into all the adjacent countries.
Hence we find, that in Esther's time, which was after the return from the
captivity, the Jews were a people that were dispersed throughout all parts of
the vast Persian empire, that extended from India to Ethiopia; as you may see,
Esth. iii.8. "And Haman said unto King Ahasuerus, There is a certain people
scattered abroad, and dispersed among the people in all the provinces of thy
kingdom," etc. And so they continued dispersed till Christ came, and till the
apostles went forth to preach the pospel. But yet these dispersed Jews retained
their religion in this dispersion. Their captivity, as I said before,
thoroughly cured them of their idolatry; and it was their manner, for as many
of them as could from time to time to go up to the land of Judea to Jerusalem
at their great feasts. Hence we read in the 2d chapter of Acts, that at the
time of the great feast of Pentecost, there were Jews abiding at Jerusalem out
of every nation under heaven. These were Jews come up from all countries where
they were dispersed, to worship at that feast. Hence we had, in the history of
the Acts of the Apostles, that wherever the Apostles went preaching through the
world, they found Jews. They came to such a city, and to such a city, and went
into the synagogue of the Jews.

Antiochus the Great, about two hundred years before Christ, on a certain
occasion, transplanted two thousand families of Jews from the country about
Babylon into Asia the Less; and so they and their post^^^ty, many of them,
settled in Pontus, Galatia, Phrygia, Pamphylla, and in Ephesus, and from thence
settled in Athens, Corinth, and Rome. Whence came those synagogues in those
places that the Apostle Paul preached in.

Now, this dispersion of the Jews through the world before Christ came, did
many ways prepare the way for his coming, and setting up his kingdom in the
world.

One was, that this was a means of raising a general expectation of the Messiah
through the world about the time that he actually came. For the Jews,
wherever they were dispersed, carried the holy scriptures with them, and so
the prophecies of the Messiah; and being conversant with the nations among whom
they lived, they, by that means, became acquainted with these prophecies, and
with the expectations of the Jews of their glorious Messiah; and by this means,
the birth of such a glorious person in Judea about that time began to be the
general expectation of the nations of the world, as appears by the writings of
the learned men of the Heathen that lived about that time, which are still
extant; particularly Virgil, the famous ^^et that lived in Italy a little
before Christ was born, has a p^em about the expectation of a great prince that
was to be born, and the happy times of righteousness and peace that he was to
introduce; some of it very much in the language of the prophet Isaiah.

Another way that this dispersed state of the Jews prepared the way for Christ
was, that it showed the necessity of abol^hing the Jewish dispentation, and
introducing a new dispensation of the covenant of grace. It showed the
necessity of abolishing the ceremonial law, and the old Jewish worship: For, by
this means, the observance of that ceremonial law became impracticable even by
the Jews themselves; for the ceremonial law was adapted to the state of a
people dwelling together in the same land, where was the city that God had
chosen; where was the temple, the only place where they might offer sacrifices;
and where it was lawful for their priests and Levites to officiate, where they
were to bring their first fruits, and where they were their cities of refuge,
and the like. But the Jews, by this dispersion, lived, many of them, in other
lands, more than a thousand miles distant, when Christ came; which made the
observation of their laws of sacrifices, and the like, impracticable. Though
their forefathers might be to blame in not going up to the land of Judea when
they were permitted by Cyrus, yet the case was now, as to many of them at
least, become impracticable; which showed the necessity of introducing a new
dispensation, that should be fitted, not only to one particular land, but to
the general circumstances and use of all nations of the world.

Again, another way that this dispersion of the Jews through the world prepared
the way for the setting up of the kingdom of Christ in the world, was, that it
contributed to the making the facts concerning Jesus Christ publicly known
through the world. For, as I observed before, the Jews that lived in other
countries, used frequently to go up to Jerusalem at their three great feasts,
which were from year to year; and so, by this means, they could not but become
acquainted with the news of the wonderful things that Christ did in that land.
We find that they were present at, and took great notice of, that great miracle
of raising Lazarus, which excited the curiosity of those foreign Jews that come
up to the feast of the Passover to see Jesus; as you may see in John
xii.19.20.21. These Greeks were foreign Jews and proselytes, as is evident by
their coming to worship at the feast of the Passover. The Jews that lived
abroad among the Greeks, and spoke their language, were called Greeks or
Hellenists: so they are called Grecians, Acts vi.1. These Grecians here spoken
of were not Gentile Christians; for this was before the calling of the Gentiles.

By the same means, the Jews that went up from other countries became
acquainted with Christ's crucifixion. Thus the disciples, going to Emmaus, say
to Christ, when they did not know him, Luke, xxiv.18. "Art thou only a stranger
in Jerusalem, and have not known the things which have come to pass there in
these days?" plainly intimating, that the things concerning Jesus were so
publicly known to all men, that it was wonderful to find any man unacquainted
with them. And so afterward they became acquainted with the news of his
resurection; and when they went home again into their own countries, they
carried the news with them, and so made these facts public through the world,
as they had made the prophecies of them public before.

After this, those foreign Jews that came to Jerusalem, took great notice of
the pouring out of the Spirit at Pentecost, and the wonderful effects of it;
and many of them were converted by it, viz. Parthians, Medes, El^mites, and the
dwellers in Mesapotamia, and in Egypt, and the parts of Libyia about Cyrene,
and the strangers of Rome, Jews and Proselytes, Cretes and Arabians. And so
they did not only carry back the news of the facts of Christianity, but
Christianity itself, into their own countries with them; which contributed much
to the spreading of it through the world.

Again, another way that the dispersion of the Jews contributed to the setting
up of the gospel kingdom in the world was, that it opened a door for the
introduction of the apostles in all place, where they came to preach the
gospel. For almost in all places where they came to preach the gospel, they
found Jews, and synagogues of the Jews, where the holy scriptures were wont to
be read, and the true God worshipped; which was a great advantage to the
apostles in their spreading the gospel through the world. For their way was,
into whatever city they came, first to go into the synagogue of the Jews, (they
being people of the same nation), and there to preach the gospel unto them. And
hereby their coming, and their new doctrine, was taken notice of by their
Gentile neighbors, whose curiosity excited them to hear what they had to say;
which became a fair occasion to the apostles to preach the gospel to them. It
appears that it was thus* by the account we have of things in the Acts of the
Apostles. These Gentiles having been before, many of them, prepared in some
measure, by the knowledge they had of the Jews religion, and of their worship
of one God, and of their prophecies, and expectation of a Messiah; which
knowledge they derived from the Jews, who had long been their neighbors; this
opened the door for the gospel to have access to them. And the work of the
apostles with them was doubtless much easier than if they never had heard any
thing before of any expectation of such a person as the apostles preached, or
any thing about the worship of one only true God.

So many ways did the Babylonish captivity greatly prepare the way for Christ's
coming.

II. The next particular that I would take notice of is, the addition made to
the cannon of scripture in the time of the captivity, in those two remarkable
portions of scripture, the prophecies of Ezekiel and Daniel. Christ appeared to
each of these prophets in the form of that nature which he was afterward to
take upon him. The prophet Ezekiel gives an account of his thus appearing to
him repeatedly, as Ezekiel. i.26* "And above the firmament that was over their
heads, was the likeness of a throne as the appearance of a sapphire-stone, and
upon the likeness of the throne was the likeness as the appearance of a man
above upon it." And so chap. viii.1 2. So Christ appeared to the prophet Daniel
^ Dan. viii.15.16. "There stood before me as the appearance of a man. And I
heard a man's voice between the banks of Ulai, which called, and said, Gabriel,
make this man to understand the vision." There are several things that make it
evident, that this was Christ, that I cannot now stand to mention particularly.
So Christ appeared again as a man to this prophet, chap. x.5.6. "Then I lift up
mine eyes and looked, and behold, a certain man clothed in linen, whose loins
were girded with fine gold of Uphaz: his body also was like the beryl, and his
face as the appearance of lightning, and his eyes as lamps of fire, and his
arms and his feet like in color to polished brass, and the voice of his words
like the voice of a multitude." Comparing this vision with that of the Apostle
John in the 1st chapter of Revelation, makes it manifest that it was Christ.
And the prophet Daniel, in the historical part of his book, gives an account of
a very remarkable appearance of Christ in Nebuchadnezzar's furnace, with
Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego. We have the account of it in the 3d chapter.
In the 25th verse, Christ is said to be like the Son of God; and it is manifest
that he appeared in the form of man: "Lo, I see four (...) loose, -- and the
form of the fourth is like the Son of God."

Christ did not only here appear in the form of the human nature, but he
appeared in a furnace, saving those persons who believed on him from that
furnace; by which is represented to us, how Christ, by coming himself into the
furnace of God's wrath, saves those that believe in him from that furnace, so
that he has no power on them; and the wrath of God never reaches or touches
them, so much as to singe the hair of their heads.

These two prophets, in many respects, were more particular concerning the
coming of Christ, and his glorious gospel kingdom, than any of the prophets had
been before. They both of them mention those three great overturnings of the
world that should be before he came. Ezekiel is particular in several places
concerning the coming of Christ. The prophet Daniel is more particular in
foretelling the time of the coming of Christ than ever any prophet had been
before, in the 9th chap. of his prophecy; who foretold, that it should be
seventy weeks, i. e. seventy weeks of years, or seventy times seven years, or
four hundred and ninety years, from the decree to rebuild and restore the state
of the Jews, till the M^ssiah should be crucified; which must be reckoned from
the commission given to Ezra by Artaxerxes that we have an account of in the
7th chap. of Ezra; whereby the very particular time of Christ's crucifix on was
pointed out, which never had been before.

The p^ophe^ ^zekiel is very particular in the mystical description of the
gospel church, in his account of his vision of the temple and city, in the
latter part of his prophecy. The prophet Daniel points out the order of
particular events that should come (...) pass relating ^o the Christian church
after Christ was come, as the rise of Antichrist, and the continuance of his
reign, and his fall, and the glory that should follow.

Thus does gospel light still increase, the nearer we come to the time of
Christ's birth.

III The next particular I would mention is, the destruction of Babylon, and
the overthrow of the Chaldean empire by Cyrus. The destruction of Babylon was
in that night in which B^lshazzar the king, and the city in general, was
drowned in a drunken festival, which they kept to their gods, when Daniel was
called to read the handwriting on the wall, Dan. v.30. and it was brought
about in such a manner, as wonderfully to show the hand of God, and remarkably
to fulfill his word by his prophets, which I cannot now stand particularly to
relate. Now that great city, which had long been an enemy to the city of God,
his Jerusalem, was destroyed* after it had stood ever since the first building
of Babel, which was about seventeen hundred years. If the check that was put to
the building this city at its beginning, whereby they were prevented from
carrying of it to that extent and magnificence that they intended; I say, if
this promoted the work of redemption, as I have before shown it did, much more
did this destruction of it.

It was a remarkable instance of God's vengeance on the enemies of his redeemed
church; for God brought this destruction on Babylon for the injuries they did
to God's children, as is often set forth in the prophets. It also promoted the
work of redemption, as thereby God's people, that were held captive by them,
were set at liberty to return to their own land to rebuild Jerusalem; and
therefore Cyru^, who did it, is called God's shepherd therein, Is. xliv. latter
end; and xlv.1. And these are over and above those ways wherein the setting up
and overthrowing the four monarchies of the world promote the work of
redemption, which have been before observed.

IV. What next followed this was, the return of the Jews to their own land, and
rebuilding Jerusalem and the temple. Cyrus, as soon as he had destroyed the
Babylonish empire, and had erected the Persian empire on its ruins, made a
decree in favor of the Jews, that they might return to their own land, and
rebuild their city and temple. This return of the Jews out of the Babylonish
(...), next to the redemption out of Egypt, the most remarkable of all the Old
Testament redemptions, and most insisted on in scripture, as a type of the
great redemption of Jesus Christ. It was under the hand of one of the legal
ancestors of Christ, viz. Zerubbabel, the son of Shealtiel, whose Babylonish
name was S^eshbazzar. He was the governor of the J^ws, and their leader in
their first return out of captivity; and, together with Joshua the son of
Josedek the high priest, had the chief hand in rebuilding the temple. This
redemption was bro't about by the hand of Zerubbabel and Joshua the priest, as
the redemption out of Egypt was brought about by the hand of Moses and Aaron.

The return out of captivity was a remarkable dispensation of Providence. It
was remarkable, that the heart of a Heathen prince, as Cyrus was, should be so
inclined to favor such a design as he did, not only in giving the people
liberty to return, and rebuild the city and temple, but in giving charge that
they should be helped with silver and gold, and with goods, and with beasts, as
we read in Ezra, i.4. And afterward God wonderfully inclined the heart of
Darius to further the building of the house of God with his own tribute money,
and by commanding their bitter enemies, the Samaritans, who had been striving
to hinder them to help them without fail, by furnishing them with all that they
needed in order to it, and to supply them day by day; making a decree, that
whosoever failed of it, timber should be pulled down out of his house, and he
hanged thereon, and his house made a dunghill; as we have an account in the 6th
chapter of Ezra. And after this God inclined the heart of Artaxerxes, another
king of Persia, to promote the work of restoring the state of the Jews, by his
ample commission to Ezra, which we have an account of in the 7th chapter of
Ezra; helping them abundantly with silver and gold of his own bounty, and
offering more, as should be needful, out of the King's treasure-house, and
commanding his treasurers beyond the river Euphrates to give more, as should be
needed, unto an hundred talents of silver, and an hundred measures of wheat, an
hundred baths of wine, and an hundred baths of oil, and salt, without
prescribing how much; and giving leave to establish magistrates in the land;
and freeing the priests of ^oll, tribute, and custom, and other things, which
render this ^ecree and commission by Artaxerxes the most full and ample in the
Jews favor of any that, at any time, had been given for the restoring of
Jerusalem: And therefore, in Daniel's prophecy, this is called A decree for
restoring and building Jerusalem; and hence the ^eventy weeks are dated.

After this, another favorable commission was granted by the King of Persia to
Nehemiah, which we have an account of in the second chapter of Nehemiah.

It was remar^able, that the hearts of Heathen princes should be so inclined.
It was the effect of his power, who has the hearts of kings in his hands, and
turns them whithersoever he wit^; and it was a rema^kable instance of his
favor to his people.

Another remarkable circumstance of this restitution of the state of the Jews
to their own land was that it was accomplished against so much o^p^sition of
their bitter indefatigable enemies the Samaritans, who, for a long time
together, with all the malice and craft they could exercise, opposed the Jews
in this affair, and ^ought their destruction; one while by Bishlam, Mithridath,
Tabeal, Rehum, and Shimshai, as in Ezra iv, and then by Tatnai, Shetharboznai,
and their companions, as in chap. v and afterward by S^nballat and Tobiah, as
we read in the book of Nehemiah.

We have showed before how the settlement of the people in this land in
Joshua's time promoted the work of redemption. On the same account does their
restitution ^elong to the same work. The resettlement of the Jews in the land
of Canaan belongs to this work, as it was a necessary means of preserving the
Jewish church and dispensation in being, till Christ should come. If it had not
been for this restoration of the Jewish church, and temple, and worship, the
people had remained without any temple, and land of their own, that would be as
it were their headquarters, a place of worship, habitation, and resort; the
whole constitution, which God had done so much to establish, would have been in
danger of utterly failing, long before that six hundred years had been out,
which was from about the time of the captivity till Christ. And so all that
preparation which God had been making for the coming of Christ, from the time
of Abraham, would have been in vain. Now that very temple was built that God
would fill with glory by Christ's coming into it, as the Prophets Haggai and
Zechariah told the Jews to encourage them in building it.

V. The next particular I would observe, is the addition made to the canon of
the scriptures soon after the captivity by the Prophets H^ggai and Zechariah,
who were prophets sent to encourage the people in their work of rebuilding the
city and temple; and the main argument they made use of to that end, is the
approach of the time of the coming of Christ. Haggai foretold that Christ
should be of Zerubbabel's legal posterity, last chap. last verse. This seems to
be the last and most particular revelation of the descent of Christ, ^oll the
angel Gabriel was sent to reveal it to his mother Mary.

VI. The next thing I would take notice of, was the pouring out of the Spirit
of God that accompanied the ministry of Ezra ^he priest after the captivity.
That there was such a pouring out of the Spirit of God that accompanied Ezra's
ministry, is manifest by many things in the books of Ezra and Nehemiah.
Presently after Ezra came up from Babylon, with the ample commission which
Artaxerxes gave him, whence Daniel's seventy weeks began, (...) set himself to
reform the vices and corruptions he found among the Jews; and his great success
in it we have an account of in the 10th chapter of Ez^a; so that there appeared
a very general and great mourning of the congregation of Israel for their sins,
which was accompanied with a solemn covenant that the people entered into with
God; and this was followed with a great and general reformation, as we have
there an account. The people about the same time, with great zeal, and
earnestness, and reverence, gathered themselves together to hear the word of
God rea^ by Ezra; and gave diligent attention, while Ezra and the other priests
preached to them, by reading and expounding the law, and were greatly affected
in the hearing of it. They wept when they heard the words of the law, and set
themselves to observe the law, and kept the feast of tabernacles, as the
scripture observes, after such a manner as it had not been kept since the days
of Joshua the son of Nun; as we have account in the 8th chapter of Nehemiah:
after this, having separated themselves from all strangers, they solemnly
observed a fast, by hearing the word of God, confessing their sins, and
renewing their covenant with God; and manifested their sincerity in that
transaction, by actually reforming many abuses in religion and morals; as we
learn from the 9th and following chapters of Nehemiah.

It is observable, that it has been God's manner in every remarkable new
establishment of the ^tate of his visible church, to give a remarkable
outpouring of his spirit. So it was on the first establishment of the church of
the Jews at their first coming into Canaan under Joshua, as has been observed;
and so it was now in this second settlement of the church in the same land in
the time of Ezra; and so it was on the first establishment of the Christian
church after Christ's resurrection; God wisely and graciously laying the
foundation of those establishments in a work of his holy Spirit, for the
lasting benefit of the state of his church, thenceforward continued in those
establishments. This pouring out of the Spirit of God, was a final cure of that
nation of that particular sin which just before they especially run into, viz.
intermarrying with the Gentiles; for however inclined to it they were before,
they ever after showed an aversion to it.

VII. Ezra added to the cannon of the scriptures. He wrote the book of Ezra;
and he is supposed to have written the book of Chronicles, at least of
compiling them, if he was not the author of the materials, or all the parts of
these writings. That these (...) were written, or compiled and completed, after
the captivity, the the things contained in the books themselves make manifest;
(...) the genealogies contained therein, are brought down below the captivity;
as 1 Chronicles. iii.17. etc. We have there an account of the posterity of
Jehoiach^n for several successive generations And there is mention in these
books of this captivity into Babylon, as of a thing past, and of things that
were done on the return of the Jews after the captivity; as you may see in the
9th chapter of ^ Chron. The chapter is mostly filled up with an account of
things that came to pass after the captivity into Babylon, as you may see by
comparing it with what is said in the books of Ezra and Nehemiah. That Ezra was
the person that compi^ed these books, i^ probable by this, because they
conclude with words that we know are the words of Ezra's history. The two last
verses are Ezra's words in the history he gives in the the two first verses of
the book of Ezra.

VIII. Ezra is supposed to have collected all the books of which the holy
scriptures did then consist, and disposed them in their proper order. Ezra is
often spoken of as a noted and eminent scribe of the law of God, and the canon
of scripture in his time was manifestly under his special care; and the Jews,
from the first accounts we have from them have always held, that the canon of
scripture, so much of it as was then extant, was collected, and orderly
disposed and settled by Ezra; and that from him they have delivered it down in
the order in which he disposed it, (...) Christ's time* when the Christian
church received it from them, and have delivered it down to our times. The
truth of this is allowed as undoubted by divines in general.

IX The work of redemption was carried on and promoted in this period, by
greatly multiplying the copies of the law, and appointing the constant public
reading of them in all the cities of Israel in their synagogues. It is evident,
that before the captivity, there were but few copies of the law. There was the
orig^^al, laid up beside the ark; and the kings were requi^ed to wr^te out a
copy of the law for their use, and the law was required to be read to the whole
congregation of Israel o^ce every seventh year. We have no account of any other
state* public reading of the law before the captivity but this. And it is
manifest by several thi^g^ that might be mentioned, that copies of the law were
exceeding rare before the captivity But after the (...), the constant reading
of the law was set up in every synag^gue throughout the land. First, they began
with readi^^ the law, and then they proceeded to establish the constant readi^^
(...) the other books of the Old Testament. Lessons were read out of the Old
Testament, as made up of both the law and the other parts of the scripture then
extant, in all the synagogues, which were set up in every city, and every
where, wherever the Jews in any considerable number dwelt, as our
meeting houses are. Thus we find it was in Christ's and the apostles time, Acts
xv.21. "Moses of old time has in every city them that preach him, being read
in the synagogues every sabbath day." This custom is universally supposed, both
by Jews and Christians, to be begun by Ezra. There were doubtless public
^ssemblies before the captivity into Babylon. They used to assemble at the
temple at their great feasts, and were directed, when they were at a loss ab^ut
any thing in the law, to go to the priest for inst^uction; and they used also
to resort to the prophet's houses: and we read of synagogues in the land
before. Psalm lxxiv.^. But it is not supposed that they had copies of the law
for constant public reading and expounding through the land before, as
afterward. This was one great means of their being preserved from idolatry.

X. The next thing I would mention, is God's remarkably preserving the church
and nation of the Jews, when they were in imminent danger of being universally
destroyed by Haman. We have the story in the book of Esther, with which you are
ac^uainted This series of providence, was very wonderful in preventing this
destruction. Esther was doubtless born for this end to be the instrument of
this remarkable preservation.

XI. After this the canon of scripture was further added to in the books of
Nehemiah and Esther; the one by Nehemiah himself; and when the others was
written by Nehemiah, or Mordecai, or Malachi, is not of importance for us to
know, so long as it is one of those books that were always admitted and
received as a part of their canon by the Jews, and was among those books that
the Jews called their sc^iptures in Christ's time, and as such was approved by
him: For Christ does often in his speeches to the Jews manifestly approve and
confirm those books, which amongst them went by the name of the scriptures, as
might easily be shown, if there were time for it.

XII. After this the canon of the Old Testament was completed and sealed by
Malachi. The manner of his concluding his prophecy seems to imply, that they
were to expect no more prophecies, and no more written revelations from God,
till Christ should come. For in the last chapter he prophecies of Christ's
coming; ver. 2 3. "But unto you that fear my name, shall the Sun of
righteousness arise with healing in his wings; and ye shall go forth and grow
up as calves of the stall. And ye shall tread down the wicked; for they shall
be as ashes under the soles of your feet, in the day that I shall do this,
says the Lord of hosts." Then we read in ver. 4. "Remember ye the law of Moses
my servant, which I commanded unto him in Horeb for all Israel, with the
statutes and judgments," i. e. Remember and improve what ye have; keep close
to that written rule you have, as expecting no more additions to it, till the
night of the Old Testament is over, and the Sun of righteousness shall at
length arise.

XIII. Soon after this, the spirit of prophecy ceased among that people till
the time of the New Testament. Thus the Old Testament light, the stars of the
long night, began space to hide their heads, the time of the Sun of
righteousness now drawing nigh. We before observed, how the Kings of the house
of David ceased before the true King and head of the church came; and how the
cloud of glory withdrew, before Christ, the brightness of the Father's glory,
appeared; and so as to several other things. And now at last the spirit of
prophecy ceased. The time of the great Prophet of God was now so nigh, it was
time for their typical prophets to be silent, and shut their mouths.

WE have now gone through with the time that we have any historical account of
in the writings of the Old Testament, and the last thing that was mentioned, by
which the work of redemption was promoted, was the ceasing of the spirit of
prophecy.

I now proceed to show how the work of redemption was carried on through the
remaining time that were before Christ: in which we have not that thread of
scripture history to guide us that we have had hitherto; but have these three
things to guide us, viz. the prophecies of the Old Testament, human histories
of those times, and some occasional mention made, and some ^^idence given, of
some things which happend in those times, in the New Testament. Therefore,

XIV. The next particular that I shall mention under this period, is the
destruction of the Pers^an empire, and sitting up of the Grecian empire by
Alexander. This came to pass about sixty or seventy years after the times
wherein the prophet Malachi is supposed to have prophesied, and about three
hundred and thirty years before Christ. This was the third overturning of the
world that came to pass in this period, and was greater and more remarkable
than either of the foregoing. It was very remarkable on account of the
suddenness of that conquest of the world which Alexander made, and the
greatness ^f the empire which he set up, which much exceeded all the fo^egoing
in its extent.

This event is ^uch spoken of in the prophecies of Daniel. This empire is
repr^^ented by the third kingdom of brass in Daniel's interpretation ^f
Nebuchadnezzar's dream, as in Dan. ii.; and in Daniel's vision of the four
beasts, is represented by the third beast that was like (...) leopard, that had
on his back four wings of a fowl, to represent the swiftness of its conquest,
chap. vii.* and is more particularly represented by the he goat in the 8^h
chapter, that came from the west on the face of the whole earth, and touched
not the ground, to represent how swiftly Alexander overran the world. The
angel himself does expressly interpret this he-goat to signify the king of
Grecia, ver. 21. The rough goat is the king of Grecia; and the great horn that
is between his eyes is the first king, i. e. Alexander himself.

After Alexander had conquered the world, he soon died; and his dominion did
not descend to his posterity, but four of his principal captains divided his
empire between them, as it there follows. Now that being broken, whereas four
stood up for it, four kingdoms shall stand up out of the nation, but not in his
power; so you may see in the 11th chap. of Daniel. The angel, after foretelling
of the Persian empire, then proceeds to foretell of Alexander, ver. 3. "And a
mighty king shall stand up, that shall rule with great dominion, and do
according to his will." And then he foretells, in the 4th verse, of the dividing
of his kingdom between his four captains: "And when he shall stand up, his
kingdom shall be broken, and shall be divided toward the four winds of heaven;
and not to his posterity nor according to his dominion which he ruled: for his
kingdom shall be plucked up even so* others besides those." Two of these four
capt^ins, whose kingdoms we^e next to Judea, the one had Egypt and the
neighboring countries on the south of Judea, and the other had Syria and the
neighboring countries north of Judea* and these two are those that are called
the kings of the north and of the south in the 11th chapter of Daniel.

Now this setting up of the Grecian empire did greatly prepare the way for the
coming of Christ and setting up his kingdom in the world. Besides these ways
common to the other overturnings of the world in this period, that have been
already mentioned, there is one peculiar to th^s rev^^ution which I (...) take
notice of, which did remarkably promote the w^rk of redemption; and that was,
that it made the Greek language (...) in the world. To have one common language
understood and used through the greater part of the world, was a thing that
(...) prepare the way for the setting up of Christ's kingdom This gave
advantage for spreading the gospel from one nation to another, and so through
all nations, with vastly greater ease, than if every nation had a distinct
language, and did not understand each other. For though some of the first
preachers of the gospel had the gift of languages so that they could preach in
any language; (...) all had not this particular gift; and they that had, could
not exercise it when they would, but only at special seasons, when the spirit
of God was pleased to inspire them in this way. The church, in different parts
of the world, as the churches of Jerusalem, Antioch, Galatia, Corinth, and
others, which were in countries distant one from another, could not have had
that communication one with another, which we have an account of in the book of
Acts, if they had had no common language. So it was before the Grecian empire
was set up. But after this, many in all those countries well understood the
same language, viz the Greek language; which wonderfully opened the door for
mutual communication between those churches, so far separated one from another.
Again, the making the Greek language common through so great a part of the
world, did wonderfully make way for the setting up of the kingdom of Christ,
because it was the language in which the New Testament was to be originally
written. The apostles propogated the gospel through many scores of nations; and
if they could not have understood the Bible any otherwise than as it was
translated into so many languages, it would have rendered the spreading of the
gospel vastly more difficult. But by the Greek language being made common to
all, they all understood the New Testament of Jesus Christ in their language in
which the apostles and evangelists originally wrote it: so that as soon as ever
it was written by its original penmen, it immediately lay open to the world in
a language that was commonly understood every where, as there was no language
that was so commonly understood in the world in Christ's and the apostles times
as the Greek; the cause of which was the setting up of the Grecian empire in
the world.

XV. The next thing I shall take notice of is, the translation of the
scriptures of the Old Testament into a language that was commonly understood by
the Gentiles. The translation that I here speak of is that into the G^eek
language, that is commonly called the Septuagint, or the translation of the
Seventy. This is supposed to have been made about fifty or sixty years after
Alexander's conquering the world. This is the first translation that ever was
made of the scriptures that we have any credible account of. The canon of the
Old Test^ment had been completed by the prophet Malachi but about an hundred
and twenty years before in its original; and hitherto the scriptures had
remained locked up from all other nations but the Jews, in the Hebrew tongue,
which was understood by no other nation. But now it was translated into the
Greek language, which, as we observed before, was a language that was commonly
understood by the nations of the world.

This translation of the Old Testament is still extant, and is commonly in the
hands of learned men in these days, and is made great use of by them. The Jews
have many fables about the occasion and manner of this translation; but the
truth of the case is supposed to be this, that multitudes of the Jews living in
other parts of the world besides Judea, and being born and bred among the
Greeks, the Greek became their common language, and they did not understand the
original Hebrew; and therefore they pro^^^ed the scriptures to be translated
for their use into the Greek language: and so henceforward the Jews, in all
countries, except Judea, were wont in their synagogues to make use of this
translation instead of the Hebrew.

This translation of the scriptures into a language commonly understood through
the world, prepared the way for Christ's coming, and setting up his kingdom in
the world, and afterward did greatly promote it. For as the apostles went
preaching through the world, they made great use of the scriptures of the Old
Testament, and especially of the prophecies concerning Christ that were
contained in them. By means of this translation, and by the Jews being
scattered every where, they had the scriptures at hand in a language that was
understood by the Gentiles: and they did principally make use of this
translation in their preaching and writings wherever they went; as is evident
by this, that in all the innumerable quotations that are made out of the Old
Testament in their writings in the New Testament, they are almost every where
in the very words of the Septuagint. The sense is the same as it is in the
original Hebrew; but very often the words are different, as all that are
acquainted with their Bibles know. When the apostles in their epistles, and the
evangelists in their histories, cite passages out of the Old Testament, it is
very often in different words from what we have in the Old Testament, as all
know. But yet these citations are almost universally in the very words of the
Septuagint version; for that may be seen by comparing them together, they being
both written in the same language. This makes it evident, that the apostles, in
their preaching and writings, commonly made use of this translation. So this
very translation was that which was principally used in Christian churches
through most nations of the world for several hundred years after Christ.

XVI. The next thing is the wonderful preservation of the church when it was
imminently threatened and persecuted under the Grecian empire.

The first time they were threatened was by Alexander himself. When he was
besieging the c^ty of Tire, sending to the Jews for assistance and supplies for
his army, and they refusing, out of a conscientious regard to their oath to the
king of Persia, he being a man of a very furious spirit, agreeable to the
scripture representation of the rough he goa^, marched against them, with a
design to cut them off. But the priests going out to meet him in their priestly
garments, when he met them, God wonderfully turned his ^ear to spare them, and
favor them, much as he did the heart of Esau when he met Jacob.

After this, one of the kings of Egypt, a successor of one Alexander's four
captains, entertained a design of destroying the nation of the Jews; but was
remarkably and wonderfully prevented by a stronger interposition of Heaven for
their preservation.

But the most wonderful preservation of them all in this period was under the
cruel persecution of Antiochus Epiphanes, king of Syria, and successor of
another of Alexander's four captains. The Jews were at that time subject to the
power of Antiochus; and he being enraged against them, long strove to his
utmost utterly to destroy them, and root them out; at least all of them that
would not forsake their religion, and worship his idols: and he did indeed in a
great measure waste the country, and depopulate the city of Jerusalem; and
profaned the temple, by setting up his idols in some parts of it; and
persecuted the people with insatiable cruelty; so that we have no account of
any persecution like his before. Many of the particular circumstances of this
persecution would be very affecting, if I had time to insist on them. This
cruel persecution began about an hundred and seventy years before Christ It is
much spoken of in the prophecy of Daniel, as you may see, Dan. viii.9 -- 25.;
xi, 3^. -- 38. These persecutions are also spoken of in the New Testament, as,
Heb xi.36.37.38.

Antiochus intended not only to extirpate the Jewish religion, but, as far as
in him lay, the very nation; and particularly labored to the utmost to destroy
all copies of the law. And considering how weak they were, in comparison with a
king of such vast dominion, the providence of God appears very wonderful in
defeating his design. Many tim^s the Jews seemed to be on the very b^ink of
ruin, (...) just ready to be wholly swallowed up: their enemies often thought
themse^ves sure of obtaining their purpose. They once came against the people
with a mighty army, and with a design of killi^g all, except the women and
children, and of selling these for sl^ves; and they were so confident of
obtaining their purpose, and others of purchasing, that above a thousand
merchants came with the army, wi^h money in their hands, to buy the slaves that
should be sold* But God wonderfully stirred up and assisted one Judas, and
others his successors, that were called the Maccabees, who, with a small
handful in comparison, vanquished their enemies time after time, and delivered
their nation; which was foretold by Daniel. xi.32. Speaking of Antiochus's
persecution, he says, "And such as do wickedly against the covenant, shall he
corrupt by flatteries: but the people that do know their God, shall be strong,
and do exploits."

God afterward brought this Antiochus to a fearful, miserable and, by a
loathsome disease, under dreadful torments of body, and horrors of mind; which
was foetold, Dan. xi.45. in these words, "Yet he shall come to his end, and
none shall help him."

After his death, there were attempts still to destroy the church of God; but
God baffled them all.

XVII. The next thing to be taken notice of is the destruction of the Grecian
empire, and setting up of the Roman empire. This was the fourth overturning of
the world that was in this period. And though it was brought to pass more
gradually than the setting up of the Grecian empire, yet it far exceeded that,
and was much the greatest and largest temporal monarchy that every was in the
world; so that the Roman empire was commonly called all the world; as it is in
Luke ii.1. "And there went out a decree from Caesar Augustus, that all the
world should be taxed;" i. e. all the Roman empire.

This empire is spoken of as much the strongest and greatest of any of the
four: Dan. ii.40. "And the fourth kingdom shall be strong as iron: forasmuch as
iron breaks in pieces, and subdueth all things: and as iron that breaks all
these, shall it break in pieces, and bruise." So also Daniel vii.7.19.23.

The time that the Romans first conquered and brought under the land of Judea,
was between sixty and seventy years before Christ was born. Soon after this,
the Roman empire was established in its greatest extent; and the world
continued subject to this empire henceforward till Christ came, and many
hundred years afterward.

The nations of the world being united in one monarchy when Christ came, and
when the apostles went forth to preach the gospel, did greatly prepare the way
for the spreading of the gospel, and the setting up of Christ's kingdom in the
world. For the world being thus subject to one government, it opened a
communication from nation to nation, and so opportunity was given for the more
swiftly propagating the gospel through the world. Thus we find it to be now; as
if any thing prevail^ in the English nation, the communication is quick from
one part of the nation to another, throughout all parts that are subject to the
English government, much easier and quicker than to other nations, which are
not subject to the English government, and have little to do with them. There
are innumerable difficulties in traveling through different nations, that are
under different independent governments, which there are not in traveling
through different parts of the same realm, or different dominions of the same
prince. So the world being under one government, the government of the Romans,
in Christ's and the apostles times, facilitated the apostles traveling, and
the gospel's spreading through the world.

XVIII. About the same time learning and philosophy were risen to their
greatest height in in the Heathen would. The time of learning's flourishing in
the Heathen world was principally in this period. Almost all the famous
philosophers that we have an account of among the Heathen, were after the
captivity into Babylon. Almost all the wise men of Greece and Rome flourished
in this time. These philosophers, many of them, were indeed men of great
temporal wisdom; and that which they in (...) chiefly professed to make their
business, was to inquire wherein man's chief happiness lay, and the way in
which men might obtain happiness. They seemed earnestly ^o busy themselves in
this inquiry, and wrote multitudes of books about it, many of which are still
extant. And they were exceedingly divi^^d in their opinions about it. There
have been reckoned up several hundreds of different opinions that they had
concerning it. Thus they wearied themselves in vain, wandered in the dark, not
having the glorious gospel to guide them. God was ple^sed to suffer men to do
the utmost that they could with human wisdom, and to try the extent of their
own understandings to find out the way to happiness, before the true light came
to enlighten the world; before he sent the great Prophet to lead men in the
right way to happiness. God suffered these great philosophers to try what they
could do for six hundred years together; and then it proved, by the events of
so long a time, that all they could do was in vain; the world not becoming
wiser, better, or happier under their instructions, but growing more and more
foolish, wicked, and miserable. He suffered their wisdom and philos^phy to come
to the greatest height before Christ came, that it might be seen how far reason
and philosophy could go in their highest ascent, that the necessity of a divine
teacher might appear before Christ came. And God was pleased to make foolish
the wisdom of this world, to show men the folly of their best wisdom, by the
doctrines of his glorious gospel which were above the reach of all their
philosophy. See 1 Cor. i.19 20.21*

After God had showed the vanity of human learning, when set up in the room of
the gospel, God was pleased to make it subservient to the purposes of Christ's
kingdom, as an handmaid to divine revelation; and so the prevailing of learning
in the world before Christ came, made way for his coming both these ways, viz.
as thereby the vanity of human wisdom was shown, and the necessity of the
gospel appeared; and also as hereby an handmaid was prepared to the gospel: for
so it was made use of in the Apostle Paul, who was famed for his much learning,
as you may see Acts xxvi.24. and was skilled not only in the learning of the
Jews, but also of the philosophers; and improved it to the purposes of the
gospel; as you may see he did in disputing with the philosophers at Athens,
Acts xvii.22. etc. He by his learning knew how to accommodate himself in his
discourses to learned men, as appears by this discourse of his; and he knew
well how to improve what he had r^ad in their writings; and he here cites their
own poets. Now Dionysius^, that was a philosopher, was converted by him, and as
ecclesiastical history gives us an account, made a great instrument of
promoting the gospel. And there were many others in that and the following
age^, who were eminently useful by their human learning in promoting the
interests of Christ's kingdom.

XIX Just before Christ was born, the Roman empire was raised to its greatest
height, and also settled in peace. About four and twenty years before Christ
was born, Augustus Caesar, the first Roman emperor, began to rule as emperor of
the world. Till then the Roman empire had of a long time been a commonwealth
under the government of the senate: but then it became an absolute monarchy.
This Augustus Caesar, as he was the first, so he was the greatest of all the
Roman emperors: he reigned in the greatest glory. Thus the power of the Heathen
world, which was Satan's visible kingdom, was raised to its greatest height,
after it had been rising higher and higher, and strengthening itself more and
more from the days of Solomon to this day, which was about a thousand years.
Now it appeared at a greater height than ever it appeared from the first
beginning of Satan's Heathenish kingdom, which was probably about the time of
the building of Babel. Now the Heathen world was in its greatest glory for
strength, wealth, and learning.

God did two things to prepare the way for Christ's coming, wherein he took a
contrary method from that which human wisdom would have taken. He brought his
own visible people very low, and made them weak; but the Heathen, that were his
enemies, he exalted to the greatest height, for the more glorious triumph of
the cross of Christ. With a small number in their greatest weakness, he
conquered his enemies in their greatest glory. Thus Christ triumphed over
principalities and powers in his cross.

Augustus Caesar had been for many years establishing the state of the Roman
empire, subduing his enemies in one part and another, till the very year that
Christ was born; when all his enemies being subdued, and his dominion over the
world seemed to be settled in its greatest glory. All was established in peace;
in token whereof the Romans shut the temple of Janus, which was an established
symbol among them of there being universal peace throughout the Roman empire.
This universal peace, which was begun that year that Christ was born, lasted
twelve years, till the year that Christ disputed with doctors in the temple.

Thus the world, after it had been, as it were, in a continual convulsion for
so many hundred years together, like the four winds striving together on the
tumultuous raging ocean, whence arose those four great monarchies, being now
established in the greatest height of the fourth and last monarchy, and settled
in quietness* now all things are ready for the birth of Christ. This remarkable
universal peace, after so many ages of tumult and war, was a fi^ prelude for
the ushering of the glorious Prince of peace into the world.

Thus I have gone through the first grand period of the whole space between the
fall of man and the end of the world, vi.z that from the fall to the time of
the incarnation of Christ; and have shown the truth of the first proposition,
viz. That from the fall of man to the incarnation of Christ, God was doing
those things that were preparatory to Christ's coming, and were forerunners of
it.

IMPROVEMENT.
BEFORE I proceed to the next proposition, I would make some few remarks, by
way of improvement, upon what has been said under this.

I. From what has been said, we may strongly argue, that Jesus of Nazareth is
indeed the Son of God, and the Savior of the world; and so that the Christian
religion, is the true religion, seeing that Christ is the very person so
evidently pointed at, in all the great dispensations of divine providence from
the very fall of man, and was so undoubtedly in so many instances foretold from
age to age, and shadowed forth in a vast variety of types and figures. If we
seriously consider the course of things from the beginning, and observe the
motions of all the great wheels of providence from one age to another, we shall
descern that they all tend hither. They are all as so many lines, whose course,
if it be observed and accurately followed, it will be found that every one
centers here. It is so very plain in many things, that it would argue stupidity
to deny it. This therefore is undeniable, that this person is a divine person
sent from God, that came into the world with his commission and authority, to
do his work, and to declare his mind. The great Governor of the world, in all
his great works before and since the flood, to Jews and Gentiles, down to the
time of Christ's birth, has declared it. It cannot be any vain imagination, but
a plain and evident truth, that that person that was born in Bethlehem, and
dwelt at Nazareth, and at Capernaum, and was crucified without the gates of
Jerusalem, must be the great Messiah, or anointed of God. And blessed are all
they that believe in and confess him, and miserable are all that they deny him.
This shows the unreasonableness of the Deists, who deny revealed religion, and
of the Jews, who deny that this Jesus is the Messiah foretold and promised to
their fathers.

Here it may be some persons may be ready to object, and say, That it may be,
some subtle, cunning men contrived this history, and these prophecies, so that
they should all point to Jesus Christ on purpose to confirm it, that he is the
Messiah. To such it may be replied, How could such a thing be contrived by
cunning men* to point to Jesus Christ, long before he ever was born? How could
they know that ever any such person would be born? And how could their craft
and subtilty help them to foresee and point at an event that was to come to
pass many ages afterward? for no fact can be more evident, than that the Jews
had those writings long before Christ was born; as they have them still in
great veneration, wherer-ever they are, in all their dispersions through the
world; and they would never have received such a contrivance from Christians,
to point to and confirm Jesus to be the Messiah, whom they always denied to be
the Messiah; and much less would they have been made to believe that they
always had had those ^ooks in their hands, when they were first made and
imposed upon them.

II. What has been said, affords a strong argument for the divine authority of
the books of the Old Testament, from that admirable harmony there is in them,
whereby they all point to ^he same thing. For we may see by what has been said,
how all the parts of the Old Testament, though written by so many different
penmen, and in ages distant one from another, do all harmonize one with
another; all agree in one, and all center in the same thing, and that a future
thing; an event which it was impossible any one of them should know but by
divine revelation, even the future coming of Christ. This is most evident and
manifest in them, as appears by what has been said.

Now, if the Old Testament was not inspired by God, what account can be given
of such an agreement? for if these books were only human writings, written
without any divine direction, then none of these penmen knew that there would
come such a person as Jesus Christ into the world; his coming was only a mere
figment of their own brain; and if so, how happened it, that this figment of
theirs came to pass? How came a vain imagination of theirs, which they foretold
without any manner of ground of their prediction, to be exactly fulfilled? and
especially how did they come all to agree in it, all pointing exactly to the
same thing, though many of them lived so many hundred years distant one from
another?

This admirable consent and agreement in a future event, is therefore a clear
and certain evidence of the divine authority of those writings.

III. Hence we may learn what a weak and ignorant objection it is that some
make against some parts of the Old Testament's being the word of God, that they
consist so much of histories of the wars and civil transactions of the kings
and people of the nation of the Jews. Some say, We find here among the books of
a particular nation, histories which they kept of the state of their nation
from one age to another; histories of their kings and rulers, histories of
their wars with the neighboring nations, and histories of the changes that
happened from time to time in their state and government: and so we find that
other nations used to keep histories of of their public affairs, as well as
they; and why then should we think that these histories which the Jews kept are
the word of God, more than those of other people? But what has been said, shows
the folly and vanity of such an objection. For hereby it appears, that the case
of the histories is very different from that of all other histories. This
history alone gives us an account of the first original of all things; and this
history alone deduces things down in a wonderful series from that original,
giving an idea of the grand scheme of divine providence, as tending to its
great end. And together with the doctrines and prophices contained in it, the
same book gives a view of the whole series of the great events of divine
providence, from the first original to the last end and consumation of all
things, giving an excellent and glorious account of the wise and holy designs
of the governor of the world in all.

No common history has such p^^men as this history, which was all written by
men who came with evident signs and testimonies of their being prophets of the
most high God immediately inspired.

The histories that were written, as we have seen from what has been said under
this proposition, do all contain those great events of providence, by which it
appears how God has been carrying on the glorious divine work of redemption
from age to age. Though they are histories, yet they are no less full of divine
instruction, and those things that show forth Christ, and his glorious gospel,
than other parts of the holy scriptures which are not historical.

To object against a book's being divine, merely because it is historical, is a
poor objection; just as if that could not be the word of God which gives an
account of what is past; or as though it were not reasonable to suppose, that
God, in a revelation he should give mankind, would give us any relation of the
dispensations of his own providence. If it be so, it must be because his works
are not worthy to be related; it must be because the scheme of his government,
and series of his dispensations toward his church, and toward the world that
he has made, whereby he has ordered and disposed it from age to age, is not
worthy that any record should be kept of it.

The objection that is made, That it is a common thing for nations and kingdoms
to write histories and keep records of their wars, and the revolutions that
come to pass in their territories, is so far from being a weighty objection
against the historical part of scripture, as though it were not the word of
God, that it is a strong argument in favor of it. For if reason and the light
of nature teaches all civilized nations to keep records of the events of their
human government, and the series of their administrations, and to publish
histories for the information of others; how much more may we expect that God
would give the world a record of the dispensations of his divine government,
which doubtless is infinitely more worthy of an history for our inf^^mation? If
wise kings have taken care that there should be good histories written of the
nations over which they have reigned, shall we think it incredible, that Jesus
Christ should take care that his church, which is his nation, his peculiar
(...), should have in their hands a certain infallible history of their nation,
and of his government of them?

If it had not been for the history of the Old Testament, how woefully should we
have been left in the dark about many things which the church of God needs to
know! How ignorant should we have been of God's dealings toward mankind, and
toward his church, from the beginning! and we would have been wholly in the
dark about the creation of the world, the fall of man, the first rise and
continued progress of the dispensations of grace toward fallen mankind! and we
should have known nothing how God at first set up a church in the world, and
how it was preserved; after what manner he governed it from the beginning, how
the light of the gospel first began to dawn in the world; how it increased, and
how things were preparing for the coming of Christ.

If we are Christians, we belong to that building of God that has been the
subject of our discourse from this text: but if it had not been for the history
of the Old Testament, we should never have known what was the first occasion of
God's going about this building, and how the foundation of it was laid at
first, and how it has gone on from the beginning. The times of the history of
the Old Testament are mostly times that no other history reaches up to; and
therefore, if God had not taken care to give and preserve an account of these
things for us, we should have been wholly without them.

Those that object against the authority of the Old Testament history of the
nation of the Jews, may as well make it an objection against Moses's account of
the creation that it is historical; for, in the other, we have an history of a
work no less important viz. the work of redemption. Yea, this is a far greater
and more glorious work, as we observed before; that if it be inquired which of
the two works, the work of creation, or the work of providence, is greatest? it
must be answered, the work of providence; but the work of redemption is the
greatest of the works of providence.

Let those who make this objection consider what part of the Old Testament
history can be spared, without making a great breach in that thread or series
of events by which this glorious work has been carried on. -- This leads me to
observe,

IV. That, from what has been said, we may see much of the wisdom of God in the
composition of the scriptures of the Old Testament, i. e. in the parts of which
it consists* By what it has been said, we may see that God has wisely given us
such revelations in the Old Testament as we needed. Let us briefly take a view
of the several parts of it, and of the need there was of them.

Thus it was necessary that we should have some account of the creation of the
world, and of the degeneracy of it, and of the universal deluge, and some
account of the origin of nations after this destruction of mankind.

It seems necessary that there should be some account of the succession of the
church of God from the beginning: and seeing God suffered all the world to
degenerate, and only took one nation to be his people, to preserve the true
worship and religion till the Savior of the world should come, that in them
the world might gradually be prepared for that great light, and those wonderful
things that he was to be the author of, and that they might be a typical
nation, and that in them God might shadow sorth and teach, as under a vail, all
future glorious things of the gospel; it was therefore nec^ssary that we should
have some account of this thing, how it was first done by the calling of
Abraham, and by their being bondslaves in Egypt, and how they were brought to
Canaan. It was necessary that we should have some account of the revelation
which God made of himself to that people, in giving their law, and in the
appointment of their typical worship, and those things wherein the gospel is
veiled, and of the forming of that people, both as to their civil and
ecclesiastical state.

It seems exceeding necessary that we should have some account of their being
actually brought to Canaan, the country that was their promised land, and where
they always dwelt. It seems very necessary that we should have an history of
the successions of the church of Israel, and of those providence of God
toward them, which were most considerable and fullest of gospel mystery. It
seems nec^ssary that we should have some account of the highest promised
external glory of that nation under David and Solomon, and that we should have
a very particular account of David, whose history (...) so full of the gospel,
and so necessary in order to introduce the gospel into the world, and in whom
began the race of their kings; and that we should have some account of the
building of the temple, which was also so full of gospel-mystery.

It is a matter of great consequence, that we should have some account of
Israel's dividing from Judah, and of the ten tribes captivity and utter
rejection, and a brief account why, and therefore a brief history of them till
that time. It is necessary that we should have an account of the succession of
the kings of Juda, and of the church, till their captivity into Babylon; and
that we should have some account of their return from their captivity, and
resettlement in their own ^^nd, and of the origin of the last state that the
church was in before Christ came.

A little consideration will convince every one, that all these things were
necessary, and that none of them could be spared; and in the general* that it
was necessary that we should have an history of God's (...) such times as are
within the reach of human histories; and it was of vast (...) that we should
have an inspired history of those times of the Jewish church, wherein there was
kept up a more extraordinary intercourse between God and them, and while he
used to dwell among them as it were visibly, revealing himself by the Shechina,
by Urim and Thummim, and by prophecy, and so more, immediately to order their
affairs. And it was necessary that we should have some account of the great
dispensations of God in prophecy, which were to be after the finishing of
inspired history; and so it was exceeding suitable and needful that there
should be a number of prophets raised who should foretell the coming of the Son
of God, and the nature and glory of his kingdom, to be as so many (...) ^ingers
to make way for him, and that their prophecies should remain in the church.

It was also a matter of great consequence that the church should have a book
of divine songs given by inspiration from God, wherein there should be a lively
representation of the true spirit of devotion, of faith, hope, and divine love,
joy, resignation, humility, obedience, repentance, etc. and also that we should
have from God, such books of moral instructions as we have in Proverbs and
Ecclesiastes, relating to the affairs and state of mankind, and the concerns of
human life, containing rules of true wisdom and prudence for our conduct in all
circumstances; and that we should have particularly a song representing the
great love between Christ and his spouse the church, particularly adapted to
the disposition and holy affections of a true Christian soul toward Christ,
and representing his grace and mavelous love to, and delight in, his people;
as we have in Solomon's Song; and especially that we should have a book to
teach us how to conduct ourselves under affliction, seeing the church of God
here is in a militant state, and God's people do through much tribulation enter
into the kingdom of heaven; and the church is for so long a time under trouble,
and meets with such exceeding fiery trials, and extreme sufferings, before her
time of peace and rest in the latter ages of the world shall come: therefore
God has given us a book most proper in these circumstances, even the book of
Job, written upon occasion of the afflictions of a particular saint, and was
probably at first given to the church in Egypt under her afflictions there; and
is made use of by the Apostle to comfort Christians under persecutions, James
v.11. "Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord;
that the Lord is very pitiful, and of tender mercy." God was also pleased, in
this bo^k of J^b, to give some view of the ancient divinity before the giving
of the law.

Thus, from this brief review, I think it appears, that every part of the
scriptures of the Old Testament is very useful and necessary, and no part of it
can be spared, without loss to the church. And therefore, as I said, the wisdom
of God is conspicuous in ordering that the scriptures of the Old Testament
should consist of those very books of which they do consist.

Before I dismiss this particular, I would add, that it is very observeable,
that the history of the Old Testament is large and particular where the great
affair of redemption required it; as where there was most done toward this
work, and most to typify Christ* and to prepare the way for him. Thus it is
very large and particular in the history of Abraham and the other patriarchs;
but very short in the account we have of the time which the children of Israel
spent in Egypt. So again it is large in the account of the redemption out of
Egypt, and the first settling of the affairs of the Jewish church and nation in
Moses and Joshua's time; but much shorter in the account of the times of the
judges. So again, it is large and particular in the account of David's and
Solomon's times, and then very short in the history of the ensuing reigns. Thus
the accounts are large or short, just as there is more or less of the affair of
redemption to be seen in them.

V. From what has been said, we may see, that Christ and his redemption are the
great subject of the whole Bible. Concerning the New Testament, the matter is
plain; and by what has been said on this subject hitherto, it appears to be so
also with respect to the Old Testament. Christ and his redemption is the great
subject of the prophecies of the Old Testament, as has been shown. It has also
been shown, that he is the great subject of the songs of the O^d Testament; and
the moral rules and precepts are all given in subordination to him. And Christ
and his redemption are also the great subject of the history of the Old
Testament from the beginning all along; and even the history of the creation is
brought in as an introduction to the history of redemption that immediately
follows it. The whole book, both Old Testament and New, is filled up with the
gospel; only with this difference, that the Old Testament contains the gospel
under a vail, but the New contains it unvailed, so that we may see the glory of
the Lord with open face.

VI. By what has been said, we may see the usefulness and excellency of the Old
Testament. Some are ready to look on the Old Testament as being as it were out
of date, and as if we in these days of the gospel have but little to do with
it; which is a very great mistake, arising from want of observing the nature
and design of the Old Testament, which, if it were observed, would appear full
of the gospel of Christ, and would in an excellent manner illustrate and
confirm the glorious doctrines and promises of the New Testament. Those parts
of the Old Testament which are commonly looked upon as containing the least
divine instruction, are as it were mines and treasur^^ of gospel knowledge ^
and the reason why they are thought to contain so little is, because persons do
but superficially read them. The treasures which are hid underneath are not
observed. They only look on the top of the ground, and so suddenly pass a
judgment that there is nothing there. But they never dig into the mine* if
they did, they would find it richly stored with silver and gold, and would be
abundantly requited for their pains.

What has been said, may show us what a precious treasure God has committed
into our hands, in that he has given us the Bible. How little do most persons
consider, how much they enjoy, in that they have the possession of that holy
book the B^ble, which they have in their hands, and may converse with it as
they please. What an excellent book is this, and how far exceeding all human
writings, that reveals God to us, and gives us a view of the grand design and
glorious scheme of providence from the beginning of the world, either in
history or prophecy; that reveals the great Redeemer and his glorious
redemption, and the various steps by which God accomplishes it from the first
foundation to the top-stone! Shall we prize an history which gives us a clear
account of some great earthly prince, or mighty warrior, as of Alexander the
Great, or Julius Caesar, or the Duke of Marlborough? and shall we not prize the
history that God gives us of the glorious kingdom of his Son Jesus Christ, the
Prince and Savior, and of the wars and other great transactions of that King
of kings, and Lord of armies, the Lord mighty in battle? the history of the
things which he has wrought for the redemption of his chosen people;

VII. What has been said, may make us sensible how much most persons are to
blame for their inattentive, unobservant way of reading the scriptures. How
much do the scriptures contain, if it were but observed? The Bible is the most
comprehensive book in the world. But what will all this signify to us, if we
read it without observing what is the drift of the Holy Ghost in it? The
Psalmist, Psalm. cxix.18. begs of God, "That he would enlighten his eyes that he
might behold wondrous things out of his law." The scriptures are full of
wondrous things. Those histories which are commonly read as if they were only
histories of the private concerns of such and such particular persons, such as
the histories of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and Joseph, and the history of
Ruth, and the histories of particular lawgivers and princes, as the history of
Joshua and the Judges, and David, and the Israelitists princes, are accounts of
vastly greater things, things of greater importance, and more extensive
concernment, than they that read (...) are commonly aware of.

The histories of scripture are commonly read as if they were stories written
only to entertain men's fancies, and to while away their leisure hours, when the
infininitely great things contained of pointed at in them are passed over and
never taken notice of. Whatever treasures the scriptures contain, we shall be
never the better for them if we do not observe them. He that has a Bible, and
does not observe what is contained in it, is like a man who has a box full of
silver and gold, and does not know it, does not observe that it is any thing
more than a vessel filled with common stones. As long as it is thus with him,
he will be never the better for his treasure: for he that knows not that he has
a treasure, will never make use of what he has, and so might as well be without
it. He who has a plenty of the choicest food stored up in his house, and does
not know it, will never taste what he has, and will be as likely to starve as
if his house were empty.

VIII. What has been said, may show us how great a person Jesus Christ is, and
how great an errand he came into the world upon, seeing there was so much done
to prepare the way for his coming. God had been doing nothing else but prepare
the way for his coming, and doing the work which he had to do in the world,
through all ages of the world from the very beginning. If we had notice of a
certain stranger's being about to come into a country, and should observe that
a great preparation was made for his coming, that many months were taken up in
it, and great things were done, many great alterations were made in the state
of the whole country, and that many hands were employed, and persons of great
note were engaged in making preparation for the coming of this person, and the
whole country was overturned, and all the affai^s and concerns of the country
were ordered so as to be subservient to the design of entertaining that person
when he should come; it would be natural for us to think with ourselves, why,
surely, this person is some extraordinary person indeed, and it is some very
great business that he is coming upon.

How great a person then must he be, for whose coming into the world the great
God of heaven and earth, and governor of all things, spent four thousand years
in preparing the way, going about it soon after the world was created, and from
age to age doing great things, bringing mighty events to pass, accomplishing
wonders without number, often overturning the world in order to it, causing
every thing in the state of mankind, and all revolutions and changes in the
habitable world from generation to generation to be subservient to this great
design? Surely this must be some great and extraordinary person indeed, and a
great work indeed it must needs be that he is coming about.

We read, Matthew. xxi.8.9.10 that when Christ was coming into Jerusalem, and the
multitudes ran before him, and cut down branches of palm^trees, and strewed
them in the way, and others spread their garments in the way, and cried.
"Hosanna to the son of David" that the whole city was moved, saying, Who is
this? They wondered who that extraodinary person should be, that there should
be such an ado made on occasion of his coming into the city, and to prepare the
way before him. But if we consider what has been said on this subject, what
great things was done in all ages to prepare the way for Christ's coming into
the world, and how the world was often overturned to make way for it, much more
may we cry out, Who is this? What great person is this? and say, as in Psalm.
xxiv 8.10. "Who is this King of glory," that God should show such respect, and
put such vast honor upon him? Surely this person is honorable indeed in God's
eyes, and greatly beloved of him; and surely it is a great errand upon which he
is sent into the world.

PERIOD II.
HAVING shown how the work of redemption was carried on through the first
period, from the fall of man to the incarnation of Christ* I come now to the
second period, viz. the time of Christ's humiliation, or the space from the
incarnation of Christ to the resurrection. This is the most remarkable article
of time that ever was, or ever will be. Though it was but between 30 and 40
years, yet more was done in it than had been done from the beginning of the
world to that time. We have observed, that all that had been done from the fall
t^ the incarnation of Christ, was only preparatory for what was done now. It
may also be observed, that all that was done before the beginning of time, in
the eternal councils of God, and that eternal transaction there was between the
persons of the Trinity, chiefly respected this period. We therefore now proceed
to consider the second proposition, viz.

That during the time of Christ's humiliation, from his incarnation to his
resurrection, the purchase of redemption was made.

Though there were many things done in the affair of redemption from the fall
of man to this time, though millions of sacrifices had been offered up; yet
nothing was done to purchase redemption before Christ's incarnation: no part of
the purchase was made, no part of the price was offered till now. But as soon
as Christ was incarnate, then the purchase began immediately without any delay:
And the whole time of Christ's humiliation, from the morning that Christ began
to be incarnate, till the morning that he arose from the dead, was taken up in
this purchase. And then the purchase was entirely and completely finished. As
nothing was done before Christ's incarnation, so nothing was done after his
resurrection, to purchase redemption for men. Nor will there ever be any thing
more done to all eternity. But that very time that the human nature of Christ
ceased to remain under the power of death, the ^^most farthing was paid of the
price of the salvation of every one of the elect.

BUT for the more orderly and regular consideration of the great things done by
our Redeemer to purchase redemption for us.

1. I would speak of Christ's becoming incarnate to capacitate himself for this
purchase; -- and,

2. I would speak of the purchase itself.

PART I.
FIRST, I would consider Christ's coming into the world, or his taking upon him
our nature to put himself in a capacity to purchase redemption for us. --
Christ became incarnate, or, which is the same thing, became man, to put
himself in a capacity for working out our redemption: for though Christ, as
God, was infinitely sufficient for the work, yet to his being in an immediate
capacity for it, it was needful that he should not only be God but man. If
Christ had remained only in the divine nature, he would not have been in a
capacity to have purchased our salvation; not from any imperfection of the
divine nature, but by reason of it^ absolute and infinite perfection: for
Christ, merely as God, was not capable either of that obedience or suffering
that was needful. The divine nature is not capable of suffering: for it is
infinitely above all suffering. Neither is it capable of obedience to that law
that was given to man. It is as impossible that one who is only God, should
obey the law that was given to man, as it is that he should suffer man's
punishment.

It was necessary not only that Christ should take upon him a created nature,
but that he should ^^ke upon him our nature. It would not have sufficed for us
for Christ to have become an angel, and to have obeyed and suffered in the
angelic nature. But it was necessary that he should become a man, and that upon
three accounts.

1. It was needful to answer the law, that that nature should obey the law, to
which the law was given. Man's law could not be answered, but by being obeyed
by man. God insisted upon it, that the law which he had given to man should be
honored and submitted to, and fulfilled by the nature of man, otherwise the
law could not be answered for men. The words that were spoken, Thou shall not
eat thereof, Thou shall, or Thou shall not do thu^ or thus, were spoken to the
race of mankind, to the human nature; and therefore the human nature must
fulfill them.

2. It was needful to answer the law that the nature that sinned should die.
These words, "Thou shall surely die," respect the human nature, the same nature
to which the command was given, was the nature to which the threatening was
directed.

3 God saw (...)* that the same world which was the stage of man's fail and
ruin* should also be the stage of his redemption. We re^d often of his coming
into the world to save sinners, and of God's sending him into the world for
this purpose. It was needful that he should come into this sinful, miserable
undone world, to restore and save it. In order to man's recovery it was needful
that he should come down to man, to the world that was man's proper habitation,
and that he should tabernacle with us: John i.14, "The Word was made flesh, and
dwelt among us."

CONCERNING the incarnation of Christ, I would observe these following things.

I. The incarnation itself; in which especially two things are to be
considered, viz.

1. His conception, which was in the womb of one of the race of mankind,
whereby he became truly the Son of man, as he was often called. He was one of
the posterity of Adam, and a child of Abraham, and a son of David according to
God's promise. But his conception was not in the way of ordinary generation,
but by the power of the Holy Ghost. Christ was formed in the womb of the
Virgin, of the substance of her body, by the power of the Spirit of God* so
that he was the immediate son of the woman, but not the immediate son of any
male whatsoever; and so was the seed of the woman, and the son of a Virgin, one
that had never known man.

2. His birth -- Though the conception of Christ was supernatural, yet after he
was conceived, and so the incarnation of Christ begun, his human nature was
gradually perfected in the womb of the virgin, in a way of natural progress;
and so his birth was in a way of nature But his conception being supernatural,
by the power of the Holy Ghost, he was both conceived and born without sin.

II. The second thing I would observe concerning the incarnation of Christ, is
the fullness of the time in which it was acomplished. It was after things had
been preparing for it from the very first fall of mankind, and when all things
were ready It came to pass at a time, which in infinite wisdom was the most fit
and proper: Gal. iv.4. "But when the fullness of time was come, God sent forth
his Son, made of a woman, made under the law."

It was now the most proper time on every account. Any time before the flood
would not have been so fit a time. For then the mischief and ruin that the fall
brought on mankind, was not so fully seen. The curse did not so fully come on
the earth before the flood, as it did afterward: for though the ground was
cursed in a great measure before, yet it pleased God that the curse should
once, before the ^^^oration by Christ, be executed in an universal destruction,
as it were, of the very form of the earth, that the dire effects of the fall
might once in such a way be seen before the recovery by Christ. Though mankind
were mortal before the flood, yet their lives were the greater part of a
thousand years in length, a kind of immortality in comparison with what the
li^e of man is now. It ple^sed God, that that curse, "D^st thou art, and unto
dust thou shall return," should have its full accomplishment, and be executed
in its greatest degree on mankind, before the Redeemer came to purchase a
never-ending life for man.

It would not have been so fi^ a time for Christ to come, after the flood,
before Moses's time: for till then mankind were not so universally apostatized
from the true God: they were not fallen universally into Heathenish darkness;
and so the need of Christ, the light of the world was not so evident: and the
woeful consequence of the fall with respect to man's mortality, was not so fully
manifest till then; for man's life was not so shortened as to be reduced to the
present standard till about Moses's time.

It was most fit that the time of the Messiah's coming should not be till many
ages after Moses's time; till all nations, but the children of Israel, had lain
long in Heathenish darkness; that the remedilessness of their disease might by
long experience be seen, and so the absolute necessity of the heavenly
physician, before he came.

Another reason why Christ did not come soon after the flood probably was, that
the earth might be full of people, that Christ might have the more extensive
kingdom, and that the effects of his light, and power, and grace, might be
glorified, and that his victory over Satan might be attended with the more
glory in the multitude of his conquests. It was also needful that the coming of
Christ should be many ages after Moses, that the church might be prepared which
was formed by Moses for his coming, by the Messiah's being long prefigured, by
his being many ways foretold, and by his being long expected. It was not proper
that Christ should come before the Babylonish captivity, because Satan's
kingdom was not then come to the height. The Heathen world before that
con^i^^ed of lesser kingdoms. But God saw meet that the Messiah should come in
the time of one of the four great monarchies of the world. Nor was it proper
that he should come in the time of the Babylonish monarchy; for it was God's
will, that several general monarchies should follow one another, and that the
coming of the M^ssiah should be in the time of the last, which appeared above
them all. The Persian monarchy, by overcoming the Babylonian, appeared above
it: and so the Grecian, by overcoming the Persian, appeared above that: and for
the same reason, the Roman above the Grecian. Now it was the will of God, that
his Son should make his appearance in the world in the time of this greatest
and strongest monarchy, which was Satan's visible kingdom in the world; that,
by overcoming this, he might visibly overcome Satan's kingdom in its greatest
strength and glory, and so obtain the more complete triumph over Satan himself.

It was not proper that Christ should come before the Babylonish captivity.
For, before that, we have not histories of the state of the Heathen world, to
give us an idea of the need of a savior. And besides, before that, learning
did not much flourish, and so there had not been an opportunity to show the
insufficiency of human learning and wisdom to reform and save mankind. Again,
before that, the Jews were not dispersed over the world, as they were
afterward; and so things were not prepared in this respect for the coming of
Christ. The necessity of abolishing the Jewish dispensation was not then so
apparent as it was afterward, by reason of the dispersion of the Jews; neither
was the way prepared for the propagation of the gospel, as it was afterward,
by the same dispersion. Many other things might be mentioned, by which it would
appear, that no other time before that very time in which Christ did come,
would have been proper for his appearing in the world to purchase the
redemption of men.

III. The next thing that I would observe concerning the incarnation of Christ,
i^ the greatness of this event. Christ's incarnation was a greater and more
wonderful thing than ever had come to pass; and there has been but one that has
ever come to pass which was greater, and that was the death of Christ, which
was afterward. But Christ's incarnation was a greater thing than had ever come
to pass before. The creation of the world was a very great thing, but not so
great a thing as the incarnation of Christ. It was a great thing for God to
make the creature, but not so great as for God, a^ for the creator himself, to
become a creature. We have spoken of many great things that were accomplished
from one age to another, in the ages between the fall of man and ^he
incarnation of Christ: but God's becoming man was a greater th^^g than they
all. When Christ was born, the greatest person was born that ever was, or ever
will be born.

IV. What I would next observe concerning the incarnation of Christ, are the
remarkable circumstances of it; such as his being born of a poor virgin, that
was a pious holy person, but poor, as appeared by her offering at her
purification: Luke ii.24. "And to offer a sacrifice according to that which is
said in the law of the Lord, a pair of turtle doves* or two young pigeons."
Which refers to Lev. v.7. "And if she be not able to bring a lamb, then she
shall bring two turtles, or two young pigeons." And this poor virgin was
espoused to an husband who was a poor man. Though they were (...) ^oyal ^amily
o^ David, the most honorable fam^ly, and Joseph was the righ^ful h^ir to the
crown; yet the family was reduced to a very low state* which is represented by
the tabernacle of D^vid's being fallen or broken down, Amos ix 11. "In that day
will I raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen, and close up the
breaches thereof, and I will raise up ^is ruin^, and I will build it as in the
days of old."

He was born in the town of Bethlehem, as was foretold: and there was a very
remarkable providence of God to bring about the fulfillment of this prophecy,
the taxing of all the world by Augustus Caesar* as in Luke ii* He was born in a
very low condition* even in a stable, and laid in a manger.

V. I would observe the concomitants of this great event, or the remarkable
events with which it was attended -- And,

1. The first thing I would take notice of that attended the incarnation of
Christ, was the return of the Spirit; which indeed began a little before the
incarnation of Christ; but yet was given on occasion of that, as it was to
reveal either his birth, or the birth of his forerunner John the Baptist. I
have before observed how the spirit of prophecy ceased not long after the book
of M^lachi was written. From about the same time visions and immediate
revelations ceased also. But now, on this occasion, they are granted anew, and
the Spirit in these operations returns again. The first instance of its
restoration that we have any account of is in the vision of Zacharias, the
father of John the Baptist, which we read of in the 1st chapter of Luke. The
next is in the vision which the Virgin Mary had, of which we read also in the
same chapter. The third is in the vision which Joseph had, of which we read in
the 1st chapter of Matthew. In the next place, the Spirit was given to
Elisabeth, Luke i.41. N^xt, it was given to Mary, as appears by her song, Luke
i 46. etc. Then to Zachariah again, ibid. ver 64. Then it was sent to (...)
shepherds* of which we have an account in Luke ii.9* Then it was given to
Simeon, Luke ii.25. Then to An* 2, ver. 36* Then to the wise men in the ^^st.
Then to Joseph again, directing him to flee into Egypt, and after that
directing his return.

2 The (...) concomi^a^t of Christ's incarnation that I would obs^^ve (...)
that was taken of it in heaven, and on earth. Ho^ it was not^^ed by the
glorious inhabitants of the heavenly (...) joyful songs on this occasion, heard
by the shepherds in the night This was the greatest event of Providence that
ever the ^ng^ls had beheld. We read of their singing praises when they s^w the
formation of this lower world: Job xxxviii.7 "When (...) morning stars sang
together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy." And as they sang praise^
then, so they (...) much ^^eater occasion, of the birth of the Son of God, who
is the creator of the world.

The glorious angels had all (...) expected this event. They had taken great
notice of the prophecies and promises of these things all along: for we are
told, that the angels desire to look into the affairs of redemption, 1 Pet.
i.12. They had all along been the ministers of Christ in this affair of
redemption, in all the several steps of it down from the very fall of man. So
we read, that they were employed in God's dealings with Abraham, and in his
dealings with Jacob, and in his dealings with the Israelites from time to time.
And doubtless they had long joyfully expected the coming of Christ; but now
they see it accomplished, and therefore greatly rejoice, and sing praises on
this occasion.

Notice was taken of it by some among the Jews; as particularly by Elizabeth
and the Virgin Mary before the birth of Christ; not to say by John the Baptist
before he was born, when he leaped in his mother's womb as it were for joy, at
the voice of the salutation of Mary. But Elizabeth and Mary do most joyfully
praise God together, when they meet with Christ and his forerunner in their
wombs, and the Holy Spirit in their souls. And afterward what joyful notice is
taken of this event by the shepherds, and by those holy persons Zacharias, and
Simeon, and Anna! How do they praise God on this occasion! Thus the church of
God in heaven, and the church on earth, do as it were unite in their joy and
praise on this occasion.

Notice was taken of it by the Gentiles, which appeared in the wise men of the
east. Great part of the universe does as it were take a joyful notice of the
incarnation of Christ. Heaven takes notice of it, and the inhabitant^ si^g for
joy. This lower world, the world of mankind, does also take notice of it in
both parts of it, Jews and Gentiles. I^ pleased God to put honor on his Son, by
wonderfully stirring up some of the wisest of the Gentiles to come a long
journey to see and worship the Son of God at his birth, being led by a
miracu^^us sta^, (...) the (...) glorious person, who is the bright and ^^^ning
st^r* goi^^ before and leading them to the very pl^ce where the you^^ child
was. Some think they were instructed by the proph^^y of (...)* who (...) in the
eastern parts, and foretold Christ^^ coming as (...) that should rise ou^ of
Jacob. Or they might be instruct^^ by that general expectation there was of the
M^^siah's coming (...) ou^ (...) before spoken of, from the notice (...) the
prop^e^ies the Jews had of him in their dispersion^ (...) all (...) of the word
that time.

3. The next (...) of (...) Christ was his circumcision. But this may ^ore
properly (...) of under another head, and so I will not (...) upon it now.

4. The next concomitan^ was his first coming into the second ^^mple, which was
his being brought thither ^han an infant, on occasion of the purification of
the blessed Virgin. We read, Hagg. ii.7. "The desire of all nations shall come,
and I will fill this house (or temple) with glory." And in Mal. iii.1. "The
Lord, whom ye seek, shall suddenly come to his temple, even the messenger of
the covenant." And now was the first instance of the fulfillment of these
prophecies.

5. The last concomitant I shall mention is the sceptre's departing from Judah,
in the death of Herod the Great. The scepter had never totally departed from
Judah till now. Judah's scepter was greatly diminished in the revolt of the ten
tribes in Jeroboam's time; and the scepter departed from Israel or Ephraim at
the time of the captivity of the ten tribes by Shalmaneser. But yet the scepter
remained in the tribe of Judah, under the kings of the house of David. And when
the tribes of Judah and Benjamin were carried captive by Nebuchadnezzar* the
scepter of Judah ceased for a little while, till the return from the captivity
under Cyrus: and then, though they were not an independent government, as they
had been before, but owed ^^alty to the kings of Persia: yet their governor was
of themselves, who had the power of life and death, and they were governed by
their own laws; and so Judah had a lawgiver from between his feet during the
Persian and Grecian monarchies. Toward the latter part of the Grecian
monarchy, the people were governed by kings of their own, of the race of the
Maccabees, for the greater part of an hundred years; and after that they were
subdued by the Romans. But yet the Romans suffered them to be governed by their
own laws, and to have a king of their own. Herod the Great, who reigned about
forty years, and governed with proper (...) authority, only paying homage to
the Romans. But presently after Christ was born he died, as we have an account*
Matthew. ii.19. and Archelaus succeeded him; but was soon put down by the Roman
Emperor; and then the scepter departed from Judah. There were no more temporal
kings of Judah after that, neither had that people their governors from the
midst of themselves after that, but were ruled by a Roman governor sent among
them; and they ceased any more to have the power of life and death among
themselves. Hence the Jews say to Pilate, "It is not lawful for us to put any
man to death," John xviii.31. Thus the scepter departed from Judah when ^^iloh
came.

PART II.
HAVING thus considered Christ's coming into the world, and his taking on him
our nature, to put himself in a capacity for the purchase of redemption, I come
now, SECONDLY, to speak of the purchase itself. -- And in speaking of this, I
would,

1. Show what is intended by the purchase of redemption.

2. Observe some things in general concerning those things by which this
purchase was made.

3. I would orderly consider those things which Christ did and suffered, by
which that purchase was made.

SECT I.
I WOULD show what is here intended by Christ's purchasing redemption. There
are two things that are intended by it viz. his satisfaction, and his merit.
All is done by the price that Christ lays down. But the price that Christ laid
down does two things: it pays our debt, and so it satisfies: by its intrinsic
value, and by the agreement between the Father and the Son, it procures a title
to us for happiness, and so it merits. The satisfaction of Christ is to free us
from misery, and the merit of Christ is to purchase happiness for us.

The word purchase, as it is used with respect to the purchase of Christ, is
taken either more strictly or more largely. It is oftentimes used more strictly
to signify only the merit of Christ; and sometimes more largely, to signify
both his satisfaction and merit. Indeed most of the words which are used in
this aff^ir have various significations. Thus sometimes divines use merit in
this affair for the whole price that Christ offered, both satisfactory* and and
also positively meritorious. And so the word satisfaction i^ sometimes u^ed,
not only for hi^ propitiation, but also for his meritorious obedience. For in
some sense, not only suffering the penalty, but positively obeying, is needful
to satisfy the law. The reason of this various use of these terms seems to be,
that satisfaction and merit do not differ so much really as relatively. They
both consist in paying a valuable price, a price of infinite value; but only
that price, as it respects a debt to be paid, is called satisfaction; and as it
respects a positive good t^ be obtained, is called merit. The difference
between payi^g a debt and making a positive pu^chase is more relative than it
is essential He who lays do^n a price to pay a debt, does in some sense m^ke a
purchase: he purchases liberty from the obligation. And he who ^^ys down a
price to purchase a good, does as it were make satisfaction: he satisfies the
conditional demands of him to whom he pays it. This may suffice concerning what
is meant by the purchase of Christ.

SECT. II.
I NOW proceed to some general observations, concerning those things by which
this purchase was made. -- And here,

1. I would observe, that whatev^^ in Christ had the nature of satisfaction, it
was by virtue of the suffering or humiliation that was in it. But whatever had
the nature of merit, it was by virtue of the obedience or righteousness there
was in it. The satisfaction of Christ consists in his answering the demands of
law on man, which were consequent on the breach of the law. These were answered
by suffering the penalty of the law. The merit of Christ consists in what he
did to answer the demands of the law, which were prior to man's breach of the
law, or to fulfill what the law demanded before man sinned, which was obedience.

The satisfaction or propitiation of Christ consists either in his suffering
evil, or his being subject to abasement. For Christ did not only make
satisfaction by proper suffering, but by whatever had the nature of
humiliation, and abasement of circumstances. Thus Christ made satisfaction for
sin, by continuing under the power of death, while he lay buried in the grave,
though neither his body nor soul properly endured any suffering after he was
dead. Whatever Christ was subject to that was the judicial fruit of sin, had
the nature of satisfaction for sin. But not only proper suffering, but all
abasement and depression of the state and circumstances of mankind below its
primitive honor and dignity, such as his body's remaining under death, and
body and soul remaining separate, and other things that might be mentioned, are
the judicial fruits of sin. And all that Christ did in his state of
humiliation, that had the nature of obedience or moral virtue or goodness in
it, in one respect or another had the nature of merit in it, and was p^rt of
the price with which he purchased happiness for the elect.

2. I would observe, that both Christ's satisfaction for sin, and also his
meriting happiness by his righteousness, were carried on through the whole time
of his humiliation. Christ's satisfaction for sin was not only by his last
sufferings, though it was principally by them; but all his sufferings, and all
the humiliation that he was subject to from the first moment of his incarnation
to his resurrection, were propitiatory or satisfactory. Christ's satisfaction
was chiefly by his death, because his sufferings and humiliation in that was
greatest. But all his other sufferings, and all his other humiliation, all
along had the nature of satisfaction. So had the me^n circumstances in which he
was born. His being born in such a low condition, was to make satisfaction for
sin. His being born of a poor virgin, in a stable, and his being laid in a
manger; his taking the human nature upon him in its low state and under those
infi^mities brought upon it by the fall; his being born in the form of sinfu^
flesh, had the nature of satisfaction. And so all his sufferings in his infancy
and childhood, and all that labor, and contempt, and reproach, and temptation,
and difficulty of any kind, or that he suffered through the whole course of his
life, was of a propitiatory and satisfactory nature.

And so his purchase of happiness by his righteousness was also carried on
through the whole time of his humiliation till his resurrection; not only in
that obedience he performed through the course of his life, but also in the
obedience he performed in laying down his life.

3. It was by the same things that Christ has satisfied God's justice, and
also purchased eternal happiness. This satisfaction and purchase of Christ were
not only both carried on through the whole time of Christ's humiliation, but
they were both carried on by the same things. He did not make satisfaction by
some things that he did, and then work out a righteousness by other different
things; but in the same acts by which he wrought out righteousness, he also
made satisfaction, but only taken in a different relation. One and the same act
of Christ, considered with respect to the obedience there was in it, was part
of his righteousness, and purchased heaven: but considered with respect to the
self-denial, and difficulty, and humiliation, with which he performed it, had
the nature of satisfaction for sin, and procured our pardon. Thus his going
about doing good, preaching the gospel, and teaching his disciples, was a part
of his righteousness, and purchase of heaven, as it was done in obedience to
the Father; and the same was part of his satisfaction, as he did it with great
labor, trouble, and weariness, and under great temptations, exposing himself
hereby to reproach and contempt. So his laying down his life had the nature of
satisfaction to God's offended justice, considered as his bearing our
punishment in our stead: but considered as an act of obedience to God, who had
given him this command, that he should lay down his life for sinners, it was a
part of his righteousness, and purchase of heaven, and as much the principal
part of his righteousness as it was the principal part of his satisfaction. And
so to instance in his circumcision, what he suffered in that, had the nature of
satisfaction: the blood that was shed in his circumcision was propitiatory
blood; but as it was a conformity to the law of Moses, it was part of his
meritorious righteousness. Though it was not properly the act of his human
nature, he being an infant; yet it being what the human nature was the subject
of, and being the act of that person, it was accepted as an act of his
obedience, as our mediator.

And so even his being born in such a low condition, had the nature of
satisfaction, by reason of the humiliation that was in it, and also of
righteousness, as it was the (...) of his person in obedience to the Father,
and what the human n^^ure (...) the subject of, and what the will of the human
nature did acquiesce in* though there was no act of the will of the human
nature prior to it.

THESE things may suffice to have observed in the general concerning the
purchase Christ made of redemption.

SECT. III.
I NOW proceed to speak more particularly of those things which Christ did, and
was the subject of, during the time of his humiliation, whereby this purchase
was made -- The nature of the purchase of Christ, as it has been explained,
leads us to consider these things under twofold view* viz.

1. With respect to his righteousness, which appeared in them.

2. With respect to the sufferings and humiliation that he was subject to in
them in our stead.

I I will consider the things that passed during the time of Christ's
humiliation, with respect to the obedience and righteousness that he exercised
in them. And this is subject to a threefold distribution. I shall therefore
consider his obedience,

1 With respect to the laws which he obeyed.

2. With respect to the different stages of his life in which he performed it.

3. With respect to the virtues he exercised in his obedience.

I THE first distribution of the acts of Christ's righteousness is with respect
to the laws which Christ obeyed in that righteousness which he performed. But
here it must be observed in general, that all the precepts which Christ obeyed
may be reduced to one laws and that is that which the Apostle calls the law of
works. Romans iii.27. Every command that Christ obeyed may be reduced to that
great and everlasting law of God that is contained in the covenant of works,
that eternal rule of right which God had estab^ished between himself and
mankind. Christ came into the world to fulfill and answer the covenant of works;
that is, the covenant that is to stand forever as a rule of judgment* and that
is the covenant that we had broken, and that was the covenant that must be
fulfilled.

This law of works indeed includes all the laws of God which ever have been
given to mankind; for it is ^ general rule of the law of works, and indeed of
the law of (...)* That God is to be obeyed, and that he must be submitted to in
whatever positive precept he is pleased to give us. It is a rule of the law of
works, That men should ob^y their (...) parents: and it is certainly as much a
rule of the some law, That we should obey our heavenly Father: and so the law
of works requires obedience to all positive commands of God. It required Adam's
obedience to that positive command, Not to eat of the forbidden f^uit; and it
required obedience of the Jews to all the positive commands of their
institution. When God commanded J^nah to arise and go to Nineveh, the law of
works required him to obey: and so it required Christ's obedience to all the
positive commands which God gave him.

But more particularly, the commands of God which Christ obeyed, were of three
kinds; they were either such as he was subject to merely as m^n, or such as he
was subject to as he was a Jew, or such as he was subject to purely as Mediator.

1. He obeyed those commands which he was subject to merely as man: and they
were the commands of the moral law, which was the same with that which was
given at Mount Sinai, written in two tables of stone, which are obligatory on
mankind of all nations and all ages of the world.

2. He obeyed all those laws he was subject to as he was a Jew. Thus he was
subject to the ceremonial law, and was conformed to it. He was conformed to it
in his being circumcised the eighth day; and he strictly obeyed it in going up
to Jerusalem to the temple three times a year; at least after he was come to
the ago of twelve years, which seems to have been the age when the males began
to go up to the temple. And so Christ constantly attended the service of the
temple, and of the synagogues.

To this head of his obedience to the law that he was subject to as a Jew, may
be reduced his submission to John's baptism. For it was a special command to
the Jews, to go forth to John the Baptist, and be baptized of him; and
therefore Christ being a Jew, was subject to this command: and therefore, when
he came to be baptized of John, and John objected, that he had more need to
come to him to be baptized of him, he gives this reason for it, That it was
needful that he should do it, that he might fulfill all righteousness. See
Matthew. iii.13.14.15.

3. Another law that Christ was subject to, was the mediatorial law, which
contained those commands of God to which he was subject, not merely as man, nor
yet as a Jew, but which related purely to his mediatorial office. Such were the
commands which the Father gave him, to teach such doctrines, to preach the
gospel, to work such miracles, to call such disciples, to appoint such
ordinances, and finally to lay down his life: for he did all these things in
obedience to commands he had received of the Father, as he often tells us. And
these commands he was not subject to merely as man; for they did not belong to
other men: nor yet was he subject to them as a Jew; for they were no part of
the Mosaic law; but they were commands that he had received of the Father, that
purely respected the work he was to do in the world in his mediatorial office.

It is to be observed, that Christ's righteousness, by which he merited heaven
for himself, and all who believe in him, consists principally in his obedience
to this mediatorial law: for in fulfilling this law consisted his chief work
and business in the world. The history of the evangelists is chiefly taken up
in giving an account of his obedience to this law: and this part of his
obedience was that which was attended with the greatest difficulty of all; and
therefore his obedience in it was most meritorious What Christ had to do in the
world by virtue of his being Mediator, was infinitely more difficult than what
he had to do merely as a man, or as a Jew. To his obedience to this mediatorial
law belongs his going through his last sufferings, beginning with his agony in
the garden, and ending with his resurrection.

As the obedience of the first Adam, wherein his righteousness would have
consisted, if he had stood, would have mainly consisted, not his in obedience
to the moral law, to which he was subject merely as man, but in his obedience
to that special law that he was subject to as moral head and surety of mankind,
even the command of abstaining from the tree of knowledge of good and evil; so
the obedience of the second Adam, wherein his righteousness consists, lies
mainly, not in his obedience of the law that he was subject to merely as man,
but to that special law which he was subject to in his office as Mediator and
surety for man.

BEFORE I proceed to the next distribution of Christ's righteousness, I would
observe three things concerning Christ's obedience to these laws.

1. He performed that obedience to them which was in every respect perfect It
was universal as to the kinds of laws that he was subject to; he obeyed ^^ch of
these three laws; and it was universal with respect to every individual p^ecept
contained in these laws, and it was perfect as to each command. It was perfect
as to positive t^ansgressions avoided: for he never transgressed in one
instance; he was guilty of no sin of commission It was perfect with respect to
the work commanded: he perfected the whole work at each command required, and
never was guilty of any sin of omission. It was perfect with respect to the
principles from which he obeyed: his heart (...) principles were wholly right,
there was no corruption in his heart It was perfect with respect to the ends he
acted for: for he never had any by-ends, but aimed perf^ctly at such ends as
the law of God required. It was perfect with resp^ct to the manner of
performance: every circumstance of each ac^ was perfectly conformed to the
command. It was perfect with respect to the degree of the performance: he acted
wholly up to the rule. It was perfect with respect to the constancy of
obedience: he did not only perfectly obey sometimes, but constantly without any
i^terruption. It was perfect with respect t^ perseverance: he held out in
perfect obedience to the very end, through all the changes he passed through,
and all the trials that were before him.

The meritoriousness of Christ's obedience, depends on the perfection of it It
is had failed (...) ins^ance of perfection, it could not have been meritorious:
(...) imperfect obedience is not (...) obedience at all in the sight of the law
of works, which was (...) law that Christ was subject to; for that is not
accepted as an obedience to a law that does not answer that law.

2. The n^x^ thing I would observe of Christ's obedience is, that it was (...)
^^^ough the greatest trials and temptations that ever (...) was. His obedience
was attended with the gre^te^^ ^^fficulties, and most extreme abasement and
suffering that ever any obe^ience was; which was another thing that render^^ is
more meritorious and thank-worthy. To obey another when ^is commands are easy,
is not so worthy, as it is to obey when it cannot be done with^^^ great
difficulty.

3. He performed this obedience with infinite respect to God, and the honor of
his law The obedience he performed was with infinitely greater love to God, and
regard to his authority, than the angels perform their obedience with. The
angels perform their obedience with that love which is perfect, with sinless
perfection; but Christ did not do so, but he performed his obedience with much
greater love than the angels do theirs, even infinite love; for though the human
nature of Christ was not capable of love absolutely infinite, yet Christ's
obedience that was performed in that human nature, is not to be looked upon as
mearly the obedience of the human nature, but the obedience of his person, as
God man* and there was infinite love of the person of Christ manifest in that
obedience. And this together with the infinite dignity of the person that
obeyed, rendered his obedience infinitely meritorious.

II. THE second distribution of the acts of Christ's obedience, is with respect
to the different parts of his life, wherein they were performed. And in ^his
respect they may be divided into those which were performed ^n p^^vate life,
and those which were performed in his public (...).

1 st. Those acts he performed during his private life. He was perfectly
obedient in his ch^^^hood He infinitely differed from other children, who, as
soon a^ they begin to act begin to sin and rebel. He was subject to his ea^thly
parents, though he was Lord of all, Luke ii.51. he was found about (...)
Father's business at twelve years of age in the temple Luke ii 42. He then
began that work that he had to do in fulfillment of the mediatorial law, which
the Father had given him. He continued his private life for about thirty years,
dwelling at N^z^reth in the house of his reputed father Joseph where he served
God^ in private capacity, and in following the mechanical trade, the business
of a carpenter.

2 dly. Those acts which he p^^form^^ during his public ministry which began
when he was about thirty years of age, and continued for the three last years
and an half of his life. Most of the history of the evangelists is taken up in
giving an account of what passed during these three years and an half; so is
all the history of the Evangelist Matthew, excepting the two first chapters. So
is the whole of the history of the Evangelist Mark; it begins and ends with it.
And so also is all the gospel of John, and all the gospel of Luke, excepting
the two first chapters; excepting also what we find in the evangelists
concerning the ministry of John the Baptist. Christ's first appearing in his
public ministry, is what is often called his coming, in scripture. Thus John
speaks of Christ's coming as what is yet to be, though he had been born long
before.

Concerning the public ministry of Christ, I would observe the following
things. 1. The forerunner of it. 2. The manner of his first entering upon it. 3.
The works in which he was employed during the course of it; and, 4. The manner
of his finishing it.

1. The forerunner of Christ's coming in his public ministry was John the
Baptist; He came preaching repentance for the remission of sins, to make way
for Christ's coming, agreeable to the prophecies of him, Is. xl.3.4.5. and
Matthew. iv.5.6. It is supposed that John the Baptist began the ministry about
three years and an half before Christ; so that John's ministry and Christ's put
together, made seven years, which was the last of Daniel's weeks; and this time
is intended in Dan. ix*27. "He will confirm the covenant with many for one
week." Christ came in the midst of this week, viz. in the beginning of the last
half of it, or the last three years and an half, as Daniel foretold, as in the
verse just now quoted: "And in the midst of the week he shall cause the
sacrifice and the oblation to cease." John Baptist's ministry consisted
principally in preaching the law, to awaken men and convince them of sin, to
prepare men for the coming of Christ, to comfort them, as the law is to prepare
the heart for the entertainment of the gospel.

A very remarkable out pouring of the Spirit of God attended John's ministry;
and the effect of it was, that Jerusalem, and all Judea, and all the region
round about Jordan, were awakened, convinced, went out to him, and submitted to
him baptism, confessing their sins. John is spoken of as the greatest of all
the prophets who came before Christ: Matthew. xi*11. "Among those that are born
of women, there has not risen a greater than John the Baptist;" i e. he had
the most honorable office He was as the morning star, which is the harbinger
of the approaching day, and forerunner of the rising sun. The other prophets
were stars that were to give light in the night; but we have heard how those
stars went out on the approach of the gospel-day. But now the coming of Christ
being very nigh, the morning star comes before him, the brightest of all the
stars, as John the Baptist was the greatest of all the prophets.

When Christ came in this public ministry, the light of that morning star
decreased too: as we see, when the sun rises, it diminishes the light of the
morning star. So John the Baptist says of himself, John iii 30. "He must
increase, but I must decrease." And soon after Christ began his public
ministry, John the Baptist was put to death; as the morning star is visible a
little while after the sun is risen, yet soon goes out.

2. The next thing to be taken notice of is Christ's entrance on his public
ministry, which was by baptism, followed with the temptation in the wilderness.
His baptism was as it were his solemn inauguration, by which he entered on his
ministry; and was attended with his being anointed with the Holy Ghost, in a
solemn and visible manner, the Holy Ghost descending upon him in a visible
shape like a dove, attended with a voice from heaven, saying, "This is my
beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased," Matt. iii.16* 17.

After this he was led by the devil into the wilderness. Satan made a violent
on set upon him at his first entrance on his work; and now he had a remarkable
trial of his obedience; but he got the victory. He who had such success with
the first Adam, had none with the second.

3. I would take notice of the work in which Christ was employed during his
ministry. And here are three things chiefly to be taken notice of, v^z his
preaching, his working miracles, and his calling and appointing disciples and
ministers of his kingdom.

(1.) His preaching the gospel. Great part of the work of his public ministry
consisted in this; and much of that obedience by which he purchased salvation
for us, was in his speaking those things which the Father commanded him. He
more clearly and abundantly revealed the mind and will of God, than ever it had
been revealed before. He came from the bosom of the Father, and perfectly knew
his mind, and was in the best capacity to reveal it. As the sun, as soon as it
is risen, begins to shine; so Christ, as soon as he came into his public
ministry, began to enlighten the world with his doctrine. As the law was given
at Mount Sinai, so Christ delivered this evangelical doctrine, full of
blessings, and not curses, to a multitude on a mountain, as we have an account
in the 5th, 6th, and 7th chapters of Matthew.

When he preached, he did not teach as the scribes, but he taught as one having
authority; so that his hearers were astonished at his doctrine. He did not
reveal the mind and will of God in the style in which the prophets used to
preach, as not speaking their own words, but the words of another; and used to
speak in such a style as this, "Thus says the Lord;" but Christ, in such a
style as this, "I say unto you," thus or thus; "Verily, verily, I say unto
you." He delivered his doctrines, not only as the doctrines of God the Father,
but as his own doctrines. He gave forth his commands, not as the prophets were
wont to do, as God's commands but as his own commands. He spoke in such a style
as this, "This is my commandment," John xv.12. "Ye are my friends, if ye do
whatsover I command you," ibid. 14.

(2.) Another thing that Christ was employed in during the course of his
ministry, was working miracles. Concerning which we may observe several things.

Their multitude. Besides particular instances, we often have an account of
mu^titudes coming at once with deseases, and his healing them.

They were works of mercy. In them was displayed not only his infinite power
and greatness, but his infinite mercy and goodness. He went about doing good,
healing the sick, restoring sight to the blind, hearing to the deaf, and the
proper use of their limbs to the lame and halt; feeding the hungry, cleansing
the leprous and raising the dead.

They were almost all of them such as had been spoken of as the peculiar works
of God, in the Old Testament. So with respect to stilling the sea, Psalm.
cvii.29. "He makes the storm a calm, so that the waves thereof are still." So
as to walking on the sea in a storm: Job. ix.8. "Which alone -- treads upon
the waves of the sea." So as to casting our devils: Psalm. lxxiv.14. "Thou
breakest the heads of leviathan in pieces." So as to feeding a multitude in a
wilderness: Deuteronomy. viii.16. "Who fed thee in the wilderness with manns." So as
to telling man's thoughts: Amos iv.13. "Lo, he that -- declares unto man what
is his thought -- the Lord, the God of hosts is his name." So as to raising the
dead: Psa^. lxviii 20. "Unto God the Lord belong the issues from death." So as
to opening the eyes of the blind: Psalm. cxlvi.8. "The Lord opens the eyes of
the blind." So as to healing the sick: Psalm. ciii.3. "Who heals all thy
diseases." So as to lifting up those who are bowed together: Psalm. cxlvi.8.
"The Lord raises them that are bowed down."

They were in general such works as were images of the great work which he came
to work on man's heart; representing that inward, spiritual cleansing, healing,
renovation, and resurrection, which all his redeemed are the subjects of.

He wrought them in such a manner as to show, that he did them by his own
power, and not by the power of another, at the other prophets did. They were
wont to work all their miracles in the name of the Lord: but Christ wrought in
his own name. Moses was forbidden to enter into Canaan, because he seemed by
his speech to assume the honor of working only one miracle to himself. Nor did
Christ work miracles as the apostles did, who wrought them all in the name of
Christ; but he wrought them in his own name, and by his own authority and will:
Thus, says he, "I will be thou clean." Matthew. viii.3. And in the same strain
he put the question, "Believe ye that I am able to do this?" Matthew. ix.28.

(3.) Another thing that Christ did in the course of his ministry, was to call
his disciples. He called many disciples. There were many that he employed as
ministers; he sent seventy disciples at one time in this work: but there were
twelve that he set apart as apostles, who were the grand ministers of his
kingdom, and as it were the twelve foundations of his church, See Rev. xxi.14.
These were the main instruments of setting up his kingdom in the world, and
therefore shall sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

4. I would observe how he finished his ministry. And this was

(1.) In giving his dying counsels to his disciples, and all that should be his
disciples, which we have recorded particularly in the 14th, 15th, and 16th
chapters of John's g^spel.

(2.) In instituting a solemn memorial of his death. This he did in instituting
the sacrament of the Lord's supper, wherein we have a representation of his
body broken, and of his blood shed.

(3) In offering up himself, as God's high priest, a sacrifice to God, which he
did in his last sufferings. This act he did as God's minister, as God's
anointed priest; and it was the greatest act of his public ministry, the
greatest act of his obedience, by which he purchased heaven for believers. The
priests of old used to do many other things as God's ministers; but then were
they in the ^ighest execution of their office when they were actually offering
sacrifice on the altar. So the greatest thing that Christ did in the execution
of his priestly office, and the greatest thing that he ever did, and the
greatest thing that ever was done, was the offering up himself a sacrifice to
God. Herein he was the antetype of all that had been done by all the priests,
and in all their s^c^ifices and offerings, from the beginning of the world.

III. THE third distribution of the acts by which Christ purchased redemption,
regards the virtues that Christ exercised and manifested in them. And here I
would observe, that Christ in doing the work that he had to do here in the
world for our redemption, exercised every possible virtue and grace. Indeed
there are some particular virtues that sinful man may have, that were not in
Christ* not from any want or defect of virtue, but because his virtue was
perfect and without defect. Such is the vi^tue of repentance, and brokenness of
heart for sin, and mortification, and d^nying of (...). Those virtues were not
in Christ, because he had no sin of his own to repent of, nor any lust to deny.
But all virtues which do not presuppose sin, were in him, and that in a higher
degree than ever they were in any other man, or any mere creature. Every virtue
in him was perfect. Virtue itself was greater in him than in any other; and it
was under greater adva^tages to shine in him ^h^n in any other. S^rict virtue
shines most when most tried: but never any virtue had such trials as Ch^i^^'s
had.

The virtue that Christ exercised in the work he did, may be divided into three
sorts, v^z the virtues which more immediately respe^t God, those which
immediately respect himself, and those which immediately respect men.

1. Those virtues which more immediately respect God, appeared in Christ in the
work that he did for our red^mption. There appeared in him an holy fear and
reverence toward God the Father. Christ had a greater trial of his virtue in
this respect than any other had, from the honourableness of his person. This
was the temptation of the angels that fell, to cast off their worship of God,
and reverence of his majesty, that they were beings of such exalted dignity and
worthiness themselves. But Christ was infi^itely more worthy and honorable
than they; for he was the eternal Son of God, and his person was equal to the
person of God the Father: and yet, as he had taken on him the office of
mediator, and the nature of man, he was full of reverence toward God. He
adored him in the most reverential manner time after time. So he manifested a
wonderful love toward God. The angels give great testimonies of their love
toward God, in their constancy and agility in doing the will of God; and many
saints have given great testimonies of their love, who, from love to God, have
endured great labors and s^fferings* but none ever gave such testimonies of
love to God as Christ has given; none ever performed such a labor of love as
he, and suffered so much from love to God. So he manifested the most wonderful
submission to the will of God. Never was any one's submission so tried as his
was. So he manifested the most wonderful spirit of obedience that ever was
manifested.

2. In this work he most wonderfully manifested those virtues which more
immediately respected himself; as particularly humility, patience, and contempt
of the world. Christ, though he was the most excellent and honorable of all
men, yet was the most humble; yea, he was the most humble of all creatures. No
angel or man ever equalled him in humility, though he was the highest of all
creatures in dignity and honorableness. Christ would have been under the
greatest temptations to pride, if it had been possible for any thing to be a
temptation to him. The temptation of the angels that fell was the dignity of
their nature, and the honorableness of their circumstances; but Christ was
infinitely more honorable than they. The human nature of Christ was so honored
as to be in the same person with the eternal Son of God, who was equal with
God; and yet that human nature was not at all lifted up with pride. Nor was the
man Christ Jesus at all lifted up with pride with all those wonderful works
which he wrought, of healing the sick, curing the blind, lame, and maimed, and
raising the dead. Though he knew that God had appointed him to be the king over
heaven and earth, angels and men, as he says, Matthew. xi.27. " All things are
delivered unto me of my Father;" though he knew he was such an infinitely
honorable person, and thought it not robbery to be equal with G^d; and though
he knew he was the heir of God the Father's kingdom: yet such was his humility,
that he did not disdain to be abased and depressed down into lower and viler
circumstances and sufferings than ever any other elect creature was; so that he
became least of all, and lowest of all. The proper trial and evidence of
humility, is stooping or complying with those acts or circumstances, when
called to it, which are very low, and contain great abasement. But none ever
stooped so low as Christ, if we consider either the infinite height that he
stooped from, or the great depth to which he stood. Such was his hum^^ity, that
though he knew his infinite worthiness of honor, and of being honored ten
thousand times as much as the highest prince on earth, or angel in heaven; yet
he did not think it too much when called to it, to be bound as a cursed
malefactor, and to become the laughi^g-stock and spitting-stock of the vilest
of men, and to be crowned with thorns, and to have a mock robe put upon him,
and to be crucified like a slave and malefactor, and as one of the meanest and
worst of vagabonds and miscreants, and an accursed enemy of God and men, who
was not fit to live on earth; and this not for himself, but for some of the
meanest and vilest of creatures, some of those accursed wretches that crucified
him. Was not this a wonderful manifestation of humility, when be chearfuly and
most freely submitted to this abasement?

How did his patience shine forth under all the terrible sufferings which he
endured, when he was dumb, and opened not his mouth, but went as a lamb to the
slaughter, and was like a patient lamb under all the sufferings he endured from
first to last.

What contempt of the glory of this world was there, when he rather chose this
contempt, and meanness, and suffering, than to wear a temporal crown, and be
invested with the external glories of an earthly prince, as the multitude often
solicited him?

3. Christ, in the work which he wrought out, in a wonderful manner exercised
those virtues which more immediately respect ^^her men. These may be summed up
under two heads, viz. meekness, and love.

Christ's meekness was his humble calmness of spirit under the provocations
that he met with. None ever met with so great provocations as he did. The
greatness of provocation lies in two things, viz. in the degree of opposition
by which the provocation is given; and, secondly, in the degree of the
unreasonableness of that opposition, or in its being very causeless, and
without reason, and the great degree of obligation to the contrary. Now, if we
consider both these things, no man ever met with such provocations as Christ
did, when he was upon earth If we consider how much he was hated, what abuses
he suffered from the vilest of men, how great his sufferings from men were, and
how spiteful and how contemptuous they were, in offering him these abuses; and
also consider how causeless and unreasonable these abuses were, how undeserving
he was of them, and how much deserving of the contrary, viz. of love, and
honor, and good treatment at their hands: I say, if we consider these things,
no man ever met with a thousandth part of the provocation that Christ met with
from men: and yet how meek was he under all! how composed and quiet his spirit!
how far from being in a ruffle and tumult! When he was reviled, he reviled not
again; and as a sheep before the shearers is dumb, so he opened not his mouth.
No appearance was there of a revengeful spirit: on the contrary, what a spirit
of forgiveness did he exhibit! so that he fervently and effectually prayed for
their forgiveness, when they were in the highest act of provocation that ever
they perpetrated viz. nailing him to the cross: Luke xxiii.34. "Father, forgive
them; for they know not what they do."

Never did there appear such an instance of love to men, Christ's love to men
that he showed when on earth, and especially in going through his last
sufferings, and offering up his life and soul under those sufferings, which was
his greatest act of love, was far beyond all parallel. There have been very
remarkable manifestations of love in some of the saints, as in the Apostle
Paul, the Apostle John, and others: but the love to men that Christ showed when
on earth, as much exceeded the love of all other men, as the ocean exceeds a
small stream.

It is to be observed, that all the virtues which appeared in Christ shone
brightest in the close of his life, under the trials he met with then. Eminent
virtue always shows brightest in the fire. Pure gold shows its purity chiefly
in the furnace. It was chiefly under those trials which Christ underwent in the
close of his life, that his love to God, his honor of God's majesty, and his
regard to the honor of his law, and his spirit of obedience, and his humility,
and contempt of the world, and his patience, and his meekness, and his spirit
of forgiveness toward men, appeared. Indeed every thing that Christ did to
work out redemption for us appears mainly in the close of his life. Here mainly
i^ his satisfaction for sin, and here chiefly is his merit of eternal life for
sinners, and here chiefly appear the brightness of his example, which he has
set us to follow.

THUS we have taken a brief view of the things whereby the purchase of
redemption was made with respect to his righteousness that appeared in them --
I proceed now,

II. To take a view of them with respect to the satisfaction that he thereby
made for sin, or the sufferings or humiliation that he was the subject of in
them on our account. And here,

1. He was subject to uncommon humiliation and sufferings in his infancy. He
was born to that end that he might die; and therefore he did as it were begin
to die as soon as he was born. His mother suffered in an uncommon manner in
bearing him. When her travail came upon her, it is said, "there was no room in
the inn," Luke ii.7. She was forced to betake herself to a stable; and
therefore Christ was born in the place of the bringing forth of the beasts.
Thus he suffered in his birth, as though he had been meaner and viler than a
man, and not possessed of the dignity of the human nature, but had been of the
rank of the brute creatures. And we may conclude, that his mother's
circumstances in other respects were proportionably strait and difficult, and
that she was destitute of the conveniences necessary for so young an infant
which others were wont to have; for want of which the newborn babe without
doubt suffered much.

Besides, he was persecuted in his infancy. They began to seek his life as soon
as he was born. Herod, the chief man of the land, was so engaged to him, that,
in order to it, he killed all the children in Bethlehem, and in all the coasts
thereof, from two years old and under. Christ suffered banishment in his
infancy, was driven out of his native country into Egypt, and without doubt
suffered much by being carried so long a journey, when he was so young, into a
strange country.

II. Christ was subject to great humiliation in his private life at Nazareth.
He there led a servile obscure life, in a mean laborious occupation: for he is
called not only the carpenter's son, but the carpenter: Mark vi.3. "Is not this
the carpenter, the brother of James and Joses, and Juda, and Simon?" He, by
hard labor, earned his bread before he ate it, and so suffered that curse
which God pronounced on Adam, Genesis iii.13. "In the sweat of thy face shall thou
eat bread." Let us consider how great a degree of humiliation the glorious Son
of God, the creator of heaven and earth, was subject to in this, that for about
thirty years he should live a private obscure life among laboring men, and all
this while be overlooked, and not taken notice of in the world, as more than
other common laborers. Christ's humiliation in some respects was greater in
private life than in the time of his public ministry. There were many
manifestations of his glory in the word he preached, and the great miracles he
wrought; but the first thirty years of his life he spent among mean ordinary
men, as it were in silence, without those manifestations of his glory, or any
thing to make him to be taken notice of more than any ordinary mechanic, but
only the spotless purity and eminent holiness of his life; and that was in a
great measure hid in obscurity; so that he was little taken notice of till
after his baptism.

III Christ was the subject of great humiliation and suffering during his
public life, from his baptism till the night wherein he was betrayed. As
particularly,

1. He suffered great poverty, so that he had not "where to lay his head,"
Matthew. viii.20. and commonly used to lodge abroad in the open air, for want of
a shelter to betake himself to; as you will see is manifest, if you compare the
following places together, which I shall but name to you, even Matthew. viii.20.
and John xviii.1.2. and Luke xxi.37. and ch xxii.39. So that what was spoken of
Christ in Cant. v.2. "My head is filled with dew, and my locks with the drops
of the night," was literally fulfiled. Through his poverty he doubtless was
often pinched with hunger, and thirst, and cold. We read, Matthew. iv.2 that he
was an hungered; and so again in Matt. xxi.18 H^s mother and natural relations
were poor, and not able to help him: and he was maintained by the charity of
some of his disciples while he lived. So we read in Luke viii. at the
beginning, of a certain women that followed his, and ministered to him of their
substance. He was so poor, that he was not able to pay the tribute that was
demanded of him, without the miraculous coming of a fish to bring him the money
out of the sea in his mouth. See Matthew. xviii.27. And when he ate his last
passover, it was not at his own charge, but at the charge of another, as
appears by Luke xxii.7. etc. From his poverty he had no grave of his own to be
buried in. It was the manner of the Jews, unless they were very poor, and were
not able, to prepare themselves a sepulcher while they lived. But Christ had no
land of his own, though he was possessor of heaven and earth; and therefore was
buried by Joseph of Arimathea's charity, and in his own tomb, which he had
prepared for himself.

2. He sufferd great hatred and reproach, He was despised and rejected of men.
He was by most esteemed a poor insignificant person; one of little account,
slighted for his low parentage, and his mean city Nazareth. He was reproached
as a glutton and drunkard, a friend of publicans and sinners; was called a
deceiver of the people; sometimes was called a madman, and a Samaritian, and
one possessed with a devil, John vii.20. and viii.48 and x.20. He was called a
blasphemer, and was accounted by many a wizzard, or one that wrought miracles
by the black art, and communication with Beelzebub. They excommunicated him,
and agreed to excommunicate any man that should own him, as, John ix.22. They
wished him dead, and were continually seeking to murder him; sometimes by force
and sometimes by craft. They often took up stones to stone him, and once led
him to the brow of a hill, intending to throw him down the precipice, to dash
him in pieces against the rocks.

He was thus hated and reproached by his own visible people ^ John i.11. "He
came to his own, and his own received him not." He was principally despised and
hated by those who were in chief repute, their greatest men. And the hatred
wherewith he was hated was general. Into whatever part of the land he went, he
met with hatred and contempt. He met with these in Capernaum, and when he went
to Jericho, when he went to Jerusalem, which was the holy city, when he went to
the temple to worship, and also in Nazareth, his own city, and among his own
relations and his old neighbors.

3. He suffered the buffetings of Satan in an uncommon manner. We read of one
time in particular, when he had a long conflict with the devil, when he was in
the wilderness forty days, with nothing but wild beasts and devils; and was so
exposed to the devil's power, that he was bodily carried about by him from
place to place, while he was otherwise in a very suffering state.

So much for the humiliation and suffering of Christ's public life from his
baptism to the night wherein he was betrayed.

IV. I come now to his last humiliation and sufferings, from the evening of the
night wherein he was betrayed to his resurection. Here was his greatest
humiliation and suffering, by which principally he made satisfaction to the
justice of God for the sins of men. First, his life was sold by one of his own
disciples for thirty pieces of silver, which was the price of the life of a
servant, as you may see in Exodus xxi.32. Then he was in that dreadful agony in
the garden. There came such a dismal gloom upon his soul, that he began to be
sorrowful and very heavy, and said, his "soul was exceeding sorrowful even unto
death, and was sore amazed." So violent was the gloom of his soul, as to force
the blood through the pores of his skin; so that while his soul was overwhelmed
with ama^ing sorrow, his body was all clotted with blood. The disciples, who
used to be as his friends and family, at this time above all appeared cold
toward him, and unconcerned for him, at the same time that his Father's face
was hid from him. Judas, to whom Christ had been so very merciful, and treated
as one of his family or familiar friends, comes and betrays him in the most
deceitful, and treacherous manner. The officers annd soldiers apprehend and
bind him; his disciples forsake him, and flee; his own best friends do not
stand by him to comfort him in this time of his distress. He is led away as a
malefactor to appear before the priests and scribes, his venomous, mortal
enemies, that they might sit as his judges who sat up all night, to have the
pleasure of insulting him, now they had got him into their hands. But because
they aimed at nothing short of his life, they set themselves to find some
color to put him to death, and seek for witnesses against him. When none
appeared, they set some to bear false witness* and when their witness did not
agree together, then they go to examining him, to catch something out of his
own mouth. They hoped he would say, that he was the Son of God, and then they
thought they should have enough. But because they see they are not like to
obtain it without it, they then go to force him to say it, by adjuring him, in
the name of God, to say whether he was or not: and when he confessed that he
was, then they supposed they had enough; and then it was time of rejoiceing
with them, which they show, by falling upon him, and spitting in his face, and
blindfolding him, and striking Christ in the face with the palms of their
hands, and then bidding him prophesy who it was that struck him; thus
ridiculing him for pretending to be a prophet. And the very servants have a
hand in the sport: Mark, xiv.65. "And the servants did strike him with the
palms of their hands."

During the sufferings of that night, Peter, one of the chief of his own
disciples, instead of standing by him to comfort him, appears ashamed to own
him, and denies and renounces him with oaths and curses. And after the chief
priests and elders had finished the night in so shamefully abusing him, when
the morning was come, which was the morning of the most wonderful day that
eever was, they led him away to Pilate, to be condemned to death by him,
because they had not the power of life and death in their own hands. He is
brought before Pilate's judgment seat, and there the priests and elders accuse
him as a traitor. When Pilate, upon examining into the matter, declared he
found no fault in him, the Jews were but the more fierce and violent to have
him condemned. Upon which Pilate, after clearing him, very unjustly brings him
upon a second trial; and then not finding any thing against him acquits him
again. Pilate treats him as a poor worthless fellow; but is ashamed on so
little pretense to condemn him as a traitor.

Then he was sent to Herod to be tried by him, and was brought before Herod's
judgment seat; and his enemies followed, and virulently accused him before
Herod. Herod does not condemn him as a traitor, or one that would set up for a
king, but looks upon him as Pilate did, as a poor worthless creature, not
worthy to be taken notice of, and does but make a mere laugh of the Jews
accusing him as a dangerous person to Caesar, as one that was in danger of
setting up to be a king against him; and therefore, in derision, dresses him up
in a mock robe, and makes sport of him, and sends him back through the streets
of Jerusalem to Pilate with the mock robe on.

Then the Jews prefer Barabbas before him, and are instant and violent with
loud voices to Pilate, to crucify him. So Pilate, after he had cleared him
twice, and Herod once, very unrighteously brings him on trial the third time,
to try if he could not find something against him sufficient to crucify him.
Christ was stripped and scourged: thus he gave his back to the smiter. After
that, though Pilate still declared that he found no fault in him; yet so unjust
was he, that for fear of the Jews be delivered Christ to be crucified. But
before they execute the sentence, his spiteful and cruel enemies take the
pleasure of another spell of mocking him; they get round him, and make a set
business of it. They stripped him, and put on him a scarlet robe, and a reed in
his hand, and a crown of thorns on his head. Both Jews and Roman soldiers were
united in the transaction; they bow the knee before him, and in derision cry,
"Hail, king of the Jews." They spit upon him also, and take the reed out of his
hand, and smite him on the head. After this they led him away to crucify him,
and made him carry his own cross, till he sunk under it, his strength being
spent; and then they laid it on one Simon a Cyrenian.

At length, being come to Mount Calvary, they execute the sentence which Pilate
had so unrighteously pronounced. They nail him to his cross by his hands and
feet, then raise it erect, and fix one end in the ground, he being still
suspended on it by the nails which pierced his hands and feet. Now Christ's
sufferings are come to the extremity: now the cup, which he so earnestly prayed
that it might pass from him, is come, and he must, he does drink it. In those
days crucifixion was the most tormenting kind of death by which any were wont
to be executed. There was no death wherein the person expired so much of mere
torment: and hence the Roman word, which signifies torment, is taken from this
kind of death. -- Besides what our Lord endured in his excruciating death in
his body, he endured vastly more in his soul. Now was that travail of his soul,
of which we read in the prophet; now it pleased God to bruise him, and to put
him to grief; now he poured out his soul unto death, as in Is. liii. If the
mere forethought of this cup made him sweat blood, how much more dreadful and
excruciating must the drinking of it have been! Many martyrs have endured much
in their bodies, while their souls have been joyful, and have sung for joy,
whereby they have been supported under the sufferings of their outward man, and
have triumphed over them. But this was not the case with Christ; he had no such
support; but his sufferings were chiefly those of the mind, though the other were
extremely great. In his crucifixion Christ did not sweat blood, as he had
before, because his blood had vent otherwise, and not because his agony was now
not so great. But though he did not sweat blood, yet such was the suffering of
his soul, that probably it rent his vitals; as seems probable by this that when
his side was pierced, there came forth blood and water. And so here was a kind
of literal fulfillment of that in Psalm. xxii.14. "I am poured out like water: --
my heart is like wax, it is melted in the midst of my bowels."

Now under all these sufferings the Jews still mock him; and wagging their
heads say, "Thou that destroyest the temple, and buildest it in three days,
save thyself: if thou be the Son of God, come down from the cross." And even
the chief priests, scribes, and elders, joined in the cry, saying, "He saved
others, himself he cannot save." Probably the devil at the same time tormented
him to the utmost of his power; and hence it is said, Luke xxii.53. "This is
your hour, and the power of darkness."

Under these sufferings, Christ having cried out once and again with a loud
voice, at last he said, "It is finished," (John xix.30), "and bowed the head,
and gave up the ghost." And thus was finished the greatest and most wonderful
thing that ever was done. Now the angels beheld the most wonderful fight that
ever they saw. Now was accomplished the main thing that had been p^inted at by
the various institutions of the ceremonial law, and by all the typical
dispensation, and by all the sacrifices from the beginning of the world.

Christ being thus brought under the power of death, continued under it till
the morning of the next day but one; and then was finished that great work, the
purchase of our redemption, for which such great preparation had been made from
the beginning of the world. Then was finished all that was required in order to
satisfy the threatenings of the law, and all that was necessary in order to
satisfy divine justice; then the utmost that vindictive justice demanded, even
the whole debt was paid. Then was finished the whole of the purchase of eternal
life. Now there is no need of any thing more to be done toward a purchase of
salvation for sinners; nor has ever any thing been done since, nor will any
thing more be done for ever and ever.

IMPROVEMENT.
IN surveying the history of redemption, from the fall of man to the end of the
world, we have now shown how this work was carried on through the two former of
the three main periods into which this whole space of time was divided, viz.
from the fall to the incarnation of Christ, and from thence to the end of the
time of Christ's humiliation; and have particularly explained how in the first
of these periods God prepared the way for Christ's appearing and purchasing
redemption; and how, in the second period, that purchase was made and finished.
I would now make some improvement of what has been said on both these subjects
considered conjuctly. -- This I would do, 1. In an use of reproof. 2. In an use
of encouragement.


SECT. I.
I BEGIN with an use of reproof; a reproof of three things* 1. Of unbelief. 2.
Of self-righteousness. 3. Of a ^areless neglect of the salvation of Christ.


I. If it be as we have heard, how greatly do these things reprove those who do
not believe in, but reject the Lord Jesus Christ! i. e. all those who do not
heartily receive him. Persons may receive him in profession, and carry well
outwardly toward him, and may wish that they had some of those benefits that
Christ has purchased, and yet their hearts not receive Christ; they may be
hearty in nothing that they do toward Christ; they may have no high esteem of
Christ, nor any sincere honor or respect to Christ; they may never have opened
the door of their heart to Christ, but have kept him shut out all their days,
ever since they first heard of Christ, and his salvation has been offered to
them. Though their hearts have been opened to others, their doors have been
flung wide open to them, and they have had free admittance at all times, and
have been embraced and made much of, and the best room in their hearts has been
given them, and the throne of their hearts has been allowed them: yet Christ
has always been shut out, and they have been deaf to all his knocks and calls.
They never could find an inclination of heart to receive him, nor would they
ever trust in him.

Let me now call upon you with whom it is thus, to consider how great your sin,
in thus rejecting Jesus Christ, appears to be from those things that have been
said. You slight the glorious person, for whose coming God made such great
preparation in such a series of wonderful providence from the beginning of the
world, and whom, after all things were made ready* God sent into the world,
bringing to pass a thing before unknown, viz. the union of the divine nature
with the human in one person. You have been guilty of slighting that great
Savior, who, after such preparation, actually accomplished the purchase of
redemption; and who, after he had spent three or four and thirty years in
poverty, labor, and contempt, in purchasing redemption, at last finished the
purchase by closing his life under such extreme sufferings as you have heard*
and so by his death, and continuing for a time under the power of death,
completed the whole. This is the person you reject and despise. You make light
of all the glory of his person, and of all the glorious love of God the Father,
in sending him into the world, and all his wonderful love appearing in the
whole of this affair. That precious stone that God has laid in Zion for a
foundation in such a manner, and by such wonderful works as you have heard, is
a stone set at naught by you.

Sinne^s sometimes are ready to wonder why the sin of unbelief should be looked
upon as such as a great sin: but if you consider what you have heard, how can
you wonder? If it be so, that this Savior is so great a Savior, and this work
so great a work, and such great things have been done in order to it, truly
there is no cause of wonder that the sin of unbelief, or the rejection of this
Savior, is spoken of in scripture as such a dreadful sin, so provoking to God,
and what brings greater guilt than the sins of the worst of the Heathen, who
never heard of th^se things, nor have had this Savior offered to them.

II. What has been said, affords matter of reproof to those who, instead of
believing in Christ, trust in themselves for salvation. It is a common thing
with men to take it upon themselves to purchase salvation for themselves, and
so to do that great work which Christ came into the world to do. Are there none
such here who trust in their prayers, and in their good conversation^, and the
pains they take in religion, and the reformation of their lives, and in their
self-denial, to recommend them to God, to make some atonement for their past
sins, and to draw the heart of God to them?

Consider three things:

1. How great a thing is which you take upon you. You take upon you to do the
work of the great Savior of the world. You trust in your own doings to appease
God for your sins, and to incline the heart of God to you. Though you are poor,
worthless, vile, polluted worms of the dust; yet so arrogant are you, that you
take upon you that very work, that the only begotten Son of God did when upon
earth, and that he became man to capacitate himself for, and in order to which
God spent four thousand years in all the great dispensations of his providence
in the government of the world, aiming chiefly at this, to make way for
Christ's coming to do this work. This is the work that you take upon yourself,
and foolishly think yourself sufficient for it; as though your prayers, and
other performances, were excellent enough for this purpose. Consider how vain
is the thought which you entertain of yourself. How much such arrogance appear
in the sight of Christ, whom it cost so much to make a purchase of salvation*
when it was not to be obtained even by him, so great and glorious a person, at
a cheaper rate than his wading through a sea of blood, and passing through the
midst of the furnace of God's wrath. And how vain must your arrogance appear in
the sight of God, when ^e se^^ you imagining yourself sufficient, and your
worthless polluted performances excellent enough for the accomplishing of that
work of his own Son, to prepare the way for which he was employed in ordering
all the great affairs of the world for so many age^^

2. If there be ground for you to trust, as you do, in your own righteousness,
then all that Christ did to purchase salvation when on earth, and all that God
did from the first fall of man to that tim^ to prepare the way for i^, is in
vain. Your self-righteousness charges God with the greatest folly, as though he
has done all things in vain, even so much in vain, that he has done all this to
bring about an accomplishment of that which you alone, a little worm, with your
poor polluted prayers, and the little pains you take in religion, mingled with
all that hypocrisy and filthiness, are sufficient to accomplish for yourself
without Christ's help. For if you can appease God's anger, and can commend
yourself to God by these means, then you have no need of Christ; but he is dead
in vain: Gal. ii 21. "If righteousness come by the law, then Christ is dead in
vain.

If you can do this by our prayers and good works, Christ might have spared his
pains; he might have spared his blood; he might have kept within the bosom of
his Father, without coming down into this evil world to be despised,
reproached, and persecuted to death; God needed not haved busied himself, as he
did for four thousand years together, causing so many changes in the state of
(...) world all that while, in order to the bringing about that which you, as
little as you are, can accomplish in a few days, only with the trouble of a few
sighs, and groans, and prayers, and some other religious performances. Consider
with yourself what greater folly could you have devised to charge upon God than
this, to do all those things before and after Christ came into the world so
needlessly; when, instead of all this, he might only have called you forth, and
committed the business to you, which you think you can do so easily.

Alas! how blind are natural men! how sottish are the thoughts they have of
things! and especially how vain are the thoughts which they have of themselves!
How ignorant of their own littleness and pollution! How do they exalt
themselves up to heaven! What great things do they assume to themselves!

3. You that trust to your own righteousness, arrogate to yourselves the honor
of the greatest thing that ever God himself did; not only as if you were
sufficient to perform divine works, and to accomplish some of the great works
of God; but such is your pride and vanity, that you are not content without
taking upon you to do the very greatest work that ever God himself wrought,
even the work of redemption. You see how God's works of providence are greater
than his works of creation, and that all God's works of providence, from the
beginning of the generations of men, were in order to this, to make way for the
purchasing of redemption. But this is what you take upon yourself. To take on
yourself to work out redemption, is a greater thing than if you had taken it
upon you to create a w^rld. Consider with yourself what a figure you a poor
wo^m would m^ke, if you should seriously go about to c^eate such a world as God
did* should swell in your own conceit of yourself, should ^eck yourself with
majesty, pretend to speak the word of power, and call an universe out of
nothing, intending to go on in order, and say, "Let there be light; Let there
be a firmament*" etc. But then consider, that in attempting to work out
redemption for yourself, you attempt a greater thing than this, and are serious
in it, and will not be beat off from it; but strive in it, and are full of the
thought of y^urself that you are sufficient for it, and always big with hopes
of accomplishing it.

You take upon you to do the very greatest and most difficult part of this
work, viz. to purchase redemption. Christ can accomplish other parts of this
work without cost, without any trouble and difficulty: but this part cost him
his life, as well as innumerable pains and labors, with very great ignominy
and contempt besides. Yet this is that part which self-righteous persons go
about to accomplish for themselves. If all the angels in heaven had been
sufficient for this work, would God have set himself to effect such things as
he did in order to it, before he sent his Son into the world? and would he ever
have sent his own Son, the great Cre^tor and G^d of the angels, into the world,
to have done and suffered such things?

What self-righteous persons take to themselves, is the same work that Christ
was engaged in when h^ was in his agony and bloody sweat, and when he died on
the cross, which was the greatest thing that ever the eyes of angels beheld.
This, as great as it is, they imagine they can do the same that Christ
accompl^shed by it. Their self-righteousness does in effect charge Christ's
offering up himself in these sufferings, as the greatest instance of folly that
ever men or angels saw, instead of being the most glorious display of the
divine wisdom and grace that ever was seen. Yea, self-righteousness makes all
that Christ did through the whole course of his life, and all that he said and
suffered through that whole time, and his incarnation itself, and no^ only so,
but all that God had been doing in the great dispensations of his providence
from the beginning of the world to that time, as all nothing, but a scene of
the most wild, and extrem and transcendent fol^y.

Is it any wonder, then, that the self-rig^teous spirit is so represented in
scripture, and spoken of, as that which is most fatal to the souls of men?
(...) it any wonder, that Christ is represented in scripture as being so
provoked with the Pharisees and others, who trusted in themselves that they
were righteous, and were proud of their goodness, and thought that their own
performances were a valuable price of God's favor and love?

Let persons hence be warned against a self righteous spirit. You that are
seeking your salvation, and taking pains in religion, take heed to yourselves
that you do not trust in what you do; that you do not harbor any such
thoughts; that God now, seeing how much you are reformed, how you take pains in
religion, and how you are sometimes effected, will be pacified toward you with
respect to your sins, and on account of it will not be so angry for your former
sins; and that you shall gain on him by such things, and draw his heart to show
you mercy; or at least that God ought to accept of what you do, so as to be
inclined by it in some measure to forgive you, and have mercy on you. If you
entertain this thought, that God is obliged to do it, and does not act justly
if he refuse to regard your prayers and pains, and so quarrel with God, and
complain of him for not doing, this shows what your opinion ^s of your own
righteousness, viz. that it is a valuable price of salvation, and ought to be
accepted of God as such. Such complaining of God, and quarrelling with him, for
not taking more notice of your righteousness, plainly shows that you are guilty
of all that arrogance that has been spoken of, thinking yourself sufficient to
offer the price of your own salvation.

III. What has been said on this subject, affords matter of reproof to those
who carelessly neglected the salvation of Christ; such as live a senseless kind
of life, neglecting the business of religion and their own souls for the
present, not taking any course to get an interest in Christ, or what he has
done and suffered, or any part in that glorious salvation he has purchased by
that price, but rather have their minds taken up about the gains of the world,
or about the vanities and pleasures of youth, and so make light of what they
hear from time to time of Christ's salvation, that they do not at present so
much as seek after it. Let me here apply myself to you in some expostulatory
interrogations.

1. Shall so many prophets, and kings, and righteous men have, their minds so
much taken up with the prospect, that the purchase of salvation was to be
wrought out in ages long after their death; and will you neglect it when
actually accomplished? You have heard what great account the church in all ages
made of the future redemption of Christ: how joyfully they expected it* how
they spoke of it, how they studied and searched into these things, how they
sung joyful songs, and had their hearts greatly engaged about it, and yet never
expected to see it done, and did not expect that it would be accomplished till
many ages after their death, 1. Pet. 11.11.12. How much did Isaiah and Daniel,
and other prophets, speak concerning this redemption! How much were their
hearts engaged, and their attention and study fixed upon it! How was David's
mind taken up in in this subject! He declared that it was all his salvation,
and all his de^i^e; 2 Samuel xxiii.5. How did he employ his voice and harp in
celebrating it, and the glorious display of divine grace therein exhibited! and
all this although they beheld i^ not as yet accomplished, but saw that it was to
be brought to pass so long a time after their day -- Before this, how did
Abraham and the other patriarchs rejoice in the prospect of Christ's day, and
the redemption which he was to purchase! Even the saints before the (...) were
affected and elated in the expectation of this glorious event, though it was
then so long future, and it was so very (...) and obsc^rely revealed to them.

Now th^se things are declared to you as actually fulfilled. The church now has
seen accomplished all those great things which they so joyfully prophesied of;
and you are abundantly shown how those things were accomplished: Matthew.
xiii.17. "Verily I say unto y^u, that many prophets and righteous men have
desired to see (...) which ye see, and have not seen; and to hear those th^^gs
which ye hear, and have not heard them." Yet, when these things are (...)
abundantly set before you as already accompli^hed, how do you slight them! How
light do you make of them! How little are they taken noti^^ of by you! How
unconcerned are you a^^ut them, fol^owing other things, and not so much as
feeling a^y interest in them! Indeed your sin is extremely aggravated in (...)
sight of God. God has put you under great advantage for your eternal salvation,
for greater than those saints of old enjoyed. He has put you under a more
glorious dispensation; has given you a more clear revelation of Christ and his
salvation; and yet you neglect all these advantages, and go on in a careless
course of life, as though nothing had been done, no such proposals and offers
h^d been made you.

2. Have the angles been so engaged about this salvation which is by Christ
ever since the fall of man, though they are not (...) in it, and will you who
need it, and have it (...) to you, be so careless about it? You have heard how
the angles (...) first were subjected to Christ as mediator, and how they have
all (...) been ministering spirits to him in this affair. In all the great
d^spensations which you have heard of from the beginning of the world, they
have been active and as a flame of fire in this aff^i^ being most diligently
employed as ministering spirits to minister to Christ in this great affair of
man's redemption. And when Christ came, how engaged were their minds! They came
to Zacharias, to inform him of the coming of Christ's forerunner: They came to
the Virgin Mary, to inform her of the approaching birth of Christ: the new born
Savior, and to point out to him the means of safety. How were their minds
engaged at the time of the birth of Christ! The whole mu^titude of the hea^enly
hosts sang praises upon the occasion, saying, "Glory to God in the highest, and
on earth peace, and good will toward men." Afterward, from time to time, they
ministered to Christ when on (...); they d^d so at the time of his temptation,
at the time of his agony in the garden, at his resurrection, and at his
as^^nsion. All these things show, that they were greatly engaged in this
affair; and the scripture informs ^s, that they pry into these thin^s: 1 Pet.
i.12. "Which things the angles desire to look into." How are they represented
in the Revelation as being employed in heaven singing praises to ^im that
sits on the throne, and to the Lamb! Now, shall these take so much notice of
this redemption, and of the purchaser, who need it not for themselves, and have
no immediate conc^rn or interest in it, or offer of it; and will you, to whom
it is offered, and who are in such extreme necessity of it, neglect and take no
notice of it?

3. Was it worth the while for Christ to labor so hard, and do and suffer so
much to procure this salvation, and is it not worth the while for you to be at
some labor in seeking it? Was it a thing of so great importance, that
sa^vation should be procured for si^ners, as that it was worthy to lie with
such weight on the mind of Christ, as to induce him to become man, and to
suffer such contempt and labor, and even death itself, in order to procure i^,
though he s^ood in need of nothing, though he was like to gain no addition to
his eternal happiness, though he could get nothing by those that he saved,
though he did not need them; was it of such importance that ^^nners should be
saved, that he might properly be induced to submit to such humiliation and
suffering; and yet is it not worth the while for you, who are one of th^se
miserable sinners that need this salvation, and must perish eternally without
it, to take earnest pains to obtain an interest in it after it is procured, and
all things are ready?

4. Shall the Great God be so concerned about this salvation, as so often to
overturn the world to make way for it; and when all is done, is it not worth
your seekeng after? how has the Lord of heaven and earth been as it were
engaged about this affair! What great, what wonderful things has he done from
one age to another, removing kings, and fitt^ng up kings, rais^^g up a great
number of prophets, separating a distinct nation from the rest of the world,
overturning one nation and kingdom, and another, and often overturning the
state of the world; and so has continued bringing about one change and
revolution after another forty centuries in succession, to make way for the
procuring of salvation! And when he has done all; and when, at the ci^^le of
these ages, the great Savior comes, and, becoming incarnate, and passing
through a long series of reproach and suffering, and then suffering all the
waves and billows of God's wrath for m^ns sins, insomuch that they overwhelmed
his soul; after all these things done to procure solvation for sinners, is it
not worthy of your taking so much notice of, or being so much concerned about,
though you are those persons who need this salvation, but tha^ it should be
thrown by, and made nothing of in comparison of worldly gain, or gay clothing,
or youthful diversions, and other such trifling things?

O! that you who live negligent of this salvation, would consider what you do!
What you have heard from this subject, may show you what reason there is in
that exclamation of the Apostle, Heb. ii.3. "How shall we escape if we neglect
so great salvation?" and in that, Acts xiii.41. "Behold, ye despisers, and
wonder, and perish^ for I work a work in your days a work which you shall in no
wise believe, though a man declare it unto you." God looks on such as you as
great enemies of the cross of Christ, and adversaries and despise^s of all the
glory of this great work. If God has made soon account of the glory of
salvation as to destroy many nations, and so (...) ove^turn all nations, to
prepare the way for the glory of his Son in this affair; how little account
will he make of the lives and souls of ten thousand such opposers and despisers
as you that continue impenitent, in comparison of that glory when he shall
hereafter come and find that your welfare stands in the way of that glory? Why
surely you shall be dashed to pieces as a potter's vessel, and trodden down as
the mire of the streets. God may, through wonderful patience, bear with
hardened careless sinners for a while; but he will not long bear with such
despisers of his dear Son, and his great salvation* the glory of, which he has
had so much at heart, before he will utterly consume them without remedy or
mercy.

SECT. II.
I WILL conclude with a second use, of encouragement to burdened souls to put
their trust in Christ for salvation. To all such as are not careless and
negligent, but do make seeking an interest in Christ their main business, being
sensible in some measure of their necessity of an interest in Christ, being
afraid of the wrath to come; to such what has been said on this subject holds
forth great matter of encouragement, to come and venture their souls on the
Lord Jesus Christ: and as motives proper to excite you so to do, let me lead
you to consider two things in particular.

1. The completeness of the purchase which has been made. As you have heard,
this work of purchasing salvation was wholly finished during the time of
Christ's humiliation. When Christ rose from the dead, and was exalted from that
abasement to which he submitted for our salvation, the purchase of eternal life
was completely made, so that there was no need of any thing more to be done in
order to it. But now the servants were sent forth with (...) message which we
have account of in Matthew. xxii.4. "Behold, I have prepared my dinner: my oxen
and my fattlings are killed, and all things are ready: come unto the marriage."
Therefore all things being ready, are your sins many and great? Here (...) done
by Christ to procure their pardon. There is no need of any righteousness of
yours to obtain your pardon and justification: no, you may come freely, without
money and without price. Since therefore there is such a free and gracious
invitation given you, come; come naked as you are; come as a poor condemned
criminal; come and cast yourself down at Christ's feet, as one justly
condemned, and utterly helpless in yourself. Here is a complete salvation
wrought out by Christ, and through him offered to you. Come, therefore, accept
of it, and be saved.

2. For Christ to reject one that thus comes to him, would be to frustrate all
those great things which you have heard that God brought to pass from the fall
of man to the incarnation of Christ. It would also frustrate all that Christ
did and suffered while on earth; yea, it would frustrate the incarnation of
Christ itself, and all the great things done in preparation for his
incarnation; for all these things were for that end, that those might be saved
who should come to Christ. Therefore you may be sure Christ will not be
backward in saving those who come to him, and trust in him: for he has no
desire to frustrate himself in his own work; it cost him too dear for that.
Neither will God the Father refuse you; for he has no desire to frustrate
himself in all that he did for so many hundreds and thousands of years, to
prepare the way for the salvation of sinners by Christ. Come, therefore,
hea^ken to the sweet and earnest calls of Christ to your soul. Do as he
invites, and as he commands you, Matthew. xi.28.29.30. "Come unto me, all ye that
labor, and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest. Take my yoke upon you,
and learn of me; and ye shall find rest unto your souls. For my yoke is easy,
and my burden is light."

PERIOD III.
IN discoursing on this subject, we have already shown how the work of
redemption was carried on through the two first o^ the three periods into which
we divided the whole space of time from the fall to the end of the world; and
we are now come to

The third and last period, beginning with Christ's resurrection, and reaching
to the end of the world; and would now show how this work was also carried on
through this period, from this

PROPOSITION, That the space of time from the end of Christ's humiliation to
the end of the world is all taken up bringing about the great effect o^ success
of Christ's purchase.

Not but that there were great effects and glorious success (...) Christ's
purchase of redemption before, even from the beginning of the generations of
men. But all that success of Christ's redemption which was before, was only
preparatory, and was by way of anticipation, as some few fruits are gathered
before the harvest. (...) was no more success before Christ came than God four
needful (...) the way for his coming. The proper time of the successor effe^^
of Christ's purchase of redemption is after the purchase has been made, as the
proper time for the world to enjoy the light of the sun is daytime, after the
sun is risen, though we may have some small ^^tter of (...) reflected from the
moon and planets before. Even the success of Christ's redemption while he
himself was on earth, was very small in comparison of what it was after the
conclusion of his humiliation.

But Christ having finished that greatest and most difficult of all works, the
work of the purchase of redemption, now is come the time for obtaining the end
of it, the glorious effect of it. This is the next work he goes about. Having
gone through the whole course of his sufferings and humiliation, there is an end
to all things of that nature: he is never to suffer any more. But now is the
time for him to obtain the joy that was set before him. Having made his soul on
offering for sin, now is the time for him to see his seed, and to have a
portion divided to him with the great, and to divide the spoil with the strong.

One design of Christ in what he did in his humiliation, was to lay a
foundation for the overthrow of Satan's kingdom; and now is come the time to
effect it, as Christ, a little before his crucifixion, said, John xii.31. "Now
is the judgment of this world; now ^^all the prince of this world be cast
out." Another design was, to gather together in one all things in Christ. Now
is come the time for this also: John xii 3^. "And I, if I be lifted up, will
draw all men unto me;" which is agreeable to Jacob's prophecy of Christ. that
"when Shil^h should come, to him should the gathering of the people be," Genesis
xlix.10 Another design is the salvation of the elect. Now when his sufferings
are finished, and his humiliation is perfected, the time is come for that also:
H^b. v.8.9. "Though he were a Son, yet learned he obedience by the things which
he suffered: and being made perfect, he became the author of eternal salvation
unto all them that obey him." Another design was, to accomplish by these things
great glory to the persons of the Trinity. Now also is come the time for that^^
John xvii.1. "Father, the hour is come; glorify thy Son, that They (...) to
Joseph to war^ him of the danger which (...) thy Son also may glorify thee."
Another design was the glory of the saints. Now is the time also for this:
"John xvii.2. "As thou have given him power over all flesh, that he should give
eternal life to as many as thou have given him." And all the dispensations of
God's providence henceforward, even to the final consummation of all things,
are to give Christ his reward, and fulfill his end in what he did and suffered
upon earth, and to fulfill the joy that was set before him.

INTRODUCTION.
BEFORE I enter on the consideration of any particular things accomplished in
this period, I would briefly observe some things in general concerning it; and
particularly how the times of this period are represented in scripture.

I. The times of this period, for the most part, are those which in the O^d
Testament are called the latter days. We often, in the prophets of the Old
Testament, read of such and such things that should come to pass in the latter
days, and sometimes in the last days. Now these expressions of the prophets are
most commonly to be understood of the times of the period that we are now upon,
They are called the latter days, and the last days; because this is the last
period of the series of God's providence on earth, this last period of that
great work of providence, the work of redemption; which as it were the sum of
God's works of providence, the time wherein the church is under the last
dispensation of the convenant of grace that ever it will be under on earth.

II. The whole time of this period is sometimes in scripture called the end of
the world, as, 1 Cor. x.11. "Now all these things happened unto them for
ensamples: and they were written from our admonition, upon whom the ends of the
world are come." And the Apostle, Heb. ix.26, in this expression of the end of
the world, means the whole of the gosple day, from the birth of Christ to the
finishing of the day of judgment: "But now once in the end of the world, has
he appeared, to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself." This space of time
may well be called the end of the world* for this whole time was taken up in
bringing things to their great end and issue, to that great issue that God had
been preparing the way for, in all the great dispensations of providance, from
the first fall of man to this time. Before, things were in a kind of
preparatory state; but now they are in a finishing state* It is the winding up
of things which is all this while accomplishing. An end is now brought to the
former carnal state of things, which by degrees vanishes, and a spiritual state
begins to be established, and to be establ^shed more and more. First, an end is
brought to the former state of the church, which may be called its worldly
state, the state wherein it was subject to carnal ordinances, and the rudiments
of the world: and then an end was brought to the Jewish state, in the
distrustion of their city and country, and then, after that, an end is brought
to the old Heathen empire in Constantine's (...); which is another and further
degre^ of the winding up and finishing^ of the world: and the next step is the
finishing of Satan's visible kingdom in the world, upon the fall of Antichrist,
and the calling of the Jews: and last will come the destruction of the outward
frame of the world itself, at the conclusion of the day of judgment. But the
world is all this while as it were a finishing, though it comes to an end by
several steps and degrees. Heaven and earth began to shake, in order to a
dissolution, according (...) prophecy of Haggai, before Christ came, that so
only those things that cannot be shaken may remain i. e. that those things that
are to come to an end may come to an end, and that only those things may remain
which are to remain to all eternity.

So, in the first place, the carnal ordinances of the Jewish ^^^ship came to an
end, to make way (...) establishment of that spiritual worship, the worship of
the heart, which is to endure to all eternity: John iv.21. "Jesus says unto
the woman, Believe me, the hour comes, when ye shall neither in this mountain,
nor yet at Jerusalem, worship the Father." Ve^s. 23. "But the hour comes, and
now is, when the true wo^shippers shall worship the Father in spirit and in
truth: for the Father seeks such to worship him." This is one instance of the
temporary world's coming to an end, and the eternal world's beginning. After
that, the outward temple, and the outward city Jerusalem, came to an end, to
give place to the setting up of the spiritual temple and the spiritual city,
which are to last to eternity; which is another instance of removing those
things which are ready to vanish away, that those things which cannot be shaken
may remain. After that the old Heathen empire comes to an end, to make way for
the empire of Christ, which shall last to all eternity; which is another step
of bringing the temporal world to an end, and of the beginning of the wo^ld to
come, which is an eternal world. After that, upon the fall of Antichrist and
end is put to Satan's visible kingdom on earth, to establish Christ's kingdom,
which is an eternal kingdom; as the prophet Daniel says, chap. vii.27. "And the
kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven,
shall be gi^en to the people of the saints of the Most High, whose kingdom is
an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve and obey him:" which is
another instance of the ending of the temporary world, and the beginning of the
eternal one. Lastly, the very frame of this corruptible world shall come to an
end, to make way for the church to dwell in another dewlling place, which shall
last to eternity; which is the last instance of the same thing.

Because the world is thus coming to an end by various steps and degrees, the
Apostle perhaps uses this expression, that the ends of the world are come on
us; not the end, but the ends, of the plural number, as though the world as
several endings (...) after another.

The gospel dispensation is the last state of things in the world; and this
state is a finishing state: it is all spent in finishing things off which
before had been preparing, or abolishing things which before had stood. It is
all spent as it were in summing things up, and bringing them to their issues,
and their proper fulfillment. Now all the old types are fulfiled, and all the
prophecies of all the prophets from the beginning of the world shall be
accomplished in this period.

III. That state of things which is attained in the events of this period is
called a new heaven and a new earth: Is. lxv.17.18. "For behold, I create new
heavens, and a new earth: and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into
mind. But be you glad and rejoice for ever in that which I create: for behold,
I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy." And chapter lxvi.22. "For as
the new heavens and the new earth which I make, shall remain before me; so
shall your seed and your name remain." See also chapter li.16. As the former state
of things, or the old world, by one step after another, is through this period
coming to an end; so the new state of things, or the new world, which is a
spiritual world, is beginning and setting up.

The heaven and earth which are corruptable, are shaking, that the new heavens
and new earth, which cannot be shaken, may be established and remain.

In consequence of each of these finishings of the old state of things, there
is a new beginning of a new and eternal state of things. So was that which
acconpanied the destruction of Jerusalem, which was an establishing of the
spiritual Jerusalem, instead of the literal. So with respect to the destruction
of the old Heathen empire, and all the other endings of the old state of
things, till at length the very outward frame of the old world itself shall
come to an end; and the church shall dwell in a world new to it, or to a great
part of it, even heaven, which will be a new habitation; and then shall the
utmost be accomplished that is meant by the new heavens and the new earth. See
Rev. xxi.1.

The end of God's creating the world was to prepare a kingdom for his Son, (for
he is appointed heir of the world), and that he might have the possession of
it, and a kingdom in it, which shall remain to all eternity. So that, so far
forth as the kingdom of Christ is set up in the world so far is the world
brought to its end, and the eternal state of things set up. So far are all the
great changes and revolutions of the ages of the world brought to their
everlasting issue, and all things come to their ultimate period. So far are the
waters of the long channel of divine providence, which has so many branches,
and so many windings and turnings, emptied out into their proper ocean, which
they have been seeking from the beginning and head of their course, and so are
come to their rest. So far as Christ's kingdom is established in the world, so
far are things wound up and settled in their everlasting state, and a period
put to the course of things in this changeable world; so far are the first
heavens and the first earth come to an end, and the new heavens and the new
earth come to an end, and the new heavens and the new earth, the everlasting
heavens and earth, established in their room. This leads me to observe,

IV. That the sta^e of things which is attained by the events of this period,
is what is so often called the kingdom of heaven, or the kingdom of God We very
often read in the New Testament of the kingdom of heaven. John the Baptist
preached, that the kingdom of heaven was at hand; and so did Christ, and his
disciples after him; refering to something that the Jews in those days
expected, and very much talked of, which they called by that name. They seem to
have taken their expectation and the name chiefly from that prophecy of Daniel
in Nebuchadnezzar's dream, Dan. ii.44. "And in the days of these kings shall
the God of heaven set up a kingdom;" together with that in chap. vii.13.14.

Now this kingdom of heaven is that evangelical state of things in his church,
and in the world, wherein consists the success of Christ's redemption in this
period. There had been often great kingdoms set up before, which were earthly
kingdoms; as the Babylonish, Persian, the Grecian, and the Roman monarchies.
But Christ came to set up the last kingdom, which is not an earthly kingdom,
but an heavenly, and so is the kingdom of heaven: John xviii.36. "My kingdom is
not of this world." This is the kingdom of which Christ speaks, Luke xxii.29.
"My Father has appointed to me a kingdom." This kingdom began soon after
Christ's resurrection, and was accomplished in various steps from that time to
the end of the world. Sometimes by the kingdom of heaven, is meant that
spiritual state of the church which began soon after Christ's resurrection;
sometimes that more perfect state of the church which shall obtain after the
downfall of Antichrist; and sometimes that glorious and blessed state to which
the church shall be received at the day of judgment: 1 Cor. xv.50. the
apostle, speaking of the resurrection, says, "This I say, that flesh and blood
cannot inherit the kingdom of God."

Under this head I would obse^ve several things particularly, for the clearer
understanding of what the scripture says concerning this period

1. The setting up of the kingdom of Christ is chiefly accomplished by four
successive great events, each of which is in scripture called Christ's coming
in his kingdom. The whole success of Christ's redemption is comprehended in one
word, viz. his setting up his kingdom. This is chiefly done by four great
successive dispensations of providence; and every one of them is represented in
scripture as Christ's coming in his kingdom. The first is Christ's appearing in
those wonderful dispensations of providence in the apostles days, in setting up
his kingdom, and destroying the enemies of his kingdom, which ended in the
destruction of Jerusalem. This is called Christ's coming in his kingdom, Matthew.
xvi.28. "Verily I say unto you, there be some standing here, which shall not
taste of death till they see the Son of man coming in his kingdom." And so it
is represented in Matthew. xxiv. The second is that which was accomplished in
Constantine's time, in the destruction of the Heathen Roman empire. This is
represented as Christ's coming, and is compared to his coming to judgment, in
the 6th chapter of Revelation at the latter end. The third is that which is to
be accomplished at the destruction of Antichrist. This also is represented as
Christ's coming in his kingdom in the 7th chapter of Daniel, and in other
places, as I may possibly show hereafter, when I come to speak of it. The
fourth and last is his coming to the last judgment, which is the event
principally signified in scripture by Christ's coming into his Kingdom.

2. I would observe, that each of the three former of these is a lively image
or type of the fourth and last, viz. Christ's coming to the final judgment, as
the principal dispensations of providence before Christ's first coming, were
types of that first coming. -- As Christ's last coming to judgment is
accompained with a resurrection of the dead, so is each of the three foregoing
with a spiritual resurrection. That coming of Christ, which ended in the
destruction of Jerusalem, was preceded by a glorious spiritual resurrection of
souls in the calling of the Gentiles, and bringing home such multitudes of
souls to Christ by the preaching of the gospel. So Christ's coming in
Constantine's time, was accompanied with a glo^ious spiritual resurrection of
the greater part of the known world, in a restoration of it to a visible-chu^ch
state, from a state of Heathenism. So Christ's coming at the destruction of
Antichrist, will be attended with a spiritual resurrection of the church after
it had been long as it were dead, in the times of Antichrist. This is called
the first resurrection in the 20th chapter of Revelations.

Again, as Christ in the last judgment will gloriously manifest himself coming
in the glory of his Father, so in each of the th^^^ foregoing events Christ
gloriously manifested himself in sending judgments upon his enemies, and in
showing grace and favor to his church; and as the last coming of Christ will
be attended with a literal gathering together of the elect from the four winds
of heaven, so were each of the preceding attended with a spiritual gathering in
of the elect. As this gathering together of the elect will be effected by God's
angels with a great sound of a trumpet, as in Matthew. xxiv.31.; so were each of
the preceding spiritual in gatherings effected by the trumpet of the gospel,
founded by the ministers of Christ. As there shall precede the last appearance
of Christ, a time of great degeneracy and wickedness, so this has been, or will
be, the case with each of the other appearances. Before each of them is a time
of great opposition to the church: before the first by the Jews, in their
persecutions that we read of in the New Testament; before the second, viz in
Constantine's time, by the Heathen, in several successive persecutions raised
by the Roman emperors against the Christians; before the third, by Antichrist;
before the last, by Gog and Magog, as described in the Revelation.

By each of these comings of Christ God works a glorious deliverance for his
church. Each of them is accompanied with a glorious advancement of the state of
the church. The first, which ended in the destruction of (...), was attended
with bringing the church into (...) gospel, a glorious state of the church very
much prophesied of old, whereby the church was advanced into far more glorious
circumstances than it was in before under the Jewish dispensation. The second,
which was in Constantine's time, was accompanied with an advancement of the
church into a state of liberty from persecution, and the countenance of civil
authority, and triumph over their Heathen persecutors. The third, which shall
be at the downfall of Antichrist, will be accompanied with an advancement of
the church into that state of the glorious prevalence of truth, liberty, peace,
and joy, that we so often read of in the prophetical parts of scripture. The
last will be attended with the advancement of the church to consum^^ate glory
in both soul and body in heaven.

Each of those comings of Christ is accompanied with a terrible destruction of
the wicked, and the enemies of the church: the first with the destruction of
the persecuting Jews, which was amazingly terrible; the second, with dreadful
judgments on the Heathen persecutors of the church, of which more hereafter;
the third, with the awful destruction of Antichrist* the most cruel and bitter
enemy that ever the church had; the fourth, with divine wrath and vengeance on
all the ungodly.

Further, there is in each of these comings of Christ an ending of the old
heavens and the old earth, and a beginning of new heavens and a new earth; or
an end of a temporal state of things, and a beginning of an eternal state.

3. I would observe, that each of those four great dispensations which are
represented as Christ's coming in his kingdom, are but so many steps and
degrees of the accomplishment of one event. They are not the setting up of so
many distinct kingdoms of Christ; they are all of them only several degrees of
the accomplishment of that one even prophesied of, D^n. vii.13.14. "And I ^aw
in the night visions, and behold, one l^ke the Son of man came with the clouds
of heaven, and came to the Ancient of days, and they brought (...) near before
him. And there was given him domini^^, (...) glory* and a (...), that all
people, nations, and languages should serve him: his dominion is an everlasting
dominion and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed." This is what the
Jews expected, and called "the coming of the kingdom of heaven;" and what John
the Baptist and Christ had respect to, when they said, "The kingdom of heaven
is at hand." This great event is gradually accomplished, or is accomplished, by
several steps. Those four great events which have been mentioned, were several
steps toward the accomplishment of this grand event.

When Christ came with the preaching of the apostles, to set up his kingdom in
the world, which dispensation ended with the destruction of Jerusalem, then it
was accomplished in a glorious degree; (...) Heathen empire was destroyed in
Constantine's time, it was fulfilled in a further degree; when Antichrist shall
be destroyed, it will be accomplished in a yet higher degree; but when the end
of the world is come, then will it be accomplished in its most perfect degree
of all; then it will be finally and completly accomplished. And because these
four great events are but images one of another and the three former but types
of the last, and since they are all only several steps of the ac^omplishment of
the same things; hence we find them all from time to time prophesied of under
one, as they are in the prophecies of Daniel, and as they are in the 24th
chapter of Matthew, where some things seem more applicable to one of them, and
others (...) another.

4 I would observe, that as there are several steps of the accomplishment of
the kingdom of Christ, so in each one of them the event is accomplished in a
further degree than in the foregoing. That in the time of Constantine was a
greater and further accomplishment of the kingdom of Christ, than that which
ended in the destruction of Jerusalem; that which shall be at the fall of
Antichrist, will be a further accomplishment of the same thing, than that which
took place in the time of Constantine; and so on with regard to each: so that
the kingdom of Christ is gradually prevailing and growing by these several
great steps of its fulfillment, from the time of Christ's resurrection, to the
end of the world.

5. And lastly, It may be observed, that the great providence of God between
these four great events, are to make way for the kingdom and glory of Christ in
the great event following. Those dispensations of providence which were toward
the church of God and the world, before the destruction of the Heathen empire
in the time of Constantine, seem all to have been to make way for the glory of
Christ, and the happiness of the church in that event. And so the great
providen^^s of God which are after that, till the destruction of Antichrist,
and the beginning of the glorious times of the church, which follow, seem all
to be to prepare the way for the greater glory (...) Christ and his church in
that event; and the p^ov^dences of (...) which shall be after that to the end
of the w^^ld, seem to be for the greater manifestation of Christ's glory at the
end of the world; and in the consummation of all things.

Thus I thought it needful to observe these things in general concerning this
last period of the series of God's providence, before I take notice of the
particular providence by which the work of redemption is carried on through
this period, in their order: and before I do that, I will also briefly answer
to an INQUIRY, viz. Why the setting up of Christ's kingdom after his
humiliation, should be so gradual, by so many steps that are so long in
accomplishing, since God could easily have finished it at once?

Though it would be presumption in us to pretend to declare all the ends of God
in this, yet doubtless much of the wisdom of God may be seen in it by us; and
particularly in these two things.

1. In this way the glory of God's wisdom, in the manner of doing this, is more
visible to the observation of creatures. If it had been done at once, in an
instant, or in a very short time, there would not have been such opportunities
for creatures to perceive and observe the particular steps of divine wisdom, as
when the work is gradually accomplished, and one effect of his wisdom is held
forth to observation after another. It is wisely determined of God, to
accomplish his great design by a wonderful and long series of events, that the
glory of his wisdom may be displayed in the whole series, and that the glory of
his perfections may be seen, appearing, as it were, by parts, and in particular
successive manifestations: For if all that glory which appears in all these
events had been manifested at once, it would have been too much for us, and
more than we at once could take notice of; it would have dazzled our eyes and
overpowered our sight.

2. Satan is more gloriously triumphed over -- God could easily, by an act of
almighty power, at once have crushed Satan. But by giving him time to use his
utmost subtilty to hinder the success of what Christ had done and suffered, he
is not defeated merely by surprise, but has large opportunity to ply his utmost
power and subtilty again and again, to strengthen his own interest all that he
can by the work of many ages Thus God destroys and confounds him, and sets up
Christ's kingdom time after time, in spite of all his subtle machinations and
great works, and by every step advances it still higher and higher, till at
length it is fully set up, and Satan perfectly and eternally vanquished in the
end of all things.

I now proceed to take notice of the particular events, whereby, from the end
of Christ's humiliation to the end of the world, the success of Christ's
purchase has been or shall be accomplished.

1. I would take notice of those things whereby Christ was put into an
immediate capacity for accomplishing the end of his purchase.

2. I would show how (...) ^btained or accomplished that success.

PART I.
I WOULD take notice, first, of those things by which Christ was put into a
capacity for accomplishing the end of his purchase. They are two things, viz.
his resurrection, and his ascension. As we observed before, the incarnation of
Christ was necessary in order to Christ's being in a near capacity for the
purchase of redemption* so the (...) and ascension of Christ were requisite in
order to his acc^^plishing the (...) of his purchase.

I. His resurrection. It was ^^cessary in order to Christ's obtaining the end
and effect of his purchase of redemption, that he should rise from the dead.
For God the Father had committed the whole affair of redemption, not only the
purchasing of it, but the bestowing of the blessings purchased, to his Son,
that he should not only purchase it as priest, but actually bring it about as
king; and that he should do this as God man. For God the Father would have
nothing to do with fallen man in a way of mercy but by a mediator. But in order
that Christ might carry on the work of redemption, and accomplish the success
of his own purpose as God man, it was necessary that he should be alive, and so
that he should rise from the dead. Therefore Christ, after he had finished this
purchase by death, and by continuing for a time under the power of death, rises
from the dead, to fulfill the end of his purchase, and himself to bring about
that for which he died: For this matter God the Father had committed unto him,
that he might, as Lord of all, manage all to his own purposes: Romans xiv.9. For
to this end Christ both died, and rose, and revived, that he might be Lord both
of the dead and of the living.

Indeed Christ's resurrection, and so his ascension, was part of the success of
what Christ did and suffered in his humiliation. For though Christ did not
properly purchase redemption for himself, yet he purchased eternal life and
glory for himself by what he did and suffered; and this eternal life and glory
was given him as a reward of what he did and suffered, Phil. ii.8.9. "He
humbled himself, and become obedient unto death, even the death of the cross.
Wherefore God also has highly exalted him." It may be looked upon as part of
the success of Christ's purchase, if it be so considered, that Christ did not
rise as a private person, but as the head of the elect church; so that they
did, as it were, all rise with him. Christ was justified in his resurrection,
i. e. God acquitted and discharged him hereby, as having done and suffered
enough for the sins of all the elect: Romans iv.25. "Who was delivered for our
offenses, and raised again for our justification." And God put him in
possession of eternal life, as the head of the church, as a sure earnest that
they should ^ollow. For when Christ rose from the dead, that was the beginning
of eternal life in him. His life before his death was a mortal life, a temporal
life; but his life after his resurrection was an eternal life: Romans vi.9.
"Knowing that Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more; death has no
more dominion over him." Rev. i.18. "I am he that lives, and was dead; and
behold, I am alive for evermore, Amen," -- But he was put in possession of this
eternal life, as the head of the body; and took possession of it, not only to
enjoy himself, but to bestow on all who belive in him; so that the whole
church, as it were, rises in him. And now he who lately suffered so much, after
this is to suffer no more for ever, but to enter into eternal glory. God the
Father neither expects nor desires any more suffering.

This resurrection of Christ is the most joyful event that ever came no pass;
because hereby Christ rested from the great and difficult work of purchasing
redemption, and received God's testimony, that it was finished. The death of
Christ was the greatest and most wonderful event that ever came to pass; but
that has a great deal in it that is sorrowful. But by the resurrection of
Christ, that sorrow is turned into joy. The head of the whole church, in that
great event, enters on the possession of eternal life; and the whole church is,
as it were, "begotten again to a lively hope," 1 Pet. i.3. Weeping had
continued for a night, but now joy-cometh in the morning, the most joyful
morning that ever was. This is the day of the reigning of the head of the
church, and all the church reigns with him. This is spoken of as a day which
was worthy to be commemorated with the greatest joy of all days: Psalm.
cxviii.24. "This is the day which the Lord has made, we will rejoice and be
glad in it." And therefore this above all other days is appointed for the day
of the church's spiritual rejoicing to the end of the world, to be weekly
sanctified, as their day of holy rest and joy, that the church therein may rest
and rejoice with her head. And as the 3d chapter of Genesis is the most
sorrowful chapter in the Bible; so those chapters in the evangelists that give
an account of the resurrection of Christ, may be looked upon as the most joyful
chapters in all the Bible: for those chapters give an account of the finishing
of the purchase of redemption, and the beginning of the glory of the head of
the church, as the greatest seal and earnest of the eternal glory of all the
rest.

It is further to be observed, that the day of the gospel most properly begins
with the resurrection of Christ. -- Till Christ rose from the dead, the
Old Testament dispensation remained* but now it ceases, all being fulfilled
that was shadowed forth in the typical ordinances of that dispensation; so that
here most properly is the end of the Old Testament night, and Christ rising
from the grave with joy and glory, was as the joyful bride groom of the church,
as a glorious conqueror to subdue their enemies under their feet; or was like
the sun rising as it were from under the earth, after a long night of darkness*
and coming forth as a bride groom, prepared as a strong man to run his race,
appearing in joyful light to enlighten the world. Now that joyful and excellent
dispensation begins, that glorious dispensation, of which the prophets
prophesied so much; now the gospel sun is risen in glory, "and with healing in
his wings," that those who fear God's name, may go forth, and g^ow up as calves
of the stall.

II. Christ's ascension into heaven. In this I would include his sitting at the
right hand of God. For Christ's ascension, and sitting at the right hand of
God, can scarcely be looked upon as two distinct things: for Christ's ascension
was nothing else, but ascending to God's right hand; it was coming to sit down
at his Father's right hand in glory. This was another thing whereby Christ was
put into a capacity for the accomplishing the effect of his purchas^^ as one
that comes to be a deliverer of a people as their king, in order to it, and
that he may be under the best capacity for it, is first installed in his
throne. We are told, that Christ was exalted for this end, that he might
accomplish the success of his redemption: Acts v.31. "Him has God exalted with
his right hand, for to give repentance unto Israel, and the remission of sins."

Christ's ascension into heaven was, as it were, his solemn enthronization,
whereby the Father did set him upon the throne, and invest him with the glory
of his kingdom which he had purchased for himself, that he might thereby obtain
the success of his redemption in conquering all his enemies: Psalm. cx.1. "Sit
thou at my right hand, until I make thine enemies thy footstool." Christ
entered into heaven, in order to obtain the success of his purchase, as the
high priest of old, after he had offered sacrifice, entered into the holy of
holies with the blood of the sacrifice, in order to obtain the success of the
sacrifice which he had offered. See Heb. ix.12. He entered into heaven, the^e
to make intercession for his people, to plead the sacrifice which he had made
in order to the success of it, Heb. vii.25.

As he ascended into heaven, God the Father did in a visible manner set him on
the throne as king of the universe. He then put the angels all under him, and
subjected heaven and earth under him. that he might govern them for the good of
the people for whom he had die^, E^h i 20 21.22

As Christ rose from the dead, so he ascended into heaven as the head of the
holy and ^ore^unner of all the church; and so they, as it were, ascend with
^im, as well as rise with him: so that we are both raised up together, and made
to fit together in heavenly places in Christ, E^h ii 6

The d^y of Christ's ascension into heaven was doubtless a joyful, glorious day
in heaven. As heaven received Christ, God-man, as its king, so doubtless it
rec^ived a great accession of glory and happiness, far beyond what it had
before. So that the times in both parts of the church both that part which is
in heaven, and al^o that which is on earth, are become more (...) since
Christ's humiliation than before.

So much for those things whereby Christ was put into the best capacity for
obtaining the success of redemption.

PART II.
I Now proceed to show how he accomplished this success. Here I would observe,
that this success consists in two things, viz either in grace, or in glory.
That success which consists in the former, is to be seen in those work^ of God
which are wrought during those ages of the church wherein the church is
continued under the outward means of grace. That success which consists in the
latter of these, v^z glory: has its chief accomplishment at the day of
judgment.

SECT. I
I WOULD first consider the former kind of success, consisting (...) God's
grace here; which mainly appears in the work of G^d during the time that the
Christian church continues under the means of grace; which is from Ch^ist's
resurrection to his appearing in the clouds of heaven to judgment; which
includes the three former ^f those great events of providence before mentioned,
which are called Christ's coming in his kingdom. In speaking of thi^ success* I
would.

1 Mention those things by which the means of this success were established
after Christ's resurrection; and,

2* Consider the success itself.

I I would consider those dispensations of providence, by which the mean^ of
this success were established after Christ's resurrection.

I. The abolishing of the Jewish dispensation. This indeed was gradually done,
but it began from the time of Christ's resurrection, in which the abolition of
it is founded. This was the first thing done toward bringing the former state
of the world to an end. This is to be looked upon as the great means of the
success of Christ's redemption. For the Jewish dispensation was not fitted for
more than one nation: it was not fi^ted for the practice of the world in
general, or for a church of God dwel^ing in all parts of the world: nor would
it have been in any wise practicable by them; it would have been impossible for
men living in all parts of the world to go to Jerusalem three times a year, as
was prescribed in that constitution: When therefore God had a design of
enlarging his church, as he did after Christ's resurrection, it was necessary
that this dispensation should be abolished* If it had been continued, it would
have been a great block and hinderance to the enlargement of the church.
Besides, their ceremonial law, by reason of its burdensomeness, and great
peculiarity of some of its rites, was as it were a wall of partition: and was
the ground of enmity between the Jews and Gentiles, and would have kept the
gentiles from complying the true religion. This wall therefore was broken down
to make way for the more extensive success of the gospel; as Ephesians. ii.14 15.

II. The next thing in order of time seems to be the appointment of the
Christian Sabbath. For though this was gradually established in the Christian
church, yet th^se things by which the revelation of God's mind and will was
made, began on the day of Christ's resurrection, by his appearing then to his
disciples, John xx 19; and was afterward confirmed by his appearing from time
to time on that day rather than any other, John xx.26 and by his sending down
the Holy spirit so remarkably on that day*, Acts ii 1. and afterward in
directing that public assemblies and the public worship of Christians should be
on that day, which may be concluded from Acts xx.7 1 Cor. xvi.1 2, and R^v.
i.10. And so the day of the week on which Christ arose from the dead, that
joyful day, is appointed to be the day of the church's ^oly (...) to the end of
the world, and the day of their stated public worship. This is a very great and
principal mean^ of the success which the gospel has had in the world.

III The next thing was Ch^ist's appointment of the gos^^l ministry, and
commissionating and sending forth his apo^^le^ to te^ch and baptize all
nations. O^ these things we have an acc^unt in Matthew. xxviii.19 20. "Go ye,
therefore, and te^ch all nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching them to observe all things
whatsoever I have commanded you: and lo, I am with you always, eve^ unto the end
of the world." -- There were three things done by this one instruction and
commission o^ Christ to his Ap^stles, viz.

1. The appointment of the office of the gospel min^stry. For this commission
which Christ gives to his apostles, in the most essential parts of it* belongs
to all ministers; an^ the apostles, by virtue of it, were ministers or elders
of the church.

2. Here is something peculiar in this commission of the apostles, viz to go
forth from one nation to another, preaching the gospel in all the world. The
apostles had something above what belonged to their ordinary character as
ministers; they had an extraordinary power of teaching and ruling, which
extended to all the churches; and not only all the churches which then were,
but all that should be to the end of the world by their ministry. And so the
apostles were, as it were, in subordination to Christ, made foundations of the
Christian church. See Ephesians. ii.20. and Rev. xx.14.

3. Here is an appointment of Christian baptism. This ordinance indeed had a
beginning before; John the Baptist and Christ both baptized. But now especially
by this institution is it established as an ordinance to be upheld in the
Christian church to the end of the world. -- The ordinance of the Lord's supper
had been established be o^e, just before Christ's crucifixion.

IV. The next thing to be observed, is the enduing the apostles and others,
with extraordinary and miraculous gifts of the Holy Ghost; such as the gift of
tongues, the gift of healing, of prophecy, etc The Spirit of God was poured out
in great abundance in this respect, so that not only ministers, but a very
great part of the Christians through the world were endued with them, both old
and young; not only officers and more honorable persons, but the meaner sort
of people, servants and handmaids, were commonly endued with them, agreeable to
Joel's prophecy, Joel ii.28 29. of which prophecy the Apostle Peter takes
notice, that it is accomplished in this dispensation, Acts ii.11.

How wonderful a dispensation was this! Under the Old Testament, but few had
such honors put up ^n them by God. Moses wished that all the Lord's people were
prophets, N^mb xi.29; whereas Joshua thought it much that Eld^d and Medad
prophesied. But now we find the wish of Moses fulfilled. This continued in a
very considerable degree to the end of the apostolic age, or the first hundred
years after the birth of Christ, which is therefore called the age of miracles.

This was a great means of the success of the gospel in that age, and of
establishing the Christian church in all parts of the world; and not only in
that age, but in all ages to the end of the world: for Christianity being by
this means established through so great a part of the known world by miracles,
it was after that more easily continued by tradition; and then, by means of
these extraordinary gifts of the Holy G^ost, the apostles, and others, were
enabled to write the New Testament, to be an infallible rule of faith and
manners to the church to the end of the world. Furthermore, these miracles
stand recorded in those writings as a standing proof and evidence of the truth
of the Christian religion to all ages.

V. The next thing I wo^uld observe is the revealing those glorious doctrines
of the gospel fully and plainly, which had under the Old Testament been
obscurely revealed. The doctrine of Christ's satisfaction and righteousness,
his ascension and glory, and the way of salvation, under the Old Testament,
were in a great measure hid under the vail of types and shadows, and more
obscure revelations, as Moses put a vail on his face to hide the shining of it:
but now the vail of the temple is rent from the t^p to the bottom; and Christ,
the antetype of Moses, shines: the shining of his face is without a vail; 2
Cor. iii.12.13 and 18. Now these glorious mysteries are plainly revealed, which
were in a great measu^e kept secret from the foundation of the world, Ephesians.
iii.3.4.5; R^m. xvi.25. "According to the revelation of the mystery which was
kept secret since the world began, but now is made manifest;" and, Col. i.26.
"Even the mystery which has been (...) ages, and generations, but now is made
manifest to his (...)"

Thus the Sun of righteousness, after it is risen from under the eart^, begins
to shine fo^th clearly, and not only by a dim refl^ction as it did before.
Christ, before his death, revealed many things more clearly than ever they had
been revealed in the Old Testament; but the great mysteries of Christ's
redemption, and reconciliation by his death, and j^stification by his
righteousness, were not so plainly revealed before Christ's resurrection.
Christ g^ve this reason for it* that he would not put new wine into old
bottles; and it was g^adu^lly done after Christ's resurrection. In all (...),
Christ much more clearly instructed them personally after his ^esurrection, and
before his as^en^ion; as we read that ^e continued with them forty days,
spe^king of the things pertaining to the kingdom, Acts i 3; and that "he opened
their understandings, that they might understand the scriptures," Luke xxiv 45.
But he clear revelation of these things was p^incipally after the pouring out
of the Spirit on the day of Pentecost, agr^eable to Christ's promise, John
xvi.12.13. "I have yet many thing to ^ay unto you, but ye cannot hear them now.
Howbeit, when the Spirit of truth is come, he shall guide you into all truth."
(...) of the mysteries of the gospel, (...) are deliver^^, we (...) through the
hands of the Apostle Paul, by (...) come to know (...) of the doct^ines of the
(...)* than the greatest prophets knew (...) Old Testament.

(...) of the gospel, which began to dawn (...) gradually grew and increased
through all the ages of the (...), as we observed as we went along* is ^ow come
to the light of perfect day, and the brightness of the sun shining forth in his
unv^iled glory.

VI. The next thing that I would observe, is the appointment of the office of
deacons in the Christian church, which we have an account of in the 6th chapter
of the Acts, to take care for the outward supply of the members of Christ's
church, and the exercise of that great Christian virtue of charity.

VII. The calling, and qualifying, and sending the Apostle Paul. This was begun
in his conversion as he was going to Damascus, and was one of the greatest
means of the success of Christ's redemption that followed: for this success was
more by the labors, preaching, and writings of this Apostle, than all the
other apos^les put together. For, as he says, 1 Cor. xv.10. he "labored more
abundantly than they all;" so his success was more abundant than that of them
all. As he was the apostle of the Gentiles, so it was mainly by his ministry
that the Gentiles were called, and the gospel spread through the world; and our
nation, and the other nations of Europ^ ^ave the gospel among them, chiefly
through his means; and he was more employed by the Holy Ghost in revealing the
glorious doctrines of the gospel by his writings, for the use of the church in
all ages, than all the other apostles taken together.

VIII. The next thing I would observe, is the institution of ecclesiastical
councils, for deciding controversies, and ordering the affairs of the church of
Christ, of which we have an account in the 15th chapter of Acts.

IX. The last thing I shall mention under this head, is the committing the
New Testament to writing. This was all written after the resurrection of
Christ; and all written, either by the apostles, or by the evangelists who were
companions of the apostles. All the new testament was written by the apostles
themselves, excepting what was written by Mark and Luke, viz the gospels o^
Mark and Luke, and the book of the Acts of the Apostles. He that wrote the
gospel of Mark, is supposed to be he whose mother was Mary, in whose house they
were praying for Peter, when he, brought out of prison by the angel, came and
knocked at the door; of which we read. Acts xi^.12. "And when he had considered
the thing, ^e came to the house of Mary the mother of John, whose surname was
Mark* where many were gathered together, praying." He was the companion of the
apostles Barnabas and Saul: Acts xv.37. "And Barnabas determined to take with
them John, whose surname was Mark." He was Barnabas's sister's son, and seems
sometimes to have been a companion of the Apostle Paul: Col. iv.20.
"Aristarchus, my fellow-prisoner, saluteth you, and Marcus, sister's son to
Barnabas; touching whom ye received commandment: if he come unto you, receive
him." The apostles seem to have made great account of him, as appears by those
places, and also by Acts xii.25. "And Barnabas and Saul returned from
Jerusalem, and took with them John* whose surname was Mark;" and Acts xiii 5.
"And when they were at Salamis, they preached the word of God in the synagogues
of the Jews; and they had also John to their minister;" and, 2 Timothy iv.11.
"Only Luke is with me: take Mark and bring him with thee; for he is profitable
to me for the ministry."

This Luke, who wrote the gospel of Luke and the book of Acts, was a great
companion of the Apostle Paul. He is spoken of as being with him in the
last-mentioned place, and speaks of himself a^ accompanying him in his travels
in the history of the Acts; and therefore he speaks in the first person plural,
when speaking of Paul's travels saying* We went to such and such a place; We
set sail; We lanched from such a place; and landed at such a place. He was
greatly beloved by the Apostle Paul: he is that beloved physician spoken of,
Col. iv.14. The Apostle ranks Mark and Luke among his fellow laborers,
Philemon. 24. "Marcus, Aristarcus, D^mas, Lucas, my fellow laborers."

The rest of the books were all written by the apostles themselves. The books
of the New Testament are either historical, or doctrinal, or prophetical The
historical books are the writings of the four evangelists, giving us the
history of Christ, and his purchase of redemption, and his resurrection and
ascension; and the Acts of the apostles, giving an account of the great things
by which the Christian church was first established and propagated. The
doctrinal books are the epistles. These, most of them, we have from the great
Apostle Paul. And we have one prophetical book, which takes place after the end
of the history of the whole Bible, and gives an account of the great events
which were to come to pass, by which the work of redemption was to be carried
on to the end of the world.

All these books are supposed to have been written before the destruction of
Jerusalem, excepting those which were written by the Apostle John, who lived
the longest of all the apostles, and wrote what he wrote after the destruction
of Jerusalem, as is supposed* To this beloved disciple it was that Christ
revealed those wonderful things which were to come to pass in his church to the
end of time; and he was the person that put the finishing hand to the canon of
the scriptures, and sealed the whole of it. So that now the canon of scripture,
that great and standing written rule, which was begun about Moses's time* is
completed and settled, and a curse denounced against him that adds any thing
to it, or deminishes any thing from it. And so all things are established and
and completed which relate to the appointed means of grace. All the stated
means of grace were ^^^ished in the apostolical age, or before the death of the
Apostle John, and are to remain unaltered to the day of judgment.

Thus far we have considered those things by which the means of grace were
given and established in the Christian church.

II. THE other thing proposed relating to the success of Christ's redemption
during the church's continuance under the means of grace, was to show how this
success was carried on; which is what I would now proceed to do.

Here it is worthy to be remembered, that the Christian church during its
continuance under the means of grace, is in two very different states.

1. In a suffering, afflicted, persecuted state, as, for the most part it is,
from the resurrection of Christ till the fall of Antichrist.

2. In a state of peace and prosperity; which is the state that the church, for
the most part, is to be in after the fall of Antichrist.

FIRST, I would show how the success of Christ's redemption is carried on
during the continuance of the church's suffering state, from the resurrection
of Christ to the fall of Antichrist. This space of time, for the most part, is
a state of the church's sufferings, and is so represented in scripture. Indeed
God is pleased, out of love and pity to his elect, to grant many intermissions
of the church's sufferings during this time, whereby the days of tribulation
are as it were shortened. But from Christ's resurrection till the fall of
Antichrist, is the appointed day of Zion's troubles. During this space of time,
for the most part, some part or other of the church is under persecution; and
great part of the time, the whole church, or at last the generality of God's
people, have been persecuted.

For the first three hundred years after Christ, the church was for the most
part in a state of great affliction, the object of reproach and persecution*
first by the Jews, and then by the Heathen. After this, from the beginning of
Constantine's time, the church had r^st and prosperity for a little while;
which is represented in Rev. v^i. at the beginning, by the angel's holding the
four winds for a little while. But presently after, the church again suffered
persecution from the Arians; and after that, Antichrist rose, and the church
was driven away into the wilderness, and was kept down in obscurity, and
contempt, and suffering, for a long time, under Antichrist, before the
reformation by Luther and others. And since the reformation, the church's
persecutions have been beyond all that ever were before. Though some parts of
God's church some times have had rest, yet to this day, for the most part, the
true church is very much kept under by its enemies, and some parts of it under
grevious persecution; and so we may expect it will continue till the fall of
Antichrist; and then will come the appointed day of the church's prosperity on
earth, the set time in which God will favor Zion, the time when the saints
shall not be kept under by wicked men, as it has been hitherto; but wherein
they shall be uppermost, and shall reign on earth, as it is said, Rev. v.10.
"And the kingdom shall be given to the people of the saints of the most High,"
Dan. vii.27.

This suffering state of the church is in scripture represented as a state of
the church's travail, John xvi.20.21. and Rev. xii.1.2. What the church is in
travail striving to bring forth during this time, is that glory and prosperity
of the church which shall be after the fall of Antichrist, and then shall she
bring forth her child. This is a long time of the church's trouble and
affliction, and is so spoken of in scripture, though it be spoken of as being but
for a little season, in comparison of the eternal prosperity of the church.
Hence the church, under the long continuance of this affliction, cries out, at
in Rev. vi.10. "How long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge
our blood on them that dwell on the earth?" And we are told, that "white robes
were given to every one of them; and it was said unto them, that they should
rest yet for a little season, until their fellow servants also, and their
brethren, that should be killed as they were, should be fulfiled." So, Dan.
xii.6. "How long shall it be to the end of these wonders?"

It is to be observed, that during the time of these sufferings of the church,
the main instrument of their sufferings has been the Roman government: her
afflictions have almost all along been from Rome. That is therefore in the New
Testament called Babylon; because, as of old the troubles of the city Jerusalem
were mainly from that adverse city Babylon, so the troubles of the Christian
church, the spiritual Jerusalem, during the long time of its tribulation, is
mainly from Rome. Before the time of Constantine, the troubles of the Christian
church were from Heathen Rome: since that time, its troubles have been mainly
from Antichristian Rome. As of old, the captivity of the Jews ceased on the
destruction of Babylon, so the time of the trouble of the Christian church will
cease with the destruction of the church of Rome, that spiritual Babylon.

In showing how the success of Christ's redemption is carried on during this
time of the church's tribulation, I would,

1. Show how it was carried on till the destruction of Jerusalem, with which
ended the first great dispensation of Providence which is called Christ's
coming in his kingdom.

2. How it was carried on from thence to the destruction of the Heathen empire
in the time of Constantine, which is the second dispensation called Christ's
coming,

3. How it is carried on from thence to the destruction of Antichrist, when
will be accompished the third great event called Christ's coming, and with
which the days of the church's tribulation and travail end.

I. I would show how the success of Christ's purchase of redemption was carried
on from Christ's resurrection to the destruction of Jerusalem. In speaking of
this, I would, 1. take notice of the success itself; and, 2. the opposition
made against it by the enemies of it; and, 3. the terrible judgments of God on
those enemies.

1. I would observe the success itself. Soon after Christ had finished the
purchase of redemption, and was gone into heaven, and entered into the holy of
holies with his own blood, there began a glorious success of what he had done
and suffered. Having undermined the foundation of Satan's kingdom, it began to
fall apace. Swiftly did it hasten to ruin in the world, which might well be
compared to Satan's falling like lightning from heaven. Satan before had
exalted his throne very high in this world, even to the very stars of heaven,
reigning with great glory in his Heathen Roman empire; but never before had he
such a downfall as he had soon after Christ's ascension. He had, we may suppose,
been very lately triumphing in a supposed victory, having brought about the
death of Christ, which he doubtless gloried in as the greatest feat that ever
he did; and probably imagined he had totally defeated God's design by him. But
he was quickly made sensible, that he had only been ruining his own kingdom,
when he saw it tumbling so fast so soon after, as a consequence of the death of
Christ. For Christ, by his death, having purchased the Holy Spirit, and having
ascended, and received the Spirit, he poured it forth abundantly for the
conversion of thousands and millions of souls.

Never had Christ's kingdom been so set up in the world. There probably were
more souls converted in the age of the apostles than had been before from the
beginning of the world till that time. Thus God so soon begins gloriously to
accomplish his promise to his Son, wherein he had promised, that he should see
his seed, and that the pleasure of the Lord should prosper in his hand, if he
would make his soul an offering or sin. And,

(1) Here is to observed the success, which the gospel had among the Jews: for
God first began with them. He being about to reject the main body of that
people, first calls in his elect from among them, before he forsook them, to
turn to the Gentiles. It was so in former great and dreadful judgments of God
on that nation: the bulk of them were destroyed, and only a remnant saved, or
reformed. So it was in the rejection of the ten tribes, long before this
rejection: the bulk of the ten tribes were rejected, when they left the true
worship of God in Jeroboam's time, and afterward more fully in Ahab's time.
But yet there was a remnant of them that God reserved. A number left their
possessions in these tribes, and went and settled in the tribes of Judah and
Benjamin. And afterward there were seven thousand in Ahab's time, who had not
bowed the knee to Baal. And so, in the captivity into Babylon, only a remnant
of them ever returned to their own land. And so now again, by far the greater
part of the people were rejected entirely, but some few were saved. Therefore
the Holy Ghost compares this reservation of a number that were converted by the
preaching of the apostles, to those former remnants: Romans ix.27. Esaias also
cries concerning Israel, "Though the number of the children be as the sand of
the sea, a remnant shall be saved." See Is. x.22.

The glorious success of the gosple among the Jews after Christ's ascension,
began by the pouring out of the Spirit upon the day of Pentecost, of which we
read in Acts ii. So wonderful was the pouring out of the Spirit, and so
remarkable and swift the effect of it, that we read of three thousand who were
converted to the Christian faith in one day, Acts ii.41. Probably the greater
part of these were savingly converted. And after this, we read of God's adding
to the church daily such as should be saved, verse. 47. And soon after, we read,
that the number of them were about five thousand. Thus were not only a
multitude converted, but the church was then eminent in piety, as appears by
Acts ii.46.47.iv.32.

Thus the Christian church was first of all of the nation of Israel: and
therefore, when the Gentiles were called, they were but as it were added to
Israel, to the seed of Abraham. They were added to the Christian church of
Israel, as the proselytes of old were to the Mosaic church of Israel; and so
were as it were only grafted on the stock of Abraham, and were not a distinct
tree; for they are all still the seed of Abraham and Israel: as Ruth, the
Moabitess, and Uriah the Hittite, and other proselytes of old, were the same
people, and ranked as the seed of Israel.

So the Christian church at first began at Jerusalem, and from thence was
propagated to all nations: so that this church of Jerusalem was the church that
was as it were the mother of all other churches in the world; agreeable to the
prophecy. Is. ii.3.4. "Out of Zion shall go forth the law, and the word of the
Lord from Jerusalem: and he shall judge among the nations, and rebuke many
people." So that the whole church of God is still God's Jerusalem: they are his
spiritual Jerusalem, and are as it were only added to the church, which was
begun in the literal Jerusalem

After this, we read of many thousands of Jews that believed in Jerusalem, Acts
xxi.20. And so we read of multitudes of Jews who were converted in other cities
of Judea; and not only so, but even in other parts of the world. For wherever
the apostles went, if there were any Jews there, their manner was, first to go
into the synagogues of the Jews, and preach the gospel to them, and many in one
place and another believed; as in Damascus and Antioch, and many other places
that we read of in the Acts of the Apostles.

In this pouring out of the spirit, which began at the Pentecost following
Christ's ascension, began that first great dispensation which is called
Christ's coming in his kingdom. Christ's coming thus in a spiritual manner for
the glorious setting up of his kingdom in the world, is represented by Christ
himself as his coming down from heaven, whither he had ascended, John xiv.18.
There Christ having been speaking of his ascension, says "I will not leave you
comfortless; I will come unto you*" speaking of his coming by the coming of the
Comforter, the Spirit of truth. And, verse 28. "Ye have heard how I said unto
you, I go away, and come again unto you." Thus the apostles began to see the
kingdom of heaven come with power, as he promised they should, Mark ix.1.

(2) What is next to be observed is the success of the gospel among the
Samaritans. After the s^ccess of the gospel had been so gloriously begun among
the pr^per ^ews, the Spirit of God was next wonderfully poured out on the
Samaritans, who were not Jews by nation, but the posterity of those (...) the
king of Assyria removed from different parts of his dominions, and settled in
the land that was ^^habited by the ten tribes, whom he carried captive. But yet
they had received the five books of Moses, and practiced most of the ri^es of
the ^aw of Moses, and so were a sort of mongrel Jews. We do not find them
reckoned as Gentiles in the New Testament: for the calling of the Gentiles is
spoken of as a new thing after this, beginning with the conversion of
Cornelius. But yet it was an (...) of making that a people that (...) no
people: for they had c^rrupted the religion which Moses commanded, and did not
go up to Jerusalem to worship, but had another temple of their own in Mount
Geri^zim; which is the mountain of which the woman of Samaria speaks, when she
says, "Our fathers worshipped in this mountain." Christ there does not approve
of their separation from the Jews; but tells the woman of Samaria, that they
worshipped they knew not (...), and that salvation is of the Jews. But now
salvation is brought from the Jews to them by the preaching of Philip,
(excepting that before Christ had some success among them) with whose preaching
there was a glorious pouring out of the Spirit of God in the city of Samaria,
where we are told, that "the people believed Philip preaching the things
concerning the kingdom of Christ, and were baptized, both men and women; and
that there was great joy in that city," Acts viii.8. -- 12.

Thus Christ had a glorious harvest in Samaria; which is what Christ seems to
have had respect to, in what he said to his disciples at Jacob's well three or
four years before, on occasion of the people of Samaria's appearing at a
distance in the fields coming to the place where Christ was, at the instigation
of the woman of Samaria. (...) that occasion, he bids his disciples lift up
their eyes to the (...) for that they were white to the harvest. John iv.35.36.
(...) position which the people of Samaria s^owed toward Christ (...) gospel,
showed that they were ripe for the harvest. (...) the harvest is come by
Philip's preaching. There used to be a (...) bitter enmity between the Jews and
Samaritans; but now, by (...) conversion, the Christian Jews and Samaritans are
all happily united: for in Christ Jesus is neither Jew nor Samaritan, but
Christ is all in all. This was a glorious instance of the wolf's dwelling with
the lamb, and the leopard's lying down with the kid.

(3) The next thing to be observed is the success there was of the gospel in
calling the Gentiles. This was a great and glorious dispensation of divine
providence, much spoken of in the prophecies of the Old Testament, and spoken
of by the apostles time after time, as a most glorious event of Christ's
redemption. This was begun in the conversion of Cornelius and his family,
greatly to the admiration of Peter, who was used as the instrument of it, and
of those who were with him, and of those who were informed of it; as you may
see, Acts x. and xi. The next instance of it that we have any account of, was
in the conversion of great numbers of Gentiles in Cyprus, and Cyrene, and
Antioch, by the disciples that were scattered abroad by the persecution which
arose about Stephen, as we have an account in Acts xi.19.20.21. Presently upon
this the disciples began to be called Christians first at Antioch, verse 26.

After this, vast multitudes of Gentiles were converted in many (...) parts of
the world, chiefly by the ministry of the Apostle Paul, a glorious pouring out
of the Spirit accompanying his preaching in one place and another. Multitudes
flocked into the church of Christ in a great number of cities where the Apostle
came. So the number of the members of the Christian church that were Gentiles,
soon far exceeded the number of its Jewish members; yet so, that in less than
ten years time after Paul was sent forth from Antioch to preach to the
Gentiles, it was said of him and his companions, that they had turned the world
upside down: Acts xvii.^. "These that have turned the world upside down are
come hither also." But the most remarkable pouring out of the Spirit in a
particular city that we have any account of in the New Testament, seems to be
that in the city of Ephesus, which was a very great city. Of this we have an
account in Acts xix. (...) also a very extraordinary in gathering of souls at
Corinth, (...) the greatest cities in all Greece. And after this many were
converted in Rome, the chief city of all the world; and the gospel was
propogated into all parts of the Roman empire. Thus the gospel-son, which had
lately risen on the Jews, now rose upon, and began to enlighten the Heathen
world, after they had continued in gross Heathenish darkness for so many ages.

This was a great thing, and a new thing, such as never had been before. All
nations but the Jews, and a few who had at one time and another joined with
them, had been rejected from about Moses's time. The Gentile world had been
covered over with the thick darkness of idolatry; but now, at the joyful
glorious sound of the gospel, they began in all parts to forsake their old
idols, and to abhor them, and to cast them to the moles and to the bats, and to
learn to worship the true God, and to trust in his Son Jesus Christ; and God
owned them for his people; those who had so long been afar off, were made nigh
by the blood of Christ. Men were changed from being Heathenish and brutish, to
be the children of God; were called out of Satan's kingdom of darkness, and
bro't into God's marvelous light and in almost all countries through out the
known world were assemblies of the people of God; joyful praises were sung to
the true God, and Jesus Christ the glorious Redeemer. Now that great building
which God began soon after the fall of man, rises gloriously, not in the same
manner that it had done in former ages, but in quite a new manner; now Daniel's
prophecies concerning the last kingdom, which should succeed the four
Heathenish monarchies, begins to be fulfilled; now the stone cut out of the
mountains without hands, began to smite the image on its ^eet, and to break it
in pieces, and to grow great, and to make great advances toward filling the
earth; and now God gathers together the elect from the four winds of heaven, by
the preaching of the apostles and other ministers, the angels of the Christian
church sent forth with the great sound of the gospel-trumpet, before the
destruction of Jerusalem, agreeable to what Christ foretold, Matthew. xxiv.31.

This was the success of Christ's purchase during this first period of the
Christian church, which terminated in the destruction of Jerusalem.

2. I would proceed now, in the second place, to take notice of the opposition
which was made to this success of Christ's purchase by the enemies of it. --
Satan, who lately was so ready to triumph and exult, as though he had gained
the victory in putting Christ to death, now finding himself fallen into the pit
which he had dug, and finding his kingdom falling so fast, and seeing
Christ's kingdom make such amazing progress, such as never had been before, we
may conclude he was filled with the greatest confusion and astonishment, and
hell seemed to be effectually-alarmed by it to make the most violent opposition
against it. First, the devil stirred up the Jews, who had before crucified
Christ, to persecute the church: for it is observeable, that the persecution
which the church suffered during this period, was mostly from the Jews. Thus we
read in the Acts, when, at Jerusalem, the Holy Ghost was poured out at
Pentecost, how the Jews mocked, and said, "These men are full of new wine;" and
how the scribes and Pharisees, and the captain of the temple, were alarmed, and
bestirred themselves to oppose and persecute the apostles, and first
apprehended and threatened them, and afterward imprisoned and beat them; and
breathing out threatenings and slaughter against the disciples of the Lord,
they stoned Stephen in a tumultuous rage; and were not content to persecute
those that they could find in Judea, but sent abroad to Damascus and other
places, to persecute all that they could find every where. Herod, who was chief
among them, stretched forth his hands to vex the church, and killed James with
the sword, and proceeded to take Peter also, and cast him into prison.

So in other countries, we find, that almost wherever the apostles came, the
Jews opposed the gospel in a most malignant manner, contradicting and
blaspheming. How many things did the blessed Apostle Paul suffer at their hands
in one place and another! How violent and blood-thirsty did they show
themselves toward him, when he came to bring alms to his nation! In this
persecution and cruelty was fulfilled that of Christ, Matthew. xxiii.34. "Behold,
I send you prophets, and wise men, and scribes; and some of them ye shall kill
and crucify, and some of them shall ye scourge in your synagogues, and
persecute them from city to city."

3. I proceed to take notice of those judgments which were executed on those
enemies of Christ, the persecuting Jews.

(1) The bulk of the people were given up to judicial blindness of mind and
hardness of heart. Christ denounced such a woe upon them in the days of his
flesh; as Matthew. 13.14.15. -- This curse was also denounced on them by the
Apostle Paul, Acts xxviii.25.26.27.; and under this curse, under this judicial
blindness and hardness, they remain to this very day, having been subject to it
for about 1700 years, being the most awful instance of such a judgment, and
monuments of God's terrible vengeance, of any people that ever were. That they
should continue from generation to generation so obstinately to reject Christ,
so that it is a very rare thing that any one of them is converted to the
Christian faith, though their own scriptures of the Old Testament, which they
acknowledge, are so full of plain testimonies against them, is a remarkable
evidence of their being dreadfully left of God.

(2) They were rejected and cast off from being any longer God's visible
people. They were broken off from the flock of Abraham, and since that have no
more been reputed his seed, than the Ishmaelites or Edomites, who are as much
his natural seed as they. The greater part of the two tribes were now cast off,
as the ten tribes had been before, and another people were taken in their room,
agreeable to the predictions of their own prophets; as of Moses, Deuteronomy.
xxxii.21. "They have moved me to jealousy with that which is not God; they have
provoked me to anger with their vanities; and I will move them to jealousy with
those which are not a people, I will provoke them to anger with a foolish
nation;" and of Isaiah, lxv.1. "I am sought of them that asked not for me; I am
found of them that sought me not*" -- They were visibly rejected and cast off,
by God's directing his apostles to (...) away from them, and let them alone; as
Acts xiii.46.47. "Then Paul and Barnabas waxed bold, and said, It was necessary
that the word of God (...) first have been spoken to you: but seeing ye put it
from you, and judge yourselves unworthy of everlasting life, lo, we turn to the
Gentiles: for so has the Lord commanded us." And so Acts xviii.6. and
xxviii.28.

Thus far we have had the scripture-history to guide us: henceforward we shall
have the guidance only of two things* viz. of scripture-prophecy, and God's
providence, as related in human histories. -- But I proceed.

(3) The third and last judgment of God on th^se enemies of the success of the
gospel which I shall mention, is the terrible destruction of their city and
country by the Romans. They had great warnings and many means used with them
before this destruction. First, John the Baptist warned them, and told them,
that the axe was laid at the root of the tree; and that every tree which should
(...) bring forth good fruit, should be hewn down, and cast into the fire. Then
Christ warned them very particularly, and told them of their aproaching
destruction, and at the thoughts of it wept over them. And then the apostles
after Christ's ascension abundantly warned them. But they proved obstinate, and
went on in their opposition to Christ and his church, and in their bitter
persecuting practices. Their so malignantly persecuting the Apostle Paul, o^
which we have an account toward the end of the Acts of the Apostles, is
supposed to have been not more than seven or eight (...) before the destruction.

After this God was pleased to give them one more very remarkable warning by
the Apostle Paul, in his epistle to the Hebrews, which is an epistle written to
that nation of the Jews, as is suppos^^^, about four years before their
destruction; wherein the plainest (...) clearest arguments are set before them
from their own law, and from their prophets, for whom they professed such a
regard, to prove that Christ Jesus must be the Son of God, and that all their
law pointed to him and typified him, and that their Jewish dispensation must
needs have now ceased. For though the epistle was more immediately directed to
the Christian Hebrews, yet the matter of the epistle plainly shows that the
apostle intended it for the use and conviction of the unbelieving Jews. In this
epistle he mentions particularly the approaching destruction, as chap. ^.25.
"So much the more; as ye see the day approaching;" and in verse. 27* he speaks
of the approaching judgment and fiery indignation which should devout the
adversaries.

But the generality of them refusing to receive conviction. God soon destroyed
them with such terrible circumstances, as the destruction of no country or city
since the foundation of the world can parallel; agreeable to what Christ
foretold, Matthew xxiv.21. "For then shall be tribulation, such as was not from
the beginning of the world to this time, no, nor ever shall be." The first
destruction of Jerusalem by the Babylonians was very terrible, as it is in the
most affecting manner described by the Prophet Jeremiah, in his Lamentations;
but this was nothing to the dreadful misery and wrath which they suffered in
the destruction; God, according as Christ foretold, bringing on them all the
righteous blood that had been shed from the foundation of the world. Thus the
enemies of Christ were made his footstool often his ascension, agreeable to
God's promise in Psalm. cx at the beginning; and Christ rules them with a rod of
Iron. They had been kicking against Christ, but they did not kick against the
pricks. The briars and thorns set themselves against him in battle: but he went
through them: he burned them together.

This destruction of Jerusalem was in all respects agreeable to what Christ had
foretold of it, Matthew. xxiv. by the account which Josephus gives of it, who was
then present, and was one of the Jews, who had a share in the calamity, who
wrote the history of their destruction. Many circumstana^s of this destruction
resembled the destruction of the wicked at the day of judgment, by his
account, being accomplished with many fearful sights in the heavens, and with
the separation of the righteous from the wicked. Their city and their temple
were burnt, and rased to the ground, and the ground on which the city stood*
was plowed; and so one stone was not left upon another, Matthew. xxiv.2.

The people had ceased for the most part to be an independent government after
the Babylonish captivity: but the scepter entirely departed from Judah on the
death of Archelaus; and then Judea was made a Roman province; after this they
were cast off from being the people of God; but now their very city and land
are utterly destroyed, and they carried away from it; and so have continued in
their dispersions through the world for now about 1600 years.

Thus there was a final end to the Old Testament world; all was finished with a
kind of day of judgment, in which the people of God were saved, and his
enemies terribly destroyed. -- Thus does he who was so lately mocked, despised,
and spit upon by the Jews, and whose followers they malignantly persecuted,
appear gloriously exalted over his enemies.

Having thus shown how the success of Christ's purchase was carried on till the
destruction of Jerusalem, I come now.

II. To show how it was carried on from that time till the destruction of the
Heathen empire in the time of Constantine the Great, which is the second great
event which is in scripture compared to Christ's coming to judgment.

Jerusalem was destroyed about the year of our Lord 68* and so before that
generation passed away which was contemporary with Christ; and it was about
thirty five years after Christ's death. The destruction of the Heathen empire
under Constantine, was about 260 years after this. In showing how the success
of the gospel was carried on through this time* I would. 1. Take notice of the
opposition made against it by the Roman empire. 2. How the work of the gospel
went on notwithstanding all that opposition. 3. The peculiar circumstances of
tribulation and distress that the church was in just before their deliverance
by Constantine. 4. The great revolution in Constantine's time.

1. I would briefly show what opposition was made against the gospel, and the
kingdom of Christ, by the Roman empire. The opposition that was made to the
gospel by the Heathen Roman empire, was mainly after the destruction of
Jerusalem, though their opposition began before; but the opposition that was
before the destruction of Jerusalem, was mainly by the Jews. But when Jerusalem
was destroyed, the Jews were put out of a capacity of much troubling the
church. Now therefore the devil turns his hand elsewere, and uses other
instruments. The opposition which was made in the Roman empire against the
kingdom of Christ, was chiefly of two kinds.

(1) They employed all their learning, philosophy, and wit, in opposing it.
Christ came into the world in an age wherein learning and philosophy were at
their height in the Roman empire. This was employed to the utmost against the
kingdom of Christ. The gospel, which held forth a crucified Savior, was not at
all agreeable to the notions of the philosophers. The Christian scheme of
trusting in such a crucified Redeemer, appeared foolish and ridiculous to them.
Greece was a country the most famous for learning of any in the Roman empire;
but the apostle observes, tha^ the doctrine of Christ crucified appeared
foolishness to the Greeks, 1 Cor. i.23.; and therefore the wise men and
philosophers opposed the gospel with all the wit they had* We have a specimen
of their manner of opposing, in the story we have of their treatment of the
Apostle Paul at Athens, which was a city that had been for many ages the chief
seat of philosophers of any in the whole world. We read in Acts xvii.18. that
the philosophers of the Epicureans and Stoics encountered him, saying, "What
will this babbler say? He seems to be a setter forth of strange gods." So they
were wont to deride and ridicule Christianity. After the destruction of
Jerusalem, several of these philosophers published books against it; the chief
of whom were Celsus and Porphyry. These wrote books against the Christian
religion with a great deal of virulence and contempt, much after the manner
that the Deists of the present age oppose and ridicule Christianity. Something
of their writings yet remains. As great enemies and despisers as they were of
the Christian religion, yet they never denied the facts recorded of Christ and
his apostles, in the New Testament, particularly the miracles which they
wrought, but allowed them. They lived too near the times wherein these miracles
were wrought to deny them; for they were so publicly done, and so lately, that
neither Jews nor Heathens in those days appeared to deny them; but they
ascribed them to the power of magic.

(2) The authority of the Roman empire employed all their strength, time after
time, to persecute, and if possible to root out Christianity. This they did in
ten general successive persecutions. We have heretofore observed, that Christ
came into the world, when the strength of Heathen dominion and authority was
the greatest that ever it was under the R^man monarchy, the greatest and
strongest human monarchy that ever was on earth. All the strength of this
monarchy was employed for a long time to oppose and persecute the Christian
church, and if possible to destroy it, in ten successive attempts, which are
called the ten Heathen persecutions, which were before Constantine.

The first of these, which was the persecution under Nero, was a little before
the destruction of Jerusalem, in which the Apostle Peter was crucified, and the
Apostle Paul beheaded, soon after he wrote his second epistle to Timothy. When
he wrote that epistle, he was a prisoner at Rome under Nero, and was soon after
he wrote it beheaded, agreeable to what he says, chap. iv.6.7. "I am now ready
to be offered, and the time of my departure is at hand. I have fought a good
fight, I have finished my course, I have kept the faith." -- There were many
thousands of other Christians slain in that persecution. The other nine
persecutions were all after the destruction of Jerusalem. Some of these were
very terrible indeed, and far exceeded the first persecution under Nero. One
emperor after another set himself with the utmost rage to root out the
Christian church from the earth, that there should not be so much as the name
of Christian left in the world. Thousands and millions were put to cruel deaths
in these persecutions; for they spared neither sex nor age, but killed them as
fast as they could. Under the second general persecution, that which was next
after the destruction of Jerusalem, the Apostle John was banished to the isle
of Patmos, where he had those visions of which he has given an account in the
Revelation. Under that persecution it was reckoned, that about 40,000 suffered
martydom; which yet was nothing to what were put to death under some succeeding
persecutions. Ten thousand suffered that one kind of cruel death, crucifixion,
in the third persecution under the Emperor Adrian. Under the fourth
persecution, which began about the year of Christ 162, many suffered martyrdom
in England, the land of our forefathers, where Christianity had been planted
very early, and, as is supposed, in the days of the apostles. In the later
persecutions, the Roman emperors being vexed at the frustration of their
predecessors, who were not able to extirpate Christianity, or hinder its
progress, were enraged to be the more violent in their attempts.

Thus a great part of the first 300 years after Christ was spent in violent and
cruel persecutions of the church by the Roman powers. Satan was very unwilling
to let go his hold of so great a part of the world, and every way the chief
part of it, as the countries contained in the R^man empire were, of which he
had had the quiet possession for so many ages: and therefore, when he saw it
going so fast out of his hands, he bestired himself to his utmost: and hell
was, as it were, raised against it to oppose it with its utmost power.

Satan thus exerting himself by the power of the Heathen Roman empire, is
called the great red dragon in scripture, having seven heads and ten horns,
fighting against the woman clothed with the sun, as in the 12th of Revelation.
And the terrible conflict there was between the church of Christ, and the
powers of the Heathen empire before Constantine's time, is there, in verse. 7.
represented by the war between Michael and his angels, and the dragon and his
angels: "And there was war in heaven; Michael and his angels fought, and the
dragon fought and his angels."

2. I would take notice what success the gospel had in the world before the
time of Constantine, notwithstanding all this opposition. -- Though the
learning and power of the Roman empire wer-so great, and both were employed to
the utmost against Christianity to put a stop to it, and to root it out for so
long a time, and in so many repeated attempts; yet all was in vain; they could
neither root it out, nor put a stop to it. But still, in spite all that they
could do, the kingdom of Christ wonderfully prevailed, and Satan's Heathen
kingdom mouldered and consumed away before it, agreeable to the words of the
text, "The moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the worm shall eat them
like wool." It was very observable, that for the most part the more they
persecuted the church, the more it increased; insomuch that it became a common
saying. The blood of the martyrs is the seed of the church. Herein the church
of Christ proved to be like a palm tree; of which tree it is remarked, that the
greater weight is laid upon it, or hung to its branches, the more it grows and
flourishes; on which account probably the church is compared to a palm tree in
Cant. vii.7. "This thy stature is like to a palm tree." Justin Martyr, an
eminent father in the Christian church, who lived in the age next after the
apostles, in some writings of his, which are yet extant, says, that in his days
there was no part of mankind, whether Greeks or barbarians, or by what name
soever they were called, even the most rude and unpolished nations, where
prayers and thanksgivings were not made to the great creator of the world,
through the name of the crucified Jesus. Tertullian, another eminent father in
the Christian church, who lived in the beginning of the following age, in some
of his writings which are yet extant, sets forth how that in his day the
Christian religion had extended itself to the utmost bounds of the then known
world, in which he reckons Britain, the country of our forefathers; and thence
demonstrates, that the kingdom of Christ was then more extensive than any of
the four great monarchies; and moreover says, that though the Christians were
as strangers of no long standing, yet they had filled all places of the Roman
dominions, their cities, islands, castles, corporations, councils, armies,
tribes, the palace, senate, and courts of judicature; only they had left to the
Heathen their temples* and that if they should all agree to retire out of the
Roman empire, the world would be amazed at the solitude and desolation that
would ensue upon it, there would be so few left; and that the Christians were
enough to be able easily to defend themselves, if they were disposed to rise up
in arms against the Heathen magistrates. And Pliny, a Heathen who lived in
those days, says, multitude, of each sex, every age and quality, were become
Christians. This superstition, says he, having infected and overrun not the
city only, but towns and countries, the temples and sacrifices are generally
desolate and forsaken.

It was remarked by both Heathen and Christian writers in those days, that the
famous Heathen oracles in their temples, where princes and others for many past
ages had been wont to inquire and receive answers with an audible voice from
their gods, which were indeed answers from the devil; I say, those oracles were
now silenced and struck dumb, and gave no more answers: and particularly the
oracle at Delphos, which was the most famous Heathen oracle in the whole world,
which both Greeks and Romans used to consult, began to cease to give any
answers, even from the birth of Christ; and the false deity who was worshipped,
and used to give answers from his oracle in that temple, being once inquired
of, why he did now give answers as he was won^ to do? made this reply, as
several Heathen historians who lived about those times relate, There is an
Hebrew boy, says he, who is king of the gods, who has commanded me to leave
this house, and be gone to hell, and therefore you are to expect no more
answers Many of the Heathen writers who lived about that time, speak much of
the oracles being silenced, as a thing at which they wondered, not knowing what
the cause should be. Plutarch, a Heathen writer of those times, wrote a
particular treatise about it, which is still extant. And Porphyry, one of the
Heathen writers beforementioned, who opposed the Christian religion, in his
writings has these words: It is no wonder if the city for these so many years
has been overrun with sickness; Esculapius, and the rest of the gods, having
withdrawn their converse with men "for since Jesus began to be worshipped, no
man has received any public help or benefit by the gods."

Thus did the kingdom of Christ prevail against the kingdom of Satan.

3. I now proceed to take notice of the peculiar circumstances of tribulation
and distress just before Constantine the Great came to the throne. This
distress they suffered under the tenth Heathen persecution, which, as it was
the last, so it was by far the heaviest, and most severe. The church before
this, after the ceasing of the ninth persecution, had enjoyed a time of
quietness for about forty years together; but, abusing their liberty, began to
grow cold and lifeless in religion, and carnal, and contentions prevailed among
them; by which they offended God to suffer this dreadful trial to come upon
them. Satan having lost ground so much, notwithstanding all his attempts, now
seemed to bestir himself with more than ordinary rage. Those who were then in
authority set themselves with the utmost violence to root out Christianity, by
burning all Bibles, and destroying all Christians; and therefore they did not
stand to try or convict them in a formal process, but fell upon them where ever
they could; sometimes setting fire to houses where multitudes of them were
assembled, and burning them all together; and at other times slaughtering
multitudes together: so that sometimes their persecutors were quite spent with
the labor of killing and tormenting them; and in some populous places, so many
were slain together, that the blood ran like torrents. It is related, that
seventeen thousand martyrs were slain in one month's time; and that during the
continuance of this persecution, in the province of Egypt alone, no less than
144,000 Christians died by the violence of their persecutors, besides 700,000
that died through the fatigues of banishment, or the public works to which they
were condemned.

This persecution lasted for ten years together; and as it exceeded all
foregoing persecutions in the number of martyrs, so it exceeded them in the
variety and multitude of inventions of torture and cruelty Some authors who
lived at that time, say, they were innummerable, and exceed all account and
expression.

This persecution in particular was very severe in England; and this is that
persecution which was foretold in Rev. vi.9.10. "And when he had opened the
fifth seal, I saw under the altar the souls of them that were slain for the
word of God, and for the testimony which they held. And they cried with a loud
voice, saying, How long, O lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge
our blood on them that dwell on the earth?"

At the end of the ten years during which this persecution continued, the
Heathen persecutors thought they had finished their work, and boasted that they
had utterly destroyed the name and superstition of the Christians, and had
restored and propagated the worship of the gods.

Thus it was the darkest time with the Christian church just before the break
of day They were brought to the greatest extremity just before God appeared for
their glorious deliverance, as the bondage of the Israelites in Egypt was the
most severe and cruel just before their deliverance by the hand of Moses. Their
enemies thought they had swallowed them up just before their destruction, as it
was with Pharaoh and his host when they had hemmed in the children of Israel at
the Red Sea.

4. I come now, in the fourth place, to the great revolution which was in the
world in the days of Constantine, which was in many respects like Christ's
appearing in the clouds of heaven to save his people, and judge the world. The
people of Rome being weary of the government of those tyrants to whom they had
lately been subject, sent to Constantine, who was then in the city of York in
England, to come and take the throne. He being encouraged, as is said, by a
vision of a pillar of light in the heavens, in the form of a cross, in the
fight of his whole army, with this inscription, In this overcome; and the night
following, by Christ's appearing to him in a dream with the same cross in his
hand, who directed him to make a cross like that to be his royal standard, that
his army might fight under that banner, and assured him that he should
overcome. Accordingly he did, and overcame his enemies, and took possession of
the Imperial throne, and embraced the Christian religion, and was the first
Christian emperor that ever reigned. He came to the throne about 320 years
after Christ. There are several things which I would take notice of which
attended or immediately followed Constantine's coming to the throne.

(1) The Christian church was thereby wholly delivered from persecution. Now
the day of her deliverance came after such a dark night of affliction: weeping
had continued for a night, but now deliverance and joy came in the morning. Now
God appeared to judge his people, and repented himself for his servants, when
he saw their power was gone, and there was none shut up or left. Christians had
no persecutions now to fear. Their persecutors now were all put down, and their
rulers were some of them Christians like themselves.

(2) God now appeared to execute terrible judgments on their enemies.
Remarkable are the accounts which history gives us of the fearful ends to which
the Heathen empero^s, and princes, and generals, and captains, and other great
men came, who had exerted themselves in persecuting the Christians; dying
miserably, one and another, under exquisite torments of body, and horrors of
conscience, with a most visible hand of God upon them. So that what now came to
pass might very fi^ly be compared to their hiding themselves in the de^^s and
rocks of the mountains.

(3) Heathenism now was in a great measure abolished throughout the Roman
empire. Images were now destroyed, and Heathen temples pulled down. Images of
gold and silver were melted down, and coined into money. Some of the chief of
their idols, which were curiously wrought, were brought to Constantinople, and
there drawn with ropes up and down the streets for the people to behold and
laugh at. The Heathen priests were dispersed and banished.

(4) The Christian church was brought into a state of great peace and
prosperity. Now all Heathen magistrates were put down, and only Christians were
advanced to places of authority all over the empire. They had now Christian
presidents, Christian governors, Christian judges and officers, instead of
their old Heathenish ones. Constantine set himself to put honor upon Christian
bishops or ministers, and to build and adorn churches; and now large and
beautiful Christian churches were erected in all parts of the world, instead of
the old Heathen temples.

This revolution was the greatest revolution and change in the face of things
that ever came to pass in the world since the flood. Satan, the prince of
darkness, that king and god of the Heathen world, was cast out. The roaring
lion was conquered by the Lamb of God, in the strongest dominion that ever he
had, even the Roman empire. This was a remarkable accomplishment of, Jer. x.ii.
"The Gods that have not made the heavens and the earth, even they shall perish
from the earth, and from under these heavens." The chief part of the world was
now brought utterly to cast off their old gods and their old religion, to which
they had been accustomed much longer than any of their histories give an
account of. They had been accustomed to worship the gods so long, that they
khew not any beginning of it. It was formerly spoken of as a thing unknown for
a nation to change their gods, Jer. ii.10.11.; but now the greater part of the
nations of the known world were brought to cast off their former gods. That
multitude of gods that they worshipped were all forsaken. Thousands of them
were cast away for the worship of the true God, and Christ the only Savior:
and there was a most remarkable fulfillment of that in Is. ii.17.18. "And the
loftiness of man shall be bowed down, and the haughtiness of men shall be made
low* and the Lord alone shall be exalted in that day. And the idols he shall
utterly abolish." Since that, it has come to pass, that those gods that were
once so famous in the world, as Jupiter, and Saturn, and Minerva, and Juno,
etc. are only heard of as things which were of old. They have no temples, no
altars, no worshippers, and have not had for many hundred years.

Now is come the end of the old Heathen world in the principal part of it, the
Roman empire. This great revolution and change of the state of the world, with
that terrible destruction of the great men who had been persecutors, is
compared, in Rev. vi. to the end of the world, and Christ coming to judgment;
and is what is most immediately signified under the sixth seal, which followed
upon the souls under the altar, crying, "How long, O Lord, holy and true, do
thou not avenge our blood on them that dwell on the earth?" This vision of the
sixth seal, by the general consent of divines and expositors, has respect to
this downfall of the Heathen Roman empire; though it has a more remote respect
to the day of judgment, or this was a type of it. The day of judgment cannot
be what is immediately intended; because we have an account of many events
which were to come to pass under the seventh seal, and so were to follow after
those of the sixth seal. What came to pass now is also represented by the
devil's being cast out of heaven to the earth. In his great strength and glory,
in that mighty Roman empire, he had as it were exalted his throne up to heaven.
But now he fell like lightning from heaven, and was confined to the earth. His
kingdom was confined to the meaner and more barbarous nations, or to the lower
parts of the world of mankind. This is the event foretold, Rev. xii.9. etc. And
the great dragon was cast out, that old serpent, called the devil and Satan,
which deceives the whole world: he was cast out into the earth, and his angels
were cast out with him. etc. Satan tempted Christ, and promised to give him the
glory of the kingdoms of the world, but now he is obliged to give it to him
even against his will. This was a glorious fulfillment of that promise which God
made to his Son, that we have an account of in Is. liii.12. "Therefore will I
divide him a portion with the great, and ^e shall divide the spoil with the
strong; because he has poured out his soul unto death: and he was numbered
with the transgressors, and he bare the sin of many, and made intercession for
the transgressors." This was a great fulfillment of the prophecies of the Old
Testament concerning the glorious time of the gospel, and particularly of the
prophecies of Daniel. Now the kingdom of heaven is come in a glorious degree.
It pleased the Lord God of heaven to set up a kingdom on the ruins of Satan's
kingdom. And such success is there of the purchase of Christ's redemption, and
such honor does the Father put upon Christ for the disgrace he suffered* when
on earth. And now see to what a height that glorious building is erected, which
had been building ever since the fall.

INFERENCE. From what has been said of the success of the gospel from Christ's
ascension to the time of Constantine, we may deduce a strong argument of the
true Christian religion, and that the gospel of Jesus Christ is really from
God. This wonderful success of it which has been spoken of, and the
circumstances of it which have been mentioned, are a strong argument of it
several ways.

1. We may gather from what has been said, that it is the gospel, and that
only, which has actually been the means of bringing the world to the knowledge
of the true God. That those are (...) gods whom the Heathen worshipped, and
that there is but one only God, is what, now since the gospel has so taught us,
we can see to be truth by our own reason: it is plainly agreeable to the light
of nature: it can be easily shown by reason to be demonstrably true. The very
Deists themselves acknowledge, that it can be demonstrated, that there is one
God, and but one, who has made and governs the world. But now it is evident
that it is the gospel, and that only, which has actually been the means of
bringing men to the knowledge of this truth: it was not the instructions of
philosophers. They tried in vain: "The world by wisdom kn^w not God." Till the
gospel and the holy scriptures came abroad in the world, all the world lay in
ignorance of the true God and in the greatest darkness with respect to the
things of religion, embracing the absurdest opinions and practices, which all
civilized nations now acknowledge to be childish fooleries. And so they lay one
age after another, and nothing proved effectual to enlighten them. The light of
nature, and their own reason, and all the wisdom of learned men, signified
nothing till the scriptures came. But when these came abroad, they were
successful to bring the world to an acknowledgement of the one only true God,
and to worship and serve him.

Hence it is that all that part of the world which now does own one only true
God, Christians, Jews, Mahometans, and even Deists too, originally came by the
knowledge of him. It is owing to this that they are not in general at this day
left in Heathenish darkness. They have it all, first of all, either immediately
from the scriptures or by tradition from their fathers, who had it first from
the scriptures. And doubtless those who now despise the scriptures, and boast
of the strength of their own reason, as being sufficient to (...) to the
knowledge of the one true God, if the gospel had never come a broad in the
world to enlighten their forefathers, would have been as sottish and brutish
idolaters as the world in general was before the gospel came abroad. The
Mahometans, who own but one true God, at first borrowed the notion from the
scriptures: for the first Mahometans had been educated in the Christian
religion, and apostatized from it. This is evidential, that the scriptures were
designed of God to be the proper means to bring the world to the knowledge of
himself* rather than human reason, or any thing else. For it is unreasonable to
suppose, that the gospel, and that only, which God never de^igned as the proper
means for obtaining this effect* should actually obtain it, and that after
human reason, which he designed as the proper mean, had been tried for a great
many ages without any effect. If the scriptures be not the word of God, then
they are nothing but darkness and delusion, yea the greatest delusion that ever
was. Now, is it reasonable to suppose, that God in his providence would make
use of falsehood and delusion, and that only, to bring the world to the
knowledge of himself, and that no part of it should be brought to the knowledge
of him any other way?

2. The gospel's prevailing as it did against such p^werful opposition, plainly
shows the hand of God. The Roman government, th^^ did so violently set itself
to hinder the success of the gospel, and to subdue the church of Christ, was
the most powerful human government that ever was in the world: and not only so,
but they seemed as it were to have the church in their hands. The Christians
were mostly their subjects, under their command, and never took up arms to
defend themselves: they did ^ot gather together, and stand in their own
defense; they armed themselves with nothing but patience, and such like
spiritual weapons: and yet this mighty power could not conquer them; but, on
the contrary, Christianity conquered them. The Roman empire had subdued the
world; they ^ad subdued many mighty and potent kingdom^: they subdued the
Grecian monarchy, when they were not their subjects, and made the utmost
resistance: and yet they could not conquer the church which was in their hands;
but, on the contrary, were subdued, and finally triumphed over by the church.

3. No other sufficient cause can possibly be assigned of this propag^tion
(...) the gospel, but only God's own power. Nothing else can be devised as the
reason of it but this. Their was certainly some reason Here was a great and
wonderful effect* the most remarkable change that ever was in the face of the
world of mankind since the flood; and this effect was not without some cause.
Now, what other cause can be devised but only the divine power? It was not the
outward strength of the instruments which were employed in it. At first, the
gospel was preached only by a few fishermen, who were without power and worldly
interest to support them. It was not their craft and policy that produced this
wonderful effect; for they were poor illiterate men. It was not the
agreeableness of the story they had to tell to the notions and principles of
mankind. This was no pleasant ^able: A crucified God and Savior was to the
Jews a stumbling block, and to the Greeks foolishness. It was not the
agreeableness of their doctrines to the dispositions of men: for nothing is
more contrary to the corruptions of men than the pure doctrines of the gospel.
This effect therefore can have proceeded from no other cause than the power and
agency of God: and if the power of God was what was exercised to cause the
gospel to prevail, then the gospel i^ his word; for surely God does not use his
almighty power to promote a mere imposture and delusion.

4. This success is agreeable to what Christ and his apostles foretold. --
Matthew. xvi.18. "Upon this rock will I build my church: and the gates of ^ell
shall not prevail against it." John xii.24. "Verily verily I say unto you,
Except a corn of wheat fall into the ground and die, it abides alone: but if
it die, it brings forth much fruit." And verse. 31.32. "Now is the judgment
of this world: now shall the prince of this world be cast out. And I, if I be
lifted up from the earth, will draw all men unto me." John xvi.8. "When he (the
comforter) is come, he will reprove the world of sin, of righteousness, and of
judgment, -- because the prince of this world is judged."

So the Apostle Paul, in 1 Cor. chap. i.21. -- 28. declares, how that after the
world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching,
to save them that believe; and that God chose the foolish things of the world,
to confound the wise; and weak things of the world, to confound the things
which are mighty: and base things of the world, and things which are despised,
yea and things which are not, to bring to naught things that are. -- If any man
foretells a thing, very likely in itself to come to pass, from causes which can
be foreseen, it is no great argument of a revelation from God: but when a thing
is foretold which is very unlikely ever to come to pass, is entirely contrary
to the common course of things, and yet it does come to pass just agreeable to
the prediction, this is a strong argument that the prediction was from God.

Thus the consideration of the manner of the propagation and success of the
gospel during the time which has been spoken of, affords great evidence that
the scriptures are the word of God.

III. I am to show how the success of Christ's redemption is carried on from
the time of the overthrow of the Heathen Roman empire in the time of
Constantine the Great, till the fall of Antichrist, and the destruction of
Satan's visible kingdom on the earth, which is the third great dispensation
which is in scripture compared to Christ's coming to judgment. This is a
period wherein many great and wonderful things are brought to pass. Herein is
contained a long series of wonders of divine providence toward the Christian
church. The greater part of the book of Revelation is taken up in foretelling
the events of this period.

The success of Christ's purchase of redemption in this period, appears mainly
at the close of it, when Antichrist comes to fall, when there will be a far
more glorious success of the gospel than ever was before: and that long series
of events which are before, seem to be only to prepare the way for it. In order
to a more clear view of the great works of God in accomplishing the success of
Christ's redemption, and our seeing the glory of them, it will be necessary, as
we have done in the foregoing periods, to consider not only the success itself,
but the opposition made to it, and the great works of Satan in this period
against the church and kingdom of Christ: and therefore* in taking a view of
this period, I would take notice of events which may be referred to either of
these heads, viz. either to the head of Satan's opposition to the success of
Christ's redemption, or to the head of success of Christ's redemption: and for
the more orderly consideration of the events of this period, I would divide it
into these four parts: the first reaching from the destruction of the Heathen
empire to the rise of Antichrist; the second, from the rise of Antichrist to
the reformation in Luther's time; the third, from thence to the present time;
the fourth, from the present time, till Antichrist is fallen, and Satan's
visible kingdom on earth is destroyed.

1 st, I would consider the events of the first part of this period, reaching
from the destruction of the Heathen empire to the rise of Antichrist. Here,
first, I would take notice of the opposition Satan made in this space of time
to the church: and, secondly, the success that the gospel had in it.

1. The opposition. Satan being cast out of this old Heathen empire, the great
red dragon, after so ^ore a conflict with Michael and his angels for the
greater part of three hundred years, being at last entirely routed and
vanquished, so that no pl^ce was found any more in heaven for him, but he was
cast down, as it were, from heaven to the earth; yet does not give over his
opposition to the woman, the church of Christ, concerning which all this
conflict had been. But he is still in a rage, and renews his attempts, and has
recourse to new devices against the church. The serpent, after he is cast out
of heaven to the earth, casts out of his mouth water as a flood, to cause the
woman to be carried away of the flood. The opposition that he made to the
church of Christ before the rise of Antichrist, was principally of two sorts.
It was either by corrupting the church of Christ with heresies, or by new
endeavors to restore Paganism.

(1) I would observe, that after the destruction of the Heathen Roman empire,
Satan infested the church with heresies. Though there had been so glorious a
work of God in delivering the church from her Heathen persecutors, and
overthrowing the Heathen empire; yet the days of the church's travail not being
ended, and the set time of her prosperity not being yet come, as being what was
to succeed the fa^l of Antichrist, therefore the peace and prosperity which the
church enjoyed in Constantine's time, was but very shor^: it was a respite,
which gave the church a time of peace and silence, as it were, for half an
hour, wherein the four angels held the four winds from blowing, till the
servants of God should be sealed in their foreheads. But the church soon began
to be greatly infested with heresies; the two principal, and those which did
most infest the church, were the Arian and Pelagian heresies.

The Arians began soon after Constantine came to the throne. They denied the
doctrine of the Trinity, and the divinity of Christ and the Holy Ghost, and
maintained, that they were but mere creatures. This heresy increased more and
more in the church, and prevailed like a flood, which threatened to overflow
all, and entirely to carry away the church, insomuch that before that age was
out, that is, before the fourth century after Christ was finished, the greater
part of the Christian church were become Arians. There were some emperors, the
successors of Constantine, who were Arians; so that the Arians being the
prevailing party, and having the civil authority on their side, did raise a
great persecution against the true church of Christ; so that this heresy might
well be compared to a flood out of the mouth of the serpent, which threatened
to overthrow all, and quite carry away the woman.

The Pelagian heresy arose in the beginning of the next century. It began by
one Pelagiu^, who was born in Britain: his Brit^^h name was Morgan. He denied
original sin, and the influence of the Spirit of God in conversion, and held
the power of free will, and many other things of like tendency; and this heresy
did for a while greatly infest the church. Pelagius's principal antagonist, who
wrote in defense of the orthodox faith, was St Augustine.

(2) The other kind of opposition which Satan made against the church, was in
his endeavors to restore Paganism. His first attempt was to restore it in the
Roman empire, was by Julian the apostate. Julian was nephew to Constantine the
Great. When Constantine died, he left his empire to his three sons; and when
they were dead, Julian the apostate reigned in their stead. He had been a
professed Christian; but he fell from Christanity, and turned Pagan; and
therefore he is called the apostate. When he came to the throne, he used his
utmost endeavors to overthrow the Christian church, and set up Paganism again
in the empire. He put down the Christian magistrates, and set up Heathens in
their room: he rebuilt the Heathen temples, and set up the Heathen worship in
the empire, and become a most notorious persecutor of the Christians, and, as
is thought, against his own light: he used to call Christ, by way of reproach,
the Galilean* He was killed with a lance in his wars with the Persians. When he
saw that he was mortally wounded, he took a handful of his blood, and threw it
up toward heaven, crying out, Thou have overcome, O Galilean. He is commonly
thought by divines to have committed the unpardonable sin.

Another way that Satan attempted to restore Paganism in the Roman empire, was
by the invasions and conquests of Heathen nations. For in this space of time
that we are upon, the Goths and Vandals, and other Heathen barbarous nations,
that dwelt in the north of the Roman empire, invaded the empire, and obtained
great conquest, and even over ran the empire, and in the fifth century took the
city of Rome, and finally subdued and conquered, and took possession of the
Western empire, as it was called, or the western half of the empire, and
divided it amongst them; divided it into ten kingdoms, with which began the ten
horns of the beast* for we are told, that the ten horns are ten kings, who
should rise in the latter part of the Roman empire: these are also represented
by the ten ^oes of Nebuchadnezzar's image. The invasion and conquests of these
Heathen nations are supposed to be foretold in the 8th chapter of Revelation,
in what came to pass under the sounding of the four first trumpets. Now these
nations, who now took possession of the Western empire, were Heathens; so that
by their means Heathenism was again for a while restored after it had been
rooted out.

So much for the opposition of Satan against the success of the gospel during
this space before the rise of Antichrist. I proceed,

2 To show what success there was of the gospel in this space, notwithstanding
this oppos^tion.

(1) I would observe, that the opposition of Satan in those things was baffled.
Though the dragon cast out of his mouth such a flood after the woman to carry
her away, yet he could not obtain his design; but the earth helped the woman,
and opened her mouth, and swallowed up the flood which the dragon cast out of
his mouth. These heresies, which for a while so much prevailed, yet after a
while dwindled away, and orthodoxy was again restored: and his attempt by
Julian was baffled at his death.

(2) The gospel, during this space of time, was further propagated amongst many
barbarous Heathen nations in the confines of the Roman empire. In the time of
Constantine there was a considerable propagation of the gospel in the
East Indies, chiefly by the ministry of one Frumentius. Great numbers of the
Iberians an Heathen people, were converted to Christianity by a Christian woman
of eminent piety, whom they had taken captive. Some account is given of several
other barbarous nations who were not within the Roman empire, that great
numbers of them were bro'^ to receive the gospel by the teaching and example of
captives whom they had taken in war. After this, about the year of Christ 372*
the gospel was propagated among the barbarous people that dwelt in Arabia; as
it was also among some of the northern nations; particularly a prince of the
country of the Goths about this time become Christian, and a great number of
hi^ people with him. Toward the latter end of this century, the gospel was
also further propagated among the Persians, and also the Scythians, a barbarous
people, that the apostle mentions in Col. iii.11. "Barbarian, Scythian, bond
nor free."

After this, about the year 430 there was a remarkable con^ersion of a Heathen
people, calle^ the Burgundians, to the Christian faith. About the same time* in
this age, the gospel began to be propagated in Ireland; and the Irish, who till
now had been Heathen, began to receive the Christian faith. About the same time
it was further propagated among some barbarous people in Scotland, and also in
some other places. In the next century to this, one Z^thus, a Heathen king, who
ruled over a people called the Colchian^, was brought to renounce his
Heathenism, and to embrace the Christian religion Several other barbarous
nations are recorded to have renounced Heathenism and embraced Christianity
about this time, that I cannot stand to mention,

Thus I have briefly considered the principal events of providence which
concern the success of the gospel of Christ from Constantine to the rise of
Antichrist.

2 dly* I come now to the second part of the time from Constantine to the
destruction of Antichrist, viz. that which reaches from the rise of Antichrist
to the refo^mation by Luther and others This is the darkest and most dismal day
that ever the christian church saw, and probably the darkest that ever it will
see. The time of the church's affliction and persecution, as was observed
before, is from Christ's resurrection till the destruction o^ An^ichrist,
excepting what the day is, as it were, shortened by some intermissions and
times of respite, which God gives i^ the e^ect's sake. But this time, from the
rise of Antichrist till the Reformation, was a space wherein the Christian
church was in its greatest depth of depression, and its darkest time of all.
The true church in this space was for many hundred years in a state of great
obscurity* like the woman in the wilderness: indeed she was almost hid from
sight and observation. In speaking of the events of this space of time, I
would, 1. Take notice of the great machinations and works of the devil against
the kingdom of Christ during this time; 2. How the church of Christ was upheld
during this time.

1. I would take notice of the great works of the devil against the kingdom of
Christ during this time. Satan had done great things against the Christian
church before, but had been baffled once and again. Michael and his angels had
obtained a glorious victory. How terrible was this opposition during the
continuance of the Heathen empire; and how glorious was Christ's victory and
triumph over him in the time of Constantine! I^ pleased God now to prepare the
way for a yet more glorious victory over him, to suffer him to renew his
strength, and to do the utmost that his power and subtilty can help him to; and
therefore he suffers him to have a long time to lay his schemes, and to
establish his interest, and make his matters strong; and suffers him to carry
his designs a great length indeed almost to the swallowing up of his church;
and to exercise a high, and proud, and almost uncontrouled dominion, in the
world, a long time before Christ finally conquers, and subdues, and utterly
ruins his visible kingdom on earth, as he will do in the time of the
destruction of Antichrist: thus gloriously triumphing over him, after he has
done the utmost that his power and subtilty can extend to, and showing that he
is above him, after he has dealt most proudly, and lifted himself highest of
all.

The two great works of the devil which ^e in this space of time wrought
against the kingdom of Christ, are his erecting his Antichristian and Mohammedan
kingdoms, which have been, and still are, two kingdoms of great extent and
strength, both together swallowing up the ancient Roman empire; the kingdom of
Antichrist swallowing up the Western empire, and Satan's Mohammedan kingdom the
Eastern^empire. As the scriptures in the book of Revelations represente^ it, it
is in the destruction of these that the glorious v^ctory of Christ, at the
introduction ^f the glorious times of the church, will mainly consist. Here let
us briefly observe how Satan e^ects and maintains these two great kingdoms of
his in opposition to the kingdom of Christ.

(1) With respect to the kingdom of Antichrist. This seem, to be the master
piece of all the contrivances of the devil against the kingdom of Christ, and
is evidently so spoken of in scripture, and therefore Antichrist is the man of
sin, or that man of sin* 2 These. ii.3. He is so called e^phatically, a^ though
he was so eminently. So he is called Antichrist, which signifies the opponent
or adversary of Christ. Not that he i^ the only opponent of Christ; there were
many others besides him. The Apostle John observes, that in his days there were
many Antichrists. But yet this is called the Antichrist, as though there were
none but he, because he was so eminently, and above all others. So this
contrivance of the devil, is called the mystery of iniquity, 2 These. ii.7. We
find no enemy of Christ one half so much spoken of in the prophecies of
Revelation as this; and the destruction of no enemy is spoken of as so glorious
and happy for the church. The craft and subtilty of the devil, above all
appears in this work of his; as might be shown, were it not that is would
consume too much time.

This is a contrivance of the devil to turn the ministry of the Christian
church into a ministry of the devil, and to turn these angels of the churches
into fallen angels, and so into devils. In the tyranny, and superstition, and
idolatry, and persecution, which he sets up, he contrives to make an image of
ancient Paganism, and more than to restore what was lost in the empire by the
overthrow of Paganism in the time of Con^^antine: so that by these means the
head of the beast, which was wounded unto death in Constantine, has his deadly
wound healed in Antichrist, Rev. xiii 3. The dragon, that formerly reigned in
the Heathen Roman empire, being cast out thence, after the beast with seven
heads and ten horns rises up out of the sea, gives him his power, and ^ea^, and
great authority; and all the world wonders after the beast.

I am far from pretending to determine the time when the reign of Antichrist
began, which is a point that has been so much controverted among divines and
expositors. It is certain that the 1260 days, or years, which are so often in
scripture mentioned as the time of the continuance of Antichrist's reign, did
not commence before the year of Christ 479* because if they did, they would
have ended, and Antichrist would have fallen before now. But I shall not
pretend to determine precisely how long it was after this that that period
began. The rise of Antichrist was gradual. The Christian church corrupted
itself in many things presently after Constantine's time, growing more and more
superstitious in its worship, by degrees bringing in many ceremonies into the
worship of God, till at length they brought in the worship of saints, and set
up images in their churches, and the clergy in general* and especially the
bishop of Rome, assumed more and more authority to himself. In the primitive
times he was only a minister of a congregation; then a ^^^nding moderator of a
presbytery; then adiocesan bishop; then a metropolitan, which is equivalent to
an archbishop; then he was a patriarch; then afterward he claimed the power of
universal bishop over the whole Christian church through the world; wherein he
was opposed for a while, but afterward was confirmed in it by the civil power
of the Emperor in the year 606. After that he claimed the power of that
temporal prince; and so was wont to carry two swords, to signify that both the
temporal and spiritual sword was his; and claimed more and more authority, till
at length he, as Christ's vicegerent on earth, claimed the very same power that
Christ would have, if he was present on earth, and reigned on his throne, o^
the same power that belongs to God, and used to be called God on earth; and
used to be submitted to by all the princes of Christendom. He claimed power to
crown princes, and to degrade them at his pleasure; and this power was owned:
and it came to that, that kings and emperors used to kiss his feet. The
emperors were wont to receive their crowns at his hands, and princes were were
wont to dread the displeasure of the Pope, as they would dread a thunderbolt
from heaven; for if the Pope was pleased to excommunicate a prince, all his
subjects were at once freed from their allegiance to him; yea, and obliged not
to own him any more, on pain of excommunication; and not only so, but any man
might kill him where ever he found him. And further, the Pope was believed to
have power to damn men a^ pleasure; for whoever died under his excommunication,
was looked upon a^ certainly damned. And several emperors were actually
deposed, and ejected, and died miserable by his means; and if the people of any
state or kingdom did not please him, he had power to lay that state or kingdom
under an interdict, which was a sentence pronounced by the Pope against that
state or kingdom, whereby all sacred adminis^rations among them could have no
validity. There could be no (...) baptisms, or sacraments, or prayers, or
preaching, or pardons, till that interdict was taken off; so that that people
remained, in their apprehension, in a miserable, damnable state and therefore
dreaded it as they would a storm of fire and brimstone from heaven. In order to
execute his wrath on a prince or people with whom the Pope was displeased,
other princes must also be put to a great deal of o^ble and expense.

As the Pope and his clergy robbed the people of their ecclesiastical and civil
liberties and privileges, so they also robbed them of their estates, and
drained all Christendom of their money, and engrossed (...) of their riches
into their own coffers, by their vast revenues, besi^es pay for pardon^ and
indulgences, baptisms and extreme unction^, deliverance out of pu^gatory, and
an hundred other things -- See how well this agree^ with the prophecies, 2
These. ii.3.4. (...). vii 20 21. R^v xiii.6.7. and chap xvii.3 4.

D^^ing this time also ^upers^ition and ignorance more and more prev^iled. The
holy scriptures by degrees were taken out of the hands of the l^ity* the better
to p^omote the unscriptual and wicked desig^s of the P^pe and the clergy: and
instead of promoting knowledge among the people, they industriously promoted
ignorance. It was a received m^x^m among them, That ignorance is the mother of
devotion: and so great was the darkness of those times, that learning was
almost extinct in the world. The very priests themselves, most of them, were
barbarously ignorant as to any commendable learning, or any other knowledge,
than their hellish craft in oppressing and tyrannizing over the souls of the
people. The superstition and wickedness of the church Rome, kept growing worse
and worse till the very time of the Reformation; and the whole Christian world
were led away into their great defection, excepting the remains of the
Christian church in the Eastern empire that had not been utterly overthrown by
the Turks, as the Greek church, and some others, which were also s^^k into
great darkness and gross superstition, excepting also those few that were the
people of God, who are represented by the woman in the wilderness, and God's
two witnesses, of which more hereafter.

This is one of those two g^e^t kingdoms which the devil in this period erected
in oppositon to the kingdom of Christ, and was the greatest and chief. I come
now*

(2) To speak of the other, the second, which is in many respects like unto it,
v^z. his M^hometan kingdom, which is another great kingdom of mighty power and
vast extent, set up by Satan against the ki^gdom of Christ: he set this up in
the Eastern empire, as he did that of Antichrist in the Western.

Mahomet was born in the year of Christ ^70, in Arabia. When he was about forty
years of age, he began to give forth that he was the great prophet of God, and
began to teach his new invented religion, of which he was to be worshipped as
the head next under God. He published his Alcoran, which he pretended he
received from the angel G^briel; and being a subtle crafty man, and possessed
of considerable wealth, and living among a people who were very ignorant, and
greatly divided in their opinions of religious matters, by subtlety, and fair
promises of a sensual paradi^^, he gained a number to be his followers, and set
up for their prince, and propagated his religion by the sword, and made it
meritorious of paradise to fight for him. By which means his party grew, and
went on fighting till they conquered and brought over the neighboring
countries; and so his party gradually grew till they overran a great part of
the world. First, the Saracens, who were some of his followers, and were a
people of the country of Arabia, where Mahomet lived, about the year 700, began
dreadfully to waste the Roman empire. They overran a great many countries
belonging to the empire, and continued their conquest for a long time. These
are supposed to be meant by the locusts that we read of in the 9th chapter of
Revelation.

After this the Turks, who were originally another people, different from the
Saracens, but were followers of Mahomet* conquered all the Eastern empire. They
began their empire about the year of Christ 1296* and began to invade Europe
about 1300, and took Constantinople, and so became m^^ters of all the E^stern
empire in the year 1453, which is near three hundred years ago. Thus all those
cities and countries where were those famous churches of old, that we read of
in the New Testament, as Jerusalem, Antioch, Ephesus, Corinth, etc. now all
became subject to the Turks. And they took possession of Constantinople, which
was named after Constantine, the Great, being made by him the head city of the
Roman empire, whereas Rome had been till then. These are supposed to be
prophesied of by the horsemen in the 9^h chapter of Revelation, beginning with
the 15th verse. The Remains of the Christians that are in those parts of the
world, who are mostly of the Greek church, are in miserable slavery under these
Turks, and treated with a great deal of barbarity and cruelty, and are become
mostly very ignorant and superstitious.

Thus I have shown what great works of Satan were wrought during this space of
time in opposition to the kingdom of Christ.

2. I come now to show how the church of Christ was upheld through this dark
time. -- Here,

(1) It is to be observed, that toward the former part of this space of time,
some of the nations of Christendom held out a long time before they complied
with the corruptions and usurpations of the church of Rome. Though all the
world wondered after the beast, yet all nations did not fall in at once. Many
of the principal corruptions of the church of Rome were brought in with a great
deal of struggle and opposition; and particularly, when the Pope gave out, that
he was universal bishop* many churches greatly opposed him in it; and it was a
long time before they would yield to his exorbitant claims. And so, when the
worship of images was first brought into the churches, there were many who
greatly opposed it, and long held out against it. And so with respect to other
corruptions of the church of Rome. Those people that dwelt nearer the city of
Rome complied sooner, but some that were more remote, were a long time before
they could be induced to put their necks under the yoke: and particularly
ecclesiastical history gives an account, that it was so with great part of the
churches in England, and Scotland, and France, who retained the ancient purity
of doctrine and worship much longer than many others, who were nearer the chief
seat of Antichrist.

(2) In every age of this dark time, there appeared particular persons in all
parts of Christendom, who bore a testimony against the corruptions and tyranny
of the church of Rome. There is one age of Antichrist, even in the darkest
times of all, but ecclesiastical historians mention great many by name, who
manifested an abhorrence of the Pope, and his idolatrous worship, and pleaded
for the ancient purity of doctrine and worship. God was pleased to maintain an
uninterrupted succession of witnesses through the whole time, in Germany,
France, Britain, and other countries; as historians demonstrate, and mention
them by name* and give an account of the test^mony which they held. Many of
them were private persons, and many of them ministers, and some magistrates,
and persons of great distinction. And there were numbers in every age who were
persecuted and put to death for this testimony.

(3) Besides these particular persons dispersed here and there, there was a
certain people, called the Waldenses, who lived separate from all the rest of
the world, who kept themselves pure, and constantly bore a testimony against
the church of Rome through all this dark time. The place where they dwelt was
the Vaudois, or the five valleys of Piedmont, a very mountainous county,
between Italy and France. The place they lived was compassed about with those
exceeding high mountains called the Alps* which (...) almost impassable. The
passage over these mountainous de^er^ countries, was so difficult, that the
valleys where this people dwelt were almost inaccessable. There this people
lived for many ages* as it were, alone, in a state of separation from all the
world, having very little to do with any other people. There they served God in
the ancient purity of his worship, and never submitted to the church of Rome.
This place in this desert mountainous country, probably was the place
especially meant in the 12th chapter of Revelation, 6th verse, as the place
prepared of God for the woman, that they should feed her there during the reign
of Antichrist.

Some of the Popish writers themselves own, that that people never submitted to
the church of Rome. One of the Popish writers, speaking of the Waldenses, says.
The heresy of the Waldenses i^ the oldest heresy in the world. It is supposed
that this people first betook themselves to this desert secret place among the
mountains* to hide themselves from the severity of the Heathen persecutions
which were before Constantine the Great. Thus the woman fled into the
wilderness from the face of the serpent, Rev. xii.6. And so, verse. 14. "And to
the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that she might fly into the
wilderness, into her place: where she is nourished for a time, and times, and
half a time, from the face of the serpent." The people being settled there,
their posterity continued there from age to age afterward: and being, as it
were, by natural walls, as well as by God's grace, separated from the rest of
the world, never partook of the overflowing corruption.

These especially were those virgins who were not defiled with the rest of
women, or when other women prostituted themselves and were defiled; but they
kept themselves pure for Christ alone: they followed the Lamb, their spiritual
husband, whithersoever he went: they followed him into this hideous wilderness,
Rev. xiv.4.5. -- Their doctrine and their worship, as there still remain
accounts of them, appear to be the same with the Protestant doctrine and
worship; and by the confession of Popish writers, they were a people remarkable
for the strictness of their lives, for charity and other Christian virtues.
They lived in external poverty in this hideous country* but they chose this
rather than to comply with the great corruptions of the rest of the world.

They lived in so secret a place, it was a long time before they seem to have
been much taken notice of by the Romanists; but a^ last falling under
observation, they went out in mighty armies against them, and fell upon them
with insatiable cruelty, barbarously massacring and putting to death, men,
women, and children, with all imaginable tortures; and so continued persecuting
them with but little intermission for several hundred years; by which means
many of them were driven out of their old habitations in the valleys of
Piedmont, and fled into all parts of Europe, carrying with them their doctrine,
to which many were brought over. So their persecutors could not by all their
cruelties extirpate the church of God; so fulfilling his word, "that the gates
of hell should not prevail against it."

(4) Toward the latter part of this dark time, several noted divines openly
appeared to defend the truth, and bear testimony against the corruptions of the
church of Rome, and had many (...), The first and principal of these was a
certain English divine, whose name was John Wickliff, who appeared about 140
years before the Reformation, and strenuously opposed the Popish religion, and
taught the same doctrine that the Reformers afterward did, and had many
followers in England. He was hotly persecuted in his lifetime, yet he died in
peace; and after he was buried* his bones were dug up by his persecutors, and
burnt. His followers remained in considerable numbers in England till the
Reformation, and were cruelly persecuted, and multitudes put to death for their
religion.

Wickliff had many disciples and followers, not only in England, but in other
parts of Europe, whither his books were carried; and particularly in Bohemia,
among whom were two eminent divines, the name of one was John Hus^, the other's
name was Jerome, a divine belonging to Prague, the chief city of Bohemia. These
strenuously opposed the church of Rome, and had many who adhered to them. They
were both burnt by the Papists for their doctrine; and their followers in
Bohemia were cruelly persecuted, but never extirpated till the Reformation.

Thus having gone through this dark time of the church, which is the second
part of the space from Constantine to the destruction of Antichrist, I come now,

3 dly* To the third part, viz. that which begins with the Reformation, and
reaches to the present time. And here I would, 1. Speak of the Reformation
itself; 2. The opposition which the devil has made to the Reformed church; 3
What success there has lately been of the gospel in one place and another; 4
What the state of things is now in the world with regard to the church of
Christ, and the success of his pu^chase.

1. Here the first thing to be taken notice of is the Reformation. This was
begun about 220 years ago: first in Saxony in Germany, by the preaching of
Martin Luther, who, being stirred in his spirit, to see the horrid practices of
the Popish clergy, and having set himself diligently to inquire after truth, by
the study of the holy scriptures, and the writings of the ancient fathers of
the church, very openly and boldly decried the corruptions and usurpations of
the Romish church in his preaching and writings, and had soon a great number
that fell in with him; among whom was the Elector of Saxony, the sovereign
prince of the country to which he belonged. This greatly alarmed the church of
Rome; and it did as it were rally all its force to oppose him and his doctrine,
and fierce wars and persecutions were raised against it: but yet it went on by
the labors of Luther, and Melancthon in Germany, and Z^inglius in Switzerland,
and other eminent divines, who were cotemporary with Luther, and fell in with
him; and particularly Calvin, who appeared something after the beginning of the
Reformation, but was one of the most eminent Reformers.

Many of the princes of Germany soon fell in with the Reformed religion, and
many other states and kingdoms in Europe, as Scotland, Sweden, Denmark, Norway,
great part of France, Poland, Lithuania, Switzerland and the Low Countries. So
that it is thought, that heretofore about half Christendom were of the
Protestant religion; though, since, the Papists have gained ground; so that the
Protestants now have not so ^great a proportion.

Thus God began gloriously to revive his church again, and advance the kingdom
of his Son, after such a dismal night of darkness as had been before from the
rise of Antichrist to that time. There had been many endeavors used by the
witnesses for the truth for a reformat^on before. But now, when God's appointed
time was come, his work was begun, and went on with a swift and wonderful
progress; and Antichrist, who had been rising ^igher and higher from his very
first beginning till that time, was swiftly and suddenly brought down, and fell
half^way toward utter ruin, and never has been able to rise ag^in to his
former height. A certain very late expositor (Mr. Lowman)* who explains the
five first vials in the 16th chapter of Revelation, with greater probability
perhaps than any who went before him, explains the fifth vial, which was p^ured
out on the seat of the beast, of what came to pass in the Reformation;
explaining the four proceeding vials of certain great judgments God brought on
the Popish dominions before the Reformation. It is said, R^v. xvi.10 that "the
fifth angel poured out his vial on the seat of the beast;" in the original, it
is the throne of the beast; "and his kingdom was full of darkness, and they
gnawed their tongues for pain, and blasphemed the God of heaven because of
their pains and their sores, and repented not of their deeds." He poured out
his vial upon the throne of the beast, i. e. on the authority and dominion of
the P^pe: so the word throne is often used in scripture; so 1 Kings i.37. "As
the Lord has been with my lord the king* even so be he with Solomon, and make
his throne greater than the throne of my lord King David;" i e make his
dominion and authority greater, and his kingdom more glorious.

But now, in the Reformation, the vials of God's wrath were poured out on the
thron^ of the beast. His throne was terrible shaken and diminished. The Pope's
authority and dominion was greatly diminished, both as to the extent and
degree. He lost, as was said before, about half his dominions. Besides, since
the Reformation, the P^pe has lost great part of that authority, even in the
Popish dominions, which he had before. He is not regarded, and his power is
dreaded in no measure as it was wont to be. The powers of Europe have learned
not to put their necks under the Pope's feet, as formerly they were wont to do.
So that he is as a lion that has lost his ^eeth* in comparison of what he was
once.

When the Pope and his clergy, enraged to see their authority so diminished at
the Reformation, laid their heads together, and joined their forces to destroy
the Reformation; their policy, which was wont to serve them so well, failed;
and they found their kingdom full of darkness, so that they could do nothing,
any more than the Egyptians, who rose not from their seats for three days. The
Reformed church was defended as Lot and the angels were in Sodom, by smiting
the Sodomites with darkness or blind^ness, that they could not find the door.
God then (...) that in Job v.11. etc. "To set up on high those that below; that
those which mourn may be exalted to safety. He disappointeth the devices of the
crafty, so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise. He takes the wife
in their own craftiness: and the counsel of the froward is carried headlong.
They meet with darkness in the daytime, and grope in the noonday as in the
night. But he saves the poor from the sword, from their mouth, and from the
hand of the mighty."

Those proud enemies of God's people being so disappointed, and findi^g
themselves so unable to uphold their own dominion and authority, this made them
as it were to gnaw their tongues for pain, or bite their tongues for there rage.

2. I proceed therefore to show what opposition has been made to this success
of Christ's purchase by the Reformation by Satan and his adherents; observing,
as we go along, how far they have been baffled, and how far they have been
successful.

The opposition which Satan has made against the Reformed religion has been
principally of the following kinds. viz. that which was made. 1 by a general
council of the church of Rome; 2 by secret plots and devices; 3. by open wars
and invas^ons; 4 by cruel oppression and persecution; and, 5 by bringing in
corrupt opinions.

(1) The first opposition that I shall take notice of i^ that which was made by
the clergy of the church of Rome uniting together in a general council. This
was the famous council of Trent, which the Pope called a little while after the
Reformation. In that council, there met together six cardinal^, thirty^two
archbishops, two hundre^ and twenty eight bishops, besides innumerable others
of the R^mish clergy This council, in all their sittings, including the time^
of intermission between their sittings, was held for twenty five years
together. Their main business all this while was to conce^^ measures for
establishing the church of Rome against the Reformers, and for destroying the
Reformation. But it proved that they were not able to perform their enterprise.
The Reformed church, notwithstanding their holding so great a council, and for
so long a time together against it remained, and remains still. So that the
counsel of the froward is carried headlong, and their kingdom is full of
darkness* and they weary themselves to find the door.

Thus the church of Rome, instead of repenting of their deeds, when such clear
light was held forth to them by Luther and other servants of God, the
Reformers, does, by general agreement in council, persist in their vile
corruptions and wickedness, and obstinate opposition to the kingdom of Christ.
The doctrines an practices of the church of Rome, which were chiefly condemned
by the Reformed, were confirmed by the decrees of their council; and the
corruptions, in many respects, were carried higher than ever before; and they
uttered blasphemous reproaches and curses against the Reformed religion, and
all the Reformed church was excommunicated and anathematized by them; and so,
according to the prophesy, "they blasphemed God." Thus God hardened their
hearts, intending to destroy them.

(2) The Papists have often endeavored to overthrow the Reformation by secret
plots and conspiracies. So there were many plots against the life of Luther.
The Papists were engaged in contriving to dispatch him, and to put him out of
their way; and he, as he was a very bold man, often very much exposed himself
in the cause of Christ: but yet they were wonderfully prevented from hurting
him, and he at last died in his bed in peace. And so there have been from time
to time innumerable schemes secretly laid for the overthrow of the Protestant
religion; among which, that which seem to be most considerable, and which
seemed to be the most likely to have taken effect, was that which was in the
time of King James II. of England, which is within the memory of many of us.
There was at that time a strong conspiracy between the King of England and
Lewis XIV. of France, who were both Papists, to extirpate the Northern heresy,
as they called the Protestant religion, not only out of England, but out of all
Europe; and had laid their schemes so, that they seemed to be almost sure of
their purpose. They looked upon it, that if the Reformed religion were
suppressed in the British realms, and in the Netherlands, which were the
strongest part, and chief defense of the Protestant interest, they should have
easy work with the rest. And just as their matters seemed to become to a head,
and their enterprise ripe for execution, God, in his providence, suddenly
dashed all their schems in pieces by the Revolution, at the coming in of King
William and Queen Mary; (...) which all their designs were at an end; and the
Protestant interest was more strongly established, by the crown of England's
being established in the Protestant house of Hanover, and a Papist being, by
the constitution of the nation, for ever rendered incapable of wearing the
crown of England. Thus they groped in darkness at noon day as in the night, and
their hands could not perform their enterprise, and their kingdom was full of
darkness, and they gnawed their tongues for pain.

After this, there was a deep design laid to bring the same thing to pass in
the latter end of Queen Anne's reign, by the bringing in of the Popish
pretender: which was no less suddenly and totally baffled by divine Providence;
as the plots against the Reformation, by bringing in the pretender, have been
from time to time.

(3) The Reformation has often been opposed by open wars and invasions. So in
the beginning of the reformation, the Emperor of Germany, to suppress the
Reformation, declared war with the Duke of Saxony, and the principal men who
favored and received Luther's doctrine. But they could not obtain their end;
they could not suppress the Reformation. For the some end, the King of Spain
maintained a long war with Holland and the Low Cou^^ries in the century before
last. But those cruel wars issued greatly to the disadvantage of the Romish
church, as they occasioned the (...) up of one of the most powe^ful Protestant
states in Europe, which, next to Great Britian, is the chief barrier of the
Protestant religion. And the design of the Spanish invasion of England in Queen
Elisabeth's time, was to suppress and ^oo^ out the Reformed religion; and
therefore they brought in their fleet all manner of instruments of cruelty
wherewith to torture the Protestants who would not renounce the Protestant
religion. But their designs were totally baffled, and their mighty fleet in a
great measure ruined.

(4) Satan has opposed the Reformation with cruel persecutions. The
persecutions with which the Protestants in one kingdom and another have been
persecuted by the church of Rome, have in many respects been far beyond any of
the Heathen persecutions which were before Constantine the Great, and beyond
all that ever were before. So that Antichrist has proved the greatest and
cruelest enemy to the church of Christ that ever was in the world, in this, a^
well as in all other respects; agreeable to the ^escription given of the church
of Rome, Rev. xvii 6. "And I s^w a woman drunken with the blood of saints, and
with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus." And, chap. xviii.24. "And on her was
found the blood of prophets, and of saints, and all of them that were slain
upon the earth."

The Heathen persecutions had been very dreadful: but now persecution by the
church of Rome was improved and studied, and cultivated, as an art or science.
Such ways of afflicting and tormenting were found out, as are beyond the
thought and invention of ordinary men, or men who are unstudied in those
things, and beyond the invention of all former ages. That persecution might be
managed the more effectually, there were certain societies of men established
in various parts of the Popish dominions, whose business it should be to study,
and improve, and practice persecution in its highest perfection, which are
those societies called the courts of inquisition. A reading of the particular
histories of the R^mish persecution, and their courts of inquisition, will give
that idea which a few words cannot express.

When the Reformation began, the beast with seven heads and ten horns began to
rage in a dreadful manner. After the Reformation, the church of Rome renewed
its persecution of the poor Waldenses, and great multitudes of them were
cruelly tortured and put to death. Soon after the Reformation, there were
terrible persecutions in various parts of Germany; and especially in Bohemia,
which lasted for thirty years together; in which so much blood was shed for the
sake of religion, that a certain writer compares it to the plenty of waters of
the great rivers of Germany. The countries of Poland, Lit^unia, and Hungary*
were in like manner deluged with Protestant blood.

By means of these and other cruel persecutions, the Protestant Religion was in
a great measure suppressed in Bohemia, and the Palatinate, and Hungary, which
before were as it were Protestant countries. Thus was fulfilled what was
foretold of the little horn, Dan. vii.20 21 " -- and of the ten horns that were
in his head, and of the other which came up, and before whom three fell, even
of that horn that had eyes, and a mouth that spoke very great things, whose
look was more stout than his fellows. I beheld, and and the same horn made war
with the saints, and prevailed against them." And what was foretold of the
beast having seven heads and ten horns. Rev. ^*ii.7. And it was given unto him
to make war with the saints, and to overcome them: and power was given him over
all kindreds, and tongues, and nations." Also Holland and the other L^w
Countries were for many years a scene of nothing but the most aff^cting and
amazing cruelties, being deluged with the blood of Protestants, under the
merciless hands of the Spaniards, to whom they were then in subjection. But in
this persecution, the devil in a great measure failed of his purpose; as it
issued in a great part of the Netherlands casting off the Spanish yoke, and
setting up a wealthy and powerful Protestant state, to the great defense of the
protestant cause ever since.

France also is another country, which, since the Reformation, in some
respects, perhaps more than any other, has been a scene of dreadful cruelties
suffered by the Protestants there. After many cruelties had been exercised
toward the Protestants in that kingdom, there was begun a persecution of them
in the year 1571, in the reign of Charles IX. King of France. It began with a
cruel massacre, wherein 70,000 Protestants were slain in a few days time, as
the King boasted: and in all this persecution, be slew, as i^ supposed, 300,000
mary^s. It is reckoned, that about this time, within thirty years, there were
martyred in this kingdom, for the Protestant religion, 39 princes, 148 counts,
234 barons, 147,518 gentlemen, and 760,000 of the common people.

But all these persecutions were, for exquisite cruelty, far exceeded by those
which followed in the reign of Lewis XIV. which indeed are supposed to exceed
all others that ever have been; and being long continued* by reason of the long
reign of that King, almost wholly extirpated the Protestant religion out of
that kingdom, where had been before a multitude of famous Protestant churches
all over the kingdom. Thus it was given to the beast to make war with the
saints, and to overcome them.

There was also a terrible persecution in England in Queen Mary's time, wherein
^great numbers in all parts of the kingdom were burnt alive. After this, though
the Protestant religion has been for the most part established by law in
England, yet there have been very severe persecutions by the high church men,
who symbolize in many things with the Papists. Such a persecution was that
which occasioned our forefathers to f^ee from their native country, and to come
and settle in this land, which was then an hideous howling wilderness. These
persecutions were continued with little intermission till King William come to
the throne.

Scotland also has been the scene, for many years together, of cruelties and
blood by the hands of high churchmen, such as came very little short of the
Popish persecution in Queen Mary's days, and in many things much exceed it,
which continued till they were delivered by King William.

Ireland also has been as it were overwhelmed with Protestant blood. In the
days of King Charles I of England, above 200,000 Protestants were cruel^y
murdered in that kingdom in a few days; the Papists, by a secret agreement,
rising all over the kingdom at an apppointed time, intending to kill every
Protestant in the kingdom at once.

Besides these, there have been very cruel persecutions in Italy, and Spain,
and other places, which I shall not stand to relate.

Thus did the devil, and his great minister Antichrist, rage with such violence
and cruelty against the church of Christ! and thus did the whore of Babylon
make herself drunk with the blood of the saints and martyrs of Jesus! and thus,
by these persecutions, the Protestant church has been much diminished! Yet with
all have they not been able to prevail; but still the Protestant church is
upheld, and Christ fulfils his promise, that "the gates of hell shall not
prevail against his church."

(5) The last kind of opposition that Satan has made to the Reformation is by
corrupt opinions. Satan has opposed the light of the gospel which shone forth
in the Reformation with many corrupt opinions, which he has brought in and
propagated in the world.

Here, in the first place, the first opposition of this kind was by raising up
the sect of the Anabaptists, which began about four or five years after the
Reformation itself began. This sect, as it first appeared in Germany* were
vastly more extravagant than the present Anabaptists, are in England. They held
a great many exceeding corrupt opinions. One tenet of theirs was, That there
ought to be no civil authority, and so that it was lawful to rebel against
civil authority. On this principle, they refused to submit to magistrates, or
any human laws; and gathered together in vast armies, to defend themselves
against their civil rulers; and put all Germany into an uproar, and so kept it
for some time.

The next opposition of this kind to the Reformation was that which was made by
enthusiasts. Those are called enthusiasts who falsely pretend to be inspired by
the Holy Ghost as the prophets were. These began in Germany about ten years
after Luther began the Reformation; and there arose various sects of them who
were exceeding wild and extravagant. The followers of these are the Quakers in
England, and other parts of the British dominions.

The next to these were the Socinians, who had their beginning chiefly in
Poland, by the teaching of two men; the name of the one was Laelius Socinus, of
the other, Faust^^ Socinus. They held, that Christ was a mere man, and denied
Christ's satisfaction, and most of the fundamental doctrines of the Christian
religion. Their heresy has since been greatly propagated among Protestants in
Poland, Germany, Holland, England, and other places.

After these arose the Arminians. These first appeared in Holland about 130
years ago. They take their name from a Dutchman, whose name was Jacobus Van
Harmin, which* turned into Latin, is called Jacobus Arminius; and from his name
the whole sect are called Arminians. This Jacobus Arminius was first a minister
at Amsterdam, and then a professor of divinity in the university of Leyden. He
had many followers in Holland. There was upon this a synod of all the Reformed
churches called together, who met at Dort in Holland. The synod of Dort
condemned them; but yet they spread and prevailed. They began to prevail in
England in the reign of Charles I. especially in the church of England. The
church of England divines before that were almost universally Calvinists: but
since that, Arminianism has gradually more and more prevailed, till they are
become almost universally Arminians. And not only so, but Arminianism has
greatly prevailed among the Dissenters, and has spread greatly in New England,
as well as Old.

Since this, Arianism has revived. As I told you before, Arianism, a little
after Constantine's time, almost swallowed up the Christian world, like a flood
out of the mouth of the serpent which threatened to swallow up the woman. And
of late years, this heresy has been revived in England, and greatly prevails
there, both in the church of England, and among Dissenters. These hold, that
Christ is but a mere creature, though they grant that he is the greatest of all
creatures.

Again, another thing which has of late exceedingly prevailed among
Protestants, and especially in England, is Deism. The Deists wholly cast off
the Christian religion, and are professed infi^els. They are not like the
heretics, Arians, Socinians, and others, who own the scripture to be the word
of God and hold the Christian religion to be the true religion, but only deny
these and these fundamental doctrines of the Christian religion: they deny the
whole Christian religion. Indeed they own the being of God; but deny that
Christ was the Son of God, and say he was a mere cheat; and so they say all the
prophets and apostles we^e: and they deny the whole scripture. They deny that
any of it is the word of God. They deny any revealed religion, or any word of
God at all; and say, that God has given mankind no other light to walk by but
their own reason. These sentiments and opinions our nation, which is the
principal nation of the Reformation, is very much overrun with, and they
prevail more and more.

Thus much concerning the opposition that Satan has made against the
Reformation.

3. I proceed now to show what success the gospel has more lately had, or what
success it has had in these later times of the Reformed church. This success
may b^ reduced to these three heads: 1. Reformation in doctrine and worship in
countries called Christian; 2. Propagation of the gospel among the Heathen; 3.
Revival of religion in the power and practice of it.

(1) As to the first, viz. reformation in doctrine, the most considerable
success of the gospel that has been of late of this kind, has been in the
empire of Muscovy, which is a country of vast extent. The people of this
country, so many of them as call themselves Christians, professed to be of the
Greek church; but were barbarously ignorant* and very superstitious, till of
late years. Their late Emperor Peter the Great, who reigned till within these
twenty years, set himself to reform the people of his dominions, and took great
pains to bring them out of their darkness, and to have them instructed in
religion. And to that end, he set up schools of learning, and ordered the Bible
to be printed in the language of the country, and made a law that every family
should keep the holy scriptures in their houses, and that every person should
be able to read the same, and that no person should be allowed to marry till
they were able to read the scriptures. He also reformed the churches of his
country of many of their superstitions, whereby the religion professed and
practiced in Muscovy is much nearer to that of the Protestants than formerly it
used to be. This emperor g^ve great encouragement to the exercise of the
Protestant religion in his dominions. And since that Muscovy is become a land
of light, in comparison of what it was before. Wonderful alterations have been
brought about in the face of religion for the better within these fifty years
past.

(2) As to the second kind of success which the gospel has lately ^ad, viz its
propagation among the Heathen, I would take notice of three things.

[1] The propagation there has been of the gospel among the Heathen here in
America. This American continent on which we live, which is a very great part
of the world, and, together with its neighboring seas adjoining, takes up one
side of the globe, was wholly unknown to all Christian nations till these
latter times. It was not known that there was any such part of the world,
though it was very full of people: and therefore here the devil had the people
that inhabited this part of the world as it were secure to himself, out of the
reach of the light of the gospel, and so out of the way of molestation in his
dominion over them. And here the many nations of Indians worshipped him as God
from age to age, while the gospel was confined to the opposite side of the
globe. I^ is a thing which, if I remember right, I have some where lit of, as
probably supposed from some remaining accounts of things, that occasioned the
peopleing of America was this, that the devil being alarmed and surprised by
the wonderful success of the gospel which there was the first three hundred
years after Christ, and by the downfall of the Heathen empire in the time of
Constantine; and seeing the gospel spread so fast, and fearing his Heathenish
kingdom would be wholly overthrown through the world, led away a people from
the other continent into America, that they might be quite out of the reach of
the gospel, that here he might quietly possess them, and reign over them as
their god. It is what many writers give an account of, that some of the nations
of Indians, when the Europeans first came into America, had a tradition among
them, that their god first led them into this continent, and went before them
in an ark.

Whether this was so or not, yet it is certain that the devil did here quietly
enjoy his dominion over the poor nations of Indians for many ages. But in later
times God has sent the gospel into these parts of the world, and now the
Christian church is set up here in New England, and in other parts of America,
where before had been nothing but the grossest Heathenish darkness. Great part
of America is now full of Bibles, and full of at least the form of the worship
of the true God and Jesus Christ, where the name of Christ before had not been
heard of for many ages, if at all. And (...) there has been but a small
propagation of the gospel among the Heathen here, in comparison of what were to
be wished for; yet there has been something worthy to be taken notice of. There
was something remarkable in the first times of New England, and something
remarkable has appeared of late here, and in other parts of America among many
Indians, of an inclination to be instructed in the Christian religion.

However small the propagation of the gospel among the Heathen here in America
has been hitherto, yet I think we may well look upon the discovery of so great
a part of the world as America, and bringing the gospel into it, as one thing
by which divine providence is preparing the way for the future glorious times
of the church; when Satan's kingdom shall be overthrown, not only throughout
the Roman empire, but throughout the whole habitable globe, on every side, and
on all its continents. When those times come, then doubtless the gospel, which
is already brought over into America, shall have glorious success, and all the
inhabitants of this new discovered world shall become subjects of the kingdom
of Christ, as well as all the other ends of the earth: and in all probability
providence has so ordered it, that the mariner's compass, which was an
invention of later times, whereby men are enabled to sail over the widest
ocean, when before they durst not venture far from land; should prove a
preparation for what God intends to bring to pass in the glorious times of the
church, viz. the sending forth the gospel wherever any of the children of men
dwell, how far soever off, and however separated by wide oceans from those
parts of the world which are already Christianized.

[2] There has of late years been a very considerable propagation of the gospel
among the Heathen in the dominions of Muscovy. I have already observed the
reformation which there has lately been among those who are called Christians
there: but I now speak of the Heathen. Great part of the vast dominions of the
Emperor of Muscovy are gross Heathens The greater part of Great Tartary, a
Heathen country, has in later times been brought under the Muscovite
government; and there have been of late great numbers of those Heathens who are
renounced their Heathenism, and have embraced the Christian religion.

[3] There has been lately a very considerable propagation of the Christian
religion among the Heathen in the East Indies; particularly, many in a country
in the East Indies called Malabar, have been brought over to the Christian
Protestant religion, chiefly by the labors of certain missionaries sent thither
to instruct them by the King of Denmark, who have brought over many Heathens to
the Christian faith, and have set up schools among them, and a printing ^ress
to print Bibles and other books for their instruction, in their own language,
with great success.

(3) The last kind of success which there has lately been of the gospel* which
I shall take notice of, is the revivals of the power and practice of religion
which have lately been. Here I shall take notice of but two instances.

(1) There has not long since been a remarkable revival or the power and
practice of religion in S^xony in Germany, through the endeavors of an eminent
divine there, whose name was August Herman Frank, professor of divinity at Hall
in Saxony, who being a person of eminent charity* the great work that God
wrought by him, began with his setting on foot a charitable design. It begin
only with his placing an alms-box at his study door, into which some poor mites
were thrown, whereby books were bought for the instruction of the poor. God was
pleased so wonderfully to smile on his design, and so to pour out a spirit of
charity on people there on that occasion, that with their charity he was
enabled in a little time to erect public schools for the instruction of poor
children, and an orphan-house for the supply and instruction of the poor; so
that at last it came to that, that near five hundred children were maintained
and instructed in learning and piety by the charity of others; and the number
continued to increase more and more for many years, and till the last accounts
I have seen. This was accompanied with a wonderful reformation and revival of
religion, and a spirit of piety, in the city and university of Hall; and thus
it continued. Which also had great influence in many other places in Germany.
Their example seemed remarkably to stir up multitudes to their imitation.

(2) Another thing, which it would be grateful in us not to take notice of, is
that remarkable pouring out of the Spirit of God which has been of late in this
part of New England, of which we, in this town, have had such a share. But it
is needless for me particularly to describe it, it being what you have so
lately been eyewitnesses to, and I hope multitudes of you sensible of the
benefit of.

Thus I have mentioned the more remarkable instances of the success which the
gospel has lately had in the world.

4. I proceed now to the last thing that was proposed to be considered relating
to the success of Christ's redemption during this space, viz. what the state of
things is now in the world with (...) to the church of Christ, and the success
of Christ's purchase. This I would do, by showing how things are now, compared
with the first times of the Reformation. 1. I would show wherein (...) of
things is altered for the worse; and, 2. How it is altered (...) the better.

(1) I would show wherein the state of things is altered (...) what it was in
the beginning of the Reformation, for the (...); and it is so especi^^^ in
these three respects

[1] The reformed church is much diminished. The Reformation in the former
times of it, as was observed before, was supposed (...) take place through one
half of Christendom, excepting the (...) church; or that there were as many
Protestants as Papists. But now it is not so; the Protestant church is much
diminished. Heretofore there have been multitudes of Protestants in France;
many famous Protestant churches were all over that country, who used to me^^
together in synonds, and maintain a very regular discipline; and great part of
that kingdom were Protestants. The P^otestant church of France was a great part
of the glory of the Reformation. But now it is far otherwise: this church is
all b^oken to pieces and scattered. The Protestant religion is almost wholly
rooted out of that kingdom by the cruel persecutions which have been there, and
there are now but very few Protestant assemb^^es in all tha^ ^ingdom. The
Protestant interest is also greatly diminished in Germany. There were several
sovereign princes (...) who were Protestants, whose successors are now Papists;
(...) particularly, the Elector Palatine, and the Elector of (...). The kingdom
of Bo^emia was formerly a Protestant kingdom, but is now in the hands of the
Papists* and so Hungary was formerly a Protestant country; bu^ the Protestants
there have been greatly ^edu^ed, and in a great measure subdued, by the
persecutions that have been there. And the Protestant interest has no way
remarkably gained gro^n^ of late of the church of Rome.

(2) Another thing within the state of things is altered for the worse from it
what was in the former times of the Reformation, i^ the prevailing of
licentiousness in principles and opinions. There is not now that spirit of
orthodoxy which there was then: there is very little appearance of z^al for the
mysterious and spiritual doctrines of Christianity; and they never were so
ridiculed, and had in contempt, as they are in the present age; and especially
in England, the principal kingdom of the Reformation. In this kingdom, those
principles, on which the power of godliness dedepends, are in a great measure
exploded, and Arianism, the Socinian^sm, so, and Arminianism, and Deism, are
the things which prevail, and carry almost all before them Particularly history
gives no account of any age wherein there was so great an apostasy of those who
had been brought up under the light of the gospel, to infidelity; never was
there such a casting off of the Christian and all revealed religion; never any
age wherein was so much scoffing at and rediculing the gospel of Christ, by
those who have been brought up under gospel light, nor any thing like it, as
there is at this day.

[3] Another thing wherein things are altered for the worse, is, that the (...)
is much less of the prevalency of the power of godliness, that there was at the
beginning of the Reformation. There was a glorious ou^ pouring of the Spirit of
God that accompanied the first Reformation, not only to convert multitudes in
so short a time from Pope^y to the true religion, but to turn many to God and
true godliness. Religion gloriously flourished in one country and another, as
most rem^rkably appeared in those times of terrible persecution, which have
already been spoken of. But now there is an exceeding great decay of vital
piety; yea, it seems to be despised, called enthusiasm, whimsy, and fanaticism.
Those who are truly religious, are commonly looked upon to be crack brained,
and beside their right mind; and vice and profaneness dreadfully prevail, like
a flood which threatens to bear down all before it. -- But I proceed now to
show,

(2) In what respect things are altered for the better from what they were in
the first Reformation.

[1] The power and influence of the Pope is much diminished. Although, since
the former times of the Reformation, he has gained ground in extent or
dominion; yet he has lost in degree of influence. The vial which in the
beginning of the Reformation was poured out on the throne of the beast, to the
great diminishing of his power and authority in the world, has continued
running ever since. The Pope, soon after the Reformation, became less regarded
by the princes of Europe than he had been before; and so he has been since less
and less. Many of the Popish princes themselves them now to regard him very
little more than they think will serve their own designs; of which there have
been several remarkable proofs and instances of late.

[2] There is far less persecution now than there was in the first times of the
Reformation. You have heard already how dreadfully persecution raged in the
former times of the Reformation; and there is something of it still. Some parts
of the Protestant church are at this day under persecution, and so probably
will be till the day of the church's suffering and travail is at an end, which
will not be till the fall of Antichrist. But it is now in no measure as it was
heretofore. There does not seem to be the same spirit of persecution
prevailing; it is become more out of fashion even among the Popish princes. The
wickedness of the enemies of Christ; and the opposition against his cause, seem
to run in another channel. The humor now is, to despise the laugh at all
religion; and their seems to be a spirit of indifferency about it. However, so
far the state of things is better than it has been, that there is so much less
of persecution.

(3) There is a great increase of learning. In the dark times of Popery before
the Reformation, learning was so far decayed, that the world seemed to be
overrun with barbarous ignorance. Their very priests were many of them grossly
ignorant. Learning began to revive with the Reformation, which was owing very
much to the art of printing, which was invented a little before the
Reformation; and since that, learning has increased more and more, and at this
day is undoubtedly raised to vastly a greater height than ever it was before:
and though no good use is made of it by the greater part of learned men, yet
the increase of learning in itself is a thing to be rejoiced in, because it is
a good, and, if duly applied, an excellent handmaid to divinity, and is a
talent which, if God gives to men an heart, affords them a great advantage to
do great things for the advancement of the kingdom of Christ, and the good of
the souls of men. That learning and knowledge should greatly increase before
the glorious times, seems to be foretold, Dan. xii 4. "But thou, O Daniel, shut
up the words, an seal the book* even to the time of the end; many shall run to
and fro, and knowledge shall be increased." And however little no^ learning is
applied to the advancement of religion; yet we may hope that the days are
approaching wherein God will make great use of it for the advancement of the
kingdom of Christ.

God in his providence now seems to be acting over again the same part which he
did a little before Christ came. The age wherein Christ came into the world,
was an age wherein learning greatly prevailed, and was at greater height than
ever it had been before* and yet wickedness never prevailed more than then. God
was pleased to suffer human learning to come to such a height before he sent
forth the gospel into the world, that the world might see the insufficiency of
all their own wisdom for the obtaining the knowledge of God, without the gospel
of Christ, and the teachings of his Spirit: and then, after that, in the wisdom
of God, the the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God, by the
foolishness of preaching, to save them that believe. And when the gospel came
to prevail first without the help of man's wisdom, then God was pleased to make
use of learning as an handmaid. So now learning is at a great height at this
day in the world far beyond what it was in the age when Christ appeared; and
now the world, by their learning and wisdom, do not k^ow God; and they seem to
wande^ in darkness, are miserably de^uded, ^^mble and fall in matters of
religion, as in midnight-darkness. Trusting to their learning, they grope in
the day time as in the night Learned men are exceedingly divided in their
opinions concerning the matters of religion* run into all manner o^ corrupt
opinions, and pernicious and foolish errors. They (...) submi^ their reason to
divine revelation, to believe any thing that is above their comprehension; and
so being wise in their own eyes* they become fools. and even vain in their
imaginations* and turn the truth of God into a lie, and their foolish hearts
are d^rkened. See Romans ^ 21* etc.

But yet, when God has sufficiently shown men the insuffic^ency of human wisdom
and learning for the purposes of religion* and when the appointed time comes
for that glorious (...) of the Spirit of God, when he will himself by his own
immediate influence enlighten men's minds; then may we hope that God will make
use of the great increase of learning as an handmaid to religion, as a means of
the glorious advancement of the ^i^gdom of his Son. Then shall human learning
be subservient to the understanding of the scriptures, and to a clear
explanation and a glorious defense of the doctrines of christianity. There is
no doubt to be made of it, that God in his providence has of late given the
world the art of printing, and such a great increase of learning, to prepare
for what be designs to accomplish for his church in the approaching day of its
prosperity. Thus the wealth of the wicked is laid up for the just* agreeable to
Prove. xiii.22.

HAVING now shown how the work of redemption has been carried on from the fall
of man to the present time, before I proceed any further, I would make some
APPLICATION.

1 From what has been said, we may see great evidence of the truth of the
Christian religion and that the scriptures are the word of God. There are three
arguments of this, which I shall take notice of, which may be drawn from what
has been said.

(1) It may be argued from that violent and inveterate opposition there has
always appeared of the wickedness of the world against this religion. The
religion that the church of God has professed from the first founding of the
church after the fall to this time, has always been the same. Though the
dispensations have been altered, yet the religion which the church has
professed has always, as to its essentials, been the same. The church of God,
from the beginning, has been one society. The christian church which has been
since Christ's ascension, is manifestly the same society continued with the
church, that was before Christ came. The Christian church is grafted on their
root: they are built on the same foundation. The revelation on which both have
depended, is essentially the same: for as the Christian church is built on the
holy scriptures, so was the Jewish church though now the scriptures be enlarged
by the addition of the New Testament; but still it is essentially the same
revelation with that which was given in the Old Testament, only the subjects of
divine revelation are now more clearly revealed in the New Testament than they
were in the Old. But the sum and substance of both the Old Testament and New,
is Christ and his redemption. The religion of the church of Israel, was
essentially the same religion with that of the Christian church, as evidently
appears from what has been said. The ground work of the religion of the church
of God, both before and since Christ has appeared, is the same great scheme of
redemption by the Son of God* and so the church that was before the Israelitish
church, was still the same society, as it was essentially the same religion
that was professed and practiced in it. Thus it was from Noah to Abraham, and
thus it was before the flood And this society of men that is called the church,
has always been built on the foundation of those revelations which we have in
the scriptures, which have always been essentially the same, though gradually
increasing The church before the flood, was built on the foundation of those
revelations of Christ which were given to Adam, and Abel, and Enoch, of which
we have an account in the former chapters of Genesis* and others of the like
import. The church after the flood, was built on the foundation of the
revelations made to Noah and Abraham, to Melchisedek, Isaac, and Jacob, to
Joseph, Job, and other holy men of whom we have an account in the scriptures,
or other revelations that were to the same purpose. And after this the church
depended on the scriptures themselves as they gradually increased; so that the
church of God has always been built on the foundation of divine revelation, and
always on those revelations that were essentially the same, and which are
summarily comprehended in the holy scriptures, and ever since about Moses's
time have been built on the scriptures themselves.

So that the opposition which has been made to the church of God in all ages,
has always been against the same religion, and the same revelation. Now
therefore the violent and perpetual opposition that has ever been made by the
corruption and wickedness of mankind against this church, is a strong ar^^ment
of the truth of this religion, and this revelation, upon which this church ^as
always been built. Contraries are well argued one with another. We may well and
safely argue, that a thing is good, according to the degree of opposition in
which it stands to evil, or the degree in which evil opposes it, and is an
enemy to it. We may well argue, that a thing is light, by the great enmity
which darkness has to it. Now it is evident by the things which you have heard
concerning the church of Christ, and that the holy religion of Jesus Christ
which it has professed, that the wickedness of the world has had a perpetual
hatred to it, and has made most violent opposition against it.

That the church of God has always met with great opposition in the world, none
can deny. This is plain by profane history as far as that reaches; and before
that, divine history gives us the same account. The church of God* and its
religion and worship* began to be opposed in Cain's and Abel's time, and was so
when the earth was filled with violence in Noah's time. After this, how was the
church opposed in Egypt! and how was the church of Israel always hated by the
nations round about, agreeable to that in Jer. xii.9 "Mine heritage is unto me
as a speckled bird, the birds round about are against her." After the
Babylonish captivity, how was this church persecuted by Antiochus Epiphanes and
others! and how was Christ persecuted when he was on earth! and how were the
apostles and other Christians persecuted by the Jews, before the destruction of
Jerusalem by the Romans! How violent were that people against the church* and
how dreadful was the opposition of the Heathen world against the Christian
church after this before Constantine! How great was their spite against the
true religion! Since that, how yet more violent, and spiteful, and cruel, has
been the opposition of Antichrist against the church!

There is no other such instance of opposition. History gives no account of any
other body of men that have been so hated, and so maliciously and insatiably
pursued and persecuted, nor any thing like it. No other religion ever was so
maligned age after age. The nations of other professions have enjoyed their
religion in peace and and quietness, however they have differed from their
neighbors. One nation has worshipped one sort of gods, and others another,
without molesting or disturbing one another about it. All the spite and
opposition has been against this religion, which the church of Christ has
professed. All other religions have seemed to show an implacable enmity to
this; and men have seemed to have, from one age to another, such a spite
against it, that they have seemed as though they could never satisfy their
cruelty. They put their inventions upon the rack to find out torments that
should be cruel enough; and yet, after all, never seemed to be satisfied. Their
thirst has never been satisfied with blood.

So that this is out of doubt, that this religion, and these scriptures, have
always been malignantly opposed in the world. The only question that remains
is, What it is that has made this opposition? whether it be the wickedness and
corruption of the world, or not, that has done this? But of this (...) can be
no greater doubt than of the other, if we consider how ^^useless this cruelty
has always been, who the opposers have been, and the manner in which they have
opposed. The opposition has chiefly been from Heathenism and Popery; which
things certainly are evil. They are both of them very evil, and the fruits of
the blindness, corruption, and wickedness of men, as the very Deists themselves
confess. The light of nature shows, that the religion of Heathens, consisting
in the worship of idols, and sacrificing their children to them, and in obscene
and abominable rites and ceremonies, is wickedness. And the superstitions, and
idolatries, and usurpations, of the church of Rome, are no less contrary to the
light of nature. By this it appears, that this opposition which has been made
against the church of God, has been made by wicked men. With regard to the
opposition of the Jews in Christ's and the apostles times, it was in a most
corrupt time of that nation* when the people were generally become exceeding
wicked, as some of the Jewish writers themselves, as Josephus and others, who
lived about that time, do expressly say. That it has been mere wickedness that
has made this opposition, is manifest from the manner of opposition. the
extreme violence, injustice, and cruelty, with which the church of God has been
(...). It seems to show the the (...) of malignant in^ernal spirit^ in (...).

Now what reason can be assigned, w^y the corruption and wickedness of the
world should so implacably set itself against this religion of Jesus Christ,
and against the scriptures, but only that they are contrary to wickedness, and
consequently are good and holy? Why should the enemies of Christ, for so many
thousand years together, manifest such a mortal hatred of this religion, but
only that it is the cause of God? If the scriptures be not the word of God, and
the religion of the church of Christ be not the true religion, the^ it must
follow, that it is a most wicked religion; nothing but a pack of lies and
abominable delusions, invented by the enemies of God themselves. If this were
so, it is not likely that the enemies of God, and the wickedness of the world,
would have maintained such a perpetual and implacable enmity against it.

(2) It is a great argument that the Christian church and its religion is from
God, that it has been upheld hitherto through all the opposition and dangers it
has passed through. That the church of God and the true religion, which has
been so continually and violently opposed, with so many endeavors to overthrow
it, and which has so often been brought to the brink of ruin, and almost
swallowed up, through the greatest part of six thousand years, has yet been
upheld, does most remarkably show the hand of God in favor of the church. If
we consider it, it will appear one of the greatest wonders and miracles that
ever came to pass. There is nothing else like it upon the face of the earth.
There is no other society of man that has stood as the church has. As to the
old world, which was before the flood, that was overthrown by a deluge of
waters: but yet the church of God was preserved. Satan's visible kingdom on
earth was then once entirely overthrown; but the visible kingdom of Christ
never has been overthrown. All those ancient human kingdoms and monarchies of
which we read, and which have been in former ages, they are long since come to
an end. Those kingdoms of which we read in the Old Testament, of the Moabites,
the Ammonites, the Edomites, etc. they are all long ago come to an end. Those
four great monarchies of the world have been overthrown one after another. The
great empire of (...) Babylon was overthrown by the Persians; and then the
Persian empire was overthrown by the Greeks; after this the Grecian empire was
overthrown by the Romans; -- and, finally, the Roman empire (...) sacrifice to
various barbarous nations. Here is a remarkable fulfillment of the words of the
text with respect to other things, even the greatest and most glorious of them:
they have all grown old, and have vanished away; "The moth has eaten them up
like a garment, the worm eaten them like wool;" but yet God's church remains.

Never where there so many and so potent endeavors to destroy any thing else,
as there have been to destroy the church. Other kingdoms and societies of men,
which have appeared to be ten times as strong as the church of God, have been
destroyed with an hundred^^ part of the opposition which the church of God has
me^ with: which shows, that it is God who has been the protector of the church.
For it is most plain, that it has not upheld itself by i^ own strength. For the
most part, it has been a very weak society. They have been a little flock: so
they were of old. The children of Israel were but a small handful of people, in
comparison of the many who often sought their overthrow. And so in Christ's
time, and in the beginning of the Christian church after Christ's resurrection,
they were but a remnant: whereas the whole multitude of the Jewish nation were
against them. And so in the beginning of the Gentile church, they were but a
small number in comparison with the Heathen, who sought their overthrow. And so
in the dark times of Antichrist, before the Reformation, they were but a
handful; and yet their enemies could never overthrow them. It has commonly been
so, that the enemies of the church have not only had the greatest number of
their side, but they have had the strength of their side in other respects.
They have commonly had all the civil authority of their side. So it was in
Egypt: the civil authority was of the side of the Egyptians, and the church
were only their slaves, and were in their hands; and yet they could not
overthrow them. So it was in the time of the persecution of Antiochus
Epiphanes: the authority was all on the side of the persecutors, and the church
was under their dominion; and yet all their cruelty could not extirpate it. So
it was afterward in the time of the Heathen Roman government. And so it was in
the time of Julian the apostate, who did his utmost to overthrow the Christian
church, and to restore Heathenism. S^ it has been for the most part since the
rise of Antichrist: for a great many ages, the civil authority was all on the
side of Antichrist, and the church seemed to be in their hands.

Not only has the strength of the enemies of the church been greater than the
strength of the church, ^^t ordinarily the church has not used what strength
they have had in their own defense, but have committed themselves wholly to
God. So i^ was in the time of the Jewish persecutions before the destruction of
Jerusalem by the Romans; and so it was in the time of the Heathen persecutions
before Constantine; the Christians did not only not rise up in arms to defend
themselves, but they did not pretend to make any forcible resistance to their
Heathen persecutors. So it has for the most part been under the Popish
persecutions; and yet they have never been able to overthrow the church of God;
but it stands to this very day.

This is still the more exceeding wonderful, if we consider how often the
church has been brought to the brink of ruin, and the case seemed to be
desperate, and all hope gone, and they seemed to be swallowed up. In the time
of the old world, when wickedness so prevailed, as that but one family was
left, yet God wonderfully appeared, and overthrew the wicked world with a
flood, and preserved his church. So at the Red sea, when Pharaoh and his ^ost
though they were quite sure of their prey; yet God appeared, and destroyed
them, and delivered his church. So was it from time to time in the church of
Israel, as has been shown. So under the tenth and last Heathen persecution,
their persecutors boasted that now they had done the business for the
Christians, and had overthrown the Christian church; yet in the midst of their
triumph, the Christian church rises out of the d^st and prevails, and the
Heathen empire totally falls before it. So when the Christian church seemed
ready to be swallowed up by the Arian heresy; so when Antichrist rose and
prevailed, and all the world wondered after the beast, and the church for many
hundred years was reduced to such a small number, and seemed to be hidden, and
the power of the world was engaged to destroy those little remainders of the
church; yet they could never fully accomplish their design, and at last God
wonderfully revived his church in the time of the Reformation, and made it to
stand as it were on its feet, in the sight of its enemies, and raised it out of
their reach. So since, when the Popish powers have plotted the overthrow of the
Reformed church, and have seemed just about to bring their matters to a
conclusion, and to finish their design, then God has wonderfully appeared for
the deliverance of his church, as it was in the time of the Revolution by King
William. So it has been from time to time: presently after the darkest times of
the church, God has made his church most gloriously to flourish.

If such a preservation of the church of God, from the beginning of the world
hitherto, attended with such circumstances, is not sufficient to show a divine
hand in favor of it, what can be devised that would be sufficient? But if this
be from the divine hand, then God owns the church, and own her religion and
owns that revelation and those scriptures on which she is built; and so it will
follow, that their religion is the true religion, or God's religion, and that
the scriptures, which they make their rule, are his word.

(3) We may draw this further argument for the divine authority of the
scriptures from what has been said, viz. that God has so fulfilled those things
which are foretold in the scriptures. -- I have already observed, as I went
along, how the prophecies of the scripture were fulfilled: I shall now
therefore single out but two instances of the fulfillment of scripture prophecy.

(1) One is in preserving his church from being ruined. I have just now shown
what an evidence this is of the divine authority of the scriptures in itself
considered: I now speak of it as a fulfillment of scripture-prophecy. This is
abundantly foretold and promised in the scriptures, as particularly in the
text; there it is foretold that other things should fa^l, other kingdoms and
monarchies, which set themselves in opposition, should come to nothing: "The
moth should eat them up like a garment, and the worm should eat them like
wool." So it has in fact come to pass. But it is here foretold, that God's
covenant-mercy to his church should continue for ever; and so it has hitherto
proved, though now it be so many ages since, and though the church has passed
through so many dangers. The same is promised, Is. live.17. "No weapon^ that is
formed against thee, shall prosper; and every tongue that shall rise against
the in judgment, thou shall condemn." And again, Is. xlix.14.15 16. "But Zion
said, The Lord has forsaken me, and my Lord has forgotten me. Can a woman
forget her sucking child, that should not have compassion on the son of her
womb? yea, they may forget, yet will I not forget thee. Behold, I have graven
thee upon the palms of my hands, thy walls are continually before me." The some
is promised again in Is. lix.21. and Is. xliii.1.2. and Zech. xii.2.3. So
Christ promises the same, when he says, "On this rock will I build my church,
and the gates of hell shall not prevail against it." Now if this be not from
God, and the scriptures be not the word of God, and the church of Christ built
on the foundation of this word be not of God, how could the persons who
foretold this, know it? for if the church were not of God, it was a very
unlikely thing ever to come to pass. For they foretold the great opposition,
and the great dangers, and also foretold that other kingdoms should come to
naught, and that the church should often be almost swallowed up, as it were
^asy to show, and yet foretold that the church should remain. Now how could
they foresee so unlikely a thing but by divine inspiration?

(2) The other remarkable instance which I shall mention of the fulfillment of
scripture-prophecy, i^ in fulfilling what is foretold concerning Antichrist, a
certain great opposer of Christ and his kingdom. The way that this Antichrist
should arise* is foretold, viz. not among the Heathen, or those nations that
never professed Christianity; but that he should arise by the apostasy and
falling away of the Christian church into a corrupt state: 2 These. ii.3. "For
that day shall not come, except there come a falling away first, and that man
of sin be revealed, the son of perdition." -- It is prophesied, that this
Antichrist, or man of sin, should be one, that should set himself up in the
temple or visible church of God, pretending to be vested with the power of God
himself* as head of the church, as in the same chap. verse. 4. All this is
exactly come to pass in the church of Rome. Again, it is intimated, that the
rise of Antichrist should be gradual, as there, verse. 7. "For the mystery of
iniquity does already work: only he who now lets, will let, until he be
taken out of the way" This also came to pass. -- Again, it is prophesi^d of
such a great and mighty enemy of the Christian church, that he should be a
great prince o^ monarch of the Roman empire: so ^e is represented as an horn of
the fourth beast in Daniel, or fourth kingdom or monarchy upon earth, as the
angel himself explains it, a^ you may see of the little horn in the 7th chapter
of Daniel. This also came to pass. -- Yea it is prophesied, that the seat of
this great prince, or pretended vicar of God, and head of his church, should be
in the city of R^me itself. In the 17th chapter of Revelation, it is said
expressly, that the spiritual whore, or false church, should have her seat on
seven mountains or hills: Rev. xvii.9. "The seven heads are seven mountains, on
which the woman (...):" and in the last verse of the chapter, it is said
expressly, "The woman which thou saw, is that great city, which reigns
over the kings of the earth*" which it is certain was at that time the city of
Rome. This prophecy also has come to pass in the church of Rome.

Further, it was prophesied, that this Antichrist should reign over peoples,
and multitudes, and nations, and tongues, Rev. xvii.15.* and that all the world
should wonder after the beast, Rev xiii.3. This also came to pass in the church
of Rome. It was foretold that this Antichrist should be eminent and remarkable
for the sin of pride, pretending to great things, and assuming very much to
himself: so in the forementioned place in Thessalonians, "That he should exalt
himself above all that is called God," or that is worshipped. So Rev. xiii.5.
"And there was given unto him a mouth speaking great things, and blasphemies."
Dan. vii.20. the little horn is said to have a mouth speaking very great
things, and his look to be more stout than his fellows. This also came to pass
in the Pope, and the church of Rome. -- It was also prophesied, that Antichrist
should be an exceeding cruel persecutor, Dan. vii.21. The same horn made war
with the saints, and prevailed against them: Rev. xiii.7. "And it was given
unto him to make war with the saints, and to overcome them." Rev. xvii.6. "And
I saw the wom^n drunken with the blood of the saints, and with the blood of the
martyrs of Jesus." This also came to pas^ in the church of Rome. -- It was
foretold, that Antichrist should excel in craft and policy: Dan, vii.8. "In
this horn were eyes like the eyes of a man." And verse. 20. "Even so that horn
that had eyes." This also came to pass in the church of Rome. -- It was
foretold, that the kings of Christendom should be subject to Antich^ist: Rev.
xvii.12.13. "And the ten horns which thou savest, are ten king^, which have
received no kingdoms as yet; but receive power as kings one hour with the
beast. These have one mind, and shall give their power and strength unto the
beast." This also came to pass with respect to the Romish church. -- It was
foretold, that he should perform pretended miracles and lying wonder^: 2 These.
ii.9. "Whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all power, and signs,
and lying wonders." Rev. xiii.13.14. "And he does great wonders, so that he
makes fire come down from heav^n on the earth, in the sight of men, and
deceives them that dwell on the earth, by the means of those miracles which he
had power to do in the sight of the beast." This also came to pass in the
church of Rome. Fire's coming down from heaven, seemed to have reference to
their excommunications, which were dreaded like fire from heaven. -- It was
foretold, that he should forbid to marry, and to abstain from meats: 1 Timothy
iv.3. "Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which God
has created to be received with thanksgiving." This also i^ exactly fulfiled
in the church of Rome. -- It was foretold, that he should be very rich, and
arrive at a great degree of earthly splendour and glory: Rev. xvii.4. "And the
woman was arrayed in purple, and scarlet color, and decked with gold and
precious stones, and pearls, having a golden cup in her hand." And so chap.
xviii.7*12.13.16. This also is come to pass with respect to the church of Rome.
-- It was foretold, that he should forbid any to buy or sell, without they had
his mark: Rev. xiii.17. "And that no man might buy or sell, save h^ that had
the mark of the beast, or the number of his name." This also is fulfilled in
the church of Rome. -- It was foretold, that he should f^ll the souls of m^n,
Rev. xviii.13. where, in enumerating the articles of his merchan^ise. the souls
of men are mentioned as one. This also is ex^ctly fulfilled in the same church.
-- It was foretold, that Antichrist would not s^ffer the bodies of God's people
to be put into graves: Rev. xi.8.9. "And their dead bodies shall lie in the
street of the great city, -- and they -- shall not ^uffer their dead bodies to
be put in graves." This also has literally come to pass with respect to the
church of Rome. -- I might mention many other things which were foretold of
Antichrist, or that great enemy of the church so often spoken of in scripture,
and show that they were fulfiled most exactly in the Pope and the church of
Rome.

How strong an argument is this, that the scriptures are the word of God?

2 But I come now to a second inference; which is this: From what has been
said, we may learn what the spirit of true Christians is, viz. a spirit of
suffering. Seeing God has so ordered it in his providence, that his church
should for so long a time, for the greater part of so many ages, be in a
suffering state, yea, and often in a state of such extreme suffering, we may
conclude, that the spirit of the true church is a suffering spirit, otherwise
God never would have ordered so much suffering for the church; for doubtless
God accommodates the state and circumstances of the church to the spirit that
he has given them. We see by what has been said, how many and great sufferings
the Christian church for the most part has been under for these 1700 years: no
wonder therefore that Christ so much inculcated upon his disciples, that it was
necessary, that if any would be his disciples* 'They must deny themselves, and
take up their cross and follow him.'

We may argue, that the spirit of the true church of Christ is a suffering
spirit, by the spirit the church has shown and excercised under her suffering.
She has actually, under those terrible persecutions though which she has
passed, rather chosen to undergo those dreadful torments, and to sell all for
the pearl of great price, to suffer all that her bitterest enemies could
inflict, than to renounce Christ and his religion. History furnishes us with a
great number of remarkable instances, sets in view a great cloud of witnesses.
This abundantly confirms the necessity of being of a spirit to sell all for
Christ, to renounce our own case, our own worldly profit, and honor, and our
all, for him, and for the gospel.

Let us inquire, whether we are of such a spirit. How does it prove upon trial?
Does it prove in fact that we are willing to deny ourselves, and renounce our
own worldly interest, and to pass through the trials to which we are called in
providence? Alas, how small are our trials, compared with those of many of our
fellow Christians in former ages! I would on this occasion apply that in Jer.
xii.5. "If thou have run with the footmen, and they wearied thee, then how
can thou contend with horses?" If you have not been able to endure the light
trials to which you have been called in this age, and in this land, how would
you be able to endure the far greater trials to which the church has been
called in former ages? Every true Christian has the spirit of a martyr, and
would suffer as a martyr, if he were called to it in providence.

3. Hence we learn what great reason we have, assuredly to expect the
fulfillment of what yet remains to be fulfilled of things foretold in scripture.
The scriptures foretell many great things yet to be fulfilled before the end of
the world. But there seem to be great difficulties in the way. We seem at
present to be very far from such a state as i^ foretold in the scriptures; but
we have abundant reason to expect, that these things, however seemingly
difficult, will yet be accomplished in their season. We see the faithfulness of
God to his promises hitherto. How true has God been to his church, and
remembered his mercy from generation to generation! We may say concerning what
God has done hitherto for his church, as Joshua said to the the children of
Israel, Josh. xxi^i.14. "That not one thing has f^iled of all that the Lord
our God has spoken concerning his church;" but all things are hitherto come to
pass agreeable to the divine prediction. This should strengthen our faith in
those promises, and encourage us, and stir us up to earnest prayer to God for
the accomplishment of the great and glorious things which yet remain to be
fulfilled.

IT has already been shown how the success of Christ's redemption was carried
on through various periods down to the present time.

4thly. I come now to show how the success of Christ's redemption will be
carried on from the present time, till Antichrist is fallen, and Satan's
visible kingdom on earth is destroyed. -- And with respect to this space of
time, we have nothing to guide us but the prophecies of scripture. Through most
of the time from the fall of man to the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans,
we had scripture history to guide us; and from thence to the present time we
had prophecy, together with the accomplishment of it in providence, as related
in human histories. But henceforward we have only prophecy to guide us. Here I
would pass by those things that are only conjectural, or that are surmised by
some from those prophecies which are doubtful in their interpretation, and
shall insist only on those things which are more clear and evident.

We know not what particular events are to come to pass before that glorious
work of God's Spirit begins, by which Satan's kingdom is to be overthrown. By
the consent of most divines, there are but few things, if any at all, that are
foretold to be accomplished before the beginning of that glorious work of God.
Some think the slaying of the witnesses, Rev. xi.7*8 is not yet accomplished.
So divines differ with respect to the pouring out of the seven vials, of which
we have an account, Rev xvi. how many are already poured out, or how many
remain to be poured out; though a late expositor, whom I have before mentioned
to you, seems to make it very plain and evident, that all are already poured
out but two, viz the sixth on the river Euphrates, and the seventh into the
air. But I will not now stand to inquire what is intended by the pouring out of
the sixth vial on the river Euphrates, that the way of the kings of the east
may be prepared; but only would say, that it seems to be something immediately
preparing the way for the destruction of the spiritual Babylon, as the drying
up of the river Euphrates, which ran through the midst of old Babylon, was what
prepared the way of the kings of the Medes and Persians, the kings of the east,
to come in under the walls, and destroy that city.

But whatever this be, it does not appear that it is any thing which shall be
accomplished before that work of God's Spirit is begun, by which, as it goes
on, Satan's visible kingdom on earth shall be utterly overthrown. Therefore I
would proceed directly to consider what the scripture reveals concerning the
work of God itself, by which he will bring about this great event, as being the
next thing w^^ch i^ t^ be accomplished that we are certain of from the
prophecies of scripture.

First* I would observe two things in general concerning it.

1. We have (...) reason to conclude from the scriptures, that jus^ before this
work of God begins, it will be a very dark time with respect to the interests
of religion in the world. It has been so before those glorious revivals of
religion that have been hitherto. I^ was so when Christ came; it was an
exceeding degenerate time among the Jews: and so it was a very dark time before
the Reformation. Not only so, but it seems to be fore^old in scripture, that it
shall be a time of but little religion, when Christ shall come to set up his
kingdom in the world. Thus when Christ spoke of his coming to ^^courage his
elect, who cry to him day and night, in L^ke xviii 8 he adds this,
"Nevertheless, "when the Son of (...) comes, shall he find faith on the
earth?" Which seems to denote a great prevalency of infidelity just before
Christ's coming to avenge his suffering church. Though Christ's coming at the
last judgment is not here to be excluded, yet there seem^ to be a special
respect to his coming to deliver his church from their long continued suffering
persecuted state, which is accomplished only at his coming at the destruction
of Antichrist. That time that the elect cry to God, as in Rev. vi.10. "How
long, O Lord, holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood on them
that dwell on the earth?" and the time spoken of in Rev. xviii.20. "R^joice
over her, thou heaven, and ye holy Apostles, and prophets, for God has avenged
you on her," will then be accomplished.

It is now a very dark time with respect to the interests of religion, and such
a time as this prophesied of in this place; wherein their is but little faith,
and a great prevailing of infidelity on the earth. There is now a remarkable
fulfillment of that in 2 Pet. iii.3. "Knowing this, that there shall come in the
last days scoffers, walking after their own lusts." So Jude, 17.18. "But
beloved, remember ye the words which were spoken before of the apostles of our
Lord Jesus Christ; how that they told you there should be mockers in the last
time, who should walk after their own ungodly lusts*" Whether the times shall
be any darker still, or how much darker, before the beginning of this glorious
work of God, we cannot tell.

2. There is no reason from the word of God to think any other, than that this
great work of God will be wrought, though very swiftly, yet gradually. As the
children of Israel were gradually brought out of the Babylonish captivity,
first one company, and then another, and gradually rebuilt their city and
temple; and as the Heathen Roman empire was destroyed by a gradual, though a
very swift prevalency of the gospel; so, though there are many things which
seem to hold forth as though the work of God would be exceeding swift, and many
great and wonderful events should very suddenly be brought to pass, and some
great parts of Satan's visible kingdom should have a very sudden fall, yet all
will not be accomplished at once, as by some great miracle, as the resurrection
of the dead at the end of the world will be all at once; but this is a work
which will be accomplished by means, by the preaching of the gospel, and the
use of the ordinary means of grace, and so shall be gradually brought to pass.
Some shall be converted, and be the means of others conversion. God's Spirit
shall be poured out first to raise up instruments, and then those instruments
shall be used and succeeded. Doubtless one nation shall be enlightened and
converted after another, one false religion and false way of worship exploded
after another. By the representation in Dan. ii.3.4. the stone cut out of the
mountains without hands gradually grows. So Christ teaches us, that the kingdom
of heaven is like a grain of mustard seed, Matthew. xiii.31.32. and like leaven
hid in three measures of meal, verse 33. The same representation we have in
Mark iv.26.27.28. and in the vision of the waters of the sanctuary, Ezekiel.
xlvii. -- The scriptures hold forth as though there should be several
successive great and glorious events, by which this glorious work should be
accomplished. The angel, speaking to the prophet Daniel of those glorious
times, mentions two glorious periods, at the end of which glorious things
should be accomplished: Dan. xii.11. "And from the time that the daily
sacrifice shall be taken away, and the abomination that makes desolate set up,
there shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety days." But then he adds in the
next verse, "Blessed is he that waits, and comes to the thousand three
hundred and five and thirty days;" intimating, that something very glorious
should be accomplished at the end of the former period, but something much more
glorious at the end of the latter.

But I now proceed to show how this glorious work shall be accomplished.

1. The Spirit of God shall be gloriously poured out for the wonderful revival
and propagation of religion. This great work shall be accomplished, not by the
authority of princes, nor by the wisdom of learned men, but by God's Holy
Spirit: Z^ch. iv.6.7. "Not by might, nor by power, but by my Spirit, says the
Lord of hosts. Who art thou, O great mountain? before Zerubbabel thou shall
become a plain, and he shall bring forth the headstone thereof with shoutings,
crying Grace, grace unto it." So the prophet Ez^kiel, speaking of this great
work of God, says, chap. xxxix.29 "Neither will I hide my face any more from
them; for I have poured out my Spirit on the house of Israel, says the Lord
God." W^ know not where this pouring out of the Spirit shall begin, or whether
in many places at once, or whether, what has already been, be not some
forerunner and beginning of it.

This pouring out of the Spirit of God, when it is begun, shall soon bring
great multitudes to foresake that vice and wickedness which now so generally
prevails, and shall cause that vital religion, which is now so despised and
laughed at in the world, to revive. The work of conversion shall break forth,
and go on in such a manner as never has been hitherto; agree^ble to that in Is.
xliv.3.4.5. -- God, by pouring out his Holy Spirit, will furnish men to be
glorious instruments of carrying on this work; will fill them with knowledge
and wisdom, and fervent zeal for the promoting the kingdom of Christ, and the
salvation of soul^, and propagating the gospel in the world. So that the gospel
shall begin to be preached with abundantly greater clearness and power than had
heretofore been: for this great work of God shall be brought to pass by the
preaching of the gospel, as it is represented in Rev. xiv.6 7.8 that before
Babylon falls* the gospel shall be powerfully preached and propagated in the
world.

This was typified of old by the sounding of the silver trumpets in Israel in
the beginning of their jubilee: Lev. xxv.9. "Then shall thou c^use the trumpet
of the jubilee to sound on the tenth day of the seventh month; on the day of
atonement shall ye make the trumpet sound throughout all your land." The
glorious times which are approaching, are as it were the church's jubilee,
which shall be introduced by the sounding of the silver trumpet of the gospel,
as is foretold in Is xxvii.13. "And it shall come to pass in that day, that the
great trumpet shall be blown, and they shall come which were ready to perish in
the land of Assyria, and the outcast^ of the land of Egypt, and shall worship
the Lord in the holy mount at Jerusalem." There shall be a glorious pouring out
of the Spirit with this clear and powerful preaching of the gospel, to make it
successful for reviving those holy doctrines of religion which are now chiefly
ridiculed in the world, and turning many from heresy, and from Popery, and from
other false religion; and also for turning many from their vice and
profaneness, and for bringing vast multitudes savingly home to Christ.

That work of conversion shall go on in a wonderful manner, and spread more and
more. Many shall flow together to the goodness of the Lord, and shall come as
it were in flocks, one flock and multitude after another continu^lly flowing
in, as in Is. lx.4.5. "Lift up thine eyes round about, and see; all they gather
themselves together, they come to thee; thy sons shall come from far, and thy
daughters shall be nursed at thy side. Then thou shall see and flow together."
And so verse. 8. "Who are these that fly as a cloud, and as the doves to their
windows?" It being represented in the forementioned place in the Revelation,
that the gospel shall be preached to every tongue, and kindred, and nation, and
people, before the fall of Antichrist; so we may suppose, that it will soon be
gloriously successful to bring in multitudes from every nation; and it shall
spread more and more with wonderful swiftness, and vast numbers shall suddenly
be brought in as at once, as you may see, Is. lxvi.7 8.9.

2. This pouring out of the Spirit of God will not affect the overthrow of
Satan's visible kingdom, till there has first been a violent and mighty
opposition made. In this the scripture is plain, that when Christ is thus
gloriously coming forth, and the destruction of Antichrist is ready at hand,
and Satan's kingdom begins to totter, and appear to to be imminently
threatened, the powers of the kingdom of darkness will rise up, and mightily
exert themselves to prevent their kingdom being overthrown. Thus after the
pouering out of the sixth vial, which was to dry up the river Euphrates, to
p^epare the way for the destruction of the spiritual Babylon, it is represented
in Rev. xvi. as though the powers of hell will be mightily alarmed, and should
stir up themselves to oppose the kingdom of Christ, before the seventh and last
vial shall be poured out, which shall give them a final and complete overthrow.
We have an account of the pouring out of the sixth in verse. 12. Upon this, the
beloved disciple informs us that in the following verses, that "three unclean
spirits like frogs shall go forth unto the kings of the earth, to gather them
together to the battle of the great day of God Almighty." This seems to be the
last and greatest effort of Satan to save his kingdom from being overthrown;
though perhaps he may make as great toward the end of the world to regain it.

When the Spirit begins to be so gloriously poured forth, and the devil sees
such multitudes flocking to Christ in one nation and another, and the
foundations of his kingdom daily undermining, and the pillars of it b^eaking,
and the whole ready to come to swift and sudden destruction, it will greatly
alarm all hell. Satan has ever had a dread of having his kingdom overthrown,
and he has been opposing of it ever since Christ^s ascension, and has been
doing great works to fortify his kingdom, and to prevent it, ever since the day
of Constantine the Great. To this end he has set up those two mighty kingdoms
of Antichrist and Mahomet, and brought in all the heresies, and superstitions,
and corrupt opinions which there are in the world. But when he sees all begins
to fail it will rouse him exceedingly. If Satan dreaded being cast out of the
Roman empire, how much more does he dread being cast out of the whole world!

It seems as though in this last great opposition which shall be made against
the church to defend the kingdom of Satan, all the forces of Antichrist, and
Mahometanism, and Heathenism, will be united; and all the forces of Satan's
visible kingdom through the whole world of mankind, Therefore it is said, that
"spirits of devils shall go forth unto the kings of the earth, and of the whole
world, to gather them together to the battle of the great day of God Almighty."
These spirits are said to come out of the mouth of the dragon, and out of the
mouth of the beast, and out of the mouth of the false prophets; i. e. there
shall be the spirit of Popery, and the spirit of Mahometanism, and the spirit
of Heathenism, all united. By the beast is meant Antichrist; by the dragon, in
this book, is commonly meant the devil, as he reigns over his Heathen kingdom;
by the false prophet, in this book, is sometimes meant the Pope and his clergy:
but here an eye seems to be had to Mahomet, whom his followers call a great
prophet of God. This will be as it were the dying struggles of the old serpent:
a battle wherein he will fight as one that is almost desperate.

We know not particularly in what manner this opposition shall be made. It is
represented as a battle; it is called the battle of the great day of God
Almighty. There will be some way or other a mighty struggle between Satan's
kingdom and the church, and probably in all ways of opposition that can be; and
doubtless great opposition by external force; wherein the princes of the world
who are on the devil's side shall join hand in hand: for it is said, "The kings
of the earth are gathered together to battle;" Rev. xix.19. Probably withal
there will be a great opposition of subtle disputers and carnal reasoning, and
great persecution in many places, and great opposition by virulent reproaches,
and also great opposition by craft and subtlety. The devil now doubtless will
ply his skill, as well as strength, to the utmost. The devils, and those who
belong to their kingdom, will every where be stirred up, and engaged to make an
united and violent opposition against this holy religion, which they see
prevailing so mightily in the world. -- But,

3. Christ and his church shall in this battle obtain a complete and entire
victory over their enemies. They shall be totally routed and overthrown in this
their last effort. When the powers of hell and earth are thus gathered together
against Christ, and his armies shall come forth against them by his word and
spirit to fight with them, in how august, and pompous, and glorious a manner is
this coming forth of Christ and his church to this battle described, Rev xix.^1
etc.! To represent to us how great the victory should be which they should
obtain, and how mighty the overthrow of their enemies, it is said, verse. 17 and
18. that "all the fowls of heaven are called together, to eat the great supper
given them, of the flesh of kings, and captains, and mighty men," etc.; and
then, in the following verses, we have an account of the victory and overthrow.

In this victory, the seventh vial shall be poured out. It is said, Rev, xvi
16. of the great army that should be gathered together against Christ: "And he
gathered them together into a place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon:"
and then it is said, "And the seventh angel poured out his vial into the air;
and there came a great voice out of the temple of heaven, from the throne,
saying, it is done." Now the business is done for Satan and his adherents. When
this victory is obtained, all is in effect done* Satan's last and greatest
opposition is conquered; all his measures are defeated; the pillars of his
kingdom broken asunder, and will fall of course. The devil is utterly baffled
and confounded, and knows not what else to do. He now sees his Antichristian,
and Ma^ometan, and Heathenish kingdoms through the world, all tumbling about
his ears. He and his most powerful instruments are taken captive. Now that is
in effect done which the church of God had been so long waiting and hoping for,
and so earnestly crying to God for, saying, "How long, O Lord, holy and true?"
now the time is come.

The angel who set his right foot on the sea, and his left foot on the earth,
lift up his hand to heaven, and swore by him that lives for ever and ever, who
created heaven, and all things that therein are, and the earth, and the things
that therein are, and the sea, and the things which are therein, that when the
seventh angel should come to sound, the time should be no longer. Now the time
is come; now the seventh trumpet sounds, and the seventh vial is poured out,
both together; intimating, that now all is finished as to the overthrow of
Satan's visible kingdom on earth. This victory shall be by far the greatest
that ever was obtained over Satan and his adherents. By this blow, with which
the stone cut out of the mountain without hands, shall strike the image of
gold, and silver, and brass, and iron, and clay, it shall all be broken to
pieces. This will be a finishing blow to the image, so that it shall become as
the chaff of the summer threshing-floor.

In this victory will be a most glorious display of divine power. Christ shall
therein appear in the character of King of kings, and Lord of lords, as in Rev.
xix, 16; Now Christ shall dash his enemies, even the strongest and proudest of
them, in pieces; as at potter's vessel shall they be broken to shivers. Then
shall strength be shown out of weakness, and Christ shall cause his church as
it were to thresh the mountains, as in Is. x^i.15: "Behold, I will make thee a
new sharp threshing-instrument having teeth: thou shall thresh the mountains,
and beat them small, and shall make the hills as chaff." Then shall be
fulfilled that in Is. xlii.13 14 15.

4. Consequent on this victory, Satan's visible kingdom on earth shall be
destroyed. When Satan is conquered in this last battle, the church of Christ
will have easy work of it; as when Joshua and the children of Israel had
obtained that great victory over the five kings of the Amorites, when the sun
stood still, and God sent great hailstones on their enemies, they after that
went from one city to another, and burnt them with fire: they had easy work of
subduing the cities and country to which they belonged. So it was also after
that other great battle that Joshua had with that great multitude at the waters
of M^rom. So after this glorious victory of Christ and his church over their
enemies, over the chief powers of Satan's kingdom, they shall destroy that
kingdom and all those cities and countries to which they belonged. After this
the word of God shall have a speedy and swift progress through the earth; as it
is said, that on the pouring out of the seventh vial, the cities of the nations
fell, and every island fled away, and the mountains were not found," Rev.
xvi.19 20. When once the stone cut out of the mountain without hands had broken
the image in pieces, it was easy to abolish all remains of it. The very wind
will carry it away as the chaff of the summer threshing floor. Because Satan's
visible kingdom on earth shall now be destroyed, therefore it is said, that the
seventh vial, by which this shall be done, shall be poured out into the air;
which is represented in scripture as the special seat of his kingdom; for he is
called the prince of the power of the air, Ephesians. ii.2. Now is come the time of
punishing Leviathan, that piercing serpent, of which we read in Is. xxvii.1.
"In that day the Lord with his sore and great and strong sword, shall punish
Leviathan the piercing serpent, even Leviathan, that crooked serpent, and he
shall ^^ay the dragon that is in the sea."

Concerning this overthrow of Satan's visible kingdom on earth, I would, 1.
Show wherein this overthrow of Satan's visible kingdom will chiefly consist; 2.
The extent and universality of this overthrow.

1 I would show wherein this overthrow of Satan's kingdom will chiefly consist.
I shall mention the particular things in which it will consist, without
pretending to determine in what order they shall come to pass, or which shall
be accomplished first, or whether they shall be accomplished together.

(1) Heresies, and infidelity, and superstition, among those who have been
brought up under the light of the gospel, will then be abolished. Then there
will be an end to Socinianism, and A^ianism, and Quakerism, and Arminianism;
and Deism, which is now so bold and confident in infidelity, shall then be
crushed, and driven away, and vanish to nothing; and all shall agree in the
same great and important doctrines of the gospel; agreeable to that in Zech.
xiv.9. "And the Lord shall be king over all the earth: in that day shall there
be one Lord, and his name one." Then shall be abolished all superstitious ways
of worship, and all shall agree in worshipping God in his own ways: Jer.
xxxii.39. "And I will give them one heart, and one way, that they may fear me
for ever, for the good of them, and of their children after them."

(2) The kingdom of Antichrist shall be utterly overthrown* His kingdom and
dominion has been much brought down already by the vial poured out on his
throne in the Reformation; but then it shall be utterly destroyed. Then shall
be proclaimed, "Babylon is fallen, is fallen." When the seventh angel sounds,
"the time, times and half, shall be out, and the time shall be no longer." Then
shall be accomplished concerning Antichrist the things which are written in the
18th chapter of Revelation of the spiritual Babylon, that great city Rome, or
the idolatrous Roman government, that has for so many ages been the great enemy
of the Christian church, first under Heathenism, then under Popery; that proud
city which lifted herself up to heaven, and above God himself in her pride and
haughtiness; that cruel, bloody city, shall come down to the ground. Then shall
that be fulfilled, Is. xxvi.5. "For he brings down them that dwell on high,
the lofty city he lays it low, he lays it low, even to the ground, he
brings it even to the du^t." She shall be thrown down with violence, like a
great millstone cast into the sea, and shall be found no more at all, and shall
become an habitation of devils, and the hold of every soul spirit, and a cage
of every unclean and hateful bird." Now shall she be stripped of all her glory,
and riches, and ornaments, and shall be cast out as an abominable branch, and
shall be ^r^den down as the mire of the streets. All her policy and craft, in
which she so abounded, shall not save her. God shall make his people, who have
been so persecuted by her, to come and put their foot on the ^eck of of
Antichrist, and he shall be their footstool. All the strength and wisdom of
this great whore shall fail her, and there shall be none to help her. The kings
of the earth, who before gave their power and strength to the beast, shall now
hate the whore, and shall make her desolate and naked, and shall eat her flesh,
and burn her with fire, Rev. xvii.16.

(3) That other great kingdom which Satan has set up in opposition to the
Christian church, viz. his Mohammedan kingdom, shall be utterly overthrown. The
locusts and horsemen in the 9th of Revelation, have their appointed and limited
time set them there, and the false prophet shall be taken and destroyed. And
then, though Mahome^anism has been so vastly propagated in the world, and is
upheld by such a great empire, this smoke, which has ascended out of the
bottomless pit, shall be utterly scattered before the light of that glorious
day, and the Mohammedan empire shall fall at the sound of the great trumpet
which shall then be blown.

(4) Jewish infidelity shall then be overthrown. However obstinate they have
been now for above 1700 years in their rejection of Christ, and instances of
the conversion of any of that nation have been so very rare ever since the
destruction of Jerusalem, but they have against the plain teachings of their
own prophets, continued to approve of the cruelty of their forefathers in
crucifying Christ; yet when this day comes, the thick vail that blinds their
eyes shall be removed* 2 Cor. iii.16.; and divine grace shall melt and renew
their hard hearts, "and they shall look on him whom they have pierced, and they
shall mourn for him, as one mourns for his only son, and shall be in
bitterness as one that is in bitterness for his first born," Z^ch. xii.10. etc.
Then shall the house of Israel be saved: the Jews in all their dispensations
shall cast away their old infidelity, and shall wonderfully have their hearts
changed, and abhor themselves for their past unbelief and obstinacy; and shall
flow together to the blessed Jesus, penitently, humbly, and joyfully owning him
as their glorious King and only Savior, and shall with all their hearts, as
with one heart and voice, declare his praise unto other nations.

Nothing is more certainly foretold th^^ this national conversion of the Jews
is in the 11th chapter of Romans. And there are also many passages of the Old
Testament which cannot be interpreted in any other sense, which I cannot now
stand to mention. Besides the prophecies of the calling of the Jews, we have a
remarkable seal of the fulfillment of this great event in providence, by a thing
which is a kind of continual miracle, viz. their being preserved a distinct
nation in such a dispersed condition for above 1600 years. The world affords
nothing else like it. There is undoubtedly a remarkable hand of providence in
it. When they shall be called, then shall that ancient people, that were alone
God's people for so long a time, be God's people again, never to be rejected
more: they shall then be gathered into one fold together with the Gentiles; and
so also shall the remains of the ten tribes, wherever they be, and though they
have been rejected much longer than the Jews, be brought in with their brethren
the Jews. The prophecies of Hosea especially seem to hold this forth, that in
the future glorious times of the church, both Judah and Ephraim, or Judah and
the ten tribes, shall be brought in together, and shall be united as one
people, as they formerly were under David and Solomon; as Hos. i.11.; and so in
the last chapter of Hosea, and other parts of his prophecy.

Though we do not know the time in which this conversion of the nation of
Israel will come to pass; yet thus much we may determine by scripture, that it
will be before the glory of the Gentile part of the church shall be fully
accomplished; because it is said, that their coming in shall be life from the
dead to the Gentiles* Romans xi.12.15.

(5) Then shall also Satan's Heathenish kingdom be overthrown. Gross Heathenism
now possesses a great part of the earth, and there are supposed to be more
heathens now in the world, than of all other professions taken together, Jews,
Mahometans, or Christians. But then the Heathen nations shall be enlightened
with the glorious gospel. There will be a wonderful spirit of pity toward
them, and zeal for their instruction and conversion put into multitudes, and
many shall go forth and carry the gospel unto them; and then shall the joyful
sound be heard among them, and the Sun of righteousness shall then arise with
his glorious light shining on those many vast regions of the earth that have
been covered with Heathenish darkness for many thousand years, many of them
doubless ever since the times of Moses and Abraham, and have lain thus long in
a miserable condition, under the cruel tyranny of the devil, who has all this
while blinded and befooled them, and domineered over them, and made a prey of
them from generation to generation. Now the glad tidings of the gospel shall
found there, and they shall be brought out of darkness into mavelous light.

It is promised, that Heathenism shall thus be destroyed in many places. God
has said, That the gods that have not made these heavens and this earth, shall
perish from the earth, and from under these heavens, Jer. x.11. and that he
will utterly abolish idols, Is. ii.18. -- Then shall the many nations of
Africa, the nations of negroes, and other Heathens who chiefly fill that
quarter of the world, who now seem to be in a state but little above the
beasts, and in many respects much below them, be enlightened with glorious
light, and delivered from all their darkness, and shall become a civil,
Christian, understanding, and holy people. Then shall the vast continent of
America, which now in so great a part of it is covered with barbarous ignorance
and cruelty, be every where covered with glorious gospel^light and Christian
love; and instead of worshipping the devil, as now they do, they shall serve
God, and praises shall be sung every where to the Lord Jesus Christ, the
blessed Savior of the world. So may we expect it will be in that great and
populous part of the world, the East Indies, which are now mostly inhabited by
the worshippers of the devil; and so throughout that vast country Great
Tartary, and then the kingd^m of Christ will be established in those continents
which (...) more lately discovered toward the north and south poles, (...) now
men differ very little from the wild beasts, excep^ (...) they worship the
devil, and beasts do not. The (...) be the case with respect to those countries
which have never yet been discovered. Thus will be gloriously fulfilled that in
Is. xxx^.1. "The wilderness and the solitary place shall be glad for (...): and
the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose." See also verse. 6.7.

2. Having thus shown wherein this overthrow of Satan's kingdom will consist, I
come now to the thing to be observed concerning it, viz. its universal extent.
The (...) kingdom of S^tan shall be overthrown, and the kingdom of Christ set
up on the ruins of it, every where through out the whole hab^table globe. Now
shall the promise made to Abraham be fulfilled, That "in him and in his seed
shall all the families of the earth be blessed;" and Christ now shall become
the desire of all nations, agreeable to Haggai ii.7. Now the kingdom of Christ
shall in the most strict and literal sense be extended to all nations, and the
whole earth. There are many passages of scripture that can be understood in no
other sense. What can be more universal than that in Is. xi.9. "For the earth
shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters cover the sea." As
much as to say, As there is no part of the channel or cavity of the sea any
where, but what is covered with water; so there shall be no part of the world
of mankind but what shall be covered with the knowledge of God. So it is
foretold in Is. xlv.22. that all the ends of the earth shall look to Christ,
and be saved. To show that the words are to understood in the most universal
sense, it is said in the next verse, "I have sworn by myself, the word is gone
out of my mouth in righteousness, and shall not return, that unto me every knee
shall bow, every tongue shall swear."

So the most universal expression is used, Dan. vii.27. "And the kingdom and
dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be
given to the people of the saints of the Most High God." You see the expression
includes all under the whole heaven.

When the devil was cast out of the Roman empire, because that was the highest
and principal part of the world, and the other nations that were left were low
and mean in comparison of those of that empire, it was represented as Satan
being cast out of heaven to the earth, Rev. xii.9: but it is represented that
he shall be cast out of the earth too, and shut up in hell, Rev. xx.1.2.3. --
This is the greatest revolution by far that ever came to pass: therefore it is
said in Rev 16.17.18. "That on the pouring out of the seventh vial, there was a
great earthquake, such as was not since men were upon earth, so mighty an
earthquake and so great. This is the third great dispensation of providence
which is in scripture compared to Christ'^ coming to judgment So it is i^ Rev.
xvi.15. There, after the sixth vial, and after the devil's armies were gathered
together to their great battle, and just before Christ's glorious victory over
them, it is said, "Behold I come quickly; blessed is he that watches, and
keeps his garments." So it is called Christ's coming in 2 These. ii 8.
Speaking of Antichrist, it is said, "And then shall that wicked be revealed,
whom the Lord shall consume with the spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy
with the brightness of his coming." See also Dan. vii.13.14. where Christ's
coming to set up his kingdom on earth, and to destroy Antichrist, is called
with clouds of heaven. And this is more like Christ's last coming to judgment,
than any of the preceding dispensations which are so called, on these accounts.

(1) That the dispensation is so much greater and more universal, and so more
like the day of judgment, which respects the whole world.

(2) On account of the great spiritual resurrection there will be of the church
of God accompanying it, more resembling the general resurrection, at the end of
the world than any other. This spiritual resurrection, is the resurrection
spoken of as attended with judgment, Rev. xx.4.

(3) Because of the terrible judgments and fearful destruction which shall now
be executed on God's enemies. There will doubtless at the introducing of this
dispensation be a visible and awfu^ hand of God against blasphemers, Deists,
and obstinate heretics, and other enemies of Christ, terribly destroying them,
with remarkable tokens of wrath and vengeance; and especially will this
dispensation be attended with terrible judgments on Antichrist* and the cruel
persecutors who belong to the church of Rome, shall in a most awful manner be
destroyed; which is compared to a casting of, Antichrist into the burning
flame, Dan. vii.11. and to casting him alive into the lake that burns with fire
and brimstone, Rev. xix.20.

Then shall this cruel persecuting church suffer those judgments from God,
which shall be far more dreadful than her cruelest persecutions of the saints,
agreeable to Rev. xviii.6.7. -- The judgments which God shall execute on the
enemies of the church, are so great, that they are compared to God's sending
great hailstones from heaven upon them, every one of the weight of a talent,
as it is said on the pouring out of the seventh vial, Rev. xvi.21. "And their
fell upon men a great hail out of heaven, every stone about the weight of a
talent; and men blaphemed God, because of the plague of the hail; for the
plague thereof was exceeding great." Now shall be that treading of the
wine press spoken of, Rev. xiv.19.20.

(4) This shall put an end to the church's suffering state, and shall be
attended with their glorious and joyful praises. The church's afflicted state
is long, being continued, excepting some short intermissions, from the
resurrection of Christ to this time. But now shall a final end be put to her
suffering state. Indeed after this near the end of the world, the church shall
be greatly threatened; but it is said, it shall be but for a little season,
Rev. xx.3.: for at the times of the church's rest are but short, before the
long day o^ her afflictions are at an end: so whatever affliction she may
suffer after this, it will be very short; but otherwise the day of the church's
affliction and persecution shall now come to a final end. The scriptures, in
many places, speak of this time as the end of the suffering state of the
church. So Is li.22. God says to his church with respect to this time, "Behold,
I have taken out of thine hand the cup of trembling, even the dregs of the cup
of my fury, thou shall no more drink it again*" Then shall that be proclaimed
to the church, Is. xl.1.2. "Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says your God.
Speak ye comfortably to Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is
accomplished, that her iniquity is pardoned: for she has received of the
Lord's hand double for all her sins." Also that in Is. live.8.9 belongs to this
time. And so that in Is. lx.20. "The Lord shall be thine everlasting light, and
the days of thy mourning shall be ended." And so Zeph iii.15. "The Lord has
taken away thy judgments, and has cast out thine enemy: the King of Israel,
even the Lord, is in the midst of* thee: thou shall not see evil any more."

The time which had been before this, had been the church's sowing time*
wherein she sowed in tears and in blood; but now is her harvest, wherein she
will come again rejoicing, bringing her sheaves with her. Now the time of the
travail of the woman clothed with the sun is at an end: now she has brought
forth her son; for this glorious setting up of the kingdom of Christ through
the world, is what the church had been in travail for, with such terrible pangs
for so many ages: Is. xxvi.17. "Like as a woman with child draws near the
time of her delivery, is in pain, and cries out in her pangs; so have we been
in thy sight, O Lord" See Is. lx 20* and lxi.10.11. -- And now the church shall
forget her sorrow, since a manchild is born into the world: now succeed her
joyful praise and triumph. Her praises shall then go up to God from all parts
of the earth; as Is: xlii.10.11.12. And praise shall not only fill the earth,
but also heaven. The church on earth, and the church in heaven, shall both
gloriously rejoice and praise God, as with ou^ ^eart, on that occasion. Without
doubt it will be a time of very distinguished joy and praise among the holy
prophet^ and apostles, and the other saints in heaven: Rev. xviii.20. "Rejoice
over her, thou heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets* for God has avenged
you on her." See how universal these prais^^ will be in Is xliv.23. "Sing, O ye
heavens, for the Lord has done it: shout, ye lower parts of the earth: break
forth into singing, ye mountains, O forest, and every tree therein* for the
Lord has redeemed Jacob, and glorified himself in Israel." See what joyful
praises are sung to God on this occasion by the universal church in heaven and
earth, in the beginning of the 19th chapter of Revelation.

(5) This dispensation is above all preceding ones like Christ's coming to
judgment, in that it so puts an end to the former state of the world, and
introduces the everlasting kingdom of Christ. Now Satan's visible kingdom shall
be overthrown, after it had stood ever since the building of Babel; and the old
heavens and the old earth shall in a greater measure be passed away then than
before, and the new heavens and the new earth set up in a far more glorious
manner than ever before.

THUS I have shown how the success of Christ's purchase has been carried on
through the times of the afflicted state of the Christian church, from Christ's
resurrection, till Antichrist is fallen, and Satan's visible kingdom on earth
is overthrown. -- Therefore I come now,

SECONDLY, To show how the success of redemption will be carried on through
that space wherein the Christian church shall for the most part be in a state
of peace and prosperity. In order to this, I would,

1. Speak of the prosperous state of the church through the greater part of
this period.

2. Of the great apostasy there shall be toward the close of it: how greatly
then the church shall be threatened by her enemies for a short time.

I. I would speak of the prosperous state of the church through the greater
part of this period. In doing this, I would, 1. Describe this prosperous state
of the church; 2. Say something of its duration.

1 st, I would describe the prosperous state the church shall be in.

In the general, I would observe two things.

1. That this is most properly the time of the kingdom of heaven upon earth.
Though the kingdom of heaven was in a degree set up soon after Christ's
resurrection, and in a further degree in the time o^ Constantine; and though
the Christ^an church in all ages of it is c^^led the kingdom of heaven; yet
this time that we are upon* is the principal time of the kingdom of heaven upon
earth, the time principally intended by the prophecies of D^niel, which speak
of the kingdom of heaven, whence the Jews took the name of the kingdom of heaven

2. Now ^s the principal fulfillment of all the prophecies of the Old Testament
which speak of the glorious times of the gospel which shall be in the latter
da^^. Though there has been a glorious fulfillment of those prophecies already,
in the times of the apostles, and o^ Constantine; yet the expressions are too
high to suit any other time entirely, but that which is to succeed the fail of
Antichrist. This is most properly the glorious day of the gospel. Other times
are only ^ore^unner^ and preparatories to this: other times were the seed time,
but this is the harvest -- But more particularly.

(1) It will be a time of great light and knowledge. The present days are days
of darkness, in comparison of those days. The light of that glorious time shall
be so great, that it is represented as though there should then be no night,
but only day; no evening nor darkness* So Zech. xiv.6.7. "And it shall come to
pass in that day, that the light shall not be clear, nor dark. But it shall be
one day, which shall be known to the Lord, not day, no^ night: but it shall
come to pass, that at evening time it shall be light." -- It is further
represented, as though God would then give such light to his church, that it
should so much exceed the glory of the light of the sun and moon, that they
should be ashamed: Is. xxiv.23. "Then the moon shall be confounded, and the sun
ashamed, when the Lord of hosts shall reign in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem,
and before his ancients gloriously."

There is a kind of a vail now cast over the greater part of the world, which
keeps them in darkness: but then this vail shall be destroyed: Is. xxv.7. "And
he will destroy in this mountain the face of the covering cast over all people,
and the vail that is spread ^out all nations." Then all countries and nations,
even those which are now most ignorant, shall be full of light and knowledge.
Great knowledge shall prevail every where. It may be hoped, that then many of
the Negroes and Indians will be divines* and that excellent books will be
published in Africa, in Ethiopia, in Tartary, and other new and most barbarous
countries and not only learned men, but others of more ordinary education,
shall then be very knowing in religion: Is. xxxii.3.4. "The eyes of them that
see, shall not be dim; and the ears of them that hear, shall hearken. The heart
also of the rash shall understand knowledge. Knowledge then shall be very
universal among all sorts of persons; agreeable to Jer. xxxi.34. "And they
shall teach no more every man his neighbor, and every man his brother, saying,
Know the Lord: for they shall all know me, from the least of them unto the
greatest of them."

There shall then be a wonderful un^avelling of the difficulties in the
doctrines of religion, and clearing up of seeming inconsistencies: "So crooked
things shall be made straight, and ^ough places shall be made plain, and
darkness shall become light before God's people." Difficulties in scripture
shall then be cleared up, and wonderful things shall be discovered in the word
of God, which were never discovered before. The great discovery of those things
in religion which had been before kept hid, seems to be compared to removing
the vail, and discovering the ark of the testimony to the people, which before
used to be kept in the secret part of the temple, and was never seen by them.
Thus, at the sounding of the seventh angel, when it is proclaimed, "that the
kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord and of his Christ;"
it is added that "the temple of God was opened in heaven, and there was seen in
his temple the ark of his testament." So great shall be the increase of
knowledge in this time, that heaven shall be as it were opened to the church of
God on earth.

(2) It shall be a time of great holiness. Now vital religion shall every where
prevail and reign. Religion shall not be an empty profession, as it now mostly
is, but holiness of heart and life shall abundantly prevail. Those times shall
be an exception from what Christ says of the ordinary state of the church, viz.
that there shall be but few saved; for now holiness shall become general: Is.
lx.21. "Thy people also shall be all righteous." Not that there will be none
remaining in a Christless condition; but that visible wickedness shall be
suppressed every where, and true holiness shall become general, though not
universal. It shall be a wonderful time, not only for the multitude of godly
men, but for ^minency of grace: Is. lxv.20. "There shall be no more thence an
infant of days, nor an old man that has not filled his days: for the child
shall die an hundred years old, but the sinner being an hundred years old,
shall be accursed." And Zech. xii.8. "He that is feeble among them a^ that day
shall be as David; and the house of David shall be as God, as the angel of the
Lord before them." Holiness shall then be as it were inscribed on every thing,
on all men^ common business and employments, and the common utensils of life:
all shall be as it were dedicated to God, and applied to holy purposes, every
thing shall then be done to the glory of God: Is. xxiii.18. "And her
merchandise and her hire shall be holiness to the Lord." And so Zech.
xiv.20.21. -- as God's people then shall be eminent in holiness of heart, so
they shall be also in holiness of life and practice.

(3) It shall be a time wherein religion shall in every respect be uppermost in
the world. It shall be had in great esteem and honor. The saints have hitherto
for the most part been kept under, and wicked men have governed. But now they
will be uppermost. The kingdom shall be given into the hands of the saint of
the Most High God," Dan vii.27. "And they shall reign on the earth," Rev. v.10.
"They shall live and reign with Christ a thousand years," Rev. xx.4* In that
day, such persons as are eminent for true piety and religion, shall be chiefly
promoted to places of trust and authority. Vital religion shall then take
possession of kings, palaces and thrones; and those who are in highest
advancement shall be holy men: Is. xlix.23. "And kings shall be thy
nursing-fathers, and their queens thy nursing-mothers." Kings shall employ all
their power, and glory, and riches, for the advancement of the honor and glory
of Christ, and the good of his church: Is. lx.16. "Thou shall also suck the
milk of the Gen^iles, and shall suck the breasts of kings." The great men of
the world, and the rich merchants and others who have great wealth and
influence, shall devote all to Christ and his church: Psalm. xlv.12. "The
daughter of Tire shall be there with a gift, even the rich among the people
shall entreat thy favor.

(4) Those will be times of great peace and love. There shall then ^e a
universal peace and a good understanding among the ^^^tions of the world,
instead of such confusion, wars and blood sh^d, as have hitherto been from one
age to another: Is. ii.4. "And he shall judge among the nations, and shall
rebuke many people: and they shall beat their swords into ^low shires and their
spears into pruning hooks: nation shall not lift up sword against nation,
neither shall they learn (...) any more." So it is represented as if all
instruments of war should (...), as being become useless: Psalm. xlvi.9. "He
(...) wars to cease unto the end o^ the earth: and (...) the bow, and cutte^^
the spear in sunder, he burns the (...) in the (...)." See also Zech ix.10.
Then shall all nations dwell quie^ly and safely, without fear of any enemy, Is.
xxxii.13. "And my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation, and in sure
dwellings, and in quiet resting places." Also Zech. viii.10.11.

Then shall (...), and envy, and (...), and revenge, be suppressed every where,
and peace and love shall prevail between one man and another; which is most
elegantly set forth in Is. xi.6. -- 10. Then shall there be peace and love
between rulers and ruled. Rulers shall love their people, and with all their
might seek their best good; and the people shall love their rulers, and shall
^oyfully submit to them, and give them that honor which is their ^u^. And so
shall there be an happy love between ministers and their people: Mal. iv.6.
"And he shall turn the heart of the fathers to the children, and the heart of
the children to their fathers." Then shall flourish in an eminent manner those
Christian virtues of meekness, forgiveness, long suffering, gladness* goodness,
brotherly kindness, those excellent fruits of the Spirit. Men, in their temper
and disposition, shall then be like the Lamb of God, the lovely Jesus. The body
shall be conformed to the head.

Then shall all the world be united in one amiable society. All nations, in all
parts of the world, on every side of the globe, shall then be knit together in
sweet harmony. All parts of God's church shall assist and promote the spiritual
good of one another. A communication shall then be upheld between all parts of
the world to that end; and the art of navigation, which is now applied so much
to favor men's covetousness and pride, and is used so much by wicked debauched
men, shall then be consecrated to God, and applied to holy uses, as we read in
Is lx.5. -- 9. It will then be a time wherein men will be abundant in
expressing their love to one another, not only in words, but in deeds of
charity, as we learn Is. xxxii.5. "The v^le person shall be no more called
liberal, nor the churl said to be bountiful;" and, verse. 8. But the liberal
devises liberal things, and by liberal things shall ^e stand."

(5) It will be a time of excellent order in the church of Christ. The true
government and discipline of the church will then be settled and put into
practice. All the world shall then be as one church, one orderly, regular,
beautiful society. And as the body shall be one, so the members shall be in
beautiful proportion to each other. There shall that be verified in Psalm.
cxxii.3. Jerusalem is builded as a city, that is compact together."

(6) The church of God shall then be beautiful and glorious on these accounts;
yea, it will appear in perfection of beauty: Is. lx.1. "Arise, shine, for thy
light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee." Is. lxi.10 "He
has covered me with a robe of righteousness, as a (...) himself with
ornaments, and as a bride (...)." On these forementioned accounts, the church
will then be the greatest image of heaven itself.

(7) That will be a time of the great^st temporal prosperity. Such a spiritual
state as we have just (...) a natural tendency to temporal prosperity: it has a
tendency to health and long life; and that this will actually be the c^se, is
evident by Zech. viii.4. "Thus says the Lord of (...)* There shall yet old men
and old women dwell in the streets of Jerusalem, and every man with his staff
in his hand for very age." It has also a natural tendency to procure ease,
quietness, pleasantness, and cheerfulness of mind, and also wealth, and great
increase of children; as is intimated in Zech. viii.5. "And the streets of the
city shall be full of boys and girls pl^ying in the streets thereof." -- But
further, the temporal prosperi^y of the people of God will also be promoted by
a remarkable blessing from heaven: Is. lxv.21. "They shall build houses, and
inhabit them; and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them." And
in Mic. iv.4. "But they shall set every man under his vine, and under his
fig tree, and none shall make them afraid." Zech. viii 12. "For the seed shall
be prosperous, the vine shall give her ^ruit, and the ground shall give her
increase, and the heavens shall give her dew, and I will cause the rem^ant of
this people to possess all these things." See also Jer. xxxi.12.13 and Amos
ix.13. Yea then they shall receive all manner o^ t^kens of God's presence, and
acceptance, and favor Jer. x^xiii 9. "And it shall be to me a name of joy, a
praise and (...) before all the nations of the earth, which shall ^ear all the
good that I do unto them and they shall fear and tremble (...) and for all the
prosperity that I procure unto it." (...) the days of Solomon were but an image
of those days, as to the (...) prosperity which shall obtain in them.

(8) It will also be a time of great rejoicing: Is. xxxv.10. "And the ran^omed
of the Lord shall return and come to Zion with song^, and everlasting joy upon
their (...): they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and s^ghing shall
(...) away." Chap. 5^ 12 "For ye shall go out with joy, (...) forth with peace:
the mountains and the hills (...) break fort^ before you." Chap. lxvi.11. "That
ye may (...)* and ^e satisfied with the ^^easts of her consolation^ that (...)
milk out, and be delighted with the abundance of her glory." Chap. xii.3. "With
joy shall ye draw water out of the wells of salvation." -- Then will (...).
That will be the church's glorious wedding day* (...) far as her wedding with
Christ shall ^ver ^e upon earth: Rev. x^x.7. "Let (...) glad and rejoice, and
give honor to him; for the marriage of the L^mb is come, and his wife has
(...)." Ve^s. 9 "Blessed are they which are called to the (...) of the Lamb."
-- But I come now,

2dly* To say (...) of the duration of this state of the church's prosperity.
On (...) shall be very brief. The scriptures every where (...) continuance. The
former (...) of rest and prosperity, as we before observed, are represented to
be but short; but the representations of this state are quite different: Rev.
^^^ 4. "And I saw the souls of them that were ^^headed for (...) Jesus, -- and
they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years." Is. lx.15. "Whereas thou
have been forsaken and (...) that no man went through thee, I will make thee an
eternal excellency, a joy of many generations."

This may suffice as to the prosperous state of the church through the greater
part of the period from the destruction of Satan's visible kingdom in the world
to Christ's appearing in the clouds of heaven to judgment.

II. I now come to speak of the great apostasy there shall be toward the close
of this period, and how imminently the church shall be for a short time
thre^tened by her enemies. This I shall do under three particulars.

1. A little before the end of the world, there shall be a very great apostasy,
wherein great part of the world shall fall away from Christ and his church. It
is said in Rev. xx.3. that Satan should be cast into the bottomless pit, and
shut up, and have a seal set upon him, that he should deceive the nations no
more till the thousand years should be fulfilled; and that after that ^e must
be loosed out of his prison for a little season. Accordingly we are told, in
the 7th and 8th verse^, that when the thousand years are expired, Satan shall
be loosed out of his prison, and should go forth to deceive the nations, which
are in the four quarters of the earth, Gog and Magog. Which seems to show as
though the apostasy would be very general The nations of the four quarters of
the earth shall be deceived; and the number of those who shall now turn enemies
to Christ shall be vastly great, as the army of Gog and Magog is represented in
Ez^kiel, and as it is said in Rev. xx.8. that the number of them is as the sand
of the sea, and that they went upon the bread^h of the earth, as though they
were an army big enough to reach from one side of the earth to the other.

Thus after such an happy and glorious season, (...) day of light and holiness,
of love, and peace, and joy, now it (...) again to be a dark time. Satan shall
begin to set up his dominion again in the world. This world shall again become
a scene of darkness and wickedness. The bottomless pit of hell shall be opened,
and devils shall come up again out of it, and a dreadful smoke shall ascend to
darken the world. The church of Christ, instead of extending to the utmost
bounds of the world, as it did before, shall be reduced to narrow limits again.
The world of mankind being continued so long in a state of such great
prosperity, shall now begin to abuse their prosperity, to serve their lust and
corruption. This we learn from Luke xvii.26 etc.

2. Those apostates shall make great opposition to the church of God. The
church shall seem to be imminently threatened with a sudden and entire
overthrow by them. It is said, Satan shall gather them together to battle, as
the sand on the sea^shore; and they went up on the breadth of the earth, and
compassed the camp of the saints about, and the beloved city. So that this
beloved city shall seem just ready to be swallowed up by them: for her enemies
shall not only threaten her, but shall actually have gathered together against
her; and not only so, but shall have besieged her, (...) have compassed her
about on every side.

There is nothing in the prophecy which seems to hold forth as though the
church had actually fallen into their hands, as the church had fallen into the
hands of Antichrist, to whom it was given to make war with the saints, and to
overcome them. God will never suffer this to be again after the fall of
Antichrist; for then the day of her mourning shall be ended. But the church
shall seem most eminently threatened with utter and sudden destruction.

3. Now the state of things will seem most remarkably to call for Christ's
immediate appearance to judgment. For them the world shall be filled with the
most aggravated wickedness that ever it was. For much the greater part of the
world shall have become visibly wicked and open enemies to Christ, and their
wickedness shall be dreadfully aggravated by their apostasy. Before the fall of
Antichrist, most of the world was full of visi^ly wicked men. But the greater
part of these are poor Heathens, who never enjoyed the light of the gospel; and
others are those that have been bred up in the Mohammedan or P^pish darkness.
But these are those that have apostatised from the Christian church, and the
visible kingdom of Christ, in which they enjoyed the great light and privileges
of the glorious times of the church, which shall be incomparably greater than
the light and privileges which the church of God enjoys now. This apos^^^y will
be most like the apostasy of the devils of any that ever had before been: for
the devils apostatised, and turned enemies to Christ, though they enjoyed the
light of heaven; and these will apostatise, and turn enemies to him, though
they have enjoyed the light and privileges of the glorious times of the church.
That such should turn open and avowed enemies to Christ, and should s^ck the
ruin of his church, will cry aloud for such immediate vengeance as was executed
on the devils when they fell.

The wickedness of the world will remarkably call for Christ's immediate
appearing in flaming fire to take vengeance on them, because of the way in
which they shall manifest their wickedness, which will be by (...) and
bl^spheming Christ and his holy religion; and particularly, they will (...) at
the notion of Christ's coming to judgment, of which the church shall be in
expectation, and of which they will warn them. For now doubtless will be
another fulfillment, and the greatest fulfillment, of 2 Pet. iii 3.4. "Knowing
this first, that there shall come in the last day sc^ffers, walking after their
own lust^, and saying. Where is the promise of his coming? For since the
fathers fell a sleep, all things continue as they were (...) the beginning of
the creation." They shall (...) in no expectation of the ^oming of Christ to
judgment, and shall laugh at the notion. They shall trample all such things
under foot, and shall give up themselves to their lusts, or to eat and drink,
and wallow in sensual delights, a^ though they were to be here for ever. They
shall despise the warnings the church shall give them of the coming of Christ
to judgment, as the people of the old world despised what Noah told them of
the approaching flood, and as the people of Sodom did when Lot said to them,
"The Lord will destroy this city." Their wickedness on this account will cry
aloud to heaven for Christ's appearing in flaming fire to take vengeance of his
enemies; and also because another way that they shall exercise their wickedness
will be in the wicked design and violent attempt they shall be engaged in
against the holy city of God, against that holy city, wherein lately, and for
so long a time, so much of the religion of Christ had been seen. They shall
then be about to perpetrate the most horrid design against this church.

The numerousness of the wicked that shall then be, is another thing which
shall especially call for Christ's coming: for the world will doubtless then be
exceeding full of people, having continued so long in so great a state of
prosperity, without such terrible desolating extremities, as wars, pestilences,
and the like, to diminish them. The most of this world, which shall be so
populous, will be such wicked contemptuous apostates from God. Undoubtedly that
will be a day wherein the world will be by far fuller of wickedness than ever
before it was from the foundation of it. And if the wickedness of the old
world, when men began to multiply on the earth, called for the destruction of
the world by a deluge of waters, this wickedness will as much call for its
destruction by a deluge of fi^e.

Again, the circumstances of the church at that day will also eminently call
for the immediate appearing of Christ, as they will be compassed about by their
blasphemous murderous enemies, just ready to be swallowed up by them. And it
will be a most distressing time with the church, excepting the comfort they
will have in (...) hope of deliverance from God: for all other help will seem
to fail. The case will be come to the last extremity, and there will be an
immediate need that Christ should come to their deliverance. Though the church
shall be so eminently threatened, yet so will Providence order it, that it
shall be preserved till Christ shall appear in his immediate presence, coming
in the glory of his Father with all his holy angels. Then will come the time
when all the elect shall be gathered in. That work of conversation which has
been carried on from the beginning of the church after the fall through all
those ages, shall be carried on no more. There never shall another soul be
converted. Every one of those many millions, whose name, were written in the
book of life before the foundation of the worlds shall be brought in; not one
soul shall be lost. The mystical body of Christ, which has been growing since
it first began in the days of Adam, will be complete as to number of parts,
having every one of its members. In this respect, the work of redemption will
now be finished. And now the end for which the means of grace have been
instituted shall be obtained. All that effect which was intended to be
accomplished by them shall now be accomplished.

SECT. II.
THUS I have shown how the success of Christ's redemption has been accomplished
during the continuance of the Christian church under the means of grace. We
have seen what great revolutions there have been and are to be, during this
space of time; how the great wheels of providence have gone round for the
accomplishment of that kind of success of Christ's purchase, which consists in
the bestowment of grace on the elect: and we are, in the prosecution of the
subject, come to the time when all the wheels have gone round; the course of
things in this state of it is finished, and all things are ripe for Christ's
coming to judgment.

You may remember, that when I began to discourse of this third proposition,
viz. That from the resurrection of Christ to the end of the world, the whole
time is taken up in procuring the success and effect of Christ's purchase of
redemption, I observed, that the success of Christ's purchase is of two kinds,
consist-either in grace or glory; and that the success consisting in the former
of these, is to be seen in those works of God which are wrought during those
ages that the church is continued under the means of grace; and that the
success, consisting in the latter, will chiefly be accomplished at the day of
judgment.

Having already shown how the former kind of success has been accomplished, I
come now, in the second place, to the latter, viz. that kind of success which
is accomplished in the b^^^owment of glory on the church, which shall chiefly
be bestowed on the church at the day of judgment. -- Here I would mention two
o^ three things in the general concerning this kind of success of Christ's
purchase.

1. How great the success of Christ's purchase is, chiefly appears in this. The
success of Christ's purchase does summarily consist in the salvation of the
elect. But this bestowment of glory is eminently called their salvation: Heb.
ix.28. "To them that look for him, shall he appear the second time, without sin
unto salvation". -- So it is called redemption, being eminently tha^ wherein
the redemption of the church consists. So in Ephesians. iv.30. "Sealed unto the day
of redemption;" and Luke xxi.28. and Ephesians. i.14. "Redemption of the purchased
possession."

2. All that is before this, while the church is under the means of grace, is
only to make way for the success which is to be accomplished in the bestowment
of glory. The means of grace are to fit for glory; and God's grace itself is
bestowed on the elect to make them meet for glory.

3. All those glorious things which were brought to pass for the church while
under the means of grace, are but images and shadows of this. So were those
glorious things which were accomplished for the church in the days of
Constantine the Great; and so is all that glory which is to be accomplished in
the glorious times of the church which are to succeed the fall of Antichrist.
As great as it is, it is all but a shadow of what will be bestowed at the day
of judgment; and therefore, as I have already often observed, all those
preceding events, by which God wrought glorious things for his church, are
spoken of in scripture as images of Christ's last coming to judgment.

But I hasten more particularly to show how this kind of success of Christ's
purchase is accomplished.

1. Christ will appear in the glory of his Father, with all his holy angels,
coming in the clouds of heaven. When the world is thus revelling in their
wickedness, and compassing the holy city about, just ready to destroy it, and
when the church is reduced to such a great strait, then shall the glorious
Redeemer appear. He through whom this redemption has all along been carried on,
he shall appear in the sight of the world; the light of his glory shall break
forth; the whole world shall immediately have notice of it, and they shall lift
up their eyes and behold this wonderful sight. It is said, "Every eye shall see
him," Rev. i.7 -- Christ shall appear coming in his human nature, in that fame
body which was brought forth in a stable, and laid in a manger, and which
afterward was so cruelly used, and nailed to the cross.

Men shall now lift up their eyes, and see him coming in such majesty and glory
as now is to us utterly inconceivable. The glory of the sun in a clear
firmament, will be but darkness in comparison of it; and all the glorious
angels and archangels shall attend upon him, thousand thousands ministering to
him, and ten thousand times ten thousand round about him. How different a
person will he then appear from what he did at his first coming, when he was a
root out of a dry ground, a poor, despised, afflicted man! How different now is
his appearance, in the midst of those glorious angels, principalities, and
powers, in heavenly places, attending him as his ordinary servants, from what
it was when in the midst of a ring of soldiers, with his mock robe and his
crown of thorns, to be buffeted and spit upon, or hanging on the cross between
two thieves, with a multitude of his enemies about him triumphing over him!

This fight will be a most unexpected fight to the wicked world: it will come
as a cry at midnight: they shall be taken in the midst of their wickedness, and
it will give them a dreadful alarm It will at once break up their revels, their
eating, and drinking, and carousing. It will put a quick end to the design of
the great army that will then be compassing the camp of the saints: it will
make them let drop their weapons out of their hands. The world, which will then
be very full of people, most of whom will be wicked men, will then be fl^led
with dolorous sh^ieking and crying; for all the kindreds of the earth shall
wail because of him, Rev. i.7. Where shall they hide themselves? How will the
sight of that awful majesty terrify them when taken in the midst of their
wickedness? Then they shall see who he is, what kind of person he is, whom they
have mocked and scoffed at, and whose church they have been endeavoring to
overthrow. This fight will change their voice. The voice of their laughter and
singing, while they are marrying and giving in marriage, and the voice of their
scoffing, shall be changed into hideous, yea hellish yelling. Their
countenances shall be changed from a show of carnal mirth, haughty pride, and
contempt of God's people; it shall put on a show of ghastly terror and
amazement; and trembling and chattering of teeth shall seize upon them.

But with respect to the saints, the church of Christ, it shall be a joyful and
a most glorious fight to them: for this fight will at once deliver them from
all fear of their enemies, who were before compassing them about, just ready to
swallow them up. Deliverance shall come in their extremity: the glorious
Captain of their salvation shall appear for them, at a time when no other help
appeared. Then shall they lift up their heads, and their redemption shall be
drawing ^igh. Luke xxi 28 -- Thus Christ will appear with infinite majesty, and
yet at the same time they shall see infinite love in his countenance to them.
Thus to see their redeemer coming in the clouds of heaven, will fill their
hearts full of gladness. Their countenances also shall be changed, but not as
the countenances of the wicked but shall be changed from being sorrowful, To
exceeding joyful and triumphant. Now the work of redemption will be finished in
another sense, viz. that the whole church shall be completely and eternally
freed from all persecution and molestation from wicked men and devils.

2. The last trumpet shall sound, and the dead shall be raised, and the living
changed. God sent forth his angels with a great sound of a trumpet, to gather
together his elect from the four corners of the earth in a mystical sense,
before the destruction of Jerusalem; i. e. he sent forth the apostles, and
others, to preach the gospel all over the world. And so in a mystical sense the
great trumpet was blown at the beginning of the glorious times of the church.
But now the great trumpet is blown in a more literal sense, with a mighty
sound, which shakes the earth. There will be a great signal given by a mighty
sound made, which is called the voice of the archangel, as being the angel of
greatest streng^h, 1 These. iv.16. "For the Lord himself shall "descend from
heaven with a shout, with the voice of the archangel, and with the trump of
God." On the sound of the great trumpet, the dead shall be raised every where
Now the number of the dead is very great. How many has death cut down for so
long a time as since the world has stood. But then the number will be much
greater after the world shall have stood so much longer, and through most of
the remaining time will doubtless be much fuller of inhabitants than ever it
has been. All these shall now rise from the dead. The graves shall be opened
every where in all parts of the world, and the sea shall give up the
innumerable dead that are in it, Rev. xx.13.

Now all the inhabitants that ever shall have been upon the face of the earth,
from the beginning of the world to that time, shall all appear upon earth at
once; all that ever have been of the church of God in all ages, Adam an^ Eve,
the first parents of mankind, and Abel, and Seth, and Methuselah, and all the
saints who were their contemporaries, and Noah, and Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob,
and the prophets of Israel, and the saints in the time of Antiochus Epiphanes,
and all that were of the church in their times; and all the holy apostles of
Jesus Christ, and all the saints of their times; and all the holy martyrs under
the ten Heathen persecutions. And all who belonged to the church in its
wilderness state, during ^he dark times of antichrist, and all the holy martyrs
who have suffered under the cruelty of the Popish persecutions; and all the
saints of the present time, and all the saints who are here in this assembly
among the rest; and all that shall be from hence to the end of the world. --
Now also all the enemies of the church that have or shall be in all the ages of
the world, shall appear upon the face of the earth again; all the wicked killed
in the flood, and the multitudes that died all over the world among God's
professing people, or others* all that died in all the Heathen nations before
Ch^^st, and all the wicked Heathens, and Jews and Mahometans, and papists, that
have died since; all shall come together. Sinners of all sorts; demure
hypocrites; those who have the fairest and best outside, and open profane
dru^kards, whoremasters, here^ies, Deists, and all cruel persecutors, and all
that have died or shall die in sin amongst us

At the same time that the dead are raised, the living shall be changed. The
bodies of the wicked who shall then be living, shall be s^ changed us to fi^
them for eternal torment without corruption; and ^he bodies of all the living
saints shall be changed to be like Christ's glorious body, 1 Cor. xv.51 52.53
-- The bodies of the saints shall be so changed as to render them for ever
incapable of pain, (...), or uneasiness; and all (...) heaviness, and all that
deformity, which their (...), shall be put off; and they shall put on strength,
(...) beauty, and activity, and incorruptible unfading glory. In such glory
shall the bodies of all the risen saints appear.

Now the work of redemption shall be finished in another respect, viz. that all
the elect shall now be actually redeemed in both soul and body. Before this,
the work of redemption, as to its actual success, was but incomplete and
imperfect; for only the souls or the redeemed were actually saved and
glorified, excepting in some few instances: but now all the bodies of the
saints shall be saved and glorified together; (...) elect shalll be glorified
in the whole man, and the soul and body in union one with the other.

3. Now shall the whole church of saints be caught up in the clouds to meet the
Lord in the air, and all wicked men and devils shall be arrainged before the
judgment seat. When the dead saints are raised, then the whole church,
consisting of all the elect through all ages, will be standing together on the
face of the earth, at least all excepting those few whose bodies were glorified
before; and then they shall all mount up as with wings in the air to meet
Christ: for it seems that Christ, when he comes to judgment, will not come
quite down to the ground, but his throne will be fixed in the air, in the
region of the clouds, whence he may be seen by all that vast multitude that
shall be gathered before him. The church of saints therefore shall be taken up
from the earth to ascend up to their Savior. Thus the apostle tells us, that
when the dead in Christ are raised, and the living changed, then those who are
alive and remain, shall be caught up together with them to meet the Lord in the
air, and so shall we be ever with the Lord, 1 These. iv.16 17. What a wonderful
sight will that be, when all the many millions of saints are seen thus mounting
up from all parts of the world!

Then shall the work of redemption be finished in another respect: then shall
the whole church be perfectly and for ever delivered from this present evil
world, for ever forsake this cursed ground: they shall take their everlasting
leave of this earth, where they have been strangers, and which has been for the
most part such a scene of their troubles and sorrow; where the devil for the
most part has reigned as god, and has greatly molested them, and which has been
such a scene of wickedness and abomination; where Christ their Lord has been
cruelly used; and where they have been so hated, and reproached, and
persecuted, from age to age, through most of the ages of the world. They shall
leave it under foot to go to Christ, and never shall set ^oot on it again. And
there shall be an everlasting separation made between them and wicked men.
Before they were mixed together, and it was impossible in many instances to
determine which were which; but now all shall become visible; both saints and
sinners shall appear in their true characters.

Then shall all the church be seen flowing together in the air to the place
where Christ shall have fixed his throne, coming from the east and west, and
north and south, to the right hand of Christ. What a mighty cloud of them then
will there be, when all that ever have been of the church of God, all that were
before Christ, all that multitude of saints that were in the apostles time, and
all that were in the days of Constantine the Great, and all that were before
and since the Reformation, and also all that great multitude of saints that
shall be in all the glorious times of the church, when the whole earth shall
for so many generations be full of saints, and also all that shall be then
living when Christ shall come; I say, what a cloud of them will there be, when
all these are seen flocking together in the region of the clouds at the right
hand of Christ!

Then also the work of redemption will be finished in another respect, viz.
that then the church shall all be gathered together. They all belonged to one
society before, but yet were greatly separated with respect to the place of
their habitation; some being in heaven, and some on earth; and those who were
on earth together were separated one from another, many of them by wide oceans,
and vast continents. But now they shall all be gathered together, never to be
separated any more. Not only shall all the members of the church now be
gathered together, but all shall be gathered unto their Head, into his
immediate glorious presence, never to be separated from him any more. This
never came to pass till now.

At the same time, all wicked men and devils shall be brought before the
judgment seat of Christ. These shall be gathered to the left hand of Christ,
and, as it seems, will still remain upon the earth, and shall not be caught up
into the air, as the saints shall be. The devil, that old serpent, shall now be
dragged up out of hell. He, that first procured the fall and misery of mankind,
and has so set himself against their redemption, and has all along shown
himself such an inveterate enemy to the Redeemer; now he shall never more have
any thing to do with the church of God, or be suffered in the least to afflict
or molest any member of it any more for ever. Instead of that, now he must be
judged, and receive the due reward of his deeds. Now is come the time which he
has always dreaded, and trembled at the thought of; the time wherein he must be
judged, and receive his full puishment. He who by his temptation malicously
procured Christ's crucifiction, and triumphed upon it, as though he had
obtained the victory, even he shall see the consequences of the death of Christ
which he procured: for Christ's coming to judge him in his human nature is the
consequence of it; for Christ obtained and purchased this glory to himself by
that death. Now he must stand before that same Jesus whose death he procured,
to be judged, condemned, and eternally destroyed by him. If Satan, the prince
of hell, trembles at the thought of it thousands of years beforehand, how much
more will he tremble, as proud and as stubborn as he is, when he comes to stand
at Christ's bar!

Then shall he also stand at the bar of the saints, whom he has so hated, and
afflicted, and molested: for the saints shall judge him with Christ: 1 Cor.
vi.3 "Know ye not that we shall judge angels?" Now shall he be as it were
subdued under the church's feet, agreeable to Romans xvi.20 -- Satan, when he
first tempted our first parents to fall, deceitfully and lyingly told them,
that they should be gods: but little did he think that the consequence should
be, that they should indeed be so much as gods, as to be assessors with God to
judge him. Much less did he think, that that consequence would follow, that one
of that nature which he then tempted, one of the posterity of those persons
whom he tempted, should actually be united to God, and that as God he should
judge the world, and that he himself must stand trembling and astonished before
his judgment seat. But thus all the devils in hell, who have so opposed Christ
and his kingdom, shall now at last stand in utmost amazement and horror before
Christ and his church, who shall appear to condemn them.

Now also shall all Christ's other enemies be brought to appear before him. Now
shall wicked proud scribes and Pharisees, who had such a malignant hatred of
Christ while in this state of humiliation, and who persecuted Christ to death,
those before whose judgment seat Christ was once called and stood, as a
malafactor at their ba^, and those who mocked him, and buffeted him, and spit
in his face; now shall they see Christ in his glory, as Christ forewarned them
in the time of it, Matthew* xxvi.64 65: Then Christ was before their
judgment seat; but now it is their turn. They shall stand before his
judgment seat with inconceivable horror and amazement, with ghastly
countenances, and quaking limbs, and chattering teeth, and knees smiting one
against another.

Now also all the cruel enemies and persecutors of the church that have been in
all ages, shall come in sight together. Pharaoh and the Egyptians, Antiochus
Epiphanes, and the persecuting scribes and Pharisees, the persecuting Heathen
emperors, Julian the apostate, the cruel persecuting Popes and Papists, Gog and
Magog, shall all appear at once before the judgment seat of Christ. They and
the saints who have in every age been persecuted by them, shall come in sight
one of another, and must confront one another now before the great Judge. Now
shall the saints on their glorious thrones be made the judges of those unjust
kings and rulers who have before judged and condemned them, and cruelly put
them to death. Now shall those persecutor^ behold the glory to which they are
arrived whom they before so cruelly despised, and so cruelly used; and Christ
will make those holy martyrs as it were to come and set their feet on the necks
of their persecutors; they shall be made their footstool.

Thus wonderfully will the face of things be altered from what used to be in
the former times of the world; now will all things be coming to rights.

4. The righteousness of the church shall be manifested, and all the wickedness
of their enemies shall be brought to light. Those saints who had been the
objects of hatred, reproach, and contempt in the world, and were reviled and
condemned by their persecutors without cause, shall now be fully vindicated.
They shall now appear clothed with the glorious robe of Christ's righteousness.
It shall be most manifest before the world, that Christ's righteousness is
theirs and they shall as it were gloriously shine forth in it. Then also shall
their inherent holiness be made manifest, and all their good works shall be
brought to light. The good things which they did in secret shall now be
manifested openly. Those holy ones of God, who had been treated as though they
were the filth and offscouring of the earth, as though they were not fit to
live upon earth, as worse than beasts or devils, shall now, when things shall
appear as they are, appear to have been the excellent of the earth. Now God
will bring forth their righteousness as the light, and their judgment as the
noonday. Now it shall appear who were those wicked persons that were not fit
to live, when all the wickedness of the enemies of Christ and his church, their
pride, their malice, their cruelty, their hatred of true religion, shall be set
forth in all the horrid acts of it, and with all its aggravations in its proper
colors.

Now the righteous may be heard before this great Judge, who could not be heard
before those unjust judges. Now they shall declare their cause, and shall rise
up in judgment against their persecutors, and shall declare how they have been
treated by them. Now all the wickedness of the wicked of the whole world shall
be brought to light. All their secret wickedness, and their very hearts, shall
be opened to the view, and as it were turned inside out before the bright light
of that great day: and things that have been spoken in the ear, in the closet,
and done in the dark, shall be manifested in the light, and proclaimed before
all angels and men that are, ever were, or shall be.

5. The sentence shall be pronounced on the righteous and the wicked. Christ,
the glorious judge, shall pass that blessed sentence on the church at his right
hand, "Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from
the foundation of the world." This sentence shall be pronounced with infinite
love, and the voice will be most sweet, causing every heart to flow with joy.
Thus Christ shall pronounce a sentence of justification on thousands and
millions, who have before had a sentence of condemnation passed upon them by
their persecuting rulers. He will thus put honor upon those who have been
before despised: he will own them for his, and will as it were put a crown of
glory upon their heads before the world; and then shall they shine forth as the
^un with Jesus Christ in glory and joy, in the fight of all their enemies.

Then shall the sentence of condemnation be passed on the wicked, "Depart, ye
cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels." Thus
shall the church's enemies be condemned; in which sentence of condemnation, the
holy martyrs, who have suffered from them, shall concur. When the words of this
sentence are pronounced, they will strike every heart of those at the left hand
with inconceivable horror and amazement Every syllable of it will be more
terrible than a stream of lightning through their hearts. We can conceive but
very little of those signs and expressions of horror which there will be upon
it, of shrieking, quaking, gnashing of teeth, distortions of countenance,
hideous looks, hideous actions, and hideous voices, through all that vast
throng.

6. Upon this Christ and all his church of saints, and all the holy angles
ministering to them, shall leave this lower world, and ascend up toward the
highest heavens. Christ shall ascend in as great glory as he descended, and in
some respects greater: for now he shall ascend with his elect church with him,
glorified in both body and soul. Christ's first ascension to heaven soon after
his own resurrection was very glorious. But this his second ascension, the
ascension of his mystical body, his whole church, shall be far more glorious.
The redeemed church shall all ascend with him in a most joyful and triumphant
manner; and all their enemies and persecutors, who shall be left behind on the
accursed ground to be consumed, shall see the ^ight, and hear their songs.

Thus Christ's church shall for ever leave this accursed world, to to go into
that more glorious world, the highest heavens, into the paradise of God, the
king^om that was prepared for them from the foundation of the world.

7. When they are gone, this world shall be set on fire, and be turned into a
great furnace, wherein all the enemies of Christ and his church shall be
tormented for ever and ever. This is manifest by 2 Pet. iii.7. "But the heavens
and the earth which are now, by the same word are kept in store, reserved unto
fire against the day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly men." When Christ
and his church are ascended to a distance from this world, that miserable
company of wicked being left behind* to have their sentence executed upon them
here, then, some way or other, this whole lower world shall be set on fire,
either by fire from heaven, or by fire breaking out of the bowels of the earth,
or both, as it was with the water in the time of the deluge. However, this
lower world shall be set all on fire. -- How will it strike the wicked with
horror, when the fire begins to lay hold upon them, and they find no way to
escape it, or flee or hide from it! What shrieking and crying will there be
among those many thousands and millions, when they begin to enter into that
great furnace, when the whol^ world shall be a furnace of the fiercest and most
raging heat! in-so much that the Apostle Peter says, (2 Pet. iii.10.12.), that
"the heavens shall pass away with great noise, and the element^ shall melt with
fervent heat, the earth also and the works that are therein, shall be burnt
up;" and that the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements
shall melt whith fervent heat." So fierce shall be its heat, that it shall burn
the earth into its very center: which seems to be what is meant, Deuteronomy.
xxxii.22. "For a fire is kindled in my anger* and shall burn unto the lowest
hell, and shall consume the earth with her increase, and set on ^ire the
foundations of the mountains*"

Here shall all the persecutors of the church of God burn in everlasting fire,
who have before burnt the saints at the stake, and shall suffer torments far
beyond all that their utmost wit and malice could inflict on the saints. Here
the bodies of all the wicked shall burn, and be tormented to all eternity, and
never be consumed; and the wrath of God shall be poured out on their souls.
Though the souls of the wicked in hell do now suffer dreadful punishment, yea
their punishment will be increased at the day of judgment, that what they
suffered before, is, in comparison of it, as an imprisonment to the execution
which follows it. Now the devil, that old serpent, shall receive his full
punishment; now shall that which he before trembled for fear of, fully come
upon him. This world, which formerly used to be the place of his kingdom, where
he (...) up himself as God* shall now be the place of his complete punishment,
and full and everlasting torment.

In this, one design of the work of redemption which has been mentioned, viz.
putting Christ's enemies under his feet, shall be perfectly accomplished. His
enemies shall now be made his footstool, in the fullest degree. Now shall be
the most perfect fulfillment of that in Genesis iii.15. "It shall bruise thy head."

8. At the same time, all the church shall enter with Christ, their glorious
Lord, into the highest heaven, and there shall enter on the state of their
highest and eternal blessedness and glory. While the lower world, which they
left under their feet, is seized with the fire of God's vengence, and flames
are kindling upon it, and the wicked are entering into everlasting fire, the
whole church shall enter, with their glorious head, and all the holy angels
attending, in a joyful manner, into the eternal paradise of God, the palace of
the great Jehovah, their heavenly Father. The gates shall open wide for them to
enter, and there Christ will bring them into his chambers in the highest sense.
He will bring them into his Father's house, into a world not like that which
they have left. Here Christ will bring them, and present them in glory to his
Father, saying, "Here am I, and the children which thou have given me;" as much
as to say, Here am I, with every one of those whom thou gave me from eternity
to take the care of, that they might be redeemed and glorified, and to redeem
whom I have done and suffered so much, and to make way for the redemption of
whom I have for so many ages been accomplishing such great changes. Here they
are now perfectly redeemed in body and soul; I have perfectly delivered them
from all the ill fruits of the fall, and perfectly freed them from all their
enemies: I have brought them all together into one glorious society: and united
them all in myself: I have openly justified them before all angel^ and men, and
her I have brought them all away from that accur^ed world where they have
suffered so much, and have brought them before thy throne: I have done all that
for them which thou have appointed me: I have perfectly cleansed them from all
filthiness in my blood, and here they are in perfect holiness, shining with thy
perfect image.

Then the Father will accept of them, and own them all for his children, and
will welcome them to the eternal and perfect inheritance and glory of his
house, and will on this occasion give more glorious manifestations of his love
than ever before, and will admit them to a more full and perfect enjoyment of
himself.

And now shall be the marriage of the Lamb in the most perfect sense. The
commencement of the glorious times of the church on earth, after the fall of
Antichrist, is represented as the marriage of the Lamb; and this shall be the
marriage of the Lamb in the highest sense that ever shall be on earth: but
after this we read of another marriage of the Lamb, at the close of the day of
judgment. After the beloved disciple (...) given an account of the day of
judgment, in the close of the 20th chapter of Revelation, then he proceeds to
give an account of what follows, in the 21st and 22d chapters; and in the 2d
verse of the 21st chapter, he gives an account, that he saw the holy city, the
new Jerusalem, prepared as a bride adorned for her husband. And when Christ
shall bring his church into his Father's house in heaven, after the judgment,
he shall bring her thither as his bride, having there presented her, whom he
loved, and gave himself for, to himself without spot or wrinkle, or any such
thing.

The bridegroom and the bride shall then enter into heaven, both having on
their wedding-robes, attended with all the glorious angels. And there they
enter on the feast and joys of their marriage before the Father; they shall
then begin an everlasting wedding day. This shall be the day of the gladness of
Christ's heart, wherein he will greatly rejoce, and all the saints shall
rejoice with them. Christ shall rejoice over his bride, and the bride shall
rejoice in her husband, in the state of her consummate and everlasting
blessedness, of which we have a particular description in the 21st and 22d
chapters of Revelation.

Now the whole work of redemption is finished. We have seen how it has been
carried on from the fall of man to this time. But now it is complete with
respect to all that belongs to it. Now the top stone of the building is laid.
In the progress of the discourse on this subject, we have followed the church
of God in all the great changes, all her tossings to and fro that she has been
subject to, in all the storms and tempests through the many ages of the world,
till at length we have seen an end to all these storms. We have seen her enter
the harbor, and landed in the highest heavens, in complete and eternal glory,
in all her members, soul and body. We have gone through time, and the several
ages of it, as the providence of God, and the word of God, have led us; and now
we have issued into eternity after time shall be no more. We have seen all the
church's enemies fixed in endless misery, and have seen the church presented in
her perfect redemption before the Father in heaven, there to enjoy this most
unspeakable and inconceivable glory and blessedness; and there we leave her to
enjoy this glory throughout the never ending ages of eternity.

Now all Christ's enemies will be perfectly put under his feet, and and he
shall have his most perfect triumph over sin and Satan, and all his
instruments, and death, and hell. Now shall all the promises made to Christ by
God the Father before the foundation of the world, the promises of the covenant
of redemption, be fully accomplished. Christ shall now perfectly have obtained
the joy that was set before him, for which he undertook those great sufferings
which he underwent in his state of humiliation. Now shall all the hopes and
expectations of the saints be fulfilled. The state of things that the church
was in before, was a progressive and preparatory state: but now she is arrived
to her most perfect state of glory. All the glory of the glorious times of the
church on earth is but a faint shadow of her consummate glory in heaven.

Now Christ the great Redeemer shall be most perfectly glorified, and God the
Father shall be glorified in him, and the Holy Ghost shall be most fully
glorified in the perfection of his work uon the hearts of all the church -- And
now shall that new heaven and new earth, or that renewed state of things, which
have been building up ever since Christ's resurrection, be completely ^i^ished,
after every material frame of the old heavens and the old earth are destroyed:
Rev. xxi.1. "And I saw a new heaven, and a new earth: for the first heaven and
the first earth were passed away." -- Now will the great Redeemer have
perfected every thing that appertains to the work of redemption, which we began
so soon after the fall of man. And who can conceive of the triumph of those
praises which shall be sung in heaven on this great occasion* so much greater
than that of the fall of Antichrist, which occasions such praises as we have
described in the 19th chapter of Revelation! The beloved disciple John seems to
want expressions to describe those praises, and says, "It was as the voice of
many waters, and as the voice of mighty thunderings, saying, Alleluia* for the
Lord God omnipotent reigns." But much more inexpressible will those praises
be, which will be sung in heaven after the final consummation of all things.
How shall the praises of that vast and glorious multitude be as mighty
thunderings indeed.

Now how are all the former things passed away, and what a glorious state are
things fixed in to remain to all eternity! -- As Christ, when he first entered
upon the work of redemption after the fall of man, had the kingdom committed to
him of the Father, and took on himself the administration of the affairs of the
universe, to manage all so as to subserve the purposes of this affair; so now,
the work being finished, he will deliver up the kingdom to God even the Father*
1 Cor. xv.24 "Then comes the end, when he shall have delivered up the kingdom
to God, even the Father; when he shall have put down all rule, and all
authority and power." No^ that Christ should cease to reign or have a kingdom
after this; for it is said, Luke i.33. "He shall reign over the house of Jacob
for ever, and o^ his kingdom there shall be no end." So in Dan. vii.14. "That
his dominion is an everlasting dominion, which shall ^ot pass away, and his
kingdom that which shall not be destroyed." But the meaning is, that Christ
shall deliver up that kingdom or dominion which he has over the world, as the
Father's delegate or vicegerent, which the Father committed to him, to be
managed in subserviency to this great design of redemption. The end of this
commission, or delegation, which he had from the Father, seems to be to
subserve this particular design of redemption; and therefore, when that design
is fully accomplished, the commission will cease, and Christ will deliver it up
to the Father, from whom he received it.

IMPROVEMENT OF THE WHOLE.
I PROCEED now to enter upon some improvement of the whole that has been said
from this doctrine.

I. Hence we may learn how great a work this work of redemption is. We have now
had it in a very imperfect manner set forth before us, in the whole progress of
it, from its first beginning after the fall, to the end of the world, when it
is finished. We have seen how God has carried on this building from the first
foundation of it, by a long succession of wonderful works, advancing it higher
and higher from one age to another, till the top-stone is laid at the end of
the world. Now let us consider how great a work this is. Do men, when they
behold some great palaces or churches, sometimes admire their magnificence, and
are almost astonished to consider how great a piece of work it was to build
such an house? then how well may we admire the greatness of this building of
God, which he builds up age after age, by a series of such great things which
he brings to pass! There are three things that have been exhibited to us in
what has been said, which do espicially show the greatness of the work of
redemption.

1. The greatness of those particular events, and dispensations of providence,
by which it is accomplished. How great are those things which God has done,
which are but so many parts of this great work! What great things were done in
the world to prepare the way for Christ's coming to purchase, and what great
things were done in the purchase of redemption! What a wonderful thing was that
which was accomplished to put Christ in an immediate capacity for this
purchase, viz, his incarnation, that God should become man! What great things
were done in that purchase, that a person, who is the eternal Jehovah, should
live upon earth four or give and thirty years together, in a mean despised
condition, and that he should spend his life in such labors and sufferings, and
that at last he should die on the cross! What great things have been done to
accomplish the success of Christ's redemption! what great things to put him
into a capacity to accomplish this success! For this purpose he rose from the
dead, and ascended up into heaven, and all things* were made subject to him.
How many miracles have been wrought, what mighty revolutions have been brought
to pass in the world already, and how much greater shall be brought to pass, in
order to it!

2, The number of those great events by which God carries on this work, shows
the greatness of the work. Those mighty revolutions are so many as to fill up
many ages. The particular wonderful events by which the work of creation was
carried on filled up six days: but the great dispensations by which the work of
redemption is carried on, are so many, that they fill up six or seven thousand
years at least, as we have reason to conclude from the word of God. -- There
were great things wrought in this affair before the ^^ood, and in the flood the
world was once destroyed by water, and God's church was so wonderfully
preserved from the flood in order to carry on this work. After the flood, what
great things did God work relating to the resettling of the world, to the
building of Babel, the dispersing of the nations* the shortening of the days of
man's life* the calling of Abraham, the destruction of Sodom and Gomorrah, and
that long series of wonderful providence relating to Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, and Joseph, and those wonders in Egypt, and at the Red sea, and in the
wilderness, and in Canaan in Joshua's time, and by a long succession of
wonderful providence from age to age toward the nation of the Jews!

What great things were wrought by God, in so often overturning the world
before Christ came, to make way for his coming! What great things were done
also in Christ's time, and then after that in overturning Satan's kingdom in
the Heathen ^^pire, and and in so preserving his church in the dark times of
Popery, and in bringing about the Reformation! How many great and wonderful
things will be effected in accomplishing the glorious times of the church, and
at Christ's last coming on the day of judgment, in the destruction of the
world, and in carrying the whole church into heaven.

3. The glorious issue of this whole affair, in the perfect and eternal
destruction of the wicked, and in the consummate glory of the righteous. Now
let us once more take a view of this building* now all is finished and the
top-stone laid. It appeared in a glorious height in the apostles time, and much
more glorious in the time of Constantine, and will appear much more glorious
still after the fall of Antichrist; but at the consummation of all things, it
appears in (...) immensely more glorious height than ever before. Now ^t
appears in its greatest magnificence, as a complete lofty structure, whose top
reaches to the heaven of heavens; a building worthy of the great God, the King
of kings.

From what has been said, one may argue, that the work of redemption is the
greatest of all God's works of which we have any notice, and it is the end of
all his other works. It appears plainly from what has been said, that this work
is the principa of all God's works of providence, and that all other works of
providence are reducible hither; they are all subordinate to the great affair
of redemption. We see that all the revolutions in the world are to subserve
this grand design; so that the work of redemption is, as it were, the sum of
God's works of providence.

This shows us how much greater the work of redemption is, than the work of
creation: for I have several times observed, that the work of providence is
greater than the work of creation, because it is the end of it; as the use of
an house is the end of the building of the house. But the work of redemption,
as I have just said, is the sum of all God's works of providence; all are
subordinate to it: so the work of the new creation is more excellent than the
old. So it ever is, that when one thing is removed by God to make way for
another, the new one excels the old. Thus the temple excelled the tabernacle;
the new covenant the old; the new dispensation of the gospel the dispensation
of Moses; the throne of David the throne of Saul; the priesthood of Christ the
priesthood of Aaron: the new Jerusalem the old; and so the new creation far
excels the old.

God has used the creation which he has made, for no other purpose but to
subserve the designs of this affair. To answer this end, he has created and
disposed of mankind, to this the angels, to this the earth, to this the highest
heavens. God created the world to provide a spouse and kingdom for his Son: and
the setting up of the kingdom of Christ, and the spiritual marriage of the
spouse to him, is what the whole creation labors and travails in pain to bring
to pass. This work of redemption is so much the greatest of all the works of
God, that all other works are to be looked upon either as parts of it, or
appendages to it, and all are some way reducible to it; and so all the decrees
of God do some way or other belong to that eternal covenant of redemption which
was between the Father and the Son before the foundation of the world. Every
decree of God is some way or other reducible to that covenant.

Seeing this work of redemption is so great a work, hence we need not wonder
that the angels desire to look into it. We need not wonder that so much is made
of it in scripture, and that it is so much insisted on in the histories, and
prophecies, and songs of the Bible; for the work of redemption is the great
subject of the whole, of its doctrines, its promises, its types, its songs, its
histories, and its prophecies.

II. Hence we may learn how God is the Alpha and Omega, the beginning and
ending of all things. Such are the character, (...) titles we find often
ascribed to God in scripture, in those place, where the scripture speaks of the
course of things, and series of events in providence: Is. xli.4. Who has
wrought and done it, calling the generations from the beginning? I the Lord the
first, and with the last, I am he, And particularly does the scripture ascribe
such titles to God, where it speaks of the providence of God, as it relates to,
and is summed up in the great work of redemption; as Is xliv 6 7. and
xlviii.12. with the context, beginning with the 9th verse. So God eminently
appears as the first and the last, by considering the whole scheme of divine
providence as we have considered it, viz. as all reducible to that one great
work of redemption.

Therefore, when Christ reveals the future great events of providence relating
to his church and people, and this affair of redemption, to the end of the
world, to his discipl^ John, he often reveals himself under this character. So
Rev. i.8. "I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the ending, says the Lord
which, is, and which was, and which is to come, the Almighty." So again, verse
10.11. "I heard behind me a great voice as of a trumpet saying, I am Alpha and
Omega, the first and the last." Alpha and Omega are the names of the first and
last letters of the Greek alphabet, as A and Z are of ours; and therefore it
signifies the same as his being the first and the last, and the beginning and
the ending.

Thus God is called in the beginning of this book of Revelation, before the
course of the prophecy begins; and so again he is called at the end of it,
after the course of events is gone through, and the final issue of things is
seen: as Rev. xxi.6* "And he said unto me, It is done. I am Alpha and Omega,
the beginning and the end." And so chap. xxii.12 13. "And behold, I come
quickly; and my reward is with me, to give every man according as his work
shall be. I am Alpha and Omega, the beginning and the end, the first and the
last."

We have seen how this is true in the course of what I have laid before you
upon this subject. We have seen how things were from God in the beginning; on
what design God began the course of his providence in the beginning of the
generations of upon the earth; and we have seen how it is God that has all
along carried things on agreeable to the same designs without ever failing; and
how at last the conclusion and final issue of things are to God; and so we have
seen how all things are of him, and through him, and to him; and therefore may
well now cry out with the apostle, Romans xi.33 "O the depth of the riches both
of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments, and
his ways past finding out!" and verse. 36. "For of him, and through him, and to
him, are all things: to whom be glory for ever, Amen."

We have seen how other things came to an end one after another* how states,
and kingdoms, and empires, one after another, fell and came to nothing, even
the greatest and strongest of them; we have seen how the world has been often
overturned, and will be more remarkably overturned than ever it has been yet;
we have seen how the world comes to an end, how it was first destroyed by
water, and how at last it shall be utterly destroyed by fire: but yet God
remains the same through all ages. He was before the beginning of this course
of things, and he will be after the end of them* agreeable to Psalm. cii.25.26.
-- Thus God is he that is, and that was, and that is to come.

We have seen, in a variety of instances, how all other gods perish: we have
seen how the ancient gods of the Heathen in the nations about Canaan, and
throughout the Roman empire, are all destroyed* and their worship long since
overthrown; we have heard how Antichrist, who has called himself a god on
earth, and how Mahomet, who claims religious honors, and how all the gods of
the Heathen through the world, will come to an end; and how Satan, the great
dragon, that old serpent, who has set up himself as god of this world, will be
cast into the lake of fire, there to suffer his complete punishment: but
Jehovah remains, and his kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and of his dominion
there is no end. We have seen what mighty changes there have been in the world;
but God is unchangeable, "the same yesterday, to day, and for ever."

We began at the head of the stream of divine providence, and have followed and
traced it through its various windings and turnings, till we are come to the
end of it, and we see where it issues. As it began in God, so it ends in God.
God is the infinite ocean into which it empties itself. -- Providence is like a
mighty wheel, whose circumference is so high that it is dreadful, with the
glory of the God of Israel above upon it; as it is represented in E^ekiel's
vision. We have seen the revolution of this wheel, and how, as it was from God,
so its return has been to God again. All the events of divine providence are
like the links of a chain; the first link is from God and the last is to him.

III. We may see by what has been said, how Christ in all things has the
pre-eminence. For this great work of redemption is all his work: he is the
great Redeemer, and therefore the work of redemption being as it were the sum
of God's works of providence, this shows the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, as
being above all, and through all, and in all. That God intended the world for
his Son's use in the affair of redemption, is one reason that is to be given
why he created the world by him, which seems to be intimated by the ^postle in
Ephesians. iii.9. -- 12. What has been said, shows how all the purposes of God are
purposed in Christ, and how he is before all and above all, and all things
consist by him, and are governed by him, and are for him, Colos. i.15 16.17.18.
We see by what has been said, how God makes him his first born, higher than the
kings of the earth, and sets his throne above their thrones; how God has always
upheld his kingdom, when the kingdoms of others have come to an end; how that
appears at last above all, however greatly opposed for so many ages; how
finally all other kingdoms fell, and his kingdom is the last kingdom and is a
kingdom that never gives place to any other.

We see, that whatever changes there are, and how ever highly Christ's enemies
exalt themselves, that yet finally all his enemies become his footstool, and he
reigns in uncontrouled power and immense glory: in the end his people are all
perfectly saved and made happy, and his enemies all become his footstool. --
And thus God gives the world to his Son for his inheritance.

IV Hence we may see what a consistent thing divine providence is. The
consideration of what has been said, may greatly serve to show us the
consistency, order, and beauty, of God's works of providence. If we behold the
events of providence in any other view than that in which it has been set
before us, it will all look like confusion, like a number of jumbled events
coming to pass without any order or method, like the tossing of the waves of
the sea; things will look as though one confused revolution came to pass after
another, merely by blind chance, without any regular or certain end.

But if we consider the events of providence in the light in which they have
been set before us under this doctrine, in which the scriptures set them before
us, they appear far from being jumbled and confused, an orderly series of
events, all wisely ordered and directed in excellent harmony and consistence,.
tending all to one end. The wheels of providence are not turned round by blind
chance, but they are full of eyes round about, as Ezekiel represents, and they
are guided by the spirit of God: where the spirit goes, they go: and all God's
works o^ providence through all ages meet in in one at last, as so many lines
meeting in one center.

It is with God's work of providence, as it is with his work of creation; it is
but one work. The events of providence, are not so many distinct, independent,
works of providence, but they are rather so many different parts of one work of
providence: it is all one work, one regular scheme. God's works of providence
are not disunited and jumbled without connection or dependence, but are all
united, just as several parts of one building: there are many stones, many
pieces of timber* but all are so joined, and fitly formed together, that they
make but one building: they have all but one foundation, and are united at last
in one topstone.

God's providence may not unfitly be compared to a large and long river, having
innumerable branches, beginning in different regions, and at a great distance
one from another, and all co^spiring to one common issue. After their very
diverse and contrary courses which they held for a while* yet they all gather
more and more together, the nearer they come to their common end, and all at
length discharge themselves at one mouth into the same ocean. The different
streams of this river ar^ apt to appear like mere jumble and confusion to us,
because of the limitedness of our fight, whereby we cannot see from one branch
to another, and cannot see the whole at once, so as to see how all are united
in one. A man who sees but one or two streams at a time, cannot tell what their
course tends to. Their course seems very crooked, and different streams seem to
run for a while different and contrary ways: and if we view things at a
distance, there seem to be innumerable obstacles and impediments in the way to
hinder their ever uniting, and coming to the ocean, as rocks and mountains, and
the like; but yet if we trace them, they all unite at last, and all come to the
same issue, disgorging themselves in one into the same great ocean. No^ one of
all the streams fail of coming hither at last.

V. From the whole that has been said, we may strongly argue, that the
scriptures are the word of God, because they alone inform us what God is about,
or what he aims at, in these works which he is doing in the world. God
doubtless is pursuing some design, and carrying on some scheme, in the various
changes and revolutions which from age to age came to pass in the world. It is
most reasonable to suppose, that there is some certain great design to which
Providence subordinates all the great successive changes in the affairs of the
world which God has made. It is reasonable to suppose, that all revolutions,
from the beginning of the wo^ld to the end of it, are but the various parts of
the same scheme, all co^sp^ring to bring to pass that great event which the
great creator and governor of the world has ultimately in view: and that the
scheme will not be finished, nor the design fully accomplished and the great
and ultimate event fully brought to pass, till the end of the world, and the
last revolution is brought about.

Now there is nothing else that informs us what this scheme and design of God
in his works is, but only the holy scri^tu^es. Nothing else pretends to set in
view the whole (...) of God's w^^ks of providence from beginning to end and to
inform us how all things were from God at first, and for what end they are
(...) how they ^ere ordered from the beginning and how they will proceed ^o the
end of the (...) what they will come to at last, and how then all (...) Nothing
else but the scriptures has any (...) of regular scheme or drift in those
revolutions when God orders from age to age. Nothing else pretends to show*
what God would by the things which he has done, and in doing, and will do; what
he seeks and intends by them. Nothing else pretends to show, with any
distinctness or certainty, how the world began at first, or to tell us the
original of things. Nothing but the scriptures sets forth how God governed the
world from the beginning of the generations of men upon earth, in an orderly
history; and nothing else se^^ before us how he will govern it to the end, by
an orderly prophecy of future events; agreeable to the challenge which God
makes to the gods, and prophets, and teachers of the Heathen, in Is. xli.22.23.
"Let them bring them forth, and show us what shall happen: let them show the
former things what they be, that we may consider them, and know the (...) end
of them; or declare us things for to come. Show the things that are to come
hereafetr, that we may know that ye are gods."

Reason shows, that it is fit and requisite, that the intelligent and rational
beings of the world should know something of God's scheme and design in his
works: for they doubtless are beings that are principally concerned. The thing
that is God's great design in his works, is doubtless something concerning his
reasonable creatures, rather than brute beasts and lifeless things. The
revolution by which God's great design is brought to pass, are doubtless
revolutions chiefly among them, and which concern their state, and not the
state of things without life or reason. And therefore surely it is requisite,
that they should know something of it; especially seeing that reason teaches,
that God has given his rational creatures reason, and a capacity of seeing God
in his works; for this end, they see God's glory in them, and give him the
glory of them. But how can they see God's glory in his works, if they do not
know what God's design in them is, and what he aims at by what he is doing in
the world?

Further, it is fit that mankind should be informed something of God's design
in the government of the world, because they are made capable of actively
falling in with that design, and promoting of it, and acting herein as his
friends and subjects; it is therefore reasonable to suppose, that God has given
mankind some revelation to inform them of this: but there is nothing else that
does it but the Bible. ^o the Bible this is done. Hence we may learn an account
of the first original of things, and an orderly account of the scheme of God's
works from the first beginning through those ages that are beyond the reach of
all other histories. Here we are told what God aims at in the whole, what is
the greater end, how he has contrived the grand design he drives at, and the
great things he would accomplish by all. Here we have a most rational ^^cellent
account of this matter, worthy of God, and exceedingly showing forth the glory
of his perfections, his majesty, his wisdom, his glorious (...), and grace, and
love, and his exaltation above al^, showing how he is the first and the last.

Here we are shown the connection of the various parts of the work o^
providence, and how all harmonises, and is connected together in ^ regular,
beautiful, and glorious frame. In the Bible, we have an account of the whole
scheme of providence, from the beginning of the world to the end of it, either
in history or prophecy, and are told what will bec^me of things at last; how
they will be finished off by a great day of judgment, and will issue in the
subduing of God's enemies, and in the salvation and glory of his church, and
setting up the everlasting kingdom of his Son.

How rational, worthy, and excellent a revelation is this! and how excellent a
book is the Bible, which contains so much beyond all other books in the world!
and what characters are here of its being indeed a divi^e book! a book that the
great Jehovah has given to mankind for their instruction, without which we
should be left in miserable darkness and confusion!

VI. From what has been said, we may see the glorious majesty and power of God
in this affair of redemption: especially is God glorious in power. His glorious
power appears in upholding his church for so long a time, and carrying on this
work; upholding it oftentimes when it was but as a little spark of fire, or as
smoking flax* in which the fire was almost gone out, and the power of earth and
hell were combined to destroy it. Yet God has never suffered them to quench it,
and finally will bring judgment forth unto victory God glorifies his strength
in his church's weakness: in causing his people, who are like a number of
little infants, finally to triumph over all earth and hell; so that they should
tread on the lion and adder; the young lion and dragon shall they trample under
foot. The glorious power of God appears in conquering his many and mighty
enemies by that person who was once an infant in a manger, and appeared as a
poor, weak, despised man. He conquers them, and triumphs over them in their own
weapon, the cross.

The glorious majesty of God appears in conquering all those mighty enemies of
the church one age after another; in conquering Satan, that proud and strong
spirit, and all his hellish host; in bringing him down under foot, long after
he had vaunted himself as god of this world, and when he did his utmost to
support himself in his kingdom*

God's power gloriously appears in conquering Satan when exalted in that
strongest and most potent Heathen kingdom that ever he had, the Roman empire.
Christ, our Michael, has overcome him and the devil was cast out, and there was
found no more place for him in heaven; but he was cast out unto the earth, and
his angels were cast out with him. Again, his power gloriously appears in
conquering him in that kingdom wherein his pride, and subtlety, and cruelty,
above all appears, viz. the kingdom of Antichrist. It gloriously appears in
conquering him in that greatest and strongest combination and opposition of the
devil and his adherents against Christ and his church, just before the fall of
Antichrist, wherein his visible kingdom has a fatal blow given it, on which a
universal downfall of it follows all over the world.

The glorious power of God appears in thus conquering the devil, and bringing
him under foot, time after time, after long time given him to strengthen
himself to his utmost, as he was once overthrown in his Heathen Roman empire,
after he had been making himself strong in those parts of the world, ever since
the building of B^bel. It appears also in overthrowing his kingdom more fatally
and universally all over the world, after he had again another opportunity
given him to strengthen himself to his utmost for many ages, by setting up
those two great kingdoms of Antichrist and Mahomet, and to establish his
interest in the Heathen world. We have seen how these kingdoms of God's
enemies, that, before God appears, look strong, as though it was impossible to
overthrow them; yet, time after time, when God appears, they seem to melt away,
as the fat of lambs before the fire, and are driven away as the chaff before
the whirlwind, or the smoke out of the chimney.

Those mighty kingdoms of Antichrist and Mahomet, which have made such a figure
for so many ages together, and have trampled the world under foot, when God
comes to appear, will vanish away like a shadow, and will as it were disappear
of themselves, and come to nothing as the darkness in a room does, when the
light is brought in. What are God's enemies in his hands? How is their greatest
strength weakness when he rises up! and how weak will they all appear together
at the day of judgment! Thus we may apply those words in the song of Moses,
Exodus xv.6. "Thy right hand, O Lord, is become glorious in power: thy right
hand, O Lord, has dashed in pieces the enemy." How great does the majesty of
God appear in overturning the world from time to time, to accomplish his
designs, and at last in causing the earth and heavens to flee away, for the
advancement of the glory of his kingdom!

VII. From what has been said, we may see the glorious wisdom of God. It shows
the wisdom of God in creating the world, in that he has created it for such an
excellent use, to accomplish in it so glorious a work. And it shows the wisdom
of divine Providence, that he brings such great good out of such great evil, in
making the fall and ruin of mankind, which in itself is so sorrowful and
deplorable, an occasion of accomplishing such a glorious work as this work of
redemption, and of erecting such a glorious building, whose top should reach
unto heaven, and of bringing his elect to a state of such unspeakable
happiness. How glorious does the wisdom of God appear in that long course and
series of great changes in the world, in bringing such order out of confusion,
in so frustrating the devil, and so wonderfully turning all his most subtle
machinations to his own glory, and the glory of his Son Jesus Christ, and in
causing the greatest works of Satan, those in which he has most glorified
himself, to be wholly turned into occasions of so much the more glorious
triumph of his Son Jesus Christ* How wonderful is the wisdom of God, in
bringing all such manifold and various changes and overturnings in the world to
such a glorious period at last, and in so directing all the wheels of
providence by his skilful hand, that every one of them conspires, as the
manifold wheels of a most curious machine, at last to strike out such an
excellent issue, such a manifestation of the divine glory, such happiness to
his people, and such a glorious and everlasting kingdom of his Son!

VIII. From what has been said, we may see the stability of God's mercy and
faithfulness to his people; how he never forsakes his inheritance, and
remembers his covenant to them throughout all generations. Now we may see what
reason there was for the words of the text, "The moth shall eat them up like a
garment, and the worm shall eat them like wool; but my righteousness shall
endure for ever and ever, and my salvation from generation to generation." Now
we may see abundant reason for that name of God which he reveals to Moses,
Exodus iii.14. "And God said unto Moses, I am that I am:" i. e. I am the same
that I was when I entered into covenant with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and
ever shall be the same: I shall keep covenant for ever: I am self-sufficient,
all-sufficient, and immutable.

Now we may see the truth of that, Psalm. xxxvi.5.6. "Thy mercy, O Lord, is in
the heavens; and thy faithfulness reaches unto the clouds. Thy righteousness
is like the great mountains; thy judgments are a great deep." If we consider
what has been said, we need not wonder that the Psalmist, in the 13^6^ Psalm,
so so often repeats this, For his mercy endures for ever; as if he were in an
ecstasy at the consideration of the perpetuity of God's mercy to his church,
and delighted to think of it, and knew not how but continually to express it.
Let us with like pleasure and joy celebrate the everlasting duration of Gods
mercy and faithfulness to his church and people, and let us be comforted by it
under the present dark circumstances of the church of God, and all the uproar
and con^usions that are in the world; and all the threatinings of the church's
enemies. Let us take encouragement earnestly to pray for those glorious things
which God has promised to accomplish for his church.

IX. Hence we may learn how happy a society the church of Christ is. For all
this great work is for them. Christ unde^^ook it for their sakes, and for their
sakes he carries it on, from the fall of man to the end of the world; it is
because he has loved them with an everlasting love. For their sakes he
overturns states and kingdoms. For their sakes he shakes heaven and earth. He
gives men for them* and people for their life. Since they have been precious in
God's fight, they have been honorable; and therefore he first gives the blood
of his own Son to them, and then, for their sakes, gives the blood of all their
enemies, many thousands and millions, all nations that stand in their way, as a
sacrifice to their good.

For their sakes he made the world, and for their sakes he will destroy it: for
their sakes he built heaven, and for their sakes he makes his angels ministering
spirits. Therefore the Apostle says as he does, 1 Cor. iii.21 etc. "All things
are yours: whether Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas* or the world, or life, or
death, or things present, or things to come; all are yours." How blessed is
this people who are redeemed from among men, and are the first fruits unto God,
and to the Lamb; who have God in all ages for their protection and help! Deuteronomy.
xxxiii.29. "H^ppy art thou, O "Israel: who is like unto thee, O people saved by
the Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword thy excellency! and
thine enemies shall be found liars unto thee, and thou shall tread upon their
high places."

Let who will prevail now, let the enemies of the church exalt themselves as
much as they will, these are the people that shall finally prevail. The last
kingdom shall finally be theirs; the kingdom shall finally be given into their
hands, and shall not be left to other people. We have seen what a blessed issue
things shall finally be brought to as to them, and what glory they shall arrive
at, and remain in possession of, for ever and ever, after all the kingdoms of
the world are come to an end, and the earth is removed, and and the mountains
are carried into the depth of the sea, or where the sea was, and this lower
earth shall all be dissolved. O happy people, and blessed society! Well may
they spend an eternity in praises and hallalujahs to him who loved them from
eternity, and will love them to eternity.

X. And, lastly, hence all wicked men, all that are in a Christless condition,
may see there exceeding misery. You that are such, whoever you are, you are
those who have no part nor lot in this matter. You are never the better for any
of those things of which you have heard: yea, your guilt is but so much the
greater, and the misery you are exposed to so much the more dreadful. You are
some of that sort, against whom God, in the progress of the work, exercises so
much manifest wrath; some of those enemies who are liable to be made Christ's
footstool, and to be ruled with a rod of iron, and to be dashed in pieces. You
are some of the seed of the serpent, to bruise the head of which is one great
design of all this work. Whatever glorious things God accomplishes for his
church, if you continue in the state you are now in, they will not be glorious
to you. The most glorious times of the church are always the most dismal times
of the wicked and impenitent. This we are taught in Is. lxvi.14. -- And so we
find, where ever glorious things are foretold concerning the church, there
terrible things are foretold concerning the wicked, its enemies. And so it ever
has been in fact; in all remarkable deliverances wrought for the church, there
has been also a remarkable execution of wrath on its enemies. So it was when
God delivered the children of Israel out of Egypt; at the same time he
remarkably poured out his wrath on Pharaoh and the Egyptains. So when he
brought them into Canaan by Joshua, and gave them that good land he remarkably
executed wrath upon the Canaanites. So when they were delivered out of the
Babylonish captivity, signal vengeance was inflicted on the Babylonians. So
when the Gentiles were called, and the elect of God were saved by the preaching
of the apostles, Jerusalem and the persecuting Jews were destroyed in a most
awful manner. I might observe the same concerning the glory accomplished to the
church in the days of Constantine, at the overthrow of Satan's visible kingdom
in the downfall of Antichrist, and at the day of judgment. In all these
instances, and especially in the last, there have been, or will be, exhibited
most awful tokens of the divine wrath against the wicked. And to this class of
men you belong:

You are indeed some of that sort that God will make use of in this affair; but
it will be for the glory of his justice, and not of his mercy. You are some of
those enemies of God who are reserved for the triumph of Christ's glorious
power in overcoming and punishing them. You are some of that sort that shall be
consumed with this accursed world after the day of judgment, when Christ and
his church shall triumphantly and gloriously ascend to heaven.

Therefore let all that are in a Christless condition amongst us seriously
consider these things, and not be like the foolish people of the old world, who
would not take warning, when Noah told them, that the Lord was about to bring a
flood of waters upon the earth; or like the people of Sodom, who would not
regard, when Lo^ told them that God would destroy that city, and would not flee
from the wrath to come, and so were consumed in that terrible destruction.

I would conclude my whole discourse on this subject, in words like those in
the last of the Revelation: "These sayings are faithful and true, and blessed
is he that keeps these sayings. Behold, Christ comes quickly, and his reward
is with him, to render to every man according as his work shall be. And he that
is unjust, shall be unjust still; and he that is filthy, shall be filthy still;
and he that is holy, shall be holy still. Blessed are they that do his
commandments, that they may have right to the tree of life, and may enter in
through the gates into the city: for without are dogs, and sorcerers, and
whoremongers, and murderers, and idolaters, and whosoever loves and makes a
lie. He that testifies these things, says, Surely I come quickly. Amen; even
so come Lord Jesus."

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 12, line 37, for is, read it. P. 16, l. 3, after heavens, r. and. P. 45,
l. 29* dele he. P. 48. l. 4. from bottom, r. that. P. 56, l. 26. r. Shuhite --
l. 27* r. Keturah. P 58, l. ^. for an r. and. P. 65. after was, r. in. P. 75,
l. 2. for under, r. as -- l. 9, for set, r. sit. P. 88, l. 9, r. 2. Chron. P
92, last line, r. then. P. 99, l. 14 r. heavenly. P. 113, l. 38, for he, r. it.
P. 115, last line, r. seventy. P. 116. 3d line from bot. for toll r. till. P.
117, 2d l. from bot. for book r. two books. P. 119, l. 27, for when r. whether
-- for others r. other. P. 120, l. 23* for time r. times. P. 137, l. 9* for was
r. were. P. 150, l. 29* for at r. a^. P. 155 l. 20, for stood r stooped. P.
157. l 24. r. to kill. P. 16^. l. 18, for our r. your. P* 167, l. 9. for
effected r. affected. P. 172, l. 3, r. in bringing P. 173. dele the whole first
linemdash;l. 28, for from r. for P 174, l* 36, for and r. an. P. 175. l. 4, for
as after world r ha^. P. 185, l 15, after complying r. with. P. 190, l. 29. for
last r. least. P. 199. l* 26, for not r. but. P. 204, l. 7, ^. not now. P. 216,
l. 24* for is r it. P. 217. last line, r. trouble. P. 220, l. 29. for county r.
country. P. 222, l. 13, ^. Constantine the great -- l. 41, after as r. England
P. 223, l. 30* r terribly. P. 232. l. 3^. dele are. P 233. l. 23* r.
ungrateful. P. 208. l. 22, r. of the truth of the Christian religion. P 24^, l
r 10, ^or though r thought. P 243 l. 18. ^. she P. 246, l. 16, for though r.
through -- l ^2, for case r* case. P. 256, l. 22, for dispensations ^
dispersions. P. 259. l. 16. r. coming. P. 262, l. 35, for ou^ r. over. P. 270,
l. 22, r. consisting.

ADVERTISEMENT.
THE late learned and ingenious Mr. Edwards left in MS. several hundred sermons
on doctrinal and practical subjects, explications of above 500 texts of
scripture, and essays on the truth and excellency of the Christian religion,
the harmony of the Old and New Testament, the divinity of Christ, the necessity
and reasonableness of atonement and of the imputation of merit, the eternity of
hell torments, the foreknowledge of God, predestination universal and
particular redemption, efficacious grace, justification, perseverance, etc.
Though he had no design to publish these in the form in which he left them,
yet, in the opinion of good judges in America who have perused them, they
contain a variety of new and striking sentiments, on many important and
difficult subjects, which might communicate to the Christian world much useful
instruction. When writers excel only in style and composition, they can derive
little honor, and the public can reap small improvement, from the printing
their loose unfinished papers; but important original thoughts, though not
accurately methodized, nor adorned with the beauties of eloquence, will merit
being preserved from oblivion. If so much of the authors penetration and
judgment appear in the preceding sheets, written about 20 years before his
death, much more may be expected from compositions in a period, when years,
study and experience, had greatly increased his stock of knowledge. Whether the
publisher shall favor the world with any more of these valuable remains, will
probabably in a good measure depend on the encouragement this work meets with.


