Mr. PAYSON'S SERMON, DELIVERED APRIL Nineteenth, 1782.

A Memorial of Lexington Battle, and of some signal Interpositions of
Providence in the American Revolution. A SERMON PREACHED AT LEXINGTON, On the
Nineteenth of April, 1782. THE ANNIVERSARY of the Commencement of the WAR
Between Great Britain and America, Which Opened in a most Tragical Scene, in
that Town, on the Nineteenth of April, 1775.

By Phillips Payson, A. M. Pastor of the Church in Chelsea.

-- N^^ haec sine numine di^^^m,
Eveniunt.
VIRGIL. BOSTON: PRINTED by BENJAMIN EDES and SONS. IN CORNHILL. M,DCC,LXXXII.

A SERMON.
EXODUS 12. ^4. " And this Day shall be unto you for a Memorial."
THE imperfection of human nature, and the mutability of worldly things, have
given birth to frequent changes, and revolutions, in kingdoms and empires.
These revolutions, are necessarily attended with striking scenes and events,
that command the attention, and frequently excite the wonder of the world. They
also necessarily exhibit to public view, a variety of characters, especially of
such persons as were formed by nature for heroic achievements; the final issue
best determines, to whom the good or evil principally belongs.

No doubt the providence of GOD has wise and good purposes to answer, by these
things; and his hand that guides and directs them, in their most secret causes
and operations, will be devoutly acknowledged, by the thoughtful and the wise.

SENTIMENTS of this kind are naturally suggested, from the glorious American
Revolution, which in the course of nature, and by the will of Heaven, has
opened in our day.

WE have seen great events produced from causes but small in human view: we
have places in various parts of the continent famed as theaters of bloody
battles: we have a large number of names recorded for patriots and heroes; and
the important scene, yet open on the American stage, commands the attention and
wonder of the world.

THIS day, and the public appearances of it, impress our minds with an
affecting remembrance of a signal event, a most tragical scene that opened in
this place, from which the alarm of war was founded through the land.

THE battle of Lexington, will not only mark a distinguished page in the
history of this war, but be remembered, and mentioned, with indignation to
British cruelty, and with reproach to the man that ordered, and the officers
that executed the bloody orders, so long as proper feelings of humanity, shall
possess the human heart. We well remember our feelings on that day; nor shall
we ever forget them: the inhabitants of this town must have undergone more than
can be well expressed; and the friends of those who fell victims to British
cruelty and murder, must still have aching hearts.

THE religious observance of this anniversary, with martial appearances on the
day, do honor to the town, and the cause of our country, -- "For this day shall
be unto you for a memorial."

THOUGH it is our duty to impress our minds with a proper recollection of the
day, and its transactions, which gave birth to this anniversary, and devoutly
acknowledge the hand of Providence, in restraining the wrath and rage of our
enemies, and disappointing their base designs: yet it may not be necessary for
me, at this time, to go over the particular transactions of that day, or
attempt a description of its horrors and distresses, which fell so heavily on
the people of this place. In judgment, GOD remembered mercy: and among other
favors in Providence, you had your faithful pastor to advise and comfort you,
and lead in your devotions to GOD; and on every return of the anniversary, have
devoutly acknowledged the hand of GOD. A religious acknowledgment of GOD and
his Providence, is certainly the duty of a christian people, under all changes
and events: and to possess a frame of mind that corresponds with the measures
of Providence, is a noble attainment in religion.

THE day and its events we are commemorating, lead to, and are interwoven with
a series of wonders, involving our highest interests and concerns; and also
those of posterity.

THE finger of GOD has indeed been so conspicuous in every stage of our
glorious struggle, that it seems as if the wonders and miracles performed for
Israel of old, were repeated over anew for the American Israel, in our day. The
hardness that possessed the heart of Pharaoh of old, seems to have calloussed
the heart of the British King; and the madness that drove that ancient tyrant
and his hosts into the sea, appears to have possessed the British court and
councils, and to have driven them and their forces to measures, that, in human
view, must terminate in their own confusion and ruin: and this in spite of the
council and advice of the prudent and wise; and the repeated prayers and
entreaties of the poor and oppressed Americans.

AS the powers of nature, under the command of GOD, operated in favor of
Israel of old; the stars in their courses fought against their enemies; the sun
stopped in its course, that Israel might complete their victory, kings and
armies were conquered and subdued before them: So a most astonishing
concurrence of causes, under the direction of the same unerring wisdom, have
conspired to bring about the American revolution, Canaan was for a long time, a
land of rest and liberty for GOD'S people of old: so we have our raised hopes
and expectations this day, that our land will soon become a quiet habitation,
an assylum to the oppressed throughout the world, and the joy of the whole
earth.

IN miraculous productions, we see and own the hand of GOD, but are apt to
disregard it, in common events; forgetting that the providence of GOD ought as
much to be owned and acknowledged by us in events which we can trace from their
natural causes, as in prodigies, or miraculous productions, that appear to be
the immediate effect of the almighty power of GOD. And as this, we generally
say, is not the age of miracles, there is somehow, a strange and sinful
insensibility to the interposition and agency of GOD, which too generally
possesses our minds. We stop at second causes, but forget GOD, the great and
first cause of all: we admire the heroism of the general; we praise the valor
and bravery of the soldier; -- but forget that salvation is of the LORD.

THE whole of our arduous struggle, is indeed but a scene of wonder and
amazement; exhibiting the most striking marks of the interposition and agency
of GOD. However politicians have been employed, the ambition and anger of men
been raised, and the greatest exertions of human power put forth; yet as sober
men and christians, it becomes us to look above all these things, and
acknowledge and adore the hand of Providence.

THE time, it seems, was come, the full period commenced, appointed by the
councils of Heaven, in the course of nature, when a new Empire should arise in
the world, and a nation be born in a day; that wisdom which governs the world,
determines events, and drives asunder the nations, prepared the causes in the
natural, the moral, and political world to unite their forces and accomplish
the great event. Hence a spirit of liberty must stimulate this large people,
and like a spreading torrent flow over the land: the passions of men must be
aroused: the sword, which is never wantonly used but by tyrants, robbers and
madmen, must be drawn; and to the reproach of humanity, scenes of blood and
carnage must ensue: -- Alliances must be formed, and battles fought, that the
foundation of the new Empire, like most others in the world, might be laid in
blood; -- a foundation sadly ominous of its future overthrow and ruin, which,
in their turn and order, will be the fate of all the kingdoms and empires of
the world.

IT is certainly a memorable Providence, that in the beginning of the
controversy, such a spirit of liberty should so generally fill the land. The
nations of Europe, it seems, for a long time, have been much lost to a sense of
liberty. As to many of them, the body of the people are but little better than
slaves to their princes and kings: long inured to oppression, they have become
insensible to their yoke, as the stupid ass to the burden it carries. But the
sons of America had not yet lost the noble spirit of their ancestors, and
therefore disdained to be the slaves of Britain. Not dismayed by threatenings,
or dangers, they engaged in the arduous work, determined to be free; and have
exhibited examples of union, virtue, perseverance and heroism, that are
mentioned with admiration throughout the world. In following the steps of
Providence, our duty has been pointed out from time to time; and favorable
events succeeding one another, we are at length conducted, by the hand of a
kind Providence, within fight of the great object of our toils.

As the original source of the American revolution, under Providence, was that
sense of liberty, which was so universally impressed on the minds of this
people, it ought in reason to be viewed as a special interposition of
Providence, from whose dominions the hearts of men are not exempted.

THIS great principle of liberty formed a union, which neither the power nor
policy of Britain have been able to break: a union, which has been constantly
strengthening and increasing, even from those very measures that were designed
by our enemies to confound and destroy it. Not only our own dangers and
distresses, but even the successes and cruelties of our enemies, have
conspired, under Providence, to cement this people in a band of union, which at
this day may defy the rage and power of tyrants; "for it is now consolidated by
a confederation happily completed." Thus united and bound, these American
States, in a collective view, form a large empire, which bids fair, in the
course of nature, to exceed all the empires of the world; they spread over an
amazing extent of country, that by rapid population is daily filling with
inhabitants. It is not improbable but the extensive countries of Canada and
Nova Scotia will ere long be joined in the union: nor is it impossible but the
West India islands, from their local situation, may, in some future period,
become the property of these American States. Alas! what surprising
productions, what extensive prospects, has this great spirit of liberty, under
Providence produced?

VERY observable have been the interpositions of Providence, in raising up, for
us, numerous and powerful friends. Even in Britain, and in the British court,
persons of the highest reputation for virtue and knowledge, have owned the
justice of our cause, and done much to assist and support it: by their friendly
aid, we received from time to time, notice of the designs and plans of our
enemy, a circumstance of high importance and utility.

BUT our greatest human friend and supporter is, His Most Christian Majesty the
King of France, whom that GOD who has the hearts of kings in his hands,
disposed to enter into a most generous alliance with these States; and he has
given us the strongest evidences of his sincerity and friendship. From such a
powerful ally we have indulged raised hopes and expectations, and have
experienced eminent and important services, that have even exceeded our
expectations. We well know our absolute need of this foreign aid, and the many
ways in which we have felt the benefit of it; but I fear we are not in general
so mindful of the hand of Divine Providence, in this particular, as we ought in
justice to be.

THAT a nation of different manners, different language and religion, and with
minds barred against us, by national prejudices, which, like national habits,
are stubborn and incurable by human art and address, should at once form so
open, friendly, and generous an alliance, with these poor and oppressed States;
that their armies and forces should harmonize with ours, like brethren in a
common cause; and all ranks of men among them, so highly interest themselves in
our concerns, and so freely shed their blood in our cause, discovers the hand
of Providence, the kind influence of heaven; and it is much too great a
compliment to human wisdom and abilities, to consider them as the sole causes
of such great events.

FROM education and prejudice, we have generally been trained up from our
cradles, to conceive unfavourably of the French nation. We viewed them as a
kind of natural enemy, and such were our feelings toward them: and hence it is
not so much to be wondered at, that some among us appeared to be so insensible
to the vast importance of our alliance with France. However, a number of real
facts abundantly convince us of our error and mistake, and prove our prejudices
to be ill founded. And from the best authority and information, as well as from
our own experience, we are now induced to view and esteem the French by far the
most polished, humane, and generous people in the world. Their naval force,
which from time to time has been sent to America, has undoubtedly prevented our
enemies from burning our seat-port towns: and their troops, united with the
American arms, under the command of our illustrious General the last year,
effected the greatest and most happy event of the war; a victory that will make
as brilliant a figure in history as any to be met with, either in ancient or
modern wars.

A FRIEND in need, is a friend in deed. At this day we both see our need of
this friendly aid, and feel the happy effects of it; greater foreign assistance
we could not expect; that to be insensible of their kindness, must expose us to
be reproached with base ingratitude; and not to acknowledge the hand of
Providence in this alliance, must bring upon us the guilt of great impiety.

MEMORABLE have been the interpositions of Providence, in blasting and
counteracting the designs of our enemy, and in discovering and detecting their
mean and wicked plots and intreagues. We have often seen their councils turned
into foolishness, and their secret machinations detected. When their open
violence has proved abortive, they have frequently attempted to effect their
purpose by fraud and deceit. As if despairing of success from their troops,
they have had recourse to traitors among ourselves. Nay, so great is their
malice and rancour, they would undoubtedly, with wicked Saul of old, in the
hour of despair, readily go to the witch of Endor, if they might but obtain
their point; but there is no enchantment against Jacob, neither is there any
divination against Israel, according to this time it shall be said of Jacob and
of Israel, what has GOD wrought? The same overruling Providence that blasted
their open force, has detected their secret fraud.

THERE have been, also, signal appearances of Providence in our favor, in
times of our greatest distress and danger. When our enemies have had their
greatest triumphs, and we of consequence our darkest hours, some of our
greatest deliverances and victories have been sent. So signal have been the
measures of divine providence, that the greatest prosperity and successes of
our enemy, seem to have been ordered, to prepare them for a greater overthrow;
this is the doing of the Lord, and it is mavelous in our eyes.

EVERY prop our enemy seem to have depended upon, has failed them in its turn.
They have sent their secret emisaries among us, to bribe and deceive, but it
did not avail. They sometimes hoped for factions among ourselves, and did all
in their power to foment them, but have been happily disappointed. They much
expected our money would fail us, but have the mortification to see their own
money supporting our cause. They once thought we could do nothing at fighting,
for the want of arms, but now find from woeful experience, that we fight them,
and beat them, with their own arms.

IT not their last, yet their greatest hopes and dependence appear to have been
placed upon a General, differently distinguished in Britain and America; there
by his high birth and fame; here by his shocking inhumanity and cruelty, who
was permitted for a time, greatly to annoy and distress our brethren in the
southern states: but blessed be God, that General, with his whole army, are now
prisoners in our hands. Verily the Lord has done great things for us, the Lord
has triumphed gloriously.

FROM a series of favorable events, and the present aspects of providence;
from the successes of our arms; the completion of our union; the favorable
change of our currency; the feeble state of our enemy; and the despair of those
mistaken and wretched men, that are denominated tories, we cannot but entertain
raised hopes that our deliverance is just at hand, and the blessings of peace
will soon be restored, and our independence secured; when this land of liberty
will become a quiet habitation; the wilderness blossom like a rose; commerce
and agriculture flourish; the arts and sciences be cultivated; and generations
yet unborn shall rejoice in the happy purchases of our treasure and blood.

BUT notwithstanding the great things which God has done, and is doing for us,
and the pleasing prospect before us, we hear from some few the voice of
complaint and the growls of avarice; and the general subject is, the burden of
taxes. Alas! my christian friends, what is money, to the great blessings of
liberty? to be freed from the jaws of tyranny, to live in freedom ourselves,
and leave our posterity after us free, are blessings of infinitely more value
than all the wealth of the world. The kindness of heaven, and the bounties of
providence bestowed upon us, are enough to hush and suppress every uneasy
sentiment of this kind, where there is the least spark of ingenuity or public
spirit. Had we lost all our wealth, but preserved our liberty, we should have
been great gainers; but by the kindness of heaven, we may preserve them both.

IT is true, our taxes are heavy, and demands for our exertions are pressing,
and what else in reason could we possibly expect? But let me tell you, that
great spirit which first led us to disdain British tyranny, that has enabled us
to brave every danger, and surmount the greatest obstacles; that spirit which
has conquered whole armies of our enemies, one after another, and humbled the
pride of Britain, will easily prevail with us, to part with a little of our
money to complete the glorious work.

INDEED, I by no means think, that we shall find our public charges to be such
mighty difficulties as some avaricious and unfriendly minds would feign
suggest. Should the infatuation of Britain continue, and it seems likely at
present it will, it will help us to money to pay our debts, as it has furnished
us with arms to fight our battles. The immense sums Great Britain is constantly
sending over to America, to defray the expenses of her wicked war, will in the
issue, chiefly center in the Americans pockets. By impoverishing themselves, to
gratify their lust of power and revenge, they will in fine greatly enrich these
States.

A LITTLE exertion, and public spirit, I doubt not, will easily carry us
through all our expenses. Lessons of prudence, economy and industry, are
naturally inculcated upon us, when money is scarce, and taxes are high: and
these are profitable lessons for a people at all times.

WE cheerfully part with our money when we think we have a good bargain; and
certainly there cannot in nature be a better bargain obtained with money, than
liberty for our land, and freedom for ourselves and our posterity.

BUT, should Great Britain gain their point, we may absolutely depend upon
losing our possessions and our necks together. For there is not the least
scruple in the matter, but the subjugation of these States would be followed
with the most shocking scenes of hanging and gibbetting, from one end of the
continent to the other, that was ever known, in any country or age of the
world; all promises, covenants, hostages and acts of parliament to the contrary
notwithstanding.

LET us therefore steadily follow the guidance of providence, and cheerfully do
our duty, and I doubt not we shall yet see the salvation of God, and our
posterity will long rejoice in the happy fruits of our toils and wars.

THE militia of this town merit a particular address at this time. --

TO you, gentlemen, as long as life shall last, this day will be for a
memorial. You first felt the shock of the tyrant's arms, and endured the bloody
scene. You saw your brethren and friends fall victims to the lawless power and
sword of Britain, exerted in a most foolish, wanton and wicked manner. From
that hour to the present moment, you have heard the cry of their innocent blood
sounding in your ears, and calling aloud for vengeance. Your spirit and
exertion on that day, evidence a martial zeal and ardor in your country's
cause: and we trust you will always be ready to defend your country, at the
hazard of your lives.

YOU never can want for motives for exertion, as you never can forget the
murder of your friends. You and your country will always remember with marks of
distinguished respect and honor, those persons that first fell sacrifices to
our glorious cause: their surviving friends have the pity of their country, and
we heartily wish them the consolation of God.

As your names are recorded, and your fame extensive, you will distinguish
yourselves, by every exertion and virtue, of patriotism and public spirit. It
is needless to say any thing to quicken your feelings of indignation and
abhorrence of British tyranny, or to perpetuate an indignant remembrance of
British troops; but must urge you to remember with gratitude to God, his kind
appearance for us, in that hour of danger and rage.

As that memorable day, which opened the great scene of the American war, and
forever dissolved our union with Britain, has been followed with surprising
appearances of providence in our favor, so in celebrating this anniversary, it
becomes us to bless and praise God for his manifold mercies to our land.

A CHRISTIAN soldier is a noble character indeed, and (...), to your martial
address, you (...) to add the ornaments of our holy religion, and take to
yourselves the whole armor of God. To a zeal for your country you will add a
zeal for God. To a desire to conquer your temporal enemies, you will add a
desire to conquer satan and sin, and obtain a victory over every sinful lust
and passion. And to your struggles for liberty, you will add your unceasing
endeavors and prayers, to be made free from sin, and become the servants of
God, that your fruit may be unto holiness, and your end everlasting life.

GOD, who has done, and is doing such great things for us, justly expects, that
we improve to the glory of his name. His ears have been open to our cries in
the hours of our distresses; and his powerful arm has hitherto protected and
(...) us: therefore let our hearts be (...) and our whole lives but one
continued (...) of praise unto GOD.

NOR let us cease to pray that God (...) direct our counsels; prosper our arms;
(...) illustrious ally; and always keep our commander in chief under his holy
protection; and soon restore and establish an honorable peace, that we may have
none to molest us, or make us afraid.

WE still hear the alarm of war in our land, and the calls of our country for
our most strenuous exertions. We have not as yet put off the harness, nor does
(...) become us to boast; but we have constantly new and nobler motives, to
animate and encourage us. Our foreign aid and friendship, we perceive, is daily
increasing; and our prospects are enlarging, and brightening in our view. More
than this, we have what we no ways deserve, the blessing of Heaven, and the
smiles of Providence, in the agreeable and promising opening of the spring. I
am sure such things as these, must be animating to the feelings of every
ingenuous mind. The path of duty, is our path to safety; and in serving GOD, we
in the best manner serve ourselves, our country and posterity. Let us hearken
to the united voice of these motives and calls, and present ourselves living
sacrifices unto GOD. We have the blessed gospel in our hands, which contains
the calls and invitations of our glorious redeemer, and the great promise of
eternal life.

IN late years, we have past surprising changes; but we have all, an infinitely
greater change to pass, our change by death. We have had striking scenes, one
after another, open to our view; but they are not to be compared to those
invisible scenes that will open upon us in the eternal world.

WE have felt much from the terrors and alarms of war; but what are these to
the terrors of a judgment to come, and to the trump of GOD, that shall one day
pierce our ears, and raise the dead. Seeing we look for such things as these,
what manner of persons ought we to be, in all holy conversation and godliness.

We have also experienced the joys of victory and triumph over our enemies;
pleasing sensations to mankind in general: but they are mere trifles, to that
victory and triumph over sin, death and hell, that shall crown the solemnity of
the last day.

To be superior to the fear of our enemies, is indeed a pleasing sensation; but
by far a nobler one, to be superior to the fears of death, from a lively faith
in him, who has conquered death, and scattered so much light into the gloomy
mansion of the grave.

WE are all wishing and praying for the blessings of peace, that we may enjoy
quiet and rest; but the peace of Heaven, the rest which remains for GOD's
people above, is infinitely more deserving of our labor, wishes and prayers.

LET us then, never forget, that we are candidates for immortal felicity, and
shall soon have done with all worldly things, and enter upon the invisible
world; and therefore be soberly concerned, to approve ourselves, to our
consciences, to our country, and to our GOD, and then unspeakably great shall
be our reward in Heaven.

AMEN.

