Dr. MATHER' S ANSWER to an insidious Pamphlet, ENTITLED. Salvation for all Men.

ALL MEN WILL NOT BE SAVED FOREVER: OR, AN ATTEMPT TO PROVE, That this is a
Scriptural Doctrine; AND To give a sufficient Answer to the Publisher of
Extracts in Favor of the SALVATION OF ALL MEN.

By SAMUEL MATHER, D. D. Pastor of a Church in American Boston.

Ecclesiae victoria est vos aperte dicere, quod sentitis: Sententias vestras
prodidisse, superasse est.

Hieronym. epist. ad Ctesiphon. Meritis impii non gratia, sed Poena debetur.

Augustine, epist. 105. Spes immucitatis facit peceare.

Cicero. Cui addatur; Spes Paenae levis, vel magnae cito finiendae peccare
facit. -- Non obliviscitur Deus Sceleris admissi: Sed tarditatem Paenae
Gravitate Supplicii compensat. Danae. Ethic Christian. p. 297.

BOSTON: Printed by BENJAMIN EDES and SONS. In CORNHILL. M,DCC,LXXXII.

A PREMONITION TO THE READER.
THE great light of the world, and the only living and true way to God and
happiness, having said, as in Matt. vii. 13 and 14, Enter ye in at the straight
gate: For wide is the gate, and broad is the way, that leads to destruction;
and many there be which go in thereat: For straight is the gate, and narrow is
the way, which leads to life; and few there be that find it. He then
immediately adds in the two next verses, Beware of false prophets, which come
to you in sheep's clothing; but inwardly they are ravening wolves (...) Ye
shall know them by their fruits.

HERE our divine teacher and master gives us to understand, that they are false
prophets, or teachers, who encourage them, that enter the wide gate, and walk
in the broad way to destruction, that they shall all be saved: And He directs
us to beware of such false teachers, however fair and innocent they may appear:
For they are inimical to the flocks of our Lord.

AND, that so such false teachers may be discovered; our Lord, who knew what
was in man, and who indeed knew all men, acquaints us, that by their fruits ye
shall know them; which may intend and mean, that ye shall not only know them by
their own fruits, or from their own irregular, worldly and sensual lives and
conversations; but ye shall know them also by the fruits of their doctrine: For
their doctrine will surely produce those fruits whereof the children of men may
well be ashamed; and of which they may well be afraid, -- for the end of them
will be death, and even everlasting destruction.

WHEREFORE may these things be duly considered by us: And the Lord grant us
understanding in all things to know and practice his will and our duty; that
so, being found in this good old way, we may obtain and enjoy perfect and
everlasting rest and happiness; -- while the ungodly and vicious shall be
condemned in judgment, nor suffered an admission into the congregation of the
righteous.

An ANSWER etc.
The Title Page noticed.
THE charitable author of the pamphlet, entitled, Salvation for all Men,
unhappily stumbles and falls at the threshold of his performance: For even the
title page is not without its errors. -- It is this, Salvation for all men
illustrated and vindicated as a scripture doctrine.

HAD the writer intended and said, Salvation for all men revealed and offered
in the gospel; this would have passed well enough for a scriptural doctrine.
But, that all men shall actually obtain salvation sooner or later, which is the
intent and meaning of this writer; this cannot be fairly illustrated from the
sacred writings; nor can it be truly and honestly vindicated as a scriptural
doctrine.

BUT how is it proposed to illustrate and vindicate this? Not, it should seem,
from the studies and endeavors of this generous well-wisher to all mankind;
but in numerous extracts from a variety of pious and learned men, who have
purposely written on this subject; together with their answer to the objections
urged against it.

WE are not certain as to the piety and learning of these persons, to be
hereafter quoted by him. The extracts from them afford no sufficient evidence
of the one or the other. But, were they ever so learned and pious, they were
only weak and fallible mortals, like their neighbors: And it will be found,
upon due examination, that they have imbibed error, and endeavored to promote
it.

THE author of this pamplet, or the collector of these various extracts, is
pleased to give himself the flattering title of One who wishes well to all
mankind. But his whole farrago of extracts gives no satisfactory evidence of
his being so: For it is probable, that his ex^racts may prove hurtful and
ruinous to many: And, if they should do so, his wishing them well will make no
sufficient amends for it.

THE collector then quotes the speech of the Angel to the Shepherds at
Bethlehem. -- And he is chargeable with a faulty misapplication of it: For the
good tidings of great joy, promulged by the Angel to all people, was the birth
of the Savior, the CHRIST of GOD: But if this extractor meant to insinuate, as
he doubtless did, that the Angel declared universal salvation to be given to
all people, as matter of great joy to them; as it is not true, we see not but
that he must be taxed as handling the word of the Lord by his Angel deceitfully.

AND now having got over the threshold, we may go into the porch, or the
preface, and give a few strictures upon the same before we enter into the dome,
that is constructed of trash, errors and falsehoods.

The Preface considered.
THE preface begins, That mankind shall universally, in the final issue of the
gospel plan of mercy, be de^ivered from the bondage of corruption. and be
admitted to the felicity of the sons of GOD, is no novel doctrine, as many may
be ready to imagine. It is very true, as he says, that it is no novel doctrine:
But in truth it is an old error revived, that has been again and again refuted,
and repeatedly exploded; and like Jonah's g^urd, it has come up in a night, and
perished in a night.

THEN the preface goes on; it was, as some writers on the subject have
observed, received as a revealed truth by Origin and Clemens of Alexandria, in
the latter end of the second century.

IN answer to which it may be said, that it is questionable whether Origin
received this as a revealed truth, that all men will be saved, and even the
Devils too; though he has often been taxed with holding this. For we are well
assured, that one Ruffians has taken the unbecoming and licentious liberty with
Origen's works to leave out of them, and to add to them, as he pleased; which,
as that learned and judicious writer of ecclesiastical history, Mr. Du Pin, has
observed, has occasioned some to doubt, whether a great part of those works,
published under his name, were Origen's or no.

AND as for Clemens of Alexandria, though he writes indeed of one Ephesies, who
learned from barbarous philosophy, that there is an expurgation by fire of them
that have lived badly; yet we do not recollect that he any where writes this as
his own sentiment, and that he though it all mankind would be finally happy. And
although he writes in his fourth book of Stromes, that whenever sinners do
repent, whether here in this world, or in the next, they may be received to
GOD's mercy; it must be said, that nothing can be offered from the sacred
writings to support it, as to the future world. -- But this his assertion is
not only contrary to the sacred scriptures, but it shows a forgetfulness of
what he had written before and is inconsistent with it: For he had before
asserted, that after our calling to the knowledge of the truth, p^^^^l; GOD
might grant to them, that have sinned a recovery into their former state for
once or twice by repentance: But if they should fall oftener into sin, then
there is no more restitution to be expected or hoped for, but a fearful looking
for a final judgment. -- Clemens therefore may here be set against Clemens.

BUT was it really fact, that both these fathers received and owned this tenet,
the salvation of all, as an evangelical truth? It must be acknowledged however,
that they were really but mistaken mortals: And they have actually showed
themselves to be so, by admitting as a revealed truth, if they have done so, a
palpable error.

IT is then added by the prefacer; It appears from Austin and Jerome, and other
celebrated writers in their day, that it was not then a new or uncommon tenet.

BUT this is a very fallacious account: And, if the writer of it was acquainted
with Austin's and Jerome's works; he writes not honestly, but with a design to
deceive: For many, by this account, would be led to think, that those fathers
were favorers of this tenet of universal salvation: Whereas both of them have
written plainly, explicitly and strongly against it.

THE prefacer then mentions a variety of books in various languages, published
in favor of this doctrine; and particularly an ingenious piece written in
French by a noble minister in the court of the King of Prussia, styled, A
treatise on the universal restitution of the creation: What a pity it is, that
our prefacer has not favored us with some extracts from this ingenious piece?
-- But these writers that have been mentioned have never yet showed themselves
able to prove, to the satisfaction of the wise and judicious, the universal
salvation of men and of (...) ^se.

HEREUPON this new writer adds, that there is a considerable number of other
books on the same subject now extant in English And what then? this is only
telling us, what we knew before, that mankind are prone to errors; and they are
apt too soon and easily both to receive them, and to promote them, as far as
they can, among others.

BUT here our prefacer sees cause to mention one or two, out of many others, as
favorers of his charming doctrine of universal salvation.

THE first of these is " Jeremiah White, chaplain to Oliver Cromwell; (who, by
the way, had no chaplain to his own particular family, nor wanted one; for he
always blessed his own household; though he had a chaplain for his state
family;) and an eminently pious good man, who has written a large book in
vindication of God's goodness to be manifested at last in the recovery of the
whole lower creation from the fall." If by this lower creation, we understand
the whole terraqueous globe; this will undoubtedly be recovered from its
present morbid and languishing condition. But, if it is to be understood, that
all the finally wicked and impenitent will be recovered to perfect happiness;
the pious good man has advanced an idle whim and an erroneous fancy.

THEN after pious good White, Dr. Hartley is mentioned as a man of known
serious piety, who, in his observations on man, has several chapters on the
salvation of all men: And it is said of him, that he was a disciple of Mr. John
Wesley; and, in common with him and all his followers, a believer in the
restoration of all mankind in God's time and way to final happiness.

MR John Wesley may be a precious good man too, as well as the Doctor his
disciple; and the rest of his disciples may be precious good people also: With
all our hearts. -- But good people may hold errors; and with respect to the
point of doctrine which they are said to hold, we scruple not to say, it is an
error that is held in common by them, and may endanger the happiness of others,
as well as their own.

BUT why must good Dr. Hartley be introduced and commended for holding this
error as a truth? If the real truth of the case had been known by this
prefacer, he should have been so fair and candid as to have informed his
readers, that the good doctor was strong in the opinion concerning fatality:
and in order to support this favorite doctrine, he found it necessary to bring
forward, and plead for, the error of the universal salvation of men: And herein
he has displayed a consistence in his errors: For if GOD be the cause or author
of all the actions in the world, good and bad; does it not seem fit and right
to render the doers of the bad actions, as well as good, finally happy? for
they have acted by his impulse and according to his will, when they have been
disobedient to his commandments. -- Thus, we may see, that one error prepares
the way for the support of another; as indeed this doctrine of universal
salvation opens the door for the reception and maintenance of other errors and
delusions: and therefore all considerate people have need to be on their guard
against it.

BUT let us now see, what our prefacer says, it may not be unseasonable to add
here* and this is, as follows: It is freely and fully acknowledged by all the
above writers, that many among the sons and daughters of Adam will pass through
a state of unutterable misery, before they will be prepared for and admited to,
the joys of GOD'S presence in the heavenly world.

WHAT a fine discovery have we here! Though it is no novelty. Here are some
persons, that would be thought by themselves and others Protestants, who
however are represented as declaring for the Popish doctrine of purgatory,
though not in plain and explicit terms, yet in truth and reality: for they
think, that the wicked, by passing through a state of unutterable misery, are
to be prepared for a state of perfect happiness. And is not this state of
misery then to be accounted purgatorial? Precious doctrine indeed, which can
neither profit them that advance it, nor any others! There is however one thing
wanting to complete the scheme; and this is, There should be certain priests
set apart to say masses for the rest of their souls in purgatory, and their
release from it! And they should do this kind ^^^ice for them on the account of
some pecuniary consideration.

THIS state of unutterable misery, the prefacer judges it proper to mention as
taking place before the restoration of the wicked to happiness; because, as he
acquaints us, a stranger under the assumed character of a preacher in direct
contradiction, not only to all the writers beforementioned, but to the whole
tenor of the new testament books, has held forth the doctrine of universal
salvation; and, according to him, a man may go to heaven, notwithstanding all
the sins that he has been guilty of in the course of his life.

BUT wherein he judges another, does he not condemn his own self? For is it not
the plain and manifest tendency of the doctrine collected by our extracter to
show forth the universal salvation of men, and even the very worst of them,
after some intervening and unutterable punishment: And where then is the mighty
difference between this stranger and this novel extracter? For they converge
and meet in the same point of doctrine, the salvation of all.

AND yet our prefacer says, with a placid air and a great deal of assurance
such a doctrine looks very like an encouragement to libertinism; and falls in
with the scheme of too many in this degenerate age; who, under pretense of
promoting religion, undermine it at the very root.

WITHOUT criticizing here on the undermining of a root instead of a foundation;
we will venture to say, that not only the doctrine of the wandering stranger
but the strange doctrine of our extracter, whether he has the real or assumed
character of a preacher or not, not only looks like, but they both really and
in fact are encouragements to libertinism: And, if they should be generally
received and entertained, they not only may, but certainly will, prove as
hurtful to civil society as to religion.

HEREUPON the preface writer delivers a pathetic wish; would to GOD it might be
realized as an undoubted truth, that there is the same reason to believe there
is a Hell, as a Heaven. -- And may we not take leave to add our fervent wish?
Would to GOD it might be realized, that there is the same reason from scripture
to believe, that the punishment of the wicked in Hell will be eternal, as there
is to believe, that the happiness of the righteous in Heaven will be so? For
the very same terms are used for the former as for the latter. And we unite
with the preface writer in saying, that those, who are infidels as to the
former, would do well to take care, lest they should know from their own
experience the horrors, and we add the eternal ones, of that dreadful place.

THE prefacer lets us know, that the following doctrine, held forth in his
extracts, is capable of being perverted and abused: Which, he says is the truth
with every other doctrine. -- And we are taught to conceive, that the christian
religion is the doctrine according to Godliness: And we have cause to be
persuaded, that every truth of this religion is calculated and adapted to
promote piety and virtue: Whereas every error and falsehood has a contrary
tendency: And this verily is the ease of that particular error, which is held
forth by our well wishing extracter. And, if any turn the grace, which our
prefacer intends to magnify, into wantonness; while they may reflect proper
(...) on themselves, they may possibly bla^e and curse him, who has ^rawn and
led them on to a state of unutterable and long punishment, even for ages of
ages, and to an awful degree of it.

BUT, after getting over the threshold, and passing through the por^h, we come
now unto the house itself, the building of hay and stubble, that is not (...)
put together, nor will be able to stand the trial.

All men will not be finally and eternally saved.
THE pamphlet, entitled, Salvation for all men, is aptly designed and
accommodated to make bad men easy, and cause them to continue deceived and
hardened in their wicked and vicious choices and ways; and to unhinge the minds
of serious and well disposed persons from the truth, on which they were
settled, and to betray them into errors, iniquity and ruin.

IT may probably therefore be of some consequence and advantage to take this
insidious pamphlet into a serious and impartial consideration, and to show the
erroneous and wrong notions that are conveyed in it and by it. And as this has
been requested by a number of serious, virtuous and godly persons; hence it has
been undertaken.

THE author of the pamphlet would have us to think him contrary and opposite to
the notion that has been carried about by a stranger from England, who, instead
of following the business of the world, has been preaching up the general
salvation of all mankind, without any future punishment at all for the wicked;
for, according to him, as it is said, their follies and crimes will be laid on
the Devil: And he therefore alone will bear the punishment of them.

BUT although this author appears to be averse to the doctrine of this
stranger; and he owns and professes himself to be a believer of the punishment
of the wicked in the future state; yet he is plainly for confining this
punishment, however severe and unutterable, to a limited season: And he has
ransacked some books, and produced some authorities, to support his hypothesis
and to gain it a favorable reception among mankind.

NOW we shall take some proper notice of his plausible sayings; and we shall
consider and animadvert on his produced authorities: which, whatsoever they
are, it makes no matter to us: GOD accepts no man's person: He calls whom
he will to his service; and he dispenses his gifts and benefits to whomsoever
he pleases

THE doctrine of the future state of punishment, as to the eternity of it, if
not as to the extremity of it, seems by some accounts to (...) been attacked in
the beginning of the second century from the birth of our Lord. However it
stood its ground against the gain sayers at that time and afterward. And both
Austin, the celebrated minister of Hippo in Africa* and the learned Father
Jerome. bare their testimony against it, as having an unhappy tendency to
promote and encourage all manner of vice and wickedness and a continuance in
the same.

BUT since those early times of christianity, this doctrine of the eternal
duration of the punishment of the wicked has been opposed at one time and
another by some particular persons; and it has been so particularly in the
present century, as well as in that preceding it: However it has not yet been
subverted; but it has stood its ground; Nor is it to be overthrown by any thing
we have yet seen advanced against it, nor will it be overturned: For the truth
is great and strong; and though for a season there my be a running upon it and
a striving against it, it will surely prevail and stand secure.

BUT, in order to its standing and prevailing against opposition, it is highly
proper and requisite, that some one or other should set the present truth in a
fair light, prove it a christian doctrine, and endeavor to establish wavering
christians in the faith of it, left, being led away with the error of the
deceiving or the wicked, they should fall from their stedfastness.

THE collector of other men's sentiments begins with acquainting us, that after
some pertinent observations; [for the pertinence of which, as we have not the
book, we must implicitly rely on his judgment and saying] the pious and
ingenious Mr. White proceeds in the following manner, etc -- Here, as the
extract is large, it is rather too long to write: And there is no need of it,
especially as there is no argument and convictive evidence to support it. We
shall only say at present of the long extract, that it is a merely fanciful
harangue, in a declamatory way and with a great flow of words, to show what a
love he has for mankind and how pleased he is wi^h the notion, that they are
all like to be happy. And as this appears to be a favorite and most beautiful
tenet to this ingenious master White, he discovers himself to be dotingly fond
of it: for it removes various difficulties; it is ravishing to his own heart;
it is a most comfortable doctrine for the human race; and, according to his
view of it, very honorary to the divine being.

THIS fine introduction of Mr. ingenious White, which our collector says
breathes a spirit of piety and benevolence, is however only a specious and
plausible representation of error: nor is there any thing in it but fancy and
flourish to support and establish the truth of it.

AND as the extracter himself is aware of this, he therefore remarks, that,
after the ending of this introduction, our author (he pious Mr. White) proceed^
to confirm the doctrine of ^n universal restoration of the human race by a
variety of testimonies from scripture. And our collector kindly promises, that,
in order not to be tedious he will endeavor to give the ideas of the author in
as few words as possible. We may take it very well, that he has kindly promised
not to be tedious: and we shall use our endeavors to show, in as few words as
possible, that Mr. White, with all his ingenuity, has mistaken and
misinterpreted the meaning of those scriptural testimonies, and we shall
produce much superior and more established authorities than his that he has not
given the right sense and meaning of them.

THE first text that he produces is found, 1 Timothy ii. 3.4. God our Savior, who
will have all men to be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth. Upon
which Mr. White observes that the letter of this text is full and express: God
will have all men to be saved: And should we press it, there are almost as many
arguments as words. For 1st, it is not said, that God would have all men to be
saved by his good will, but that he authoritatively wills it; wills it as a
being of supreme, uncontrollable power; a being, that will be obeyed inspite of
the corrupt dispositions of men or the mischievous arts of devils: It is a
fixed, determinate immutable will, not transient nor revokable: Thus powerfully
and irresistably does God will all men to be saved. This is all gratis dictum,
freely said of his own head* and has no truth in it: For God has no where said
in his word, that he authoritatively wills the salvation of all men, so as
powerfully and irresistably to effect it. But he goes on, As God wills the end,
he wills the necessary means leading to it: he will have all men come to the
knowledge of the truth: For, no man is or can be sanctified and saved without
the knowledge of the truth -- And further he remarks that this will has its
ground in the essential benevolence of the divine nature. And to what does this
amount, but that God is not willing that any should perish? And he has
therefore furnished them with the means of grace and salvation. But, as to
God's absolutely, powerfully and irresistably willing it, so as that it shall
certainly and infallibly take place, the word of God says no such thing: and he
not only adds to the word of God in saying as he has, but he palms an untruth
upon it. -- And yet to his corrupt fancy he applies, 1 Timothy vi. 13. that, God
quickens all things: which intends and means, that he from his quickening
influence makes all things that are living, to be alive: which is nothing to
his purpose. And then, says he, our savior tells us, all things live to God*
as in Luke xx. 38: which is in Greek Pantes, all, not things; but it means men,
particularly the pious and faithful Patriarchs before mentioned: and this is
far from his intention and meaning: but there is one thing, which follows, that
is quite inexcuseable. Mark, says he, who is this Savior, i. e. of all men? It
is GOD, and not CHRIST. Let us only look into 1 Timothy ii. 3, and we shall see
who is God our Savior: And we shall see, that in the Greek it runs, in the
sight of the Savior our GOD: and servants are enjoined to show all good
fidelity, that they may adorn the doctrine of GOD our Savior in all things, in
Tit. ii. 10. But it is in the Greek, that they may adorn the doctrine of the
Savior, our GOD in all things: And how contrary is this to the interpretation
of Mr. White, as well as other Arians. However it is the truth as it is in
Jesus, the savior GOD, and worthy of acceptance.

BUT we shall now produce some testimonies, that are preferable to Mr White's
that are sufficient to invalidate the wrong design and and, for which he has
cited and misinterpreted the sacred text in the forecited 1 Timothy ii 3.

GOD then will have all men to be saved. The famous Austin Augustine. Enchirid,
103.
understands all men to mean not every man; but some of all kinds of men, as
kings and plebeians; some men and me women; some Spaniards; some Hollanders,
etc. And Beza approves of this exposition: And indeed this sense appears to
agree with the preceding context where prayers are enjoined to be made for all
men, for kings and all that are in authority etc. And Arnobius, Arnobius,
contra nationes, il.
another ancient writer, interprets the text thus for us that he, God our
Savior, makes the power of coming to him uniformly to the highest and lowest,
to servants, to women, to boys: The fountain of life lays open to all: nor is
any one prohibited or driven from the right of drinking. And that they may be
saved he would have them to come to the knowledge of the truth And this, the
learned Grotius says, is the knowledge of evangelical truth: Grot. in Loc.
It is therefore in this way, the knowledge of evangelical truth, so as to be
conformed to it, that the children of men may expect to be saved. But may they
expect to be brought to this saving knowledge in the land of darkness and
misery? We have no warrant for thinking any such thing from the word of God.
And, without this saving knowledge can they reasonably look for happiness?

OUR extracter then tells us, that our author Mr. White, further illustrates
his reasoning by the following words: For there is one God and one mediator
between God and man, the man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all,
to be testified in due time; as at the 5th and 6th verses. 1. There is one GOD,
or more properly as he says, God is one. Though it is more literally and
exactly in the Greek, one God This he strangely explains, all men, reprobated
as well as elect, have one and the self same GOD. But, if he means, that GOD is
the self-same GOD to the reprobate, as well as to the elect, to bless them and
make them eternally happy; he is grossly mistaken himself, and he tries to
deceive others by it. -- Again, 2. The Mediator is also one: And he interprets
it, that He is the Mediator between GOD and all men: He is not nearer to one
party of the human race than another. But he says more than he has authority
from the text to say, and he sinfully adds to it. -- And, 3. This Mediator gave
himself a ransom for all. And, as the greatest part of mankind have no benefit
from it now, the time will come when the happy effects of it will be
universally felt and most illustriously displayed. For which reason the apostle
adds, to be testified in due time. The meaning of St. Paul if we may believe
the pious Mr. White, is, that there shall be a time when it will be ma^^st,
that all men are ransomed and bought by the b^ood of (...) he presently after
adds, the reconciliation shall final^^ operate upon all: And if the elect are
first received to ^avor the rest she (...) after in their due order. But he
racks out a meaning (...) posile, that does not belong to the text. And we
shall now g^v^ the genuine intent and meaning of it. If the words be justly
translated, the sense will be. There is one God and one mediator of God and
man, the man Christ Jesus: And so it signifies, that the mediator in both God
and man. But we may note that the learned Mr. B^tterfield (...) propossed this
translation of the words, which it must b^^^w^ed, answers word for word to the
Greek The one GOD the one who is also mediator of GOD and man, is the man
CHRIST JESUS So then the man CHRIST JESUS, who is the mediator, is GOD, as well
as man; so that he is GOD and man united. But although this mediator has given
himself a ransom for all: For it must be granted, that he has given a
sufficient ransom and propitiation for all; and he will not cast out abroad
any, who penitently come to him as he requires, to gain and enjoy the benefit
of it; yet it is no where said that they, who will not come to him for life and
happiness shall enjoy the benefit of his ransom and propitiation. And, whereas
Mr. White, who may be called an interpreter, one of a thousand for interpreting
amiss, has explained to be testified in due time that there shall a time come
when the reconciliation shall finally operate on all, etc. he has egregiously
erred from the truth: For these words refer to what went before: And according
to the learned Grotius, they signify, that CHRIST gave himself to death as a
ransom in the proper season; and that not merely that he might yield a
testimony to the truth of his doctrine; but that he might lay down his life in
the proper time and season, of which the prophets predicted: And this appears
to be all that is meant by it.

AND then, there is another text, produced by our author that is, Mr. White, in
1 Timothy iv. 10, The living GOD, who is the Savior of all men; especially of
those that believe. Here he allows, that GOD is the common Savior of the whole
human race; and particularly of them that believe the gospel of his son. But
although believers have the advantage above other men; yet this does not prove
that GOD is not their Savior: Because he condemn them to suffering, he has
not cast them off. His meaning is, that GOD will be their final and eternal
Savior.

WE have now heard with one ear what our extractor has erroneously told us: And
let us now open the other ear that we may gain the right sense of that passage.
Grotius's explication of it, which is preferable to Mr. White's, is* the living
GOD will have all men to be saved if they believe: But he will save christians,
because they believe; to wit, if their faith be efficacious by love -- But
Cornelius a Lapide, a learned Jesuit, interprets it, and very justly as we
apprehend, the living GOD is the Savior, the preserver of the soul and body of
(...) in the present life; and especially of the faithful, whom he will save
not only in the present life, but in the future. And we may annex the
testimonies of Chrysostom, Occumenius, Ambrose* Anse^m, and many others, to the
genuine sense of the words, and which we cannot but approve as being so: Now
these observe, that GOD may be called the Savior of all men, as he gives to
all some salvation: For temporal life and the many goods of this life are
common to a^l But especially is he the Savior of the faithful; i. e. of them
that pe^s^vere in the faith which works by love: For to all them, and them
on^y is he the giver of eternal life, which is especially ^^ed for and called
salvation. And now the reader is left to judge for himself whether Mr. White's
interpretation is as likely to be true and right, as those that we have offered
from wiser men.

THEN Mr White, according to our extractor, says, if we turn to 1 Cor xv 22
etc. we shall see this matter cleared up. But, if we are not mistaken, his
interpretation will only enlighten our minds with a beam of darkness, as ^n
ancient writer has expressed it. The text is, As in Adam all die; so in CHRIST
shall all be made alive: This is interpreted for us, that believers will be
raised to everlasting lif^ at CHRIST's second coming: And unbelievers will be
raised too, but only to punish them in Hell: And when their punishment shall
have a proper effect, i. e. such an effect as Mr. White pleases; they will then
be recovered to the same happiness with the saints.

THERE is certainly nothing of this sort said in the text: nor is there any
thing offered in it from which it may be justly argued. The most, that can be
gathered from it is, that as in Adam all died, so in Christ shall all be made
alive; i. e. by a resurrection from the dead But it may be justly remarked
here; that the latter clause may be read; so in Christ all, or, all in Christ
shall be made alive. And the learned Dr. Whitby has very well paraphrased it;
and we must be allowed to say, we think better than Mr. White, that all of his
nature and spirit shall be made alive. And so indeed it follows: In CHSIST all
shall be made alive. How? it follows, every man in his own order, Christ the
first fruits; afterward they that are Christ's at his coming; and no others
are mentioned.

BY our collector we are referred to the ingenious White for his next
quotation, and the sense of it. This is out of Romans v. from verse 15 to 19.
Upon which, having made his own remarks, he forms this conclusion, Here you see
grace has the preference in the p^ot: GOD has a design to show his wrath, and
to make his power known, i e for a season; for that appears to be his meaning;
but more to glorify his grace. And he tells us at the bottom of the 11th page,
t^ ^hen he shall have exhibited acts of the greatest and most universal grace,
GOD will be viewed with admiration by the whole intellige^t creation, and
celebrated with the loudest anthems of praise. But will there not be cause for
the highest admiration and praise, when at the same time the divine holiness
and righteousness will be displayed toward wicked men and the devil and his
angels? No Our Mr. White will not, as we can find, allow the display of these
forever to be part of his divinity.

THE last quotation, says our extractor, I shall make from Mr. White, is his
remarks on Ephesians. i 10. and Col^ss 1.20 The import of these passages he makes
to be that all men, all things, were originally made by CHRIST* headed by him,
etc There was no war, no fighting, no disorder; these all came by sin But GOD
sent his son to recover them out of this state: And he has laid an effectual
plan for it. And he sums up the matter, that there is nothing in Heaven or
earth, which shall not be finally reconciled to GOD Thus there will be a
recapitulation of all things under CHRIST and universal restoration to favor.

WHAT a fine story is here; and how admirably is it adapted to please the fine
fancy of the author, and gain upon the imagination of weak people! But let us
now see, what more enlightened and wise interpreters have said upon these
scriptural passages.

IT is the plain design of Ephesians. i. 10, to signify, that the dispersed are to
be gathered together in to one flock, by Christ as their head, even the things
in heaven and earth; which, as Grotius justly notes, the Hebrews call the
superior and inferior family of God. The Jews, as he observes, hated the Aliens
as idolaters: And the Jews on the account of the diversity of their
institutions, were disagreeable to the Gentiles: but now they of both nations,
as they come to Christ, will be friends, yea brethren, among themselves, and
together one people of God: And let it be noted, that they will be reduced
under Christ their head.

BUT the plain and natural sense of the words according to various learned
authors, may be given thus, that it is the divine design and intention, under
the dispensation of the gospel, here called in the Greek, the dispensation of
the filling up of the seasons, to rec^pitulate; to bring them by a penitent
faith to a reconciliation to God, and so to good terms with all the heavenly
beings, and to bring them thus to an union, and good agreement among
themselves: thus heaven and earth will be reconciled.: And they are thus in
Christ, as the head recapitulated and gathered together in one. And it must be
putting a strange force on the words to make them signify the restoration of
the wicked and impenitent to the divine favor and everlasting happiness: They
are not adapted to convey any such wrong apprehension, only to such as are fond
of errors and delusions, and love deceit.

BUT now let us hear instead of Mr. White, what the learned and judicious Beza
has to say, on Col. i. 20. Now he understands it of the whole church, which,
contains in it things in heaven and things in earth.

ORIGIN, as it has been said, gathered from this, but very unadvisedly that it
would some time come to pass, that damned men and devils would be reconciled to
God and saved. But the most discerning learned and judicous interpreters both
Protestant and Roman Catholic, understand it, that God by the shedding of the
blood of his son on the cross, has reconciled all to himself both in heaven and
earth, and men as well as angels.

AND we may add here the interpretations which the learned and judicious Mr
Dail^e has given of this text: which is, the will of GOD was to reconcile
things on earth and in Heaven by his son, and reduce all the parts of the
universe unto good terms each with the other: This great work is begun; the
foundations of it are (...); the pledges of it are given us; but it will not be
perfectly accomplished until the latter day; when the world, free from the
bondage under which it yet groaneth shall be entirely changed; its new Heavens,
and its new earth, and its new elements, with the angels and the saints, and
all the other parts of the world, conspiring together in eternal concord and in
inviolable correspondence to the glory of their common creator, who, as the
apostle says, shall then be all in all. Thus he.

AND it is very sure and certain besides, that the best expositors, both
ancient and modern, whose expositions we need not tarry to annex to those that
we have mentioned have not given such a latitod^nary exposition of this text as
this extraordinary benev^l^nt writer has done, without any good reason; but
only from a partial attachment to his own unscriptural notion.

GOD extracter here closes his quotations from this author by saying Thus ^uch
for the excellent Jeremiah White. But we see, that his excellency for
interpreting is not discovered and manifested: And they may well be ashamed,
who have laid any great stress and placed any dependence, on the fanciful
interpretations of such a whimsical brain.

AND we are now to proceed to another author, whose testimonies for universal
salvation from the scriptures are to be noticed by us: This author is indeed a
nameless one: And we shall produce authors of name and eminence to show, that
he has not aright understood and interpreted these scriptural testimonies.

ANOTHER portion of scripture, proceeds our extractor, mentioned by another
writer may be found in 1 Corinthians. xv. from 24th to 28th verse. And this writer
thinks it is here most peremptorily affirmed, that universal subjection to
CHRIST shall be effected: And the affirmation, he says, is expressed in a
variety of as strong and extensive terms as could have been used, as by putting
down all rule, all authority, and all power; by putting all enemies and all
things under his feet, etc.

BUT there are very learned men besides Grotius, who, by the all rule,
principality and power, that are to be put down, understand all the empires and
kingdoms of the world, and all the lesser governments. And when it is said,
that after the subjection of these the son himself will become subject: they
understand the meaning of it to be, that the glorious son of GOD will be as an
ambassador, who, having laid aside the business and burden of his embassy,
will still retain his pristine dignity and glory.

AND it may be advisable here to give out in a particular manner the
sentiments of the excellent Witsius, excellent and celebrated both for learning
and piety: Now these are his thoughts, that the divine, essential and natural
kingdom of the Messiah is nothing short of eternal: Dan. iv. 34 That the
manhood of the Messiah will be forever personally united to his Godhead, and
will therein enjoy a glory far above all the creatures of GOD: Phil 11 8: That
the Messiah will be forever the head of the church; and considered,
acknowledged and celebrated by it, as being the head, the most illustrious
member of that body; and finally, that there will be everlasting effects of the
Messiah's mediatorial kingdom; such as the effulgence of the Divine majesty and
glory in the person of the GOD man, and the full deliverance of the people of
GOD from all their enemies and afflictions; and especially the full abolition
of all their sins. This blessedness of the people of GOD will be forever
acknowledged as obtained by the Messiah and the spirit inhabiting the faithful.
And our apostle makes it his design every where to establish these things. But,
after the day of judgment, and at the end, the mediatorial kingdom of our Lord
will come into other circumstances. First, the present economy will be at an
end: All rule, as it now is, shall be put down. Then, our Lord will give an
account concerning the consummation of his whole mediatorial undertaking to
obtain and apply the salvation of his church, and present it without defect to
him, the Father: And this may be meant by delivering up the kingdom to GOD. And
then, as all sin, with all the consequences of it, will be removed; there
appears not to be any further need of a mediator, which there will be until
then It seems therefore, that the Deity will now more immediately make its
communications to the blessed, as unto the angels: which favor will be forever
owned as owing to the merits of their Savior: Thus GOD will be all in all. And
in fine, our Lord in his human nature, ceasing from his mediatorial function,
that he had faithfully discharged, will be subject to GOD, with his brethren,
and at the head of them, in the most excellent glory, and without any
diminution of the glory, which he now enjoys. And we shall conclude with giving
you the learned Witsius's comparison for it; As any son of a king, who goes
from his father with the highest power to subdue rebels and vindicate citizens
from the tyrannical usurpation, having happily accomplished the business
according to the pleasure of the father, and laying aside the laborious empire,
of which there is now no further use; he will now and henceforth securely live
in the delights of the royal court. Thus the son himself will also become
subject. And, as the mediatorial kingdom of our Lord supposes and intimates
some imperfection in his church; this wise and good end of it, makes not for
the dishonor, but for the glory, of our blessed Lord and Savior.

WE have besides at hand the accounts, which the Baron Pussendorf, and sundry
others of eminence for learning and piety, have given of this place, that are
quite different from the crude and loose no ions of this author. But we
apprehend, that truth enough has been offered to show the error and falsi^y of
the notions of this unknown author.

THERE is another text, says our extracter, produced by the same author, which
is the very first, that reveals the promise of a Savior and summarily
comprehends the whole of what has been said concerning the reduction of mankind
universally to an obedient subjection to the governing will of GOD. Such, alas!
is the ignorance and foolishness of some among mankind, that when they have
embraced any particular notion and mere whimsy in religion, they soon contract
a fondness for it: And they will then apply as many passages of scripture as
they can, and put them to the rack and torture, to make them confess their
favorite opinion.

THUS this unknown writer will have this passage in Genesis to be understood as
conveying his own sense and corroborating of it; because he has a mind that it
shall do so; which sense of his is, in a narrow compass, that sin shall be
totally destroyed by the reduction of all men under moral subjection to GOD.

BUT there is not the least countenance given to this fancy in the text: It is
all the forgery of his own brain from it: All, that can be fairly and honestly
gathered from this passage is, that after the apostasy, there was an enmity
commenced between the woman and the serpent, and between his seed and hers. Now
the seat, where in the controversy arising from this enmity will be maintained,
is the present world. And the only question is, who shall get the better? Now
it is most certain, that the seed of the woman will be victorious over the
devil; and he will destroy all the works of the devil: And when he comes to
judge and rule the world at the last day; he will cause the earth and the works
therein to be burnt up: When the sinners shall be consumed out of the earth and
the wicked be no more, as in Psalm. civ. 34. And, after the conflagration, and
the restoration of the earth to a paradisaic state, the earth will be a new
one, wherein shall dwell righteousness This is the sense which the learned
Comenius thinks, that this passage in Genesis affords to us: And other learned
men are very well satisfied with this interpretation of it: And it has
certainly more truth in it, and is more worthy of reception with us, than the
bold and yet weak imagination and flourishing of our extracted author.

AND now we come to another text from this same writer and the last, says the
extracter, that I shall bring to view: It is recorded Rev. v. 13. These words,
our author observes, evidently look forward to the completion of the scheme of
GOD with reference to mankind, or the time of GOD's being all in all. But he
evidently discovers to us his ignorance of the matter: For the time to which
this passage refers, is before the opening of the seven seals. And here saints
and angels, and all creatures, are represented as making this acknowledgment,
in the 13th verse of this 5th of the Revelation, in order to signify, that GOD
in CHRIST JESUS is the sole object of worship and not any creature whatsoever.
The ingenius Mr Wap^e and others have observed to this purpose; and it is
worthy to be regarded. But, as CHRIST is now possessed of his kingdom, and his
power and dominion will be acknowledged by all creatures; the opening of the
seals of the sealed book, or volume, hereupon follows: And consequently this
knowing and assuming author is egregiously mistaken, when he declares, that it
looks forward to the completion of GOD's scheme with reference to mankind: For
it refers to the opening of the seals: And by the opening of the seals, it is
showed, that there are no creatures but what are subject and subservient to
CHRIST, the Lord and judge of this world in the conduct of his providence We
see then, how little regard is to be paid to such superficial interpreters of
the word of the living GOD.

BUT our extracter is not yet satisfied: He is not contented with extracting
from a number of writers the many texts they have mentioned in favor of
salvation for all men; but, out of his abundant kindness he will exhibit, as he
tells us, a like extract from what they and others have offered in answer to
the objections brought against the truth of this, i. e. his precious doctrine.

AND here Mr. Joseph Nicol Scot, is produced to answer the objection, (...) the
punishment of the wicked is declared in the scripture to be eter^^^^, etc. And
this same Mr. Scot, says, For my own part, I must (...) confess, that after
having with repeated care examined all the passages of scripture that relate to
the future punishment, I have not been able to find one single text in which
this article of an eternal and endless misery is either expressly affirmed or
necessarily implied.

THIS is a very peremptory and bold assertion; and yet it must be confessed
there is no truth in it: For after all his pretended care to examine all the
passages of scripture relating to this matter it is certain, that he has not so
carefully examined them as he should; or he has not taken the genuine sense and
meaning of many of them.

HERE we readily grant, that the word Aione, as well as the Hebrew word G^ol^m,
in the Old Testament, is frequently used for a^ age, or a li^^^ed time: And our
translators have again and again, and very (...) mistaken in giving the sense
of this word very variously and unaccountably.

HOWEVER this word (...) even in the singular sometimes, is used to signify an
interminable duration of punishment and misery. Thus we understand it, when it
is said concerning him, that speaks against the holy spirit, as in Matt. xii.
32, It shall not be forgiven him, neither in this world, nor in the world to
come; or, more exactly according to the Gre^k It shall not be forgiven him
either in this age or that to come. Where, by this age, we understand the age
in which CHRIST lived* and from that time to the end of the world; and by the
age to come, we understand the lengthy age, the perpetual age, that is to
succeed it: So, that this sin will never be forgiven. And the Apostle Paul has
given the reason, why such as are guilty of this sin will never be forgiven:
For writes he, in Heb. vi 4 and 6 It is impossible to renew them again to
repentance. And surely if it is impossible to recover them to repentance; it is
impossible, that they should be pardoned here or hereafter: And therefore they
must undergo an eternal punishment.

THE Greek word Aione, we have allowed, is sometimes used for an age: But it is
derived from the Greek adverb Aci, which signifies always -- And we a^
persuaded, that the adjective from it, with, or without, Mr. Scot's leave,
generally signifies everlasting: Nor can we recollect any place, where it has a
different signification.

WITHOUT insisting here on this term, Aionios, as it is applied to the blessed
GOD; and, when it is so, surely it cannot be aright understood of (...) limited
duration: For the Divine Being is without beginning; and he is a never ending
Being: -- This term is often attributed to things that had a beginning, and
will never know a period. Thus, the terms eternal, or everlasting, as
adjectives are attributed, not only to angels, to the souls of men, and to the
heavens and earth with regard to their substance; but to various other things
in the book of GOD.

IT is as certain as any thing can be, that the Greek word, which the knowing
Mr Scot will not have to be signifying eternal, is used for eternal in numerous
places, as we shall make plain and evident. Thus this adjective is adduced
concerning the covenant of God; which is said to be everlasting; because,
according to the tenor of it, God will eternally be reconciled and favorable
to them, that are in it. So the gospel is called the everlasting gospel; which
surely cannot mean of a temporary duration: for, as it has had its influence
and efficacy from the beginning of the world; its influence and efficacy will
also endure throughout all ages -- So the redemption purchased and procured by
CHRIST JESUS is expressly called eternal redemption; forasmuch as the power and
efficacy of this redemption will last forever. -- So the consolation, that is
conveyed by the gospel and grace of our divine redeemer to renewed and gracious
souls, is said to be everlasting: Why? They who are possessed of this
everlasting consolation, will not enjoy it, merely for a ^eason; but they will
never be deprived of it. So we read of enjoying in the heavenly world life
eternal; and that the holy and gracious will have eternal salvation, eternal
glory, and the things invisible and eternal, in the everlasting kingdom of God
our Savior. And what can this same adjective here over and over again used,
mean? Certainly it cannot mean any thing short of a perpetual duration in any
one of these places: And the term is adapted to convey that idea. And so we
read of the eternal judgment in Heb. vi 2 Aioniou Krimatos. And why ^s it so
called? From its effects and consequences: for it will bring life eternal to
the good and gracious; and eternal wretchedness and misery to the wicked,
unrighteous and uncharitable.

BUT here is the insurmountable difficulty: Mr. Nicol S^^t can find not so much
as one single text in which this article of eternal misery is either expressly
affirmed or necessarily imp^ied. What a strange thing is this, that he could
not find Matt xxv 46! These, i. e the wicked and ungracious, shall go away into
everlasting punishment, but the righteous into life eternal. Every one that has
eyes to see, may see that the same epithet is used for the punishment of the
wicked, as for the life of the righteous: And why then must a two fold meaning
be given to it? Surely our Lord and judg^, that had been hi^ intent and meaning
could have told us, that the wicked should go away into a temporary but
unutterable punishment, and the righteous into life eternal: but he has not
given us any information in the te^ of a temporary and limited punishment for
the wicked And therefore we have not sufficient reason to believe it: For our
Lord was no deceiver, neither was guile ever found in his mouth.

AND further our Lord has given us to understand, by his apostle, that the
devils are held in everlasting chains under darkness: And we are assured from
his own lips, that the wicked and ungracious, shall be ordered to depart
accursed into the everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels: And
here we would note, as it deserves to be noted, that the words, rendered for us
everlasting fire, are more emphatical in the Greek, To Pur To Aionion; which
plainly signify the are the everlasting one. And the very same terms are used
by our blessed Lord and judge, in Matt. xviii. 8. It is better to enter into
life halt and maimed, rather than having two hands or two feet to be cast into
the fire, the everlasting one. And we are taught of GOD our Savior, by his
apostle, that the perdition of ungodly men will be an everlasting destruction,
etc.

NOW, from all the citations out of the scripture, does it not appear that the
Greek adjective Aionios, in whatever case it is put uniformly signifies
eternal? Certainly then Mr. Scot i^ much mistaken when he affirms, that eternal
misery is never expressly of (...) in one single text.

BUT he goes further, and says, that there is not a text wherein it is
necessarily implied. We think however that it is implied in that one text
without mentionting any other, which says concerning Judas, that it had been
good for that man, that he had never been born. For, if he went to Hell at his
death, and should continue there even to the end of the final judgment and then
be recovered to life and perfect happiness; we think that it was, and it will
be, good for him that he was born: whereas our Lord affirms to the contrary.
Some have quibbled about the precise meaning of those words: But, if we collate
and compare them with the saying of our Lord in Joh xvii. 12. When praying for
his apostles, none of them is lost, but the son of perdition: Will any presume
to say, that this son of perdition is not lost, and even irrecoverably so? It
is more than they have any right or reason to do; when our Lord himself
declares him to be a lost man, and represents him as an incarnate devil.

WE have written of the substantive Aione. and the adjective Aionios: But we
must now observe, that it is written of such as give way to antichristian
superstitions and idolatries, in Rev. xiv. 11. that the smoke of their torment
assendeth forever and ever: But it is in the Greek for ages of ages And can
there be a stronger way of expressing the perpetual duration of their torment
and misery? It is the very same form of expression as is used for the Divine
Being in Revel x 6, the living one for ages of ages. Let not any then flatter
themselves that only a temporary duration of punishment can be intended by it:
For the form of expression is too full and strong to be thus confined and
straitened.

THERE is one objection, which is taken, Mr. Extracter says, from those words
of our Savior, in Mark ix which he justly notes are thrice solemnly repeated:
And this solemn repetition of them thrice, we shall be all wed to say, shows
them to be deserving of a threefold attention and heeding by us. But Mr. Joseph
Nicol Scot has with a wet finger wiped way the difficulty; and from Isaiah's
prophecy, which he misinterprets, he says, the worm preys on the wicked in Hell
and the fire torments them: The one dies not, and the other is not quenched
till they have certainly effected the dissolution or death of wicked men in the
future state It is observable, that Mr. Scot does not here grant, that the
wicked will be finally and eternally happy, as might be expected according to
our extracter, after the worm had preyed on them and the ^re had tormented them
for a while: But he affirms, that the worm dies not, and the fire is not
quenched, till they have certainly ^ffected the dissolution or death of wicked
men in the future state. And here although he does not allow the eternal
duration of their punishment in the future state: he allows their punishment to
continue till their dissolution or death; that is, until they are annihilated
or blotted out of being: So that in this sense he gives them up to an eternal
death; though he does not see fit to have them eternally miserable. However, to
use his language, it may be said, that this article, of an endless dissolution,
or death, of wicked men, we cannot find to be expressly affirmed or necessarily
implied in the sacred writings. Mr Scot's doctrine therefore must pass with us
as a new conjecture of his own brain, as it is indeed of some others: And what
will not vain men conjecture!

BUT to return to the words in Isai. lxvi. 24. and allowing the words of our
Lord in Mark ix to be taken from thence; this interpreter however does not
appear to have observed that just before this passage it is written of the
eight worshippers of GOD our ^vi^ne* And they shall go forth and look upon the
carcases of the m^n that have transgressed against me: so that the men were
dead, and their ca^cases were spread abroad: however they were not wholly
distroyed, for their worm shall not die, neither shall their fire be quenched.
^y their worm the learned Leibnitz and other learned men have understood their
human animal part, consisting of soul and spirit: for men is a worm, and the
son of man is a worm: and this worm that has transgressed shall not die,
neither shall the fire into which it shall be cast be quenched: for it is such
a fire as is prepared for the (...) and his angels -- But let us see and
particularly remark the (...) of our Lord himself upon his third citation of
these word from I^^^^ where, i. e. in hell fire, their worm dies not and the
fire is not quenched: for, as our Lord continues, every one shall be salted
with fire, and every sacrifice shall be salted with salt Upon which w^ the
learned Dr. Samuel Clark has given this paraphrase which to serves to be
considered; as every burnt offering under the law (...) first salted with salt
and then consumed by fire* (...) every (...) has been instructed in the
doctrine of the gospel, if, when (...) found not sincere, shall be destroyed by
the eternal fire (...) the divine wrath.

BUT it is probable, that the sense and meaning of it in its connection may
rather be; for every one shall be sa^e^ with, (...) or s^asoned with fire
itself, to be preserved and rendered (...): For as salt preserves from
corruption; here the f^ itself shall be of such an operation as to render the
objects of it capable of undergoing the torments of it forever with the devil
and his angels.

OUR extracter hereupon starts another objection, that if all are finally
saved, this will greatly tend to encourage wicked men in their vicious courses:
and he answers, that moral depravity is absolutely inconsistent with rational
happiness; and that the suffering of wicked men in the next state will be
exceedingly great in degree, as well as long in duration, in order that they
may be made the willing people of GOD: nor will they be delivered from their
suffering till this i^ effected -- But we answer, whosoever they be that die in
their sins; that quit the world, while they are alienated from the life of God
and abhorrent from his holy nature and will, cannot be happy in any time, or in
any place; no, not in Heaven itself And they cannot see life: for they have the
wrath of God abiding on them: and the direful effects of that wrath will abide
on them Nor is there the least reason to believe, that their suffering will
make the willing people of God; as the suffering of punishment naturally
excites an aversion in the sufferers to the inf^^cter of the punishment: And as
the sufferings and torments increase, and go forward, the enmity and rage of
those that undergo them proceed and increase against their punisher. If then
condemned sinners will never be delivered from their sufferings, until this is
effected until they are brought to be the willing people of God, there is not
the least likelihood that it will be ever effected: Nor does the word of God
any where say, that such an effect shall ever take place.

FINALLY, says our extracter, It is said, upon the supposition of the truth of
universal salvation; it may be improper and hurtful to open it as a scripture
doctrine in the world: And the extracter says, he has seen a proper answer
(...) these words; It would be very extraordinary if setting a scripture (...)
its genuine light should have a dangerous tendency, etc. But a^, on one hand it
does not yet appear, that the doctrine of universal salvation is a scriptural
one; on the other hand, it is plain and evident to all sound and considerate
minds, that the broaching of it has a very dangerous tendency: and hence it
should not be admitted for a scriptural truth.

WE have now done with our animadversions on the new extracter, and we are
sorry to say, that he has spent his time very idly and foolishly and hurtfully
in making such a collection, and communicating it to the world. For it is
probable that he may be answerable for the evil and mischievous effects of it.

BUT we shall not finish our reply without requesting the reader to attend to
our reasoning, upon the whole, with respect to the subject which we have been
considering: and if nothing new be offered in them, perhaps the new manner of
offering them may not be disagreeable.

Eternal death then and punishment is threatened against the wicked and
impenitent: and the sentence to it will most surely be pronounced against them;
and it may on very good grounds and for substantial reasons be expected, that
the pronounced sentence will be fulfilled on them.

AS men, by their sinning, go away from God and alienate themselves from him;
and all the children of disobedience unpersuadeableness and impenitence
practically say to the MOST HIGH, depart from us; hence it is most fit and
right, that GOD our Savior should order them to depart from him; and that they
should accordingly be separated from him and utterly banished from his presence
and favor. And hence foolish mortals, by continuing impenitent and hardened in
their evil choices and actions, contract a habit of sinning; hence they are
under a necessity, though it is a chosen one, of sinning: and as they will not,
hence they cannot, by any endeavors of their own, cease from doing wickedly
and sinning against God. It is therefore but fit and right that they should
smart for it, and continue under punishment.

THE wrath of God is indeed revealed from heaven against the ungodliness and
unrighteousness of men: and even Pagans themselves, from some notices of this,
have had their apprehensions and fears of it. But the direful effects and the
vast duration of it was not known to them. No! These were not discovered but by
the revelation of God in his word and the preaching of the gospel according to
it: for as life and immortality are brought to light by the gospel so a state
of eternal death and misery is clearly revealed by this divine revelation.

HOWEVER there have been some of an inquisitive turn of mind, and indulging to
contemplation; and many who are called Christians, that have been very loath to
receive this doctrine, and have actually disowned and rejected it.

AUGUSTINE Augustine, de Cevitate, etc. lib. xxi. chapter 17.
mentions some tender hearts, as he calls them, of our religion, who think,
that although GOD has justly doomed the wicked to hell, yet he will after a
certain space, deliver them from that torment: and, of this opinion, says he,
was Origin; and in a far more compassionate manner: For (if Ruffinus has not
wronged him in his works) he held, that the devils themselves, after the
expiration of a determinate time, shall be released from their torments and
become illustrious angels of heaven, as they were before; but this and other of
his opinions, and chiefly that of the rotation and circumvolution of misery and
bliss, in which he held, that all mankind should run, furnished the church with
the cause to pronounce him anathema.

THERE have been others since Origin, who have been of such a compassionate and
merciful disposition, that they could not bear any of the human race to be
perpetually miserable: and yet they are not so gracious and generous as Origin
is said to be to the devils: for they seem willing that these should
perpetually remain in misery: but the whole human race should be perfectly and
eternally happy. Is it possible, say they, that an infinitely good GOD should
make any of the children of men to damn them? Certainly there is not any good
cause to imp^^ch, nor the least reason to de^r^ct from, the goodness of GOD in
the punishment, and even the eternal punishment of sin. So far is GOD from
making any of the human race to be damned, and miserable, that he desires both
the present and future happiness of all mankind: And he mercifully prosecutes
this desire by the threatening of evil to pursue sinners: And this very
threatening must be allowed to be a kindness to mankind in general, in order to
keep them in awe and under a good regulation. Clemens, of Alexandria had this
right and just notion of it: for he writes of the threatening of punishment as
a gracious method to strike men with fear and terror that they may not sin
Clement. Alexandr. Paed^g. lib. i. chapter 8.
and so by sinning render themselves unhappy and miserable. And is it not most
plainly showed, by the previous threatening of destruction and misery, and the
kind and faithful fore warnings of it, that the God of all grace has no desire
to inflect the threatened punishment? Surely then he must be perfectly and
infinitely good as well as wise, in threatening punishment for sin and
impenitence in it, that he may not be obliged, as he is glorious in holiness
and righteousness, to execute the threatened punishment.

BUT should any one inquire, why the punishment for continued wilful ^^n and
impenitence should be not only extreme, but eternal? It may be answered that
the threatening of such a punishment must add weight and force and vast
importance to the punishment threatened. For let men imagine and fancy as they
please, neither Purgatory threatened, nor any place or state of lengthy
punishment, that is to have an end can be in reason so affrighting and
terrifying, as a punishment, that is not only extreme, but of a perpetual
duration. Therefore the punishment, to which impious, unjust, uncharitable and
impenitent transgressors are to be doomed, is called everlasting fire; or that
fire, the everlasting one, as has already been observed.

AND as GOD is perfectly good and wise, as well as holy and just, in
threatening punishment, and even eternal punishment; certainly he will still be
perfectly wise and good, as well as holy and just, in fulfilling his
threatening. And his doing this will be but a fit demonstration of his truth
and faithfulness: For he will thus testify and evidence, that He is not a man,
that He should lie or deceive; and that it is indeed impossible for him to lie.
-- And is it not right and becoming, when audacious, impenitent and hardened
sinners, from the threatening of eternal punishment, insolently laugh at it;
and, instead of fearing the Almighty and the direful effects of his
displeasure, challenge him after a sort to do his worst, and run on the thick
bosses of his buckler; that almighty GOD should make them know that his
threatenings are not despicable scarecrows; but they shall surely feel, in and
from the execution of them, the tremendous effects of his holy displeasure for
ages of ages?

AND as this holiness and righteousness of GOD, without his ceasing to be
perfectly and infinitely good, may demand and require this; so it can be no
injustice and wrong to the impenitent transgressors to infl^ct the threatened
punishment upon them: For, as Austin has truly observed, not grace, but
punishment, is due to the merits of the impious. Augustine. Epist. 14.


WE may, and should, endeavor to conceive as highly as we can with truth
concerning the goodness of our GOD in CHRIST JESUS. But is it not right and
reasonable to think, that this divine goodness is always influenced and
regulated by the highest wisdom and rectitude? And is it not contrary to reason
and fitness, and indeed to common sense, to think, that goodness itself should
bear to be exercised in vain, and be continued forever to irreclaimably
perverse and obstinate sinners? It is readily granted, that goodness,
forbearance and long suffering may, as indeed it does, bear long with deceived
and hardened sinners. But can it be reckoned goodness in GOD to bear always
with such sinners? And as there is in truth no good reason for his doing so;
there can be good reason assigned, why he should not bear with them, when they
have filled up the measure of their iniquities.

IT is a known truth and a stubborn fact, that the kindest and tenderest parent
on earth, having a bad, profligate and abandoned son, when he has again and
again rebuked and chastised him for his vices and crimes; and at length he has
threatened him in his high displeasure, that, if he continues any longer in his
excesses and enormities he will disinherit him and utterly have done with him:
And yet the base wretch will not relinquish his wicked and vicious courses, for
there is no reclaiming him: And hence the displeased parent, with grief of
heart and tears in his eyes, fulfills his threatening, and gives up his son as
a lost vagabond: Nor yet does he show any want of paternal affection to his son
in so doing: No! He would give his whole estate and all the world for his son's
recovery and salvation. And may we not argue in like manner concerning the love
of the divine Being, the Father of mercies; and its proceeding and issuing
after the like sort with respect to his disobedient, obstinate and
irreclaimable children? May it not be rationally expected, that he will swear
in his wrath, that they shall never enter into his presence and favor, and that
he will fulfill his threatening oath against them?

BUT some will insist on it, that it is very hard for the wicked to have their
bodies and souls forever tormented in hell fire. Now we cannot pretend to say,
in what way and to what a degree the corporeal part of the impenitent may be
punished. However, it is highly reasonable, that the impenitent transgressor,
who sinned in and with the body, should also suffer in it. And therefore the
resurrection of the dead is certified and assured to us. And it would be
advisable for all, who are wicked and vicious, when they are indulging to
their lusts and vices, to think of that sore punishment, which is hereafter to
be inflicted on their bodies, as well as their souls and spirits, for what they
are doing.

AND yet it should be remembered, that the fire, in which impenitent sinners
are to be tormented, cannot be a gross culinary fire: For it is said to be the
fire prepared for the devil and his angels. And it may be supposed, that the
principal punishment of sinning men may be intellectual and spiritual, and
beyond the reach of any corporeal sense. Rhimund^ de Sabunde. Theolog Natural.
P. 136.
But we cannot certainly determine about this; for we have not sufficient light
from divine revelation so to do.

AS for human actions, they are faulty and bec^me transcendently so, according
to the superiority and excellency of the object, against whom they are
committed Hence ^ff^ontive and injurious actions against good parents, kind
benefactors and benevolent and gracious rulers, are much greater than those
committed against others of different and lower relations and characters. And
consequently the faulty, base and iniquit^^ actions committed against the most
gracious and merciful parent and benefactor of all and the supreme ruler of the
universe, must exceed in guilt and aggravation, and that proportionally to the
eminence, perfection and glory of the Divine Being, against whom they are
committed: For the faults and transgressions are heightened and greatened from
the great and glorious qualities of that Being, against whom they are
committed. It must therefore be deemed no small matter, but a great wickedness,
to sin against GOD, even in the least respects and instances: And how much
greater is the crime ^f sinning knowingly, wilfully, presumptuously and
impenitently against him? Surely then this must deserve a punishment
proportioned to its aggravated nature and malignity.

IT is the will and choice of rational beings, who offend, which is the grand
principle in action: And this in right construction may be allowed to p^ss for
the deed. And as bad persons quit the world with a confirmed choice (...)
sinning, and a resolution for continuing in it; they must surely deserve to be
continued and confirmed in their exquisite punishment for it.

WICKED and vicious persons are so addicted to their wickedness and their
vices, and so powerful and predominent are their lusts, that the threatening of
the most extreme torments will not deter them from gratifying and pursuing
their lusts and vices: And when eternity is added to the extremity of the
punishment threatened; even this is not sufficient to affright and reclaim them
from their evil choices and pursuits. And, if such a threatening will not
answer this end, much less will the threatening of shorter punishments, however
great, avail for this purpose. They are therefore no friends to mankind, who
attempt to make them believe against the apparent discoveries of divine
revelation, that after suffering considerably and unutterably for a season,
they shall be brought, and even by means of their suffering, to perfect and
endless happiness.

THERE are, however, some men, who go beyond them, that think the Almighty to
be such an one as themselves; and who, by their manner of speaking and writing,
would make us believe, that they are more gracious and merciful than GOD
himself: And because they cannot find in their own hearts, that they or others
should be condemned to everlasting punishments for their transient faults and
follies; therefore they are not willing that GOD should be inclined and
resolved to condemn them to such punishments, notwithstanding his peremptory
declarations and threatenings.

BUT it is very weak and wrong to judge and conclude from the Divine benignity
and infinite goodness, either that there is no place of torments and miseries
reserved for the punishment of wicked and impenitent mortals; or that the
punishments and torments of that place, however great, are of a short duration:
For the arguing in this manner is founded on error and falsehood: I^ has this
import and carries this signification in it, that i^ GOD be essentially and
infinitely good, he cannot be holy and righteous and ^^ithful; which can by no
means be admitted by any serious and (...) persons.

AND what reason have any to think, that if sinners were allowed a longer time
and continued advantages for growing penitent and reformed, it would answer a
happy end and reclaim the children of disobedience and impenitence? That space
for repentance and those continued advantages for turning and living to GOD if
granted to stupid and hardened transgressors, would only embolden them to be
more presumptuous, obstinate and vile still, and render them more hardened in
their wicked and vicious choices and ways: For so it is found in fact often.

BUT how long shall GOD wait upon impenitent and hardened sinners? And who
shall set bounds and limits to the exercise of his goodness? If guilty
wretches, if hardened criminals, could have their own will and way, the
gracious GOD might wait forever for their penitence and amendment. But if
presumptuous mortals will think, that GOD has never sufficiently tried and
proved themselves and others; they should be informed, that his thoughts and
ways are not as their's but infinitely above them: And that glorious GOD, who
is a GOD by judgment, by whom actions are weighed, certainly knows best, and
indeed he only knows, when he has sufficiently tried and punished them.

AND ought not all the human race to acquiesce in the rectitude and justice of
the Divine appointments and the executions of them? Has not the just judge of
all the earth the undoubted prerogative and right to appoint both the time and
manner of punishing the wicked and impenitent, and also the duration of all the
torments and miseries to be endured by them?

SOME have presumed to speak of it as cruel to inflict long continued torments
on criminals, however deserving of them. But at great suffering and much
affliction is in the nature of things connected with punishment; so indeed
there cannot be punishment without it: And it is the design and end of anger
and wrath to inflict it: We read therefore, that GOD distributes, that is in a
proportional way, sorrows in his anger. Now, as the writer of sorrowful things
mournfully si^gs, the anger of Caesar draws all evil along with it, must not
the anger of the immortal King bring all manner of evil, and in the highest
degree with it? And as GOD in a peculiar manner claims vengeance to himself;
for he says, it is mine, and I will repay it: What then can be plainer, than
that it is GOD, who takes vengeance, and that he will surely and greatly do
it: And let GOD be true, though all men should be found liars.

THE causes of punishing sins, are mentioned in Aulus Gollius Gellii N^ct.
Artis. lib. 17. cap. 14.
One is for the sake of chastising and amending the offender. [Such are, we may
think the corrections and chastisements of sinners in the present life] The
next is, that the dignity and authority of him, against whom the sin is
committed may be preserved; and lest, if there be no due punishment inflicted
it may procure contempt to the lawgiver: And the third reason for punishing
it, that this punishment is necessary for an example to others; that they,
being intimid^^ed may he kep^ from the like sins, from fear of the inflicted
and known punishment.

BUT if i^ should be here inquired, why GOD should continue any to (...) ^^e
instances of his extreme displeasure and perpetual veng^^ce? Though we are not
obliged to give answer to such a captious inquiry* we may however reply on
GOD's behalf: He, the just judge of all the earth, has an undoubted right to
support the dignity of his government, and not suffer any contempt to be cast
on him by the bold transgressors against his holy will and laws. And perhaps
the examples of amazing and eternal punishments may serve to keep the holy and
happy people above in the continued choice and practice of rectitude and
holiness. And perhaps besides, if there be other worlds, and other intelligent
beings in them, who are innocent and upright, the notification of the sin and
wickedness, and the consequent extreme and perpetual misery of these wretched
creatures may serve to keep them in their right choices and actions.

BUT if a truth be cleared and sufficiently established there is no need of
indulging to imaginations, or laying any stress on speculations, for the
support of it.

WE have seen, that the punishment threatened against impenitence in sin and
wickedness, is eternal: It is that fire that is eternal, such as is prepared
for the devil and his angels: Aeternus, nullisque domabilis undis: It is an
unquenchable fire. And nothing but what is idle and frivolous has been offered
against the infliction of the threatened punishment.

LET not any transgressors then, from the hope of immunity from punishment, and
from eternal punishment especially, be encouraged to sin. -- And let them
realize it, that nocet empta dolor voluptas; pleasure is hurtful that is
bought with pain, and especially with eternal torment.

AND let all the human race, as we are required, serve Jehovah, our Lord our
GOD and Judge, with fear; and rejoice with trembling before him from the
consideration of his holiness and righteousness, his terrible majesty and
consummate truth and faithfulness. And let us seasonably repent and give glory
to GOD in CHRIST JESUS, that we may not be vexed in his sore and perpetual
displeasure; but we may be blessed in him and with him, completely and forever;
AMEN!

FINIS.

