THE REVOLUTION OF AMERICA.

BY THE ABBE RAYNAL, Author of the Philosophical and Political History of the
Establishments and Commerce of the Europeans in both the Indies.

NORWICH: PRINTED BY JOHN TRUMBULL. M. DCC. LXXXII.

ADVERTISEMENT, BY THE TRANSLATOR.
THE Philosophical and Political History of the Establishments and Commerce of
the Europeans in both the Indies, by the Abbe Raynal, is certainly one of the
finest works which have appeared since the revival of letters; and perhaps the
most instructive of any which have been known. It is an original as to its
formation; and ought to serve henceforward for a model. An additional part to
this work, discussing the disputes of Great Britain with her Colonies, has been
long and ardently expected. In the course of his travels, the translator
happily succeeded in obtaining a copy of this exquisite little piece, which has
not yet made its appearance from any press. He publishes a French edition, in
favor of those who will feel its eloquent reasoning more forcibly in its
native language, at the same time with the following translation of it; in
which he has been desirous, perhaps in vain, that all the warmth, the grace,
the strength, the dignity of the original, should not be lost. And he flatters
himself, that the indulgence of the illustrious historian will not be wanting
to a man, who, of his own motion, has taken the liberty to give this
composition to the public, only from a strong persuasion, that its momentous
argument will be useful, in a critical conjuncture, to that country which he
loves with an ardour, that can be exceeded only by the nobler flame, which
burns in the bosom of the philanthropic author, for the freedom and happiness
of all the countries upon earth.

It may not, perhaps, be quite needless to observe, though it ought to be
understood, that the valuation of sums, made in the original in foreign money,
is, in the translation, made in sterling.

The abundant good sense, the political sagacity, and even the salutary
sarcasm, to be found, amidst the effusions of benevolence, in this historical
tract, could never, it is apprehended, be more opportunely laid before those
whom it may concern, than now. It now seems to be the general and anxious
expectation, that, before the rising of Parliament from its present session,
some proper and efficacious steps will at last, at this high time, be thought
of, toward closing the unnatural, the shameful, and distressful breach,
between the mother country and her colonies; a breach in which, as it is
observed, with great truth, by the author of a Plan of Accommodation Printed in
1780.
, founded in justice and liberality, The people on both sides are robbed of
their truest interests, and made to sacrifice their mutual happiness, to gain
nothing but contempt and misery.

Let not Wisdom utter her voice in the streets, and no man regard her.

The Translator cannot help most solicitously wishing, that some of his
fellow subjects, of the British dominions, may enter the lists for the prize
proposed in the following Advertisement from the Academy of Lions, in the hope
that he shall have the happiness to see it borne from the rest of the lettered
world, by a hero of that people, who have (...) ^ear, tam Marti quam Mercurio,
who are yet distinguished for their eloquence, and who, he trusts, when
fraternal feuds shall be reconciled, will vindicate their superiority in arms.
He humbly offers his service to any candidate for this pri^e, productive of so
great celebrity, who may not know the ready means of doing it himself, to get
his performance conveyed to Lions, free of postage, provided that it be left
with his Bookseller, Mr. Lockyer Davis, before the first of December, 178^.

London, March 5, 1781.
ADVERTISEMENT, FROM THE ACADEMY Of Sciences, Polite Literature, and Arts, at
Lions.
THE Abbe Raynal, after having instructed mankind by his writings, would still
contribute to the improvement of their knowledge, by exciting emulation. An
Associate in the labors of the Academy of Lions, he proposed to it to give out
two subjects for prizes, of which he has constituted the fund, to be
distributed by the Academy, to the authors whom it shall judge to have best
answered the views of the propounded questions.

The Academy accepted of the offer with gratitude, and publishes the subjects
without delay.

The first subject proposed for the year 1782, relating exclusively to the
manufactures and prosperity of the city of Lions, is omitted here, as, however
judicious and patriotic in the founder of the prize, it is an object only of
particular concert, and, consequently, not interesting, like the second, to the
world at large.

FOR THE YEAR 1783.
The Academy proposes the following subject.

Has the discovery of America been useful or hurtful to mankind?

If advantages have resulted from it, what are the means to preserve and
increase them?

If disadvantages, what are the means to remedy them?

The prize consists of the sum of fifty Louis d'or, which will be remitted to
the successful author, or his assigns.

CONDITIONS.
Any person of any nation may be a competitor for this prize, except titulary
and veteran academicians. The associates of academies will be admitted. The
authors must not let themselves be known, directly or indirectly; they will put
some line, or motto, at the head of their performance, which will be
accompanied by a note sealed up, containing the same line, or motto, with their
names and places of abode.

The Academy, considering the importance of the subject, sets no limits to the
length of the composition, but only wishes the author to write in French or
Latin.

No work can be admitted after the first day of February, 1783. The Academy
will proclaim the prize the same year, in its public assembly, after St.
Lewis's day, or the 25th of August.

The packets are to be sent to Lions, free of postage, directed to

M. LA TOURRETTE, Secretaire perpetuel pour la class des Sciences, Rue
Boissac; or to

M. DE BORY, Secretaire perpetuel pour la class des Belles Lettres, Rue
Boissac; or to

M. AIM DE LA ROCHE, Imprimeur-Libraire de l' Academie, maison des halles de
la Grenette.

Signed, LA TOURRETTE, Perpetual Secretary.
Lions, Sept. 5, 1780.
CONTENTS:
DISTRESSED state of England is 1763, page 1 England calls her colonies to her
aid 2 England exacts from her colonies what she should but have requested 7
After having given way, England would be obeyed by her colonies. Measures which
they take to resist her 10 The colonies were in the right to separate
themselves from their mother country, independently of all discontent 17 What
was the part which England should have taken, when she saw the fermentation of
her colonies 31 England determines to reduce her colonies by force 40 The
colonies break the ties which united them to England, and declare themselves
independent of her 46 Commencement of the war between the United States and
England 52 Why the confederate provinces did not succeed in driving the English
from the continent of America 63 France acknowledges the independence of the
United States. This measure occasions war between this crown and that of
England 69 Spain, not having succeeded in reconciling England and France,
declares for the latter power 80 What ought to be the politics of the House of
Bourbon, if victorious 85 What idea should be formed of the thirteen united
provinces 88
THE REVOLUTION OF AMERICA.
ENGLAND was just disengaged from a long and bloody war, in which her fleets
had displayed the banner of victory in all seas; in which a dominion, already
too vast, was augmented by an immense accession of territory in both the
Indies. This splendid face of things might have an imposing air abroad; but the
nation was reduced within to groan for its acquisitions and its triumphs.
Overwhelmed with a debt of L. 148,000,000 which cost her an interest of L.
4,959,000, she was scarcely sufficient to the most necessary expenses with the
five millions eight hundred thousand pounds which remained to her of her
revenue; and this revenue, so far from being capable of increase, had no
certain and assured consistency.

Land remained loaded with a higher tax than it ever had been in time of peace.
New taxes had been laid on windows and on houses. These acts laid a heavy
charge on all real estate. Wine, plate, cards, dice, all that was regarded as
an object of luxury, or amusement, paid more than could have been thought
possible. To reimburse itself for the sacrifice made to the preservation of the
public health, in the prohibition of spiritous liquors, the treasury had
recourse to malt, beer, cider, and all the usual beverages of the people. The
seaports dispatched nothing to foreign countries, and received nothing from
them, but what was burdened cruelly with duties, on the import and the export.
Raw materials and workmanship were risen to so high a price in Great Britain,
that her merchants found themselves supplanted in countries where they had
never before experienced a competition. The profits of her commerce, with all
parts of the globe, amounted not annually to above two millions and a half;
and, from this balance in her favor, there must have been deducted a million
and a half, paid in interest to foreigners, on their capitals placed in her
public funds.

The springs of the state were strained. All the muscles of the body politic,
experiencing at once a violent tension, were in some sort displaced. It was a
critical moment. It was necessary to let the people breathe. They could not be
relieved by a dimmution of expense. That of the government was necessary,
either to give value to conquests bought at the price of so much treasure, at
the price of so much blood; or to restrain the house of Bourbon, angered by the
humiliations of the last war, and by the sacrifice^ of the last peace. In
default of other means, to fix (...) the security of the present, and the
prosperity of (...) future, an idea was formed of calling the colonies to the
aid of the mother country. This view was wise and just.

The members of a confederacy ought all, in proportion to the extent of their
powers, to contribute to its defense and to its spendor, since it is by the
public power alone that each class can preserve the entire and peaceable
enjoyment of its possessions. The indigent man has, without doubt, less
interest in it than the rich; but he has the interest of his quiet in the first
instance, and in the next, that of the preservation of the public wealth, which
he is called upon to partake of by his industry. There is no principle of
society more evident; and ^et no fault in politics more common than its
infraction. Whence can arise this perpetual contradiction between the knowledge
and the conduct of those who govern? From the vice of the legislative power,
which exaggerates the maintenance of the public power, and (...), for its
fancies, a part of the (...) destined to this maintenance. The gold of the
^^der and of the husbandman, with the subsistence of the (...), to^^ from
(...), in the name of the state, in (...) and their habitations, and
prostituted in courts to (...) and to vice, goes to swell the pomp of a set of
men, was flatter, hate, and corrupt their master; goes ultimately into still
viler hands, to pay the scandal and the ignominy of their pleasures. It is
prodigally squandered in a fastuous show of grandeur, the vain decoration of
those who cannot attain to real grandeur, and in festivities and
entertainments, the resource of impotent idleness, in the midst of the cares
and labors which the right government of an empire would demand. A portion of
it, it is true, is given to the public wants; but inattention, and incapacity,
apply it without judgment, as without economy. Authority deceived, and which
will not condescend even to make an effort at being undeceived, suffers an
unjust distribution in the taxes, and a manner of gathering them which is
itself but an oppression more. Then is every patriotic sentiment extinguished.
A war is established between the prince and subjects. They who raise the
revenues of the state appear to be no other than the enemies of the citizen. He
defends his fortune from taxation as he would defend it from invasion. Whatever
cunning can purloin from power seems lawful gain; and the subjects, corrupted
by the government, make reprisals on the master by whom they are pillaged. They
perceive not, that in this unequal combat, they are themselves dupes and
victims. The insatiable and ardent treasury, less satisfied with what if given,
than irritated by what has been refused, reaches eagerly, with a hundred hands,
after what one alone has dared to divert from its g^ipe. It joins the activity
of power to, that of interest. Vexations are multiplied, under the specious
name of chastisement and justice; and the monster who beggars all those whom he
torments, thanks heaven devoutly for the number of the criminals who have been
punished by him, and of the crimes by which he is enriched. Happy the sovereign
who should not disdain, for the prevention of so many abuses, to render to his
subjects a faithful account of the employment of the sums he might exact! But
this sovereign has not yet appeared; and, without doubt, he never will appear.
The debt, however, of the protected people, toward the protector state, is not
a less necessary and sacred tie; and no nation has disowned it. The Enlish
colonies in North America had not given an example of it; and never had the
British ministry recourse to them without obtaining the succor it solicited.

But this succor was granted in gifts, and not in taxes, since the concession
of it was preceded by free and public deliberations in the assemblies of each
establishment. The mother country had found herself engaged in expensive and
cruel wars. Tumultuous and enterprising parliaments had disturbed her
tranquillity. She had fallen into the hands of ministers corrupt and bold;
unhappily disposed to raise the authority of the throne upon the ruin of all
the rights, and all the powers of the people. And even revolutions had taken
place, before an attack upon a custom, stablished and strengthened by the happy
experience of two ages, had ever once been dreamed of.

The colonies in the new world had been accustomed to regard this mode of
furnishing their contingent, in men and money, as a right. Had this pretension
been doubtful, or erroneous, prudence would have forbidden its being too openly
attacked. The art of maintaining authority is a delicate art, which requires
more circumspection than is generally thought. They who govern, are, perhaps,
too much accustomed to hold men in contempt. They regard them too much as
slaves, subdued and bent down by nature, whilst they are only so from habit. If
you lay on them a new load, take care lest they shake it off with fury and with
interest. Forget not that the lever of power has no other fulcrum than opinion;
that the power of those who govern, is, in reality, but the power of those who
suffer government. Remind not people attentively occupied by their labors, or
sleeping in their chains, to lift up their eyes to truth too terrible for you;
and whilst they are obeying, bring not to their remembrance their right to
command. When the moment of this fearful rousing shall arrive; when they shall
have thought in earnest that they are not made for their magistrates, but that
their magistrates are made for them; when they shall once have been able to
bring themselves together, to feel the communication of kindred minds, and to
pronounce with a voice unanimous; We will not have this law; this practice it
offensive; medium is no more; you will be constrained, by an unavoidable
alternative, either to punish or to yield; either to be tyrannical or weak; and
your authority henceforth detested or despised, whichever part it take, will
have to choose from the people but their upon insolence, or their hidden ha^^.

The first duty, therefore, of a wise administration, is to manage the
prevailing opinions in any country: for opinion is the property most dear to
man, dearer even than his life, and consequently much dearer than his wealth. A
wise administration may, without doubt, endeavor to rectify opinions by
information, or to altar them by persuasion, if they tend to the diminution of
the public power. But it is not permitted to thwart them without necessity; and
there never was any necessity for rejecting the system adopted by North America.

In effect, whether the different settlements in this new world had been
authorized, as they wished, to send representatives to parliament, where they
might have deliberated with their fellow-citizens on the necessities of the
British empire at large; or, whether they had continued to examine within
themselves what should be the contribution which it was right for them to make,
no inconvenience could have resulted from it to the treasury. In one case, the
voice of their delegated claimants would have been drowned in that of the
majority; and these provinces would have found themselves legally loaded with
such a portion of the burden as it should be wished to make them bear. In the
other, the ministry, continuing to dispose of the dignities, the employments,
the pensions, and even of the elections, would have experienced no more
resistance to its will in that hemisphere than in this.

But the maxims consecrated by custom in America were not founded in prejudice
alone. The pretensions of the colonists rested on the nature of their charters,
and on the still more solid basis of that right of every English subject, not
to be taxed without consent, expressed by himself or his representative. This
right, which ought to be that of every people, since it is founded on the
eternal law of reason, originated so far back as in the reign of the first
Edward. From that epoch the Englishman has never lost sight of it. In peace, in
war, under weak or wicked kings, in slavish or tumultuous times, it has been
his unpermitted claim. Under the Tudors, this Englishman has been seen to give
up some of his most precious privileges, and, unresistingly, to submit his neck
to the axe of tyrants; but never to renounce the right of self-taxation. It was
in the defense of it that he has shed rivers of blood, that he has punished or
dethroned his kings. In short, at the Revolution in 1688, this right was
solemnly acknowledged, by the celebrated act, in which liberty was soon to
trace, with the same hand with which it had driven out the royal despot, the
conditions of the contract between a nation and the sovereign it had newly
chosen. This prerogative of a people, much more sacred, without all question,
than so many imaginary rights which superstition would sanctify in tyrants,
was, with regard to England, at once both the instrument and the rampart of her
liberty. She thought, she felt, that it was the only barrier which could for
ever limit despotism; that the moment which strips a people of this privilege,
condemns it to oppression; and that the funds, raised in appearance for its
security, are sooner or later subservient to its ruin. The Englishman, in
founding his colony, had carried with him these principles beyond the seas; and
the same ideas had been transmitted to his progeny.

Ah! if in the countries even of Europe, in which slavery seems long since to
have taken its seat in the midst of vices, of riches, and of arts; in which the
despotism of armies supports the despotism of courts; in which man, chained
from his cradle, and bound tightly by all the cords both of policy and
superstition, has never breathed the air of liberty; if in these countries,
notwithstanding, they who have once in their lives restricted on the fate of
nations, cannot forbear adopting the maxims, and envying the happiness of the
people who knew how to make it the ground work and foundation of their
constitution; how much more ought the English natives of America to be attached
to the glorious birth right they inherit! They know the price at which their
ancestors had bought it. The very soil which they inhabit must produce in them
a sentiment favorable to these ideas. Dispersed throughout an immense
continent; free as the wild nature which surrounds them, amidst their rocks,
their mountains, the vast plains of their deserts, on the confines of those
forests in which all is still in its savage state, and where there are no
traces of either the slavery or the tyranny of man, they seem to receive from
every natural object a lesson of liberty and independence. Besides, these
people, given up almost all of them to agriculture and to commerce, to useful
labors, which elevate and fortify the soul in inspiring simple manners,
hitherto as far removed from riches as from poverty, cannot be yet corrupted
either by the excess of luxury, or by the excess of want. It is in this state
above all others, that the man who enjoys liberty is most capable to maintain
it, and to show himself jealous in the defense of an hereditary right, which
seems to be the most certain security for all the rest. Such was the resolution
of the Americans.

Whether the British ministry were ignorant of these dispositions, of whether
they hoped that their delegates would succeed in changing them, they laid hold
of the moment of a glorious peace for exacting a forced contribution from the
colonies. For war, and let it be well remarked, war, whether unfortunate or
successful, serves always as a pretext for the usurpations of governments; as
if the directors of the warring powers proposed to themselves by it less to
vanquish their enemies, than to enslave their subjects. The year 1764 saw the
birth of the famous stamp act, which forbid the admission in the courts of
justice of any instrument which should not be written on paper marked and sold
for the profit of the British treasury.

The English provinces of North America become indignant at this usurpation of
their most precious and most sacred rights. By an unanimous agreement they
renounce the consumption of whatever was furnished them by the mother country,
'till it should have withdrawn this illegal and oppressive bid. Even the women,
whose weakness might have been (...), are the most ardent, sacriliciou^ the
subserviences to their dress and ornament; and the men, animated by this
example, give up on their part other conveniences and enjoyments. Many
cultivators of land quit the plough, to form themselves to the industry of the
workshop; and wool, flax, and cotton, coarsely wrought, are sold at the price
which would before have purchased the finest cloths and the most beautiful
stuffs.

This kind of conspiracy stu^^ the government. By the clamor of the merchants,
whose wares are without vent, its inquietude is increased. The enemies of the
ministry uphold these discontents; and the stamp act is revoked after two years
of a convulsive agitation, which, in other times, would have lighted up a civil
war.

But the triumph of the colonies is of short duration. The parliament, which
had retreated but with extreme repugnance, ordains, in 1767, that the revenue
which could not be obtained by means of stamps, should be raised by taxes on
the glass, the lead, the paste-board, the colors, the paper-hangings, and the
tea, which are carried from England to America. The people of the Northern
Continent are not less revolted at this innovation than at the former. In vain
are they told that no one could dispute the right of Great Britain to lay on
her exportations the duties which her interest demands, since she denies not to
her colonies, situated beyond the seas, the liberty of fabricating themselves
the wa^es subjected to the new taxation. This subterfuge appears but as a
derision to men, who, being cultivators of land alone, and reduced to the
having no communication but with their mother country, cannot procure, either
by their own industry, or by foreign connections, the objects which had
recently been taxed. Whether this tribute be paid in the old or new world, they
perceive that the word makes no alteration in the thing, and that their liberty
would not be less attacked by this mode, than by that which had been repelled
by them with success. The colonists sea clearly that the government would
beguile them; and they will not be beguiled. These political sophisms appear to
them as they are, the mask of tyranny.

Nations in general are made more for feeling than for thinking. The greatest
part of them never had an idea of analyzing the nature of the power by which
they are governed. They obey without reflection, and because they have the
habit of obeying. The origin and the object of the first national associations
being unknown to them, all resistance to government appears to them a crime. It
is chiefly in those states where the principles of legislation are confounded
with those of religion, that this blindness is to be met with. The habit of
believing, favors the habit of suffering. Man renounces not any one object
with impunity. It seems as if nature would revenge herself upon him who dares
thus to degrade her. The servile disposition which she stamps upon his soul in
consequence, extends itself throughout. It makes a duty of resignation as of
meanness; and kissing chains of all kinds with respect, trembles to examine
either its doctrines or its laws. In the same manner that a single extravagance
in religious opinions is sufficient to make many more to be adopted by minds
once deceived, a first usurpation of government opens the door to all the rest.
He who believes the greater, believes the less; he who can do the greater, can
do the less. It is by this double abuse of credulity and authority, that all
the absurdities in matters of religion and of policy have been introduced into
the world for the harassing and the crushing of the human race. Thus, at the
first signal of liberty amongst nations, they have been prompted to shake off
both these yokes together; and the epoch in which the human mind began to
discuss the abuses of the church and clergy, is that in which reason perceived
at last the rights of men; and in which courage attempted to set the first
limits to despotic power. The principles of toleration and of liberty,
established in the English colonies, had made them a different people from all
others. There it was known what was the dignity of man; and when the British
ministry violated it, it could not be otherwise but that a people all composed
of denizens, should rise against the wickedness of the attempt.

Three years elapsed, without a revenue from any one of the taxes which had so
wounded the Americans to the quick. This was something: but it was not all to
which (...) jealous of their prerogatives had pretensions. They ^^sisted upon a
general and formal renunciation of what had been so illegally ordained; and
this satisfaction was given them in 1770. Tea only was excepted. But the object
of this exception was only to palliate the shame of entirely giving up the
superiority of the mother country ^^ver her colonies: for this duty was not
more cogently ^xacted than the others had been.

The ministry, deceived by their delegates, believed undoubtedly that the
disposition of the new world was altered, when, in 1773, they ordered the
collection of the duty upon tea.

At this news the indignation becomes general in North America. In some
provinces, formal thanks are agreed upon to be rendered to the masters of
vessels who would not suffer this production to make any part of their cargo.
In others, the merchants to whom it is consigned will not receive it. Here, he
is declared an enemy of his country who shall dare to vend it. There, they are
stigmatized with the same reproach who shall keep it in their stores. Many
provinces solemnly renounce the use of this elegant refreshment. A still
greater number burn what they had remaining of this leaf, 'till then the object
of their delight. The tea sent to this part of the globe was valued at more
than two hundred thousand pounds; and not a single chest of it was landed.
Boston was the principal theater of this insurrection. Its inhabitants
destroyed, in their very port, three cargoes of tea which arrived from Europe.

This great town had always appeared more occupied by a sense of its rights
than the rest of America. The least attempt that was made upon their privileges
had been repelled without scruple and without reserve. This resistance,
sometimes not unaccompanied by tumult, had for some years been tiresome to
government. The ministry who had a vengeance to wreak, seized too eagerly upon
the circumstance of a blameable excess; and required the parliament to punish
it severely.

Moderate men wished that the offending town might be sentenced only to an
indemnification proportioned to the waste that had been made in its road, and
to such a ^^end^ as it ought to ^^ake for not having punished this at of
violence. This sentence was thought too slight; and on the 13th of March, 1774,
a bill was passed for shutting up the port of Boston, and forbidding any thing
to be landed or loaded at it.

The court of London applauded itself for so rigorous a law, and doubted not
but that it would bring the Bostonians to that disposition to slavery which it
had vainly labored 'till then to give them. If, contrary to all appearance,
these sturdy men should persevere in their pretensions, their neighbors would
be ardent in profiting from the interdiction laid upon the principal harbor of
the province. Supposing the worst, the other colonies, long since jealous of
that of Massachusetts, would abandon it with indifference to its melancholy
fate, and gather up the immense trade which would flow in to them on the tide
of its misfortunes. By these means would be broken the union of these different
establishments, which had for some years past acquired a greater degree of
consistency than was pleasing to the mother country.

The expectation of the ministry was totally deceived. An act of rigor
sometimes over-awes. The people who have murmured as long as the thunder-storm
grow^ed only at a distance, when it comes to burst upon them, frequently
submit. It is then that they weigh the advantages and disadvantages of
resistance; that they contemplate their own strength and that of their
oppressors; that a panic terror seizes those who have every thing to lose,
without any thing to gain; that they lift up their voice, that they intimidate,
that they corrupt; that division arises in the minds of men, and that the
community is separated into two factions, which irritate each other, which come
oftentimes to blows, and cut each other's throats under the eyes of their
tyrants, who, with sweet complacency, behold their streaming blood. But tyrants
seldom find accomplices but amongst a people already corrupted to their hands.
It it vice which gives them allies amongst those whom they oppress. It is
humanly softness, which, filled with terrors, dares not barter its repose for
honorable peril. It is the vile ambition to command, which lends its arm to
despotic power, and consents to be a slave in order to domineer; to give up a
people in order to partake their spoil; and to renounce real honor for the
obtaining of titles, the nicknames of honor. It is, above all, the
indifferent and cold personality, which is the last vice amongst a people, the
last crime of governments, for it is ever the government which gives it birth;
it is that, which, from principle, sacrifices a nation to a man, and the
happiness of an age and of posterity to the enjoyment of a day and of a moment.
None of these vices, the production of a society opulent and voluptuous, of a
society grown old and verging to its end, belong to a people newly established
and occupied in useful labors. The Americans remained united. The execution of
a bill, which they called inhuman, barbarous, and bloody, tended but to
strengthen them in the resolution of maintaining their rights with the more
accord and constancy.

At Boston, the acrid and ardent spirit is more and more exalted. The try of
religion adds force to that of liberty. The houses of worship re echo with the
most violent exhortations against England. It was, without doubt, an
interesting spectacle for philosophy, to see that even in temples, at the foot
of altars, where superstition has so often blessed the chains of nations, where
priests have so often flattered tyrants, liberty lifted up her voice in defense
of the privileges of an oppressed people; and if it can be thought that the
Deity vouchsafes to look down upon the unhappy feuds of men, it was better
pleased undoubtedly to see its sanctuary consecrated to this use, and hymns to
liberty make a part of the worship by which it was addressed. These
exhortations of the preachers must have had a great effect; and when a free
people invokes heaven against oppression, it delays not long to have recourse
to arms.

The other inhabitants of the province of Massachusetts disdain even the idea
of drawing the least advantage from the cisasters of the capital. They think
but of drawing closer the bonds which unite them with the Bostonians, disposed
rather to seek a grave in the ruins of their common country, than to let the
least assault be ma^e on rights which they had learned to prize more highly
than their lives.

All the provinces attach themselves to the cause of Boston; and their
affection increases in proportion to the sufferings of this unhappy town.
Nearly as culpable of a resistance so severely punished, they are well aware
that the mother country but defers her vengeance against them; and that all the
grace with which the most favored can be flattered, is to be the last on which
the hand of oppression shall be doomed to fall.

These dispositions to a general insurrection are augmented by the act against
Boston, which is seen circulating throughout the continent upon paper edged
with black, emblematical of mourning for liberty departed. Soon the disquietude
communicates itself from house to house. The inhabitants assemble and converse
together in the public places: and writings, full of eloquence and vigor, are
delivered every where from the press.

"The severities of the British Parliament against Boston (say they in these
writings) should cause all the American provinces to tremble. They have now
nothing left them but to choose between fire and sword and the horrors of death,
or the yoke of passive, slavish obedience. Behold the (...) of an important
revolution is at length arrived, the event of which, as it shall be happy or
successless, will claim and fix for ever either the regret or the
administration of posterity.

"Shall we be freemen, or be slaves? On the solution of this grand problem is
about to depend, for the present, the fate of three millions of men, and, for
the future, the happiness or misery of their numberless descendants.

"Awake then, rouse then, O Americans! Never did clouds so black hang over the
region you inhabit. You are called rebels, because you will not be taxed but by
your representatives. Vindicate this just pretension by your courage, or seal
the loss of it with all your blood.

"Time for deliberation is no more. Whilst the hand of the oppressor labors
incessantly to forge your chains, silence would be guilt, in action infamy. Let
the preservation of the rights of the commonweal be your su^^re^^^ law. That
man would be the last of slaves, who, in the danger into which the liberty of
America is fallen, would not exert every effort to preserve it"

This disposition was the common one: but the important object, the difficult
thing, in the midst of a general tumult, was to contrive that a calm might be
brought on, by favor of which might be formed a concert of wills, to give
dignity, strength, and consistency, to their resolutions. It is this concert,
which, of a multitude of scattered parts, and each easily to be broken,
composes a whole that is not to be rendered tractable, unless it be to be
divided by policy or by power. The necessity of this grand combination, or
totality, is strikingly perceived by the provinces of New Hampshire, of
Massachusetts, of Rhode Island, of Connecticut, of New York, of New Jersey, of
the Delaware counties, of Maryland, of Pennsylvania, of Virginia, and of both
the Carolinas. These twelve colonies, which were afterward joined by Georgia,
sent deputies to Philadelphia, in the month of September, 1774, charged with
the defense of their rights and interests.

The disputes of the mother country with her colonies, assume at this period an
importance to which they had not been before entitled. It is no longer a few
individuals who make an obstinate resistance to imperious masters. It is the
struggle of one body of men against another; of the Congress of America against
the Parliament of England; of a nation against a nation. By the resolutions
taken on either side, minds mutually are heated. The ferment of animosity
increases. All hope of reconciliation vanishes. On each side the sword is
whetted. Great Britain sends troops to the new world. This other hemisphere
prepares for its defense. Its citizens become soldiers. The combustibles are
collected; the conflagration is about to b^aze.

Gage, the commander of the royal troops, sends from Boston, in the night of
the 18th of April, 1775, a detachment charged with the destruction of a
magazine of arms, and other military stores, collected by the Americans at
Concord. This body of troops meet at Lexington with some militia, whom they
disparse with little difficulty, continue their march rapidly, and execute the
commission to which they had been appointed. But scarcely are they on their
return toward the capital, but they find themselves assailed, for the space of
fifteen miles, by a furious multitude, and death on each side is given and
received. English blood, so often shed in Europe by English hands, irrigates
America in its turn, and the civil war is embarked in.

On the same field of battle, the following months, more regular combats are
behold. Warren becomes one of the victims of these unnatural and murderous
actions. The Congress honor his ashes.

"He is not dead, (said the orator) this excellent citizen shall never die. His
memory shall be for ever present, and for ever dear, to all good men, to all
who love their country. In the short space of a life but of three and thirty
years, he had displayed the talents of a statesman, the virtues of a senator,
the soul of a hero.

"Approach, all you whom the same interest in spirits; approach your
countryman's still bleeding body. Wash with your tears his honorable wounds.
But hang not too long over this inanimated corse. Return to your habitations to
fill them with detestation at the crime of tyranny. Let your horrible
descriptions of it make each particular hair to stand on end upon your
children's heads, inflame their eyes with noble rage, stamp menaces on their
brows, and draw, by their months, indignation from their hearts! Then, then,
shall you give them arms; and your last, your fondest wish, shall be, that they
may return victorious, or may die like Warren."

The disturbances by which the province of Massachusetts was agitated, were
repeated in the other provinces. The scenes, indeed, were not bloody, because
there were no British troops? but the Americans seize every where on the forts,
the arms, and the military stores: they every where expel their governers, and
the other agents of England; and every where harrass such of the inhabitants as
appeared favorable to its cause. Some enterprising men have the spirit even to
take possession of the works formerly erected by the French upon the lake
Champlain, between New England and Canada, and to make an irruption into this
vast region.

Whilst simple individuals, or detached districts, are thus usefully serving
the common cause, the Congress is occupied with the care of assembling an army.
The command of it is given to George Washington, a native of Virginia, and
known by some happy exploits in preceding wars. Instantly the new general flies
to the province of Massachusetts, drives the royal troops from post to post,
and obliges them to shut themselves up in Boston. Six thousand of these old
soldiers, escaped from the sword, from sickness, from all the miseries incident
to their profession, and pressed by hunger, or by the enemy, embark the 24th of
March 1776, with a precipitation which partakes of flight. They go to seek an
asylum in Nova Scotia, which remained, as well as Florida, faithful to its
ancient masters.

This success was the first step of English America toward the revolution. It
was begun to be openly desired. The principles which justified it were
dispersed on all sides. These principles, which were indebted for their birth
to Europe, and particularly to England, had been transplanted in America by
philosophy. The knowledge, and the discoveries, of the mother country, were
turned against herself, and she was told that,

Care must be taken not to confound together society and government. That they
may be known distinctly, their origin should be considered.

Man, thrown, as it were, by chance, upon this globe, surrounded by all the
evils of nature; obliged continually to defend and protect his life against the
storms and tempests of the air, against the inundations of water, against the
fire of volcanos, against the intemperature of frigid or torrid zones, against
the sterility of the earth, which refuses him aliment, or its baneful
fecundity, which makes p^isons spring up beneath his feet; in short, against
the claws and teeth of savage beasts, who dispute with him his habitation and
his prey, and, attacking his person, ^^em resolved to render themselves rulers
of this globe, of which he thinks himself to be the master: man in this state,
alone and abandoned to himself, could do nothing for his preservation. It was
necessary, therefore, that he should unite himself, and associate with his
like, in order to bring together their strength and intelligence in common
stock. It is by this union that he has triumphed over so many evils, that he
has fashioned this globe to his use, restrained the rivers, subjugated the
seas, insured his subsistence, conquered a part of the animals in obliging them
to serve him, and driven others far from his empire, to the depths of deserts
or of woods, where their number diminishes from age to age. What a man alone
would not have been able to effect, men have executed in concert; and all
together they preserve their work. Such is the origin, such the advantage and
the end of all society.

Government owes its birth to the necessity of preventing and repressing the
injuries which the associated individuals had to fear from one another. It is
the sentinel who watches, in order that the common labors be not disturbed.

Thus society originates in the wants of men, government in their vices.
Society tends always to good; government ought always to tend to the repressing
of evil. Society is the first, it is in its origin independent and free;
government was instituted for it, and is but its instrument. It is for one to
command; it is for the other to obey. Society created the public power;
government, which has received it from society, ought to consecrate it entirely
to its use. In short, society is essentially good; government, as is well
known, may be, and is but too often, evil.

It has been said that we were all born equal; that is not so: that we had all
the same rights. I am ignorant of what are rights, where there is an inequality
of talents, or of strength, and no security nor sanction: that nature offered
to us all the same dwelling, and the same resources; that is not so: that we
are all endowed indifferently with the same means of defense; that is not so:
and* know not in what sense it can be true, that we all enjoy the same
qualities of mind and body.

There is amongst men an original inequality which nothing can remedy. It must
last for ever; and all that can be obtained by the best legislation, is, not to
destroy it, but to prevent the abuse of it.

But in making distinctions between her children, like a step mother, in
creating some children strong and others weak, has not nature herself formed
the germe or principle of tyranny? I do not think it can be denied; especially
if we look back to a time anterior to all legislation, a time in which man will
be seen as passionate and as void of reason as a brute.

What then have founders of nations, what have legislators proposed to
themselves? To obviate all the disasters arising from this germe when it is
expanded, by a sort of artificial equality, which might reduce all the members
of a society, without exception, under an impartial, sole authority. It is a
sword which moves gently, equably, and indifferently, over every head: but this
sword was ideal. It was necessary that there should be a hand, a corporeal
being who should hold it.

What has resulted thence? Why, that the history of civilized man is but the
history of his misery. All the pages of it are stained with blood; some with
the blood of the oppressors, the others with the blood of the oppressed.

In this point of view, man appears more wicked and more miserable than a
beast. D^fferent species of beasts subsist on different species. But societies
of men have never ceased to attack each other. Even in the same society there
is no condition but devours and is devoured, whatever may have been or are the
forms of the government, or artificial equality, which have been opposed to the
primitive and natural inequality.

But are the^e the forms of government, supposing them made by the choice, and
the free choice, of the first settlers in a country, and whatever sanction they
may have received, whether that of oaths, or of unanimous accord, as of their
duration, are they obligatory upon their descendants? There is no such thing:
and it is impossible that you Englishmen, who have successively undergone so
many different revolutions in your political constitution, tossed as you have
been from monarchy to tyranny, from tyranny to aristocracy, from aristocracy to
democracy, and from democracy to anarchy; it is impossible that you, without
accusing yourselves of rebellion and of perjury, can think otherwise than I do.

We examine things with a philosophic eye; and it is well known, that it is not
the speculations of philosophers which bring on civil troubles. No subjects are
more patient than we are. I proceed then in pursuit of my object, without any
cause to fear that mischief can follow from my reasoning.

If the people are happy under their form of government, they will keep it. If
they are unhappy, it will not be either your opinions or mine, it will be the
impossibility of suffering more, and longer, which will determine them to
change it; a salutary impulse, which the oppressor will call revolt, though it
be but the just exercise of a natural and unalienable right of the man who is
oppressed, and even of the man who is not oppressed.

A man wills and chooses for himself. He cannot will nor choose for another; and
it would be a madness to will and to choose for him who is yet unborn, for him
who will not yet exist for ages. There is no individual but who, discontented
with the form of the government of his country, may go elsewhere to seek a
better. There is no society but which has the same right to change, as their
ancestors had to adopt, their form of government. Upon this point, it is with
societies as if they were at the first moment of their civilizaiion. Without
which there would be a great evil; nay, the greatest of evils would be without
a remedy. Millions of men would be condemned to misery without end. Conclude
then with me.

That there is no form of government which has the prerogative to be immutable.

No political authority, which, created yesterday, or a thousand years ago, may
not be ab^ogated in ten years time or tomorrow.

No power, however respectable, however sacred, that is authorized to regard
the state as its property.

Whoever thinks otherwise is a slave. It is to be an idolator of the work of
his own hands.

Whoever thinks otherwise is a madman, who devotes himself to eternal misery,
who devotes to it his family, his children, and his children's children, in
allowing to his ancestors the right of stipulating for him when he existed not,
and in arrogating to himself the right of stipulating for a progeny which does
not yet exist.

All authority in this world has begun either by the consent of the subjects,
or by the power of the master. In both one and the other case, it may justly
end. There is no prescription in favor of tyranny against liberty.

The truth of these principles is so much the more essential, because that all
power by its very nature tends ^o despotism, even in the most jealous nations,
even in yours, ye Englishmen, yes, in yours.

I have heard it said by a whig, by a fanatic, if you will; but words of great
sense escape sometimes from a madman; I have heard it said by him, that so long
as the power should be wanting of taking to Tyburn a bad king, or at least a
bad minister, with as little formality, preparation, tumult, or surprise, as
the obscurest malefactor is conducted thither, the nation would not have either
that just idea, or that f^ll enjoyment, of their rights, which became a people
who ^ared to think or to say that they were free; and yet an administration, by
your own acknowledgment, ignorant, corrupted, and audacious, precipitates you,
with imperiousness and with impunity, into the most profound abyss!

The quantity of your circulating cash is inconsiderable. You are overwhelmed
with paper; which you have under all sorts of denominations. Were all the gold
of Europe collected in your treasury, it would scarcely pay the nation's debt.
We know not by what incredible illusion this fictitious money is kept up. The
most frivolous event might in the course of a day throw it into discredit.
There is need but of an alarm to bring on a sudden bankruptcy. The dreadful
consequences which would follow this failure of faith, are beyond our
imagination. And, behold, such is the instant marked out for you to make you
declare against your colonies, that is, to make you raise up against
yourselves, an unjust, mad, ruinous war. What will become of you, when an
important branch of your commerce shall be destroyed; when you shall have but a
third of your possessions; when you shall have massacred a million or two of
your countrymen; when your force shall be exhausted, your traders ruined, your
manufacturers reduced to starve; when your debt shall be augmented, and your
revenue decreased! Look well to it; the blood of the Americans will sooner or
later fall heavy on your heads. Its effusion will be revenged by your own
hands; and you are arriving at the point.

But, say you, these people are rebels. -- Rebels! And who? because they will
not be your slaves. A people subjected to the will of another people, who can
dispose as they choose of their government, of their laws, and of their trade;
tax them at their pleasure; set bounds to their industry, and enchain it by
arbitrary prohibitions, are bond servants, yes, certainly are bond-servants;
and their servitude is worse than what they would undergo if governed by a
tyrant. Deliverance from the oppression of a tyrant is effected by his
expulsion, or his death. You have delivered yourselves by each of these
methods. But a nation is not to be put to death, is not to be expelled. Liberty
is only to be expected from a rupture, which by its consequences involves one
of the nations, and sometimes both of them, in ruin. A tyrant is a monster with
a single head, which may be struck off at a single blow. A tyrannic nation is
an hydra with a thousand heads, for the cutting o^ of which a thousand swords
must be lifted up together. The crime of oppression committed by a tyrant
collects all the indignation upon him alone. The commission of the same crime
by a numerous society, scatters ^he horror and the shame of it upon a
multitude, which never blushes. It is every body's fault and nobody's; and the
resentment of injury wanders wildly in despair, without knowing where to fix,
or whither it is carried.

But they are our subjects -- Your subjects! no more than the inhabitants of
Wales are subjects to those of Lancashire. The authority of one nation over
another cannot be founded but upon conquest, upon general consent, or upon
conditions proposed on one part, and accepted on the other. Conquest binds no
more than theft: the consent of ancestors cannot be obligatory upon
descendants: and there can be no condition which must not be understood to be
exclusive of the sacrifice of liberty. Liberty is not to be bartered for any
thing, because there is not any thing which is of a comparable price. Such have
been the discourses held by you to your tyrants, such hold we to you for your
colonists.

The earth which they occupy is our's. -- Yours! it is thus you call it
because you usurped it. But be it so. Does not the charter of concession oblige
you to treat the Americans as countrymen? Do you do so? But we are well
employed here truly in talking of concessions by charters, by which men grant
what they are not masters of, what consequently they have not the right to
grant to a handful of weak people, forced by circumstances to receive as a
gratification that which belongs to them of natural right. And then, have the
descendants who are now living been called to a compact signed by their
ancestors? Either confess the truth of this principle, or recall the descendants
of James. What right had you to drive him away which we have not to separate
ourselves from you? say the Americans to you: and what have you to say in
answer?

They are ungrateful: we are their founders; we have been their defenders; we
have run in debt upon their account. -- Say as much or more upon your own than
theirs. If you have undertaken their defense, it was as you would have
undertaken that of the Suitan of Constantinople, had your ambition or your
interest required it. But have they not requitted you, in delivering up to you
their productions; in receiving your merchandise exclusively at the exorbitant
price you would please to put upon it; in subjecting themselves to prohibitions
which cramped their industry, and to restrictions by which you have oppressed
their property? Have they not helped you? Have they not run in debt upon your
account? Have they not taken arms and fought for you? When you have made your
requests to them, which is the proper way of dealing with freemen, have they
not complied with them? When did you ever experience a refusal from them, but
when you clapped a bayonet to their breast, and said, Your money or life; die
or be slaves? What! because you have been beneficent, have you a right to be
oppressive? What! and shall nations too build on gratitude the barbaroos claim,
to debase, and trample under foot, those who have had the misfortune to receive
their favors? Ah! individuals perhaps, though it is by no means a duty,
individuals may, perhaps, in a benefactor, tolerate a tyrant. In them, it is
great, it is magnanimous, undoubtedly, to consent to be wretched, that they may
not be ungrateful. But nations have a different morality. The public happiness
is the first law, as the first duty. The first obligation of these great bodies
is with themselves. They owe, before all other things, liberty and justice to
the members which compose them. Every child which is burn to the state, every
new citizen who comes to breathe the air of the country he has chosen, or
nature given him, is entitled to the greatest happiness he can enjoy. Every
obligation which cannot be reconciled with that, is broken. Every contrary
claim, is a wicked attempt upon his rights. And what is it to him, that his
ancestors have been relieved, if he is destined to be himself oppressed? With
what right can be exacted from him the payment of this usurious debt of
benefits, which he has never felt? No, no. The wishing to arm one's self with
such a claim, against a whole nation, and its posterity, is to overthrow all
the ideas of policy and order, and, whilst one invokes the name of morality, to
betray all its laws. What have you not done for Hanover? Do you command at
Hanover? All the republics of Greece were bound together by mutual services;
but did any one exact, as a mark of gratitude, the right of disposing of the
government of the succou^ed state?

Our honor is engaged -- Say that of your bad ministers, and not yours. In
what consists the true honor of (...) who has been mistaken? Is it to persist
in his error, or to acknowledge it? Has he who returns to a sen^e of justice,
any curse to blush? Englishmen, you have been too hasty. Why did you not wait,
till the Americans had been corrupted, as you are, by riches? Then they would
have thought no more highly of their liberty, than you do of your own. Then it
would have been need ef^ to take (...), against men subdued by opulence. But
what instant have you chosen for attacking them? That in which what they had to
lose, their liberty, could not be balanced by what they had to keep.

But later they would be more numerous -- I agree, they would. What then have
you attempted? the enslaving a people who shall be unfettered in spite of you
by time. In twenty, in thirty years, the remembrance of your atrocious deeds
will still be fresh; and the fruit of them will be ravished from you. Then,
there will remain to you but remorse and shame. There is a decree of nature
which you shall not change; which is, that great bodies give laws to little
ones. But, tell me, if the Americans should then undertake against Great
Britain, what you have now undertaken against them, what would you say?
Precisely what they at this moment say to you. Why should motives which affect
you so little in their mouths, appear to you more solid in your own?

They will not obey our parliament, nor adopt our ordinances -- Did they make
them? Can they change them?

We obey them readily enough, without having had, in time past, or having in
the present, any influence over them -- That is to say, that you are slaves;
and that you cannot bear that men should be free. However, do not confound the
situation of the Americans with your own. You have representatives, and they
have not. You have voices which speak for you, and no person stipulates for
them. If, indeed, these voices are bought and sol^ it is an excellent reason
for their disdaining such a fri^^lous advantage.

They wish to be independent of us -- Are not you so of them?

They will never be able to support themselves without us -- If that be so, be
quiet. Necessity will bring them back.

And if we should not be able to subsist without them -- It would be a great
misfortune: but to cut their throats in order to get out of it, is a singular
expedient.

It is for their interest, it is for their good, that we are severe with them,
as one is severe with frantic children -- Their interest! Their good! And who
made you judges of these two objects which so nearly touch them, and which they
should better know than you? If it should happen, that a man should make a
forcible entry into another's house, because, forsooth, he is a man of great
sense, and nobody more able to maintain peace and good order for his neighbor,
should not one be in the right to humbly beg he would be pleased to take
himself away, and to trouble his head about his own affairs? And if the affairs
of this officious hypocrite should be very badly ordered? If he should be at
the bottom but an ambitious mortal, who, under the pretense of settling and
ordering, should have a violent inclination to usurp? If he should cover with
the ma^^ of benevolence, but views full of injustice, such, for example, as to
get himself out of strait^ and difficulties at his neighbor's cost?

We are the mother country -- What, always the most holy names to serve as a
veil to interest and ambition? The mother country! Fulfill the duties of it
then. Besides, colonies are formed of different nations, amongst which some
will grant, others refuse you this appellation; and all will with one voice
tell you. There is a time when the authority of parents over their children
ceases; and this time is when the children are able to provide for themselves.
What term have you fixed for our emancipation? Be candid, and you will allow
that you had promised yourselves to be able to hold us in a wardship or
minority which should never end. If, indeed, this wardship were not to have
turned for us into an insupportable constraint; if our advantage were not for
ever to be sacrificed to yours; if we were not to have had a multitude of
those minor oppressions, which, together, swell to a bulk most burdensome, to
bear from the governors, the judges, the collectors, and the military, whom you
send us; if the greatest part of them, at their arrival in our climate, were
not to have brought with them, blasted characters, ruined fortunes, rapacious
hands, and the insolence of subaltern^ tyrants, who, tired, in their own
country, with obeying laws, come to requite themselves, in a new world, by the
exercise of an arbitrary power. You are the mother country: but so far from
encouraging, you fear our progress, ^ind our hands, and repress and strangle
our growing strength. Nature in favoring us deceives your secret wishes; or
rather, you would choose, that we should remain in an eternal childhood, with
regard to all that can be useful to ourselves, and that, notwithstanding, we
should be robust ^ssals, to be employed in your service, and in the furnishing,
without remission, new sources of riches to your insatiable avidity. Is it this
then to be a mother? Is it this to be a country to her children? Ah! in the
forests which surround us, nature has given a gentler instinct to the savage
beast, which, become a mother, devours not at least those which she has
produced.

Were all their pretensions to be acquiesced in, they would soon be happier
than we are. And why not? If you are corrupted, is it necessary that they must
be corrupted too? If you have a disposition to slavery, must they too follow
your example? If they had you for masters, why should you not confer the
property of their country upon another power, upon your sovereign? Why should
you not render him their despot, as you have by a solemn act declared him the
despot of Canada? Would it then be necessary that they should ratify this
extravagant concession? And even if they should have ratified it, must they
obey the sovereign whom you should have given them, and, if he commanded it,
take arms against you? The King of England has a negative power. No law can be
promulgated without his consent. Why should the Americans grant him, in their
country, a power, of the inconvenience of which you are continually made
sensible? Should it be, in order one day to divest him of it, sword in hand, as
it will happen to you, if your government be perfected? What advantage do you
find in subjecting them to a vicious constitution?

Vicious or not, this is our constitution; and it ought to be generally
acknowledged and received, by all who bear the English name; without which,
each of our provinces governing itself in its own way, having its own laws, and
pretending to independence, we cease to form a national body, and are no more
than a heap of little republics, detached, divided, continually rising against
one another, and easily to be usurped by a common enemy. The adroit and
powerful Philip, capable of attempting such an enterprise, is at our door.

If he is at your door, he is far from the Americans. A privilege which may
have some inconvenience with regard to you, is not the less a privilege. But
separated, as they are, from Great Britain, by immense seas, of what importance
is it to you, whether your colonies receive, or reject, your constitution? What
does that make, for, or against, your power; for, or against, your safety? This
unity, of which you exaggerate the advantages, is still but a vain pretext. You
object your laws to your colonies, when they are harrassed by them; and you
tread them under foot, when they make in their favor. You tax yourselves, and
you would tax them. If the least attempt is made upon this privilege, you make
a furious outcry, fly to arms, and are ready to run on swords in its defense;
and yet, you hold a dagger to the breast of your countryman, to oblige him to
renounce it. Your ports are open to all the world; and you shut up the ports of
your colonists. Your merchandise is wafted where you please; and their's must
necessarily come to you. You manufacture, and you will not suffer them to
manufacture. They have skins, they have iron; and they must deliver up to you,
unwrought, this iron and these skins. What you acquire at a low price, they
must buy of you at the price which your capacity imposes. You offer them up as
victims to your traders; and because your India Company was in danger, the
Americans must needs repair their losses. And yet you call them your countrymen
and fellow-citizens; and it is thus that you invite them to receive your
constitution? Go to, go to. This unity, this league* which seems so necessary
to you, is but that of the silly animals in the fable, amongst which you have
reserved to yourselves the lion's part.

Perhaps you have not suffered yourselves to be drawn to the filling the new
world with blood and devastation but by a false point of honor. We wish to
persuade ourselves that so many crimes have not been the consequences of a
project deliberately formed. You had been told, that the Americans were but a
vile herd of cowards, whom the least threat would bring, terrified and
trembling, to acquiesce in whatever it should please you to exact. Instead of
the cowards which had been described and promised you, you find true men, true
Englishmen, countrymen worthy of yourselves. Is this a reason for your being
irritated? What! your ancestors admired the Hollander shaking off the Spanish
yoke; and should you, their descendants, be angry or surprised, that your
countrymen, your brethren, that they who feel your blood circulate in their
veins, should rather pour it on the ground and die, than live in yokes and
bondage? A stranger, upon whom you should have formed the same pretensions,
would have disarmed you, if, showing you his naked breast, he said, Flunge in
your priguard here, or leave me free: and yet you stab your brother; and you
stab him without remorse, because he is your brother! Englishmen! what can be
more ignominious than the savageness of a man, proud of his own liberty, and
wickedly attempting to destroy the liberty of another! Would you have us
believe, that the greatest enemy to freedom is the man that is free? Alas! we
are but too much inclined to it. Enemies of kings, you have their arrogance and
pride. Enemies of royal prerogative, you carry it every where. Every where you
show yourselves tyrants. Well then, tyrants of nations, and of your colonies,
if in the event you prove the strongest, it will be because heaven is deaf to
the prayers which are directed to it from all the countries upon earth.

Since the seas have not swallowed up your blustering ruffians, tell me, what
will become of them, if there should arise in the new world a man of eloquence,
promising eternal happiness to the martyrs of liberty who die in arms.
Americans! let your preachers be seen incessantly in their pulpits, with crowns
of glory in their hands, pointing to heaven open. Priests of the new world, now
is the time for it; expiate the detestable fanaticism, which once laid waste
America, by the hap^ fanaticism, begotten by policy upon freedom. No; you will
not deceive your countrymen. To God, who is the principle of justice and of
order, tyrants are abomination, God has imprinted on the heart of man this
sacred love of liberty; he wills not that slavery disfigure and debase his
noblest work. If dei^^cation be due to man, it is, undoubtedly, to that man who
fights and dies for his nati^ soil. Put his image in your temples; set it on
your altars. It shall be worshipped by his country. Form a political and
religious calandar, marking each day by the name of some hero, who shall have
spilled his blood to set you free. Your posterity shall one day read them with
holy joy: these, shall it say, behold, these were the man who gave liberty to
half a world; and who, charging themselves with our happiness, before we had
existence, secured our infant slumbers from the being disturbed and terrified
by the clank of chains.

When the cause of your colonies was argued in your houses of parliament, we
heard some excellent pleadings pronounced in their favor. But that which
should have been addressed to you perhaps is this:

"I shall not talk to you, my lords and gentleman, of the justice or injustice
of your pretensions. I am not such a stranger to public affairs as not to know
that this preliminary discussion, so sacred in all the other circumstances of
life, would be misplaced and ridiculous in this. I shall not examine what hope
you can have of succeeding, or if you are likely to prove the strongest in the
event, though this subject might, perhaps, appear to you of some importance,
and might, probably, insure me the honor of your attention. I will do more. I
shall not compare the advantages of your situation, if you succeed, with the
consequences which will follow, if you are unfortunate. I shall not ask you how
long you are determined to serve the cause of your enemies. But I will suppose
at ones, that you have reduced your colonies to the degree of servitude which
you have authoritatively required. Show me only how you will fix and keep them.
By a standing army? But will this army, which will drain you of men and money,
keep pace, or not keep pace, with the increase of population? There are but two
answers to my question; and, of these two answers, one seems to be absurd, and
the other brings you back to the point at which you are. I have reflected on it
well; and I have discovered, if I am not mistaken, the only rational and
certain plan which you have to follow. And it is, as soon as you shall be the
masters, to stop the progress of population, since it appears to you more
advantageous, more honorable, and more becoming, to domineer over a small
number of slaves, than to have a nation of freemen for your equals and your
friends.

"But you will ask me, how is the progress of population to be stopped? The
expedient might revolt weak minds, and cowardly souls; but happily there are
not any such in this august assembly. It is, to stab without pity the greatest
part of these vile rebels, and to reduce the rest of them to the condition of
the negroes. The high-spirited and generous Spartans, so extolled in ancient
and modern story, have set you the example. Like them, and with their faces
muffled in their cloaks, shall our fellow-citizens, and the bravoes in our pay,
go clan-destinely, and by night, to massacre the children of our Helots, at
their father's side, and on their mother's breast; and leave alive but such a
number of them, as may be sufficient for their labors, and consistent with our
safety."

Englishmen! you shudder at this horrible proposition, and you ask what part
there is to take. Vanquishers, or vanquished, see here, then, what you ought to
do. If the resentment, excited by your cruelties, can be calmed; if the
Americans can shut their eyes to the devastation which surrounds them; if, in
passing over the ruins of their towns destroyed by fire, and their fields
whitened by the bones of murdered relatives; if, in drawing in with every
respiration the scent of the blood which your hands have on all sides shed,
they can forget the outrages of your despotism; if they can prevail upon
themselves to place the least confidence in your declarations of contrition,
and to believe that you have indeed renounced the injustice of your
pretensions, begin by recalling your ^^^tenary cutthroats. Restore freedom to
their ports, which you keep shut up; withdraw your squadrons from their coasts;
and, if there be a wise citizen amongst you, let him take the olive branch in
his hand, present at himself, and say,

"O you, our countrymen, and our old friends; allow us this title; we have
profaned it, but our repentance renders us worthy to resume it, and we aspire
henceforward at the glory to preserve it. We confess, in the presence of this
heaven, and of this earth, which have been conscious of it, we confess, that
our pretensions have been unjust, our conduct has been cruel. Let it on each
side be forgotten. Raise up again your fortresses and your ramparts.
Re-assemble in your peaceable habitations. Let us wash out the remembrance of
every drop of blood that has been spilled. We admire the generous spirit by
which you have been directed. It is the same with that to which, in similar
circumstances, we have been indebted for our political salvation. Yet, it is by
these marks, expressly, that we now know you to be indeed our countrymen; to be
indeed our brothers; concerning whom we have verily been guilty; and therefore
is this distress come upon us. You would be free; be ye free. Be so, in the
whole extent which we have ourselves given to this sacred name. It is not of us
that you hold this right. Not unto us, not unto us, does belong the power, by
which it is to be given, or taken away. You have received it, as we did, from
nature, which the fine and swords of tyrants may oppose, but which the sins and
swords of tyrants cannot destroy. We lay claim to no sort of superiority over
you. We aspire but at the honor of equality. This glory is sufficient for us.
We know too well the inestimable value of governing ourselves, to wish
henceforward that you should be divested of the boon.

"If, supreme masters and arbiters of your legislation, you can create for your
states a better government than our's, we give you anticipated joy. Your
happiness will inspire us with no other sentiment, than the desire of
imitation. Form for yourselves constitutions adapted to your climate, to your
soil, to this new world you civilize. Who better than yourselves can know your
peculiar wants? High-spirited and virtuous minds, like yours, should obey but
the laws which shall be given them by themselves. All other restraint would be
unworthy of them. Regulate your own taxation. We desire you only to conform
yourselves to our custom in the assessment of the duties. We will present to
you a state of our wants; and you will of yourselves assign the just proportion
between your succors and your riches.

"Moreover, exercise your industry, like us; without limitation exercise it.
Avail yourselves of the benefits of nature, and of the fruitful countries you
inhabit. Let the iron of your mines, the wool of your flocks, the skin^ of the
savage animals which wander in your woods, fashioned in your manufactures, take
a new value from your hands. Be your ports free. Go, and expose to sale the
productions of your lands, and of your arts, in all the quarters of the world.
Go, and seek for those of which you stand in need. It is one of our privileges,
let it be likewise yours. The empire of the ocean, which we have acquired by
two ages of greatness and glory, belongs as well to you as us. We shall be
united by the ties of commerce. You will bring us your productions, which we
shall receive in preference to those of all other people, and we hope that you
will prefer our's to those of foreigners, without being restrained to it,
however, by any law, but that of the common interest, and the fair claims of
countrymen and friends.

"Let the ships of your country and of our's, adorned by the same streamer,
overspread the seas; and let shouts of joy arise on each side, when sister
vessels meet each other in the deserts of the ocean. Let peace spring up again
between us, and concord last forever. We are sensible at length, that the chain
of mutual benevolence is the only one, which can bind such distant empires
together, and that every other principle of unity would be p^ecaricus and
unjust.

"Upon this new plan of eternal amity, let agriculture, industry, laws, arts,
and the first of all sciences, that of procuring the greatest good to
communities and individuals, be perfected amongst you. Let the recital of your
happiness call around you all the unfortunate of the earth. Let the tyrants of
all countries, let all oppressors, political or sacred, know, that there exists
upon the earth a place, where a deliverance from their chains is to be found;
where afflicted, dejected humanity has lifted up her head; where harvests grow
for the poor; where laws are no more than the security of happiness; where
religion is free, and conscience has ceased to be a slave; where, in short,
nature seems to put in her plea of justification, for having created man; and
government, so long time guilty, over all the earth, makes at last the
reparation of its crimes. Let the idea of such an asylum serve as a terror and
restraint to despots: for if they have no kindness about their hearts, and look
with indifference on the happiness of man, they have at least much avarice and
ambition, which must make them anxious to preserve both their riches and their
power.

"We ourselves, O countrymen, O friends, we ourselves shall profit by your
example. If our constitution should be altered for the worse; if public riches
should corrupt the court, and the court the nation; if our kings, to whom we
have given so many terrible examples, should at last forget them; if we should
be in danger, we who were an august people, of dwindling to a vile herd of
abjects, by basely setting ourselves to sale; we might be reanimated by the
sight of your virtues and your laws. It might recall to our depraved and dastard
hearts, with a sense of the value and the grandeur of liberty, the energy to
preserve it. But if it must be, that such an example as yours shall want power
to prompt us; if it must be, that slavery, the never failing follower of
venality, shall be, one day, established in that land, which has been inundated
with blood in the cause of freedom, which has seen scaffolds erected for the
punishment of tyrants; then will we emigrate like your fathers, then will we
abandon, in a body, the ungrateful isle, delivered up to a despot, and leave
the monster, to reign and roar, in a desert, for domain. Then shall you surely
welcome us as friends, as brothers. You will suffer us to partake with you of
this soil, of this air, free as the generous sou^s of their inhabitants, and,
thanks to your virtues, we shall find again an England, again a country.

"Such, brave countrymen, are our hopes, such our wishes. Receive then our
oaths, pledges of so holy an alliance. Let us invoke, to still add solemnity to
the treaty, let us invoke our common ancestors, who were all animated by the
spirit of liberty like you, and did not dread to die in its defense. Let us
call to witness, the memory of the illustrious founders of your colonies, that
of your august legislators, of the philosophic Lock, the first man upon the
earth who made a code of toleration, of the venerable Penn, the first who
founded a city of brethren. The spirits of these great men, who surely at this
moment are beholding us with earnestness and with pleasure, are worthy to
preside at a treaty, which is about to draw the blessings of peace upon a
double world. Swear we, in their presence; swear we, upon the very arms, with
which you have so valiantly withstood us; swear we, to remain for ever united,
and for ever true; and when the oath of peace shall have been pronounced by
all, make, of these same arms, a sacred deposite in some hallowed pile, where
the father's shall show them to the generations as they rise; and there keep
them carefully from age to age, in order to their being, one day, turned
against the first, be he English or American, who shall dare propose the
rupture of that alliance, which is equally useful, equally honorable to both
the names."

At this discourse, I hear the towns, the villages, the fields, all the shores
of North America resound, with liveliest acclamation, with tenderest repetition
of the endearing names of brother and of mother, applied to your country and
her sons. And whilst the conflagrations of war are succeeded by bonfires and
sports, and every demonstration of a heartfelt triumphant joy, I see the
nations, envious of your power, to stand aghast, in silence, astonishment,
despair.

Your parliament is about to meet. What is to be expected from it? Will it
listen to reason, or will it persevere in its madness? Will it be the defender
of the rights of nations, or the instrument of the tyranny of ministers? Will
its acts be the decrees of a free people, or edicts dictated by the court? I am
present at the deliberations of your houses. In these revered resorts I hear
wisdom speak by the mouth of moderation. Soft persuasion seems to flow there,
from the lips of most distinguished orators. My heart is filled with hope: my
eyes overrun with tears. Presently a voice, the organ of despotism and of war,
suspends the delicious, sweet emotion.

"Englishmen, cries a mad haranguer, can you hesitate a moment? It is your
rights, it is your must important interests, it is the glory of your name, that
you are called upon to defend. It is not a foreign power which attacks these
essential objects. They are menaced by an interior, domestic enemy. The danger
therefore is more imminent, the outrage the more sensible.

"Between two rival powers, armed for mutual pretensions, policy may sometimes
suspend hostilities. Against rebel subjects, slackness is the greatest fault,
and all moderation weakness. The standard of revolt, which was set up by
audacity, should be torn down by power. Let the sword of justice fall heavy on
the hands which dared display it. Let us be expeditious. In these cases there
is a first moment which must be seized on; revolutions should be strangled in
their birth. Give not to minds, yet in amazement, time to grow familiar with
their guilt; to the ringleaders, time to confirm their power; not to the
people, that of learning to obey new masters. The people in a revolt, are
almost always actuated by alien impu^^es. Neither their fury, nor their hatred,
nor their love, are properly their own. You may give them passions, as easily
as arms. Display to their eyes, the power and majesty of the British empire:
they will presently be falling at your feet; and go in an instant from terror
to compunction, from compunction to obedience. If we must have recourse to the
severity of arms, let us have no scruples. In civil war, pity is a most
mistaken virtue. When the sword is once drawn, it ought not to be stayed, but
by submission. It is for them to answer now, to heaven and to earth, for the
evils which they bring; upon themselves. Consider that a transient severity, in
these rebellious countries, will insure us peace and obedience that will last
for ages.

"In order to make us suspend our blows, and disarm our hands, we have been
told, and told repeatedly, that the land is peopled by our countrymen, by our
friends, by our brethren. What, invoke in their favor names which they have
outraged, bands which they have broken? These names, these bands, so sacred,
are the very thing that accuses and attaints ^^^m. Since when, were these
revered titles to impose duties but on us? Since when, had rebellious children
the right to take arms against their mother, despoil her of her heritage, and
rend her heart? They talk of liberty: I respect this name as much as they do;
but by this liberty, is it independence, that we are to understand? Is it the
right, to overturn a legislation, founded and established two ages since? Is it
the right, to usurp all those which we possess? They talk of liberty, but I
talk, and will always talk, of the supremacy, and the sovereign power, of
Britain.

"What, supposing they had some causes of complaint, supposing they intended to
refuse bearing some light portion of the heavy burden under which we stagger,
to refuse unreasonably to make themselves partners in our expenses, as we have
made them partners in our greatness, had they no other way to do it, than by
revolt and arms? There are those who call them our countrymen, and our friends;
but, for my part, I can see them in no other light than that of the most cruel
persecutors and enemies of our country. We had common fathers, it is said; and
so, undoubtedly, we had; but these respectable ancestors I myself with
confidence invoke. If their spirits could here resume their places, their
indignation would not be inferior to our own. With what wrath would these
virtuous citizens then understand, that those of their children who went to fix
themselves beyond the seas, no sooner began to be a little conscious of their
strength, than they made a traitorous trial of it against they untry; armed
themselves against her with the very benefits her bounty had bestowed? Yes,
all; even to that pacific sect, enjoined strictly by their founder never to dip
their hands in blood; they, who have respected the lives and the rights of
savage people; they, who by an enthusiasm of humanity, have struck off the
fetters from their slaves: now, equally faithless to their country and their
religion, they arm their hands for slaughter; and it is against you. They treat
all men as brethren; and you, you only, of all people, are excluded from the
title. They have shown the world that the savages of America, that the negroes
of Africa, are henceforward less alien to them than the citizens of Britain.

"Arm, then, arm. Britons, strike home; revenge, revenge, your country's
wrongs, your offended rights. Revenge the treason to your greatness. Display
that power, so redoubtable in Europe, in Africa, and the ladies; which has so
often astonished America herself; and since, between a sovereign-people and the
subject people who revolt, there can be no treaty now, but force, let force
decide. Snatch opportunely at this world, which is falling from you, and resume
it; it is your property, which ingratitude and insolence would ravish from you."

The sophisms of a fretting, strutting sprechifier, upheld by royal power and
national pride, suppress, in the majority of the representatives of the people,
the desire of pacific measures. New resolutions resemble those which begot
them; but with aggravated features of ferocity and despotism. Levies of troops,
equipments of fleets. Admirals and generals set sail for the new world, with
orders and projects sanguinary and savage. Nothing less than unconditional
submission can restrain or retard the devastation ordained against the colonies.

Until this memorable period, the Americans had confined themselves to a
resistance, authorized even by the English laws. No other ambition appeared in
them, than that of maintaining the very limited rights which they had hitherto
enjoyed. Even the leading men amongst them, who might be supposed to have more
enlarged ideas, had not yet ventured to speak to the multitude of any thing but
an advantageous accommodation. They would have been afraid, in going further,
of lossing the confidence of people attacked by habit to an empire, under whose
wings they had prospered. The accounts o^ the great preparations which were
making in the old world, with fetters to confine, or with fire to consume, the
new, extinguished all remains of affection for the original government. The
only business now, was to give energy to minds ready to receive it. This was
the effect which a work, entitled "Common Sense," produced. We shall give here
the sum and substance of its doctrine, without tying ourselves down to its
exact form and order.

Never, says the author of this celebrated performance, never did a more grand
concernment call for the attention of the world. It is not that of a city or a
province, it is that of an immense continent, and of a considerable portion of
the globe. It is not the affair of a day, it is that of ages. The present is
about to decide upon a long futurity; and many hundreds of years after that we
shall be no more, the sun, in illuminating this hemisphere, will illuminate our
glory, or expose our shame. A long time did we speak of peace and
reconcilement: all is changed, On the day when, in consequence of the recourse
which has been had to arms, the first drop of blood was shed, time for
disquisition passed away. A day has given birth to a revolution. A day has
transported us to another age.

Timid souls, souls who measure the future by the past, think that we stand in
need of the protection of England. That protection might be useful to a rising
colony; it is become dangerous for a nation formed. Infancy must needs be
supported, in its weak endeavors to walk; youth should march actively and
freely, in power and pride of port. The nation, as well as the man, who may
have the power and right to protect me, may have the power and will to oppress
me. I give up the support of a protector, to be secured from the fear of a
master.

In Europe, the people are two much agitated to allow to this part of the world
the enjoyment of constant peace. In those courts and nations interests meet
interests, and jostle without end. As friends of England we must necessarily
have all her enemies for our own. This alliance will entail upon America the
dower of perpetual war. Let us part, let us part. Neutrality, trade and peace;
such, and such only, can be the foundations of our greatness.

The authority of Great Britain over America must sooner or later be extinct.
So wills nature, necessity, and time. The English government can, therefore,
give us only a transient constitution; and we shall bequeath to our posterity
but debts, and dissentions, and a precarion state. If we would insure their
happiness, let us part. If we are fathers, if we love our children, let us
part. Laws and liberty are the heritage we owe them.

England is too far removed from us; we cannot be governed by such a distant
country. What, to traverse, always, two thousand leagues, to claim justice, or
to ask for laws! to exculpate ourselves from imaginary crimes, or solicit, with
meanness, the court and ministers of a foreign clime! What, to wait for years
for every answer; and to find, as we might too often, when we had crossed and
recrossed the ocean, that injustice only would be the product of our voyage!
No; to be a great state, the center and the seat of power must be in the state
itself. Nothing but the despotism of the East can inure men thus to receive
their laws from rulers far remote, or from the bashaws, by whom invisible
tyrants are represented. But let it not be forgotten, that the more the
distance is augmented, the more ponderous and cruel is the pressure of the
despotic power; and the people then, deprived of almost all the advantages of
government, feel only its miseries and its vices.

Nature did not create a world to subject it to the inhabitants of an island.
Nature has established the laws of equilibrium, which she every where observes,
in the heavens as well as upon the earth. By the laws of bodies, and of
distances, America can belong but to itself.

There is no government without a mutual confidence between him who commands
and him who obeys. It is all over; this mutual confidence is gone, and never
can return. England has too clearly shown that she would command us like
slaves; America, that she was equally sensible both of her rights and of her
strength. They have each betrayed their secret. From this moment there can be
no further treaty. It would be signed by hatred and distrust; hatred, which
never pardons; distrust, which, by its very nature, can never be reconciled.

Would you know what an accommodation would produce? Your ruin. You stand in
need of laws; you will not obtain them. Who would give them to you? The English
nation? She is jealous of your increase. The (...)? He is your enemy.
Yourselves, in your assemblies? Do you not remember that all legislation is
submitted to the negative right of the monarch who would bring you to his yoke?
This right would be a formidable right incessantly armed against you. Make
requests; they will be eluded. Form p^ans of commerce and greatness; they will
become to the mother country an object of affright. Your government will be no
more than a kind of clandestine war; that of an enemy who would destroy without
openly attacking; it will be, according to the ordinary course of policy, a
slow and secret assassination, which will cause languor and prolong weakness,
and, with the art of an imperial torturer, equally prohibit you to live or die.
Submit to England; and behold your fate.

It is not without right that we take arms. Our right is necessity, a just
defense, the miseries of ourselves and of our children, the excesses committed
against us. Our right is our august title of nation. It is for the sword to
judge us. The tribunal of war, is the only tribunal which now exists for us.
Well then, since the sword must necessarily be drawn, let us be sure at least,
that it be for a cause that may be worthy of it, and requite us for both our
treasure and our blood. What, shall we expose ourselves to the seeing our
habitations ruined, our lands laid waste, our families slaughtered, in order to
compass at last an accommodation; that is, to implore new chains, and cement
ourselves the edifice of our bondage? What, shall it be by the dreadful light
of conflagrations, shall it be on the tomb of our fathers, or our chidren, or
our wives, that we shall sign a treaty with our proud oppressors! and, all
covered with our blood, will they d^^g^ to pardon us! Ah, we should then be but
a vile object of pitying wonder to Europe, of indignation to America, and of
contempt even to our enemies. If we can obey them, we had not the right to
combat them. Liberty only can absolve us. Liberty, and perfect liberty, is the
only object worthy of our labors and our dangers. What do I say? From this
moment it is our own. Our title is written on the bloody plains of Lexington;
it was there that the hand of England tore the contract by which we were united
to her. Yes. At the moment when the report of the first musket discharged by
England was heard, nature herself proclaimed us free and independent.

Let us profit by the benefit of foes. The youth of nations is the age most
favorable to their independence. It is the time of energy and vigor. Our
souls are not yet surrounded by that apparatus of luxury, which serves as
hostage to a tyrant. Our arms are not yet enervated in the arts of softness.
Amongst us are not seen to domineer those nobles, who, by their very
constitution, are the necessary allies of kings; who love not liberty, but when
they can make of it an instrument of oppression; those nobles, eager for
privilege and title, for whom, in critical conjunctures, the people are but
^ools, for whom the supreme power is a ready corruptor.

Your colonies are formed of plain, brave, laborious, upright men, proprietors
and cultivators of their land in one. Liberty is their first want. Rural
labors have already hardened them for war. Public enthusiasm brings to light
unknown talents. It is in revolutions that great minds are formed, that heroes
show themselves, and take their place. Remember Holland, and all her sons; and
that number of extraordinary men to which the quarrel of her liberty gave
birth: behold in these men an example for you; remember their success, and
behold a presage.

Let our first step be to form a constitution by which we may be united. The
moment is arrived. Later, it would be abandoned to an uncertain fururity and
the caprice of chance. The more people and riches we shall acquire, the more
barriers will there be raised up between us. Then, how shall so many provinces
and interests be made consistent? For such an union, it is necessary that each
people should at once be sensible, both of the particular weakness, and the
general strength. There must be great calamities or great fears. It is then
amongst communities as amongst individuals, that spring up those firm and
vigorous friendships which associate souls with souls, and interests with
interests. It is then, that one spirit, breathed from every part, forms the
genius of states; and that all the scattered powers become by union a single
and a formidable power. Thanks to our persecuters, we are at this epoch^. If we
have courage, it will be that of our happiness. Few nations have laid hold of
the favorable moment to form their government. Once escaped, this moment
returns no more; and anarchy or slavery punishes the neglect of it for ages.
Let not a similar fault prepare for us similar regret. Regret is impotent.

Let the moment, which, in respect to us, is singular, be seized on. We have it
in our power to frame the finest constitution that the world has seen. You have
read in your sacred books how mankind were destroyed by the general deluge. A
single family survived, and was commanded by the Supreme Being to re-people the
earth. We are this family. Despotism has deluged all; and we can a second time
renew the world.

We are about, at this moment, to decide the fate of a race of men more
numerous, perhaps, than all the people of Europe put together. Shall we wait
till we may be the prey of a conqueror, and suffer the hope of the universe to
be destroyed? Imagine to yourselves, that all the generations of the world to
come, have at this moment their eyes fixed on us, and demand of us their
liberty. We are about to fix their destiny: If we give them up, they will,
perhaps, one day, drag their chains across our tombs, and load them with
imprecations.

Call to mind a writing which has appeared amongst you, and had for a motto,
UNITE OR DIE.

Let us unite then, and begin by declaring our INDEPENDENCE. That alone can
efface the name of rebellious subjects, which our insolent oppressors have
dared to give us. That alone can make us rise up to the dignity which is our
due, insure us allies amongst the powers, impress respect even upon our
enemies, and, if we treat with them, give us the right to treat, with the power
and majesty which becomes a nation.

But I repeat it; we must be quick. Our uncertainty makes our weakness. Let us
dare to be free, and we are so. Ready to take the leap, we draw back. We read
the countenances of each other with anxious curiosity. It seems, as if we were
astonished at our own boldness, and that our very courage gave us fear. But it
is not now the time to be musing on calculations. It is passed. In great
affairs, in which there is but one great part to take, too much circumspection
ceases to be prudence. Every thing that is extreme, demands resolution in the
extreme. Then, the boldest measures are the wisest; and the excess of boldness
itself becomes the means and the warrant of success.

Such was the substance of the sentiments displayed in this work. They
confirmed in their principles the enterprising spirits who had long required a
total separation from the mother country. The timid citizens, who had been
wavering till then, now declared decisively for this great and interesting
rupture. The votaries of independence were numerous enough to bring the general
congress, on the 4th of July, 1776, to the determination to pronounce it.

Why have I not received the genius and the eloquence of the celebrated orators
of Athens and of Rome! -- With what grandeur, with what enthusiasm, should I
not speak of those generous men who erected this grand edifice, by their
patience, their wisdom, and their courage! Hancock, Franklin, the two Adamses,
were the greatest actors in this affecting scene: but they were not the only
ones. Posterity shall know them all. Their honored names shall be transmitted
to it by a happier pen than mine. B^ass and marble shall show them to remotest
ages. In beholding them, shall the friend of freedom feel his heart palpitate
wi^h joy, feel his eyes floating in delicious tea^s. Under the bust of one of
them has been written, HE WRESTED THUNDER FROM HEAVEN, AND THE SCEPTER FROM
TYRANTS "Eripuit coelo sulmen sceptrumque tyrannis," is the line applied to the
great Electrician; and the translator dares not criticize a line which his
master has thought worthy to be studded in his work.
. Of the last words of this eulogy shall all of them partake.

Heroic country! my advanced age permits me not to visit thee. Never shall I
see myself amongst the respectable personages of thy Areopagus; never shall I
be present at the deliberations of thy Congress. I shall die without having
seen the retreat of toleration, of manners, of laws, of virtue, and of freedom.
My ashes will not be covered by a free and holy earth: but I shall have desired
it; and my last breath shall bear to heaven an ejaculation for thy prosperity.

Though America might be assured of universal approbation, she thought it
incumbent on her to expose to the eyes of the world the motives of her conduct.
She published her manifesto, in which we read.

"That the history of the English nation and its king* will show to the
succeeding generations, whom it shall entertain and instruct with accounts of
them and us, a series of outrages and of usurpations, which vied with each
other in their tendency to establish absolute tyranny in these provinces.

"It will she that the monarch refused his consent to laws the most salutary
and the most necessary to the public good.

"That he removed the assemblies to inconvenient places, at a distance from all
records, in order to bring the deputies more easily to his views.

"That he had frequently dissolved the assembly of representatives, because
they had firmly defended the people's rights.

"That, after such dissolution, he had left the states too long without
representatives, and consequently exposed to the inconveniences resulting from
the want of assemblies.

"That he endeavored to hinder population, by raising difficulties to the
naturalization of foreigners, and by selling the lands, of which he granted the
property, too dear.

"That he made the judges too dependent on himself, by decreeing that they
should hold but of him alone, both their offices and their salaries.

"That he created new employments, and filled this country with a multitude of
place men, who devoured our substance, and disturbed our quiet.

"That he maintained amongst us, in time of profound peace, a considerable
number of troops, without the consent of the legislative power.

"That he rendered military power independent of, and even superior to, the
civil power.

"That he contrived all means, in conjunction with perverse men, to quarter
armed soldiers in our houses, and exempt them from the pains due to the murders
they might commi^ in America; to destroy our trade in all parts of the world;
to impose taxes on us without our consent; to deprive us, in many cases, of our
trials by juries; to transport us, and make us take our trials, beyond the
seas; to take away our charters, suppress our best laws, to alter the
foundation and the form of our government for the worse; to suspend our own
legislation, and make us receive other laws.

"That he himself abdicated his government in the American provinces, by
declaring us fallen from his protection, and by making war upon us.

"That he caused our coasts to be ravaged, our ports to be destroyed, our towns
to be burnt, our people to be massacred.

"That he forced those who were taken prisoners upon the high seas, to bear
arms against their country, to become the executioners of their friends and
brethren, or to perish themselves by hands so dear.

"That he excited amongst us intestine divisions; and that he endeavored to
raise against our peaceable inhabitants, the barbarous savages, accustomed to
massacre all, without distinction of rank, sex, and age.

"That at this time there arrived on our shores foreign mercenaries,
commissioned to complete the work of devastation and death.

"And that a prince, whose character was thus marked by all the features at
tyranny, was not fit to govern a free people."

A step which broke the ties formed by blood, by religion, and by habit, was to
be supported by a grand concert of wills, by wise and vigorous measures. The
United States of America gave themselves a federate constitution, which joined
to the interior advantages of republican government, all the power of monarchy.

Each province had an assembly formed by the representatives of the different
districts, and in which the legislative power resided. The executive power was
committed to its president. His rights and his obligations were, to listen to
every application from any of the people; to call them together when
circumstances might require it; to provide for the arming and subsisting
troops, and concert the operations of them with their officers. He was at the
head of a secret committee, which was to hold a continual correspondence with
the general congress. The time of his continuance in office was limited to two
years. But the laws permitted a prolongation of it.

The provinces were not obliged to render an account of their administration to
the great council of the nation, though composed of the deputies of all the
colonies. The superiority of the general congress over the particular
congresses, was confined to matters relative to politics and wa^.

But some people have thought that the institution of this body was not so well
contrived as the legislation of the provinces. It seems, it must be confessed,
that federate states, which raise themselves from the condition of subjects up
to that of being independent, cannot, without danger, trust their delegates
with the unlimited power of making peace and war. For these delegates, should
they be corrupt or ill informed, might bring back the whole state to the
bondage which it is seeking to escape from. It seems, that in these times of
revolution, the public will cannot be too well known, too literally pronounced.
It is necessary, undoubtedly, they say, that all the measures, all the
operations, which relate to the common defense and offense, should be decided
on by the common representatives of the body of the state: but the continuation
of war, and the conditions of peace, ought to be deliberated upon in every
province; and the deliberations to be transmitted to the congress by the
deputies, who would submit the opinion of their provinces to the plurality of
voices. In short, they add, that if in established governments it is proper
that the people should rely with confidence in the wisdom of their senate, in a
state where the constitution is forming, where the people, as yet uncertain of
their fate, call for their liberty, sword in hand, it is necessary that all the
citizens should be continually in council, in camp, in the public places, and
have their eyes continually open upon the representatives to whom their destiny
has been committed.

Though these principles are true in general, there might be a difficulty, we
may answer, in applying them to the new republic formed by the Americans. It is
not with that republic as with the federate republics which we see in Europe, I
mean Holland and Switzerland, which occupy a country but of small extent, and
in which it is easy to establish a rapid communication between all the
provinces. The same thing may be said of the confederacies of ancient Greece.
These states were situated at a small distance from each other, confined almost
within the narrow compass of the Peloponnesus, or, at most, within the limits
of the Archipelago. But the United States of America, dispersed over an immense
continent; occupying in the new world a space of almost fifteen degrees;
separated by deserts, by mountains, by gulfs, and by a vast extent of coast,
cannot have the advantage of this rapid communication. If the general congress
could not decide upon political interests without the particular deliberations
of each province; if on every important occasion, on every unforeseen event, it
should be necessary to give new instructions, and, as we may say, a new power
to the representatives, this body would remain inactive. The distances to be
passed, the delays and the multitude of debates, might too often be hurtful to
the public good.

Besides, it is never at the birth of a constitution, and amidst the great
fermentations of liberty, that there is cause to fear that a body of
representatives should, either from weakness or corruption, betray the
interests with which they are entrusted. It is rather in such a body that the
general spirit is both exalted and inflamed. In that resides, in its vigor,
the genius of the nation. Chosen by the esteem of their fellow-citizens, chosen
at a time when every public function is a danger, and every vote an honor,
placed at the head of those who will compose for ever that celebrated
Areopagus, and thence even naturally carried to regard the public liberty as
their own work, they cannot but have the enthusiasm of founders, who make it
their pride to have their names engraved conspicuously, to be read by distant
ages, on the frontispiece of an august monument which is rising. The fears
which the partisans of the contrary system might have upon this object, seem,
therefore, to have small foundation.

I will say more. It might happen that a people who are fighting for liberty,
fatigued with a long and painful struggle, and more struck with the present
danger than the future good, might feel their courage failing, and perhaps, one
day, be tempted to prefer dependence and peace to independence and tumult,
attended with peril and with blood. Then would it be advantageous to this
people to have divested themselves of the power of making peace with their
oppressors, and deposited it in the hands of the senate which they had chosen
to serve as an organ to their will, when this will could show itself with
freedom, pride, and courage. It seems as it each individual, when he had given
his voice for the instituting such a senate, should say to it* I raise the
standard of war against my tyrants. If my arm should weary in the war, if I
could debase myself so low as to implore repose, support me against my
weakness. Listen to no prayer or wish unworthy of me, which I disavow
beforehand; and pronounce not the name of peace until my bonds be broken.

In reality, if we consult the history of republics, we shall see, that the
multitude have almost always great impetuosity and heat at the first moment;
but that it is only in a small number of chosen men, and qualified to serve as
chiefs, that reside those constant and vigorous resolutions which march, with a
steady, firm, undaunted step, toward some great and worthy end, never turning,
or looking, from the path, and never ceasing most stubbornly to combat all
obstructions that they meet with, from fortune, from misery, and from man.

However it be, and whatsoever side may be taken in this political discussion,
the Americans had not yet created for themselves a system of government, when
in the month of March, Hopkins plundered the island of Providence of a large
train of artillery and a considerable quantity of ammunition; when in the
beginning of May, Carleton drove out of Canada the provincial troops, which
were employed to reduce Quebec with a view of completing the conquest of that
important territory; when in the month of June, Clinton and Parker had been so
vigorously repulsed on the Southern coasts of America. Far greater scenes
followed the declaration of independence.

How had been appointed to supersede the feeble Gage: and it was this new
general who had evacuated Boston. Having arrived on the 2d of April at Halifax,
on the 10th of June he departed for Staten-Island. The forces, which were to
act both by sea and land, successively joined him according to expectation; and
on the 28th of August he landed on Long Island without opposition, under the
protection of a fleet commanded by the admiral his brother. The Americans
exhibited as little spirit in defending the interior part of their country as
they did on the landing of the enemy.

After a very feeble resistance, and considerable loss, they took refuge on the
continent with a facility which would hardly have been granted them by a
conqueror who knew how to avail himself of the advantages he had obtained. The
city of New York too was abandoned by these new republicans with still greater
precipitation than they had evacuated Long Island: and they filed off toward
Kingsbridge, where they appeared determined to make an obstinate resistance.

If the English had followed up their success with that vivacity which
circumstances demanded, the new-raised troops which had opposed them, had
infallibly been dispersed, or reduced to the necessity of laying down their
arms. On the contrary, they were allowed six week: to recover from their
consternation: nor did they abandon their intrenchments till the night of the
first or second of November, when the movements, which were making in their
view, were sufficient to convince them that their camp was upon the point of
being attacked.

Their commander in chief, Washington, was unwilling to trust the fate of his
country to an action, which might, and naturally would have terminated to the
prejudice of those important interests which had been committed to him. He
knew, that delays, ever favorable to a native, are ever fatal to a stranger.
This conviction determined him to retire to the Jerseys with a design of
protracting the war. Favored both by the inclemency of the season, by his
knowledge of the country, and by the nature of the ground, which compensated in
some measure for the want of discipline, he had reason to flatter himself, that
he should be able to cover the greatest part of this fertile province, and keep
the enemy at a distance from Pennsylvania. In a moment, however, he sees his
colors abandoned by the soldiers, whose engagement, at the end of six, and
even at the end of three months, had expired: and of an army of twenty five
thousand men, there scarce remained two thousand five hundred, with which he
was fortunate enough to retire beyond the Delaware.

Without losing a moment, the King's troops ought to have passed the river in
pursuit of this handful of fu^^tives, and have put them totally to the route.
If the fi^ thousand men, destined for the conquest of Rhode Island, had gone up
the river in the transports they were aboard of, the junction of the two corpse
might have been effected without opposition even in Philadelphia itself, and
the new republic had been stifled in that important and celebrated city which
gave it birth.

At this time, perhaps, reproaches were cast on the English general for being
timid and too circumspect in the operations of the campaign. Certain it is,
however, that he was rash enough in the distribution of his winter-cantonments.
They were disposed in such a manner, as if there remained not in America a
single individual, who had either inclination or power to molest them.

This presumption encouraged the militia of Pennsylvania, Maryland, and
Virginia, collected together and reunited for the support of the common cause.

On the 25th of December they crossed the Delaware, and fell accidentally upon
Trenton, which was occupied by fifteen hundred of the twelve thousand Hessians,
sold in so base a manner, by their avaricious master, to the king of
Great Britain. This corpse was massacred, taken, or entirely dispersed. Eight
days after three English regiments were in like manner driven from Princeton,
but after having better supported their reputation than the foreign troops in
their pay.

These unexpected events reduced the enemies of America, in the Jerseys, to the
necessity of confining their posts to Amboy and Brunswick, where yet they were
exceedingly harrassed during the remainder of the winter.

The effect of strong passions, and of great dangers, is often to astonish the
mind, and to throw it into that kind of torpor that deprives it of the use of
its powers; by degrees it recovers and collects itself; all its faculties,
suspended for a moment, display themselves with redoubled vigor: every spring
of action is awakened, and it feels its powers rise at once to a level with the
difficulties it has to encounter. In a great multitude there are always some
who feel this immediate effect, which rapidly communicates itself to others.
Such a revolution took place amongst the confederate states. It caused armed
men to issue from all quarters.

It was very late before the campaign of 1777 was opened. The English army, in
despair of penetrating into Pennsylvania by way of the Jerseys, at last
embarked on the 23d of July, and, by the bay of Chesapeak, landed in a country
which their generals may very justly be reproached for not having invaded the
year before. Their march is uninterrupted, till they reach Brandywine. There,
on the 11th of September, they attack and beat the Americans, and arrive on the
30th at Philadelphia, which had been abandoned on the 25th by the Congress, and
a few days later or sooner by the greatest number of the inhabitants.

This victory is attended with no consequences. The conqueror sees nothing
around him but hatred and devastation. Pent up in a space extremely
circumscribed, he meets with insurmountable obstacles in extending himself over
an uncultivated country. Even his gold affords him not its usual resources in
the neighboring districts, nor is there a possibility of any supplies, but
what must necessarily cross the seas. The irksomeness of an imprisonment of
nine months duration, determined him to regain New York by way of the Jerseys;
and under the command of Clinton, successor to How, this long and dangerous
retreat was effected, without sustaining so much loss as a more experienced
enemy would have occasioned.

While the English were wasting away their time in Pennsylvania, an important
scene opens itself in the more northern part of America. In the month of May,
1776, Carleton had driven the provincials out of Canada, and in October
destroyed the armed sloops which they had constructed on the Lake Champlain.
This success drew Burgoyne to Ticonderoga, in the month of July in the
following year. At his approach, a garrison consisting of four thousand men,
abandoned this important post, with the loss of their rear-guard, their
artillery, and ammunition.

The English general was naturally presumptuous. A weakness so extraordinary
increased his arrogance. He had conceived the design of re uniting the troops
of Canada with those of New York by Hudson's-river. This project was bold and
great. Had he succeeded he would have out North America in two, and, perhaps,
have ended the war. But, to have had success, it would have been necessary,
that whilst one army was going down, the other should have gone up, the river.
Having failed in this idea. Burgoyne ought to have seen, from the very first
steps of it, that his enterprise was chimerical. At every march it became more
and more so. His communication grew more distant; his provisions less abundant.
The Americans, taking heart again, assembled from all parts round him. At
length this unlucky body of men found themselves caught, on the 13th of
October, at Saratoga; and nations learned with astonishment, that six thousand
of the best disciplined troops of the old hemisphere, had laid down their arms
before the husbandmen of the new, conducted by the fortunate Gates. Those who
remembered that the Swedes, under Charles the twelfth, till then invincible,
had capitulated before the Ruffians, yet uncivilized, did not accuse the
English troops, but only blamed the imprudence of their general.

This event, so decisive in the opinion of our politicians, was of no greater
consequence than that with which other actions, less favorable to the American
arms, had been attended. After three years of fighting, massacre, and
devastacion, the state of things was scarcely changed from what it had been a
fortnight after the commencement of hostilities. Let us endeavor to discover
the causes of so strange a singularity.

Great Britain, accustomed to storms at home, saw not at first all the danger
there might be in the tempest which was rising in her remote possessions. For a
long time her troops had been insulted at Boston; an authority, independent of
here is, had been formed in the province of Massachusetts. The other colonies
were making dispositions to follow this example, had not the administration
taken those great objects into their serious consideration. When th^^ were laid
before parliament, both houses were filled with clamor; and much declamation
followed after much declamation that had gone before. The senate of the nation
decreed at last, that the country which was rebellious to its decreed, should
by force be made obedient: but his violent resolution was executed with the
slowness too frequent in states of freedom.

England thought, in general, that coasts without defense, that countries
entirely open, could not resist her fleets and armies. It did not appear to her
that this expedition could be of sufficient duration to give time to the
peaceful husbandmen of America to learn the art of war. It was forgotten that
the climate, the rivers, the desires, the swamps, the want of provision, in
proportion as advances were made into the country, and an infinity of other
natural obstructions, militating against a rapid progress in a region
three-fourths uncultivated, should have made a part of the calculation.

Success was still more retarded by the influence of moral causes.

Great Britain is the region of party. Her kings have generally seemed to be
well enough convinced of the necessity of leaving public affairs to the
management of the prevailing faction, by which they were conducted commonly
with intelligence and with vigor, because the principal agents of which it was
composed were animated by a common interest. Then, to public spirit, which
reigns more in England than in any other government of Europe, was added the
power of a faction, and that spirit of party which moves men's minds so
powerfully, because it is always the effect of passion. To rid himself of this
restraint, George the third composed his council of detached, unconnected
members. This innovation was not attended with any very great inconveniences,
as long as events rolled round in their common course. But as soon as a war
with America had complicated a machine, which was not before too simple, it was
perceived that it had neither that strength, nor that union, which are so
necessary for the execution of great affairs. The wheels, too far asunder,
wanted, as we may say, a center of motion, and a common impulse. They went
sluggishly and precipitately, by turns. The administration too much resembled
that of an ordinary monarchy, when the principle of action proceeds not from
the head of an intelligent and active monarch, who brings together all the
springs under his own hand. There was no longer any integrity or wholeness in
what was undertaken, nor was there more of it in what was executed.

A ministry, without harmony and concord, was exposed to the incessantly
renewed attacks of a body of enemies, united, close, and firm. Its resolutions,
be they what they would, were sure to be combated by reasoning or by ridicule.
It was reproached for having been severe with the distant members of the state,
as it would have been reproached for having been too tender to them. Even they
who in parliament were the most outrageous against the treatment which had been
shown to the Americans; they who most encouraged them to resistance; they who,
perhaps, secretly sent them succor, were as averse to their independence as
the very ministers whom they labored, without ceasing, to remove or vilify.
Could the opposition have succeeded in disgusting the king with his confidents,
or have obtained the sacrifice of them by the cry of the nation, the project of
subjugating America had still been followed, but with more dignity, more force,
and perhaps with measures better planned. As the reduction of the revolted
provinces was not to be their work, they rather wished that this immense part
of the British empire might be separated from it, than that it should be
reunited by any other hands than theirs.

The activity of the generals repaired not the vice of these contrarieties, and
the delays in consequence. They indulged the soldier with too long repose; they
employed in meditating, the time for acting; they approached new-raised men
with the precaution they would have taken before veteran troops. The English,
who have so much impetuosity in party, are of a cool and calm character in
other things. They are to be agitated but by violent passions. When this spring
is wanting, they move slow enough to count their steps. Then they govern
themselves by the temper of their mind, which, in general, if we except the
arts of imagination and taste, is, in every thing else, methodical and wise. In
war, their valor never loses sight of principles, or leaves much to chance.
Rarely do they leave, either on their flanks, or in their rear, any thing which
may give them trouble. This system has its advantages, particularly in a close
and narrow country, in a country set thick with strong holds and fortified
towns. But in the present circumstances, and upon the vast continent of
America, against a people who should not have had time allowed them for their
being fortified, or inured to war, the perfection of the art, perhaps, had been
to have forgot it, and to substitute, in its stead, the rapid and impetuous
march, and the mighty da^^ngs which at once astonish, strike, and overcome. It
was in the first moments, above all, that it would have been necessary to
impress upon the Americans, not the terror of such ravages as affect a people,
armed for their liberty, more with indignation than with fear; but that dread
which is struck from a superiority of talents and of arms, and which a warlike
people, of the old world, should naturally be supposed to carry to the new. The
confidence of victory had soon been victory itself. But by too much
circumspection, by their too servile attachment to rules and principles,
skilful leaders failed of rendering to their country the service it expected
from them, and which it was justified in expecting.

The troops, on their side, did not press their commanders to lead them on.
They were just come from a country, where the cause which had sent them across
the ocean, made no impression. It was, in the eyes of the people, but a broil
which could not be of any consequence. They confounded the debates it
occasioned in parliament with other debates, often of small importance. It was
not talked of; or if some persons entertained themselves with it, they were not
more earnest about it than about those pieces of news, which, in great cities,
occupy the idleness of every day. The indifference of the nation had
communicated itself to the defenders of its rights. They would even have been
afraid, perhaps, to gain too decisive advantages over countrymen, who had taken
arms but to keep themselves from chains. In all the monarchies of Europe, the
soldier is but an instrument of despotism, and has its disposition. He looks
upon himself as belonging to the throne, and not to the country; and a hundred
thousand armed men, are but a hundred thousand disciplined and formidable
slaves. The habit even of exercising the empire of force, that empire to which
all gives way, contributes to extinguish in them every spark o^ the love of
liberty. At length, the military government and subordination, which moves
thousands of arms by a single voice, which permits no asking, nor seeing, nor
judging, nor thinking; and, at the first signal, makes it a law to kill or die,
compleats the work of changing these sentiments into principles, which make
what may be called the morals of their state. It is not so in England. The
influence of the constitution is so great, that it extends itself even to the
troops. There, a man is a citizen before he is a soldier. Public opinion,
conforming itself to the constitution, honors one, and lightly regards the
other, of these titles. That we see by the history of the revolutions and
tempests by which that turbulent island has been torn, that the English
soldier, though enlisted for life, preserves for political liberty a passion,
of which an idea is not easily to be formed in our countries of slaves.

How should the ardour which was wanting in the British troops have animated
the Hessians, the Brunswickers, and the other Germans ranking under the same
banners, all equally discontented with the princes who had sold them,
discontented with the sovereign who had bought them, discontented with the
nation which paid their wages, and discontented with their comrades, who
treated their mercenariness with contempt? Besides, they ^^d also brothers in
the enemy's camp, to whom they dreaded to give death, and from whose hand a
wound would have grieved them with a double pain.

The spirit of the English army had been altered too, in consequence of a
revolution in the manners of their country, which had taken place about fifteen
or eighteen years before. The successes of the last war; the extension which
the peace had given to commerce; the great acquisitions made in the East
Indies: all these means of fortune had, without interruption, accumulated in
Great Britain prodigious riches. These riches kindled the desire of new
enjoyments. The great went to acquire them in foreign countries; and, above
all, in France; and brought home the poison to their country. From the higher
conditions, it flowed down into all the classes, even to the lowest. To a
character of plainness, simplicity, reserve, and haughtiness, succeeded a taste
for exterior show, for dissipation, gallantry, and what is called politeness.
Travelers who had formerly visited this island so renowned, thought themselves
in another climate. The contagion had spread to the troops. They carried with
them to the new hemisphere the passion which they had contracted in the old,
for gaming, for soft accommodation, and good living. In departing from their
coast, they should have renounced the superfluities of which they were
enamoured. This taste for luxury, this ardour, so much the more violent as it
was new, did not encourage them to pursue, into the interior part of the
country, an enemy ever ready to plunge into it for shelter. Ye new politicians,
who advance with so much confidence, that manners have no influence on the fate
of nations; that, with regard to them, the measure of greatness is that of
riches; that the pleasures of peace and the voluptuousness of the citizen
cannot weaken the effect of those great machines called armies, and of which
the European discipline has, according to your account, so perfected the
infallible and tremendous operations: you, who to support your opinion, must
turn away your eyes from the ashes of Carthage and the ruins of Rome, upon the
recital I am making to you; suspend your judgment, and believe it possible that
there may be opportunities of success which are lost by luxury. Believe, that,
even to courageous troops, independence on wants has been often the chief cause
of conquest. It is too easy perhaps to brave only death. For nations corrupted
by opulence, a severer trial is reserved, that of supporting the loss of their
pleasures.

Add to all these reasons, that the means of war seldom arrived, across such a
length of sea, in the convenient season for action. Add, that the councils of
George the third were wisely determined to have too much influence in military
operations which were to be executed at such a distance from them; and you will
know the greatest part of the obstacles by which the ruinous efforts of the
mother country against the freedom of her colonies were opposed.

But how happened it that America did not herself repulse from her shores these
Europeans who were bringing to her chains or death?

This new world was desended by regular troops, which at first had been
enlisted but for three or six months, and afterward for three years, or as
long as hostilities might continue. It was defended by citizens who took the
field only when their particular province was invaded or menaced. Neither this
army always on foot, nor this militia casually assembled, had a military turn.
They were farmers, traders, lawyers, exercised only in the arts of peace, and
conducted to danger by guides, as little versed as their subalterns in the very
complicated science of war. In this state of things, what hope could they have
of measuring themselves with advantage against veterans in discipline, formed
to evolution, instructed in tactics, and abundantly provided with all the
instruments necessary to a vigorous attack, to an obstinate defense?

Enthusiasm alone might have surmounted these difficulties: but did there in
reality exist more enthusiasm in the colonies than in the mother country?

The general opinion in England, was, that the parliament had essentially the
right of taxing every country which made a part of the British empire. Perhaps,
in the beginning of the troubles, not a hundred individuals were to be found
who would have called this authority in question. Yet no anger was excited by
the refusal of the Americans to acknowledge it. No hatred was borne toward
them even after they had taken arms in support of their pretensions. As the
labors of the people in the interior part of the kingdom were not affected by
it, as the storm murmured but at a distance, every one was peaceably occupied
with his business, or gave himself up without disturbance to his pleasures.
They all waited for the conclusion of the drama without impatience, as if
already certain of what was to be exhibited in the unravelling of the plot.

The ferment must be supposed to have shown itself at first much greater in the
new hemisphere than the old. I^ ever the co^^s name of tyranny, or the grateful
sound of independence, pronounced to nations without communicating to them that
warmth which produces motion? But did that warmth sustain itself? Had the first
vehemence of imagination lasted, must not the repressing of excesses have
occupied the attention of the new authority? But so far from having cause to
withhold courage, it had cowardice to pursue. It was seen to punish desertion
with death, staining the standard of liberty with blood. It was seen to refuse
admitting of an exchange of prisoners, for fear of augmenting the inclination
of the troops to surrender at the first summons. It was seen reduced to the
necessity of erecting tribunals for the prosecution of the generals or their
lieutenants who should too easily give up the posts which their vigilance was
to guard. It is true, that a hoary patriot, of fourscore years, who was desired
to return to his fi^e side, cried out, My death will be of use; I shall shield
with my body a younger man. It is true, that Putnam said to a royalist his
prisoner, Return to thy commands, and if be asks thee how many troops I have,
tell him, that I have enough; that, even if he should beat them, I should have
still enough; and that he will find, in the event, that I have too many for him
and for the tyrants whom he serves. These sentiments were heroic, but they were
rare; and they became less common every day.

The intoxication was never general; and it could be but momentateous. None of
those energetic causes, which have produced so many revolutions upon the globe,
existed in North America. Neither religion nor law had there been outraged.
The blood of martyrs or patriots had not there streamed from scaffolds. Morals
had not been there insulted. Manners, customs, habits, no object dear to
nations had there been the sport of ridicule. Arbitrary power had not there
torn any inhabitant from the arms of his family and his friends, to drag him to
a dreary dungeon. Public order had not been there inverted. The principles of
administration had not been changed there; and the maxims of government had
there always remained the same. The whole question was reduced to the knowing
whether the mother country had, or had not, the right to lay, directly, or
indirectly, a flight tax upon the colonies: for the accumulated grievances in
the manifesto were valid only in consequence of this leading grievance. This,
almost metaphysical, question, was scarcely of sufficient importance to cause
the multitude to rise, or at least to interest them strongly in a quarrel for
which they saw their land deprived of the hands destined to its cultivation,
their harvests laid waste, their fields covered with the dead bodies of their
kindred, or stained with their own blood. To these calamities, the work of the
royal troops upon the coast, were soon added more insupportable ones in the
heart of the country.

Never had the restlessness of the courts of London and Versailles disturbed
the tranquillity of North America but both these powers brought some of the
migratory clans in this part of the new hemisphere to partake in their
sanguinary strife. Instructed by experience in the weight which these bordes
could add to the scale, the English and the colonists were equally resolved to
employ them for their mutual destruction.

Carleton tried, first, to arm these barbarous bands in Canada. "It is the
dispute," said they in answer to his solicitations, "of a father with his
children; we do not think it right for us to enter into this domestic
squabble." -- "But if the rebels should come to attack this province, would not
you help us to drive them back?" -- "Ever since the peace, the hatchet of war
has been buried forty fathoms deep." -- "You would certainly find it, if you
were to dig for it." -- "The helve of it is rotten, and we cannot make any use
of it."

The United States were not more fortunate. "We have heard talk of some
differences that have happened between Old and New England (said the tribe of
the Oneidas to their deputies) but we shall never take a part in such atrocious
divisions. War between brethren is a new and a strange thing in these regions.
Our traditions have left us no example of this nature. Suppress your mad
hatred; and may a benevolent sun disperse the black vapor in which you are
involved!"

The Masphies alone seemed to interest themselves in the cause of the
Americans. "There (said these good savages to them) there is sixteen shillings
for you. It Is all that we have. We thought to have bought some rum with it;
we'll drink water. We'll go a hunting. If any beasts fall by our arrows, we'll
sell their skins, and bring you the money."

But in time, the very active agents of Great Britain succeeded in conciliating
to it many nations of these aborigines. Its interests were preferred to those
of its enemies, as well because the remoter distance had prevented the savages
from having received so many outrages from it as from their proud neighbors,
as because it could and would better pay the services which might be rendered
to its cause. Under its banners, these allies, whose characteristic fierceness
knew no restraint, did a hundred times more damage to the colonists settled
near the mountains, than had been suffered, from the royal troops, by those of
their fellow citizens whom a happier destiny had fixed upon the confines of the
ocean.

These calamities attacked but a more or less considerable number of the
members of the United States, who soon after were all, collectively, afflicted
by an inward hurt.

The metals, which, throughout the whole globe, represent all the object of
commerce, had, in this part of the new world, never been abundant. The small
quantity of them which had been seen there, disappeared even at the
commencement of hostilities. To these signs, universally agreed upon, were
substituted signs peculiar to these provinces. Paper replaced silver and gold.
In order to give some dignity to the new pledge, it was adorned with emb^ems,
which might continually remind the people of the greatness of their
undertaking, of the inestimable price of liberty, and of the necessity of a
perseverance superior to all sufferings. The artifice did not succeed. These
ideal riches were rejected. The more the multiplication of them was urged by
want, the greater did their depreciation grow. The Congress was indignant at
the affronts given to its money, and declared all those to be traitors to their
country who should not receive it as they would have received gold itself.

Did not this body know, that prepossessions are no more to be controled than
feelings are? Did it not perceive, that in the present crisis every rational
man would be afraid of exposing his fortune? Did it not see, that at the
beginning of a republic it permitted to itself the exercise of such acts of
despotism as are unknown even in the countries which are molded to, and become
familiar with, servitude and oppres^ion? Could it pretend that it did not
punish a want of confidence with the pains which would have been scarcely
merited by revolt and treason? Of all this was the Congress well aware. But it
had no choice of means. Its despised and despicable scraps of paper were
actually thirty times below their original value, when more of them were
ordered to be made. On the 13^h of September, 1779, there was of this paper
money, amongst the public, to the amount of L 35, 544.155. The state owe^
moreover L. 8.385, 356, without reckoning the particular debts of single
provinces.

The people had no amends for this domestic scourge, as it might be called, by
an easy communication with all the other parts of the world. Great Britain had
intercepted their navigation with Europe, with the West Indies, with all the
latitudes which their vessels covered. Then, they said to the universe, "It is
the English name which makes us od^^us; we solemnly abjure it. All men a^e^ou^,
brethren. We are the friends of all nations. Every flag may, without fear of
insult, show itself upon our coasts, frequent our ports." An invitation, so
seducing in appearance, was not complied with. Those states which are truly
commercial ones, knowing that North America had been reduced to contract debts
at the e^^^ even of her greatest prosperity, thought wisely that in her present
d^stress she would be able to pay but very little for what might be carried to
her. The French alone, who dare every thing, dared to brave the inconveniences
of this new connection. But by the judicious vigilance of Admiral Lord How,
the greatest part of the ships which they sent out were taken before they
arrived at the places of their destination, and the others at their dep^^^ from
the American coasts. Of many hundreds of vessels which s^^led from France, but
twenty-five or thirty returned back to it, and even those brought no profit, or
very little, to their owners.

A multitude of privateers, added to so many other misfortunes, might make the
Americans regret their former tranquillity, and incline them to an
accommodation with England. In vain had the people been bound to the new
government by the sacredness of oaths and the influence of religion. In vain
had endeavors been used to convince them that it was impossible to treat
safely with a country in which one parliament might overturn what should have
been established by another. In vain had they been threatened with the eternal
resentment of an exasperated and vindictive enemy. It was possible that these
distant troubles might not be balanced by the weight of present evils.

So thought the British ministry, when they sent to the new world public
agents, authorized to offer every thing except independence to these very
Americans, from whom they had two years before exacted an unconditional
submission. It is not improbable but that by this plan of conciliation, a few
months sooner, some effect might have been produced. But at the period at which
it was proposed by the court of London, it was rejected with disdain, because
this measure appeared but as an argument of fear and weakness. The people were
already re^assured. The Congress, the generals, the troops, the bold and
skilful men who in each colony had possessed themselves of the authority; every
thing had recovered its first spirit. This was the effect of a treaty of
friendship and commerce between the United States and the court of Versailles,
signed the 6th of February, 1778.

If the British ministry had reflected upon it, they would have comprehended
that the same delirium which was drawing them to attack their colonies, was
reducing them to the necessity of declaring war in the same instant against
France. Then prevailed in the councils of this crown the circumspection which
must always be inspired by a new reign. Then the finances were still in the
confusion into which they had been plunged by a madness of twenty years. Then
the decayed condition of the navy was such as filled every citizen with
disquiet. Then Spain, already fatigued with her extravagant expedition of
Algiers, found herself in embarrassments which would not have permitted her to
run to the succor of her ally. And then might England, without rashness, have
promised herself success against the most powerful of her enemies, and to
intimidate America by victories gained or conquests made near home. The
importance that it was of, for this crown to take away from its rebellious
subjects the only support of which they might be assured, would have diminished
the indignation inspired by a violation of the most solemn treaties.

George the third saw nothing of all this. The obscure succors which the court
of Versailles sent to the provinces armed for the defense of their rights, did
not open his eyes. The dock-yards of France were fil^ing with shipwrights. Her
arsenals were filling with artillery. Scarcely was there room remaining in her
magazines for more naval stores. Her ports presented the most menacing
appearance; and this strange blindness still continued. To awaken the court of
St. James's from its lethargy, it was necessary that Lewis the sixteenth should
signify to i^, on the 14th of March, that he had acknowledged the independence
of the United States.

This signification was a declaration of war. It was impossible that a nation,
more accustomed to give provocation than receive it, could patiently look on,
whilst another nation was loosening its subjects from their bonds of
allegiance, and raising them up with much parade to the rank of sovereign
powers. All Europe foresaw that two states, in rivalship for ages, were about
to tinge the waters of the ocean with their blood, and again play that dreadful
game, in which public prosperities will never compensate for particular
disasters. They in whom ambition had not extinguished all benevolence for their
fellow creatures, deplored beforehand the calamities, which, in either
hemisphere, were ready to fall upon the human race.

The bloody scene, notwithstanding, did not open yet; and this delay gave
credulity a ground of hope, that peace would still continue. It was not known
that a fleet, which had sailed from Tou^on, was commissioned to attack the
English in North America. It was not known that orders had been dispatched from
London to drive the French from the East Indies. Without being initiated in
those mysteries of perfidy, which infidious politics are arrived at regarding
as great strokes of state* judicious men supposed that hostilities must be
inevitable, and on the point of taking place, even in our ocean. This event,
which had been foreseen, was brought on by the fight of two frigates, on the
17th of June, 1778.

Here our task becomes more and more difficult. Our sole object is to be
useful, and to be true. Far be from us that spirit of party which blinds and
degrades those who are the conductors, and those who aspire to be the
instructors, of mankind. Our wish is for our country; our homage is to justice.
We honor virtue, in whatever place, in whatever form, she is seen: the
distinctions of condition and of nation cannot estrange us from her; and the
man who is just and magnanimous is our countryman over all the world. If in the
different events which pass under our eyes, we blame with boldness what appears
to us blame worthy, we seek not the vain and sorry pleasure of casting
indiscreet reproach. But we are speaking to nations and to posterity. We ought
to give them the history of errors, to teach them how they may be shuned.
Should we dare to be traitorously wanting to so great a duty, we might,
perhaps, flatter the generation which passes away; but truth and justice,
which are eternal, would impeach us to future generations, who would read us
with contempt, and pronounce not our name but with disdain. In this long career
we should be just to those who still exist, as we have been to those who exist
no more. If, amongst the men of power, there are any who are offended at this
freedom, let us not fear to tell them, that we are but the organ of a supreme
tribunal, which reason is erecting upon a basis that cannot be shaken. There is
no longer a government in Europe but should stand in fear of its
determinations. Public opinion, which is becoming more and more informed, and
which nothing has power to arrest or awe, has its eyes open upon nations and
their courts. It penetrates into the cabinets where policy would he hid. There
it judges the depositaries of power, their weaknesses and their passions; and,
by the empire of genius and knowledge, raises itself, on all sides, above the
ministers of kings, to incite or to restrain them. Woe to them who despise or
brave it! This seeming courage is weakness in reality. Woe to them whose talents
cannot arm them with a confidence to sustain its look! Let such, that they may
once do justice, at least to themselves, lay down the burden too heavy for
their feeble shoulders. They will cease to expose themselves and the nations
they pretend to serve.

France began the war with invaluable advantages. The time, the place, the
circumstances; she had chosen all. It was not till after she had, at leisure,
made her preparations, till after she had increased her power to the proper
pitch, that she showed herself upon the field of battle. She had to combat but
an enemy who was humbled, weakened, and discouraged by domestic feuds. The
wishes of other nations were with her, against those imperious masters, or, as
they were called, those tyrants of the ocean.

Events seemed to correspond to the desire of Europe. The French officers, who
had old humiliations to wipe away, performed brilliant actions, the remembrance
of which will be of long duration. Great theoretic knowledge, and unshaken
courage, supplied what might be wanting in them from practice and experience.
All the single engagements, of ship to ship, did them the highest honor, and
most of them terminated to their advantage. The British fleet ran still greater
danger than the isolated vessels. It was so roughly treated as to have cause to
fear being wholly or partially destroyed; had not the French fleet, by which it
was reduced, off Ushant, to this almost despairing state, been destined, from
timid orders, from odious intrigues, from the weakness of its admirals, or from
all these motives together, to quit the sea and be the first to make for port.

In the intoxication of this, perhaps, unexpected success, France seemed to
lose sight of her dearest interests. Her principal object should have been to
intercept the commerce of her enemies, cutting the double nerve of their
strength, their seamen and their wealth, and so sap, at once, the two
foundations of English greatness. Nothing was more easy for a power prepared a
long while for hostilities, than to intercept fleets of merchantmen, quite
unprepared, and very feebly convoyed. This was not done. The immense riches
expected by Great Britain, from all parts of the globe, entered peaceably into
her harbors, without suffering the smallest diminution.

The commerce of France, on the contrary, was harassed in both the hemispheres,
and every where intercepted. Her colonies saw ravished from them, on their very
coasts, subsistences, to welcome which they were reaching out their arms with
all the eagerness of want; whilst the mother country was deprived of four
millions sterling, arrived almost in her fight. This reverse was not without a
cause. Let us endeavor to discover it.

The French navy had been a long time unsuccessful; and it was to the vice of
its constitution that so many misfortunes had been ascribed. Many attempts had
been made to modify or change the regulations of it; but these innovations,
good or bad, were always repelled with a more or less strongly marked disdain.
At length its admirals dictated themselves, in 1776, a disposition, which
rendering them absolute masters of the roads and anchoring places, of the
arsenals, of the dock-wards, and the magazines, destroyed that mutual
inspectorship, which Lewis the fourteenth thought it was right he should
establish, between the military officers and those of the administration. From
that time there was no longer any responsibility, regulation, or economy; in
the ports. Every thing there fell into disorder and confusion.

The new plan had an influence that was still more unhappy. Till this period,
it was the ministry who had directed the naval operations toward the end aimed
at by their politics. This authority passed, perhaps, almost without being
perceived, to those who were to execute these operations, which took insensibly
a tincture from their prejudices. These prejudices inclined them to think, that
it was not in heavily and laborious^* convoying the ships of their nation, or
in remaining out upon difficult cruises, to surprise or destroy those of the
enemy's nation, that fame was to be acquired. This double duty, therefore, was
entirely neglected, or very ill performed, in consequence of the opinion common
at Breast, that such a service had nothing noble in it, and led not to any kind
of glory.

It must be confessed, that this prejudice is a very odd one, and qui^e
contrary to all the laws of society. What can be supposed to have been the
design of states in instituting this military force destined to scour the seas?
Was it only to procure promotions for those who command or serve? Only to give
them opportunities of exercising a valor useless to every body but themselves?
Only to stain red another element with bloody battles? No, undoubtedly. Fleets
of war upon the ocean, are what fortresses and ramparts are for inhabitants of
cities; what the national armies are for provinces exposed to incursions of the
foe. There are some sorts of property attached to the soil; there are others
which are created, transported by commerce, and, as they may be called,
wandering on the ocean. Both these sorts of property want defenders. Warriors,
that is your function. What would be said, if the land forces should refuse to
protect the inhabitants of cities, the cultivators of fields, and to drive back
the fire threatened to the harvest? Naval officers, you think yourselves
debased by convoying and protecting commerce. But if commerce is to be no more
protected, what will become of the riches of the state, of which, without
doubt, you expect a part, in recompense of your service? What will become of
your own property, in the revenue of your land, which commerce and the
circulation of wealth chiefly contribute to make fruitful? You think yourselves
debased. What, debased in making yourselves useful to your countrymen! And what
are all the orders in the state, to whom government has committed any portion
of the public power, but protectors and defenders of your countrymen and the^
wealth? Your post is upon the ocean, as that of the magistrate upon the bench,
that of the soldier in the camp, and that of the monarch himself upon the
throne, where he commands from a higher station but to take a wider survey, and
comprise, at one view, all those who stand in need of his protection and
defense. Know, that glory is to be gleaned in every field on which a service to
your country can be performed. Know, that to preserve is more glorious, as well
as more blessed, than to destroy. In ancient Rome there were also admirers of
glory. Yet, there, the glory of having saving a single citizen, was preferred
to the glory of having slain a host of foes. What, see you ^ot that in saving
the commercial ships, you save the fortune of the state? Yes, your valor is
splendid; it is known to Europe as well as to your country; but what b^^^ it to
your countrymen, that it has been displayed upon occasions of eclat, that it
has brought the ship of your enemy in tow, or blown its ruins wide upon the
waves, if you have suffered to perish, or be taken, the ships which bear your
country's riches; if, in the very port, which you triumphantly re enter, a
thousand desolate families deplore their fortunes lost? On your landing,
instead of hearing the shouts of victory, you will be received with silence and
dejection; and your exploits will be destined but to swell the recital of a
court gazette, and those public papers, which, in amusing idleness, give glory
but for a day, when that glory is not graven upon the hearts of your fellow
citizens, by the remembrance of real utility to the common good.

The max^ms sacred at Portsmouth were very different. There was felt, there was
respected, the dignity of commerce. There, it was both a duty and an honor to
defend it; and events have decided on which side the naval officers had the
justest ideas of their function.

Great Britain had just experienced a very humiliating reverse in the new
world, and a more powerful enemy threatened her with greater disasters in the
old. This alarming situation filled all minds with doubtfulness and distrust.
The national riches arrive. Those of the rival power add to the enormous mass;
and instantly public credit is reanimated; hope sorings up again, and this
people, who were contemptuously thought to be brought down, resume, and
sustain, their usual prowess and their usual pride.

The ports of France, on the contrary, are filled with groans. A shameful and
ruinous inaction succeeded to an activity which contributed to their same and
riches; The indignation of the merchants communicated itself to all the nation.
The first moments of success are moments of intoxication, in which faults seem
to be justified as well as hid. But misfortune gives more severity to judgment.
The nation then observes more nearly those who govern, and loudly calls for an
account of the employment of the power and authority which have been committed
^o them. The councils of Lewis the sixteenth are reproached for having wounded
the majesty of the first power on the globe, in disavowing, to the face of the
universe, the succors which were sent continually to the Americans in a
clandestine manner. They are reproached, for having; by a ministerial intrigue,
or, by the ascendency of some obscure agents, engaged the nation in a
disastrous war, whilst they should have been occupied in putting the springs of
government again in order, in healing the tedious wounds of a reign, of which
the latter half was divided between depredation and shame, between the baseness
of vice and the convulsions of despotism. They are reproached, for having
provoked the con^est by infidious politics, for having descended to wrap
themselves round with guile, in discourses unworthy of France; for having
employed with England the language of a timid audacity, which seems to disown
and contradict the projects which are formed, and the sentiments which are
uppermost, in the heart; a language which can only debase him from whom it
proceeds, without deceiving him to whom it is addressed; and, whilst it brings
dishonor, can make that dishonor of no use either to the minister or to the
state. How much nobler had it been to say, with all the franknesss of dignity,
Englishmen, you have abused your victories. Now is the moment for you to show
to justice; or it shall be that of vengeance. Europe is weary of suffering
tyrants. She r^ enters at length upon her rights. Henceforward, equality (...)
war. Choose. -- It is thus that they would have been ta^^ed to by that
Richelieu, whom every citizen, it is (...) should hate, because he was an
inhuman butcher, and that he might reign despotic, murdered his enemies with
the hangman's axe; but whom, as a minister, the nation is bound to honor, as
it was he who first showed France her dignity, and gave her, amongst the states
of Europe; the air which became her power. It is thus that they would have been
talked to by that Lewis, who, for forty years together, knew how to be worthy
of the age to which he gave a name, who mixed greatness with his very faults,
who never, even in adversity and abasement, degraded his people or himself. Ah,
for governing a great nation, a great character is requisite. There is no
fitness for it in those minds which are indifferent and cold from levity, to
which absolute authority is but as it were a kind of last amusement, which
carelessly leave great interest^ floating at the caprice of chance, and are
more occupied in preserving than employing power* Why, it is asked again, why
did men, who hold in their hands all the authority of the state, and have but
to command in order to be obeyed, why did they suffer themselves to be
prevented, in all seas, by an enemy whose constitution must of necessity cause
slowness in putting their measures in execution? Why did they, by an
inconsiderate treaty, tie themselves down to conditions with the Congress,
which they might themselves have herd in dependence, by ample and regular
supplies? Why, in short, did they not strengthen and confirm the revolution, by
keeping always, on the northern coasts of the new world, a squadron which might
protect the colonies, and, at the same time, make our alliance to be respected?
But Europe, who has her eyes fixed upon us, sees a great design, and no
concerted measures; sees, in our arsenals and our ports, immense preparations,
and no execution; sees menacing fleets fitted out, and the pompous expense of
them rendered almost useless; sees spirit and valor in subalterns,
irresolution and timidity in chiefs; sees whatever proclaims, on one hand, the
strength and the awe-commanding power of a great people, and, on the other, the
slackness and weakness inseparable from its character and views. It is by this
striking contradiction between our projects and their execution, between our
means and their direction, that the genius of England, stunned for a moment,
has resumed his vigor: and it is even now a problem for Europe to resolve, if,
in declaring for America, we have not ourselves revived and advanced the
English power.

Such are the complaints with which all parts of the kingdom ring, and which we
are not afraid to collect together here, and lay before the eyes of authority,
if it deigns to read or hear them.

In short, philosophy, whose first sentiment is the desire to see all
government^ just, and all people happy, in casting her eyes upon this alliance
of a monarchy with a people who are defending their liberty, i^ curious to know
its motives* She sees at once, too clearly, that the happiness of mankind has
no part in it* She thinks that if the court of Versailles had been determined
by the love of justice, it would have settle^ in the first article of its
agreement with America. That all oppressed people have the right of resisting
their oppressors. But this maxim, which forms one of the laws of England; which
a king of Hungary was great enough, when he was ascending the throne, to make
one of the constitutions of the state; which was adopted by one of the greatest
princes who reigned over the world, Trajan, when he said* before an assembly of
the Roman people, to the first officer of the empire, in presenting him with a
drawn sword, according to custom upon investing him with his charge, Use it for
me, if I continue just; against me, if I become tyrannical. This maxim is too
foreign for our feeble and corrupted governments, in which the suffering
patiently is so much become a duty, that the sufferer ought to deprecate ^
sensation of his misery, lest it be punished as a crime.

But the most bitter complaints are directed above all to Spain. She is blamed
for her blindness, her wavering, her tardiness, and sometimes even for her
infidelity: all which accusations are ill founded.

Some politicians imagined, in seeing France engage herself without necessity
in a naval war, that this crown supposed itself powerful enough to divide the
British domain, without sharing with a^^^lly the honor of (...) important
revolution. We shall not examine whether the spirit which then reigned in the
cabinet of Versailles authorized this conjecture. It is now known that this
crown, which from the very beginning of the troubles had sent secret succor to
the Americans, was watching for the propitious moment of declaring openly in
their favor. The event of Saratoga appeared to it the most favorable
conjuncture for proposing to the Catholic king to make the cause a common one.
Whether it were that this prince might then jude the liberty of the United
States to be contrary to his interest; whether the resolution might appear to
him to be precipitate; or whether, in short, other political objects might
require all his attention, he did not agree to the proposal. From his character
it was supposed that repeated solicitation would be useless. After the first
experiment, he was so little applied to about this great affair, that it was
without his being apprised of it that the court of Versailles caused it to be
signified at St. James's that it had acknowledged the independence of the
confederate provinces.

In the mean time the land and sea forces which Spain employed against the
Portuguese in the Brazils, were returned home. The rich fleet which she
expected from Mexico was arrived in her ports. The treasures which came to her
from Peru and from her other possessions were secure. She was free from all
inquietude, and mistress of her motions, when she aspired to the glory of being
a pacificator between the two hemispheres. Her mediation was accepted, as well
by France, whose bold attempts had not been attended with the happy
consequences which she had promised herself from them, as by England, who might
fear the having an additional adversary to contend with.

Charles the third sustained with dignity the great part he had to act. He
awarded that, laying down their arms, each of the belligerent powers should be
maintained in the territories which it should occupy at the time of the
convention; that a congress should be formed, in which the different
pretensions should be discussed; and that no fresh hostilities should commence
till after the expiration of a twelve month's notice.

This monarch was aware that this arrangement gave to Great Britain a facility
of being reconciled with her colonies, or at least of making them purchase, by
great advantages to her commerce, the ports which she occupi- in the midst of
them. He was aware that it must wound the dignity of the king his nephew, who
had engaged to maintain the United States in the totality of their territory.
But he would be just; and without forgetting all personal considerations, one
cannot be so.

This plan of conciliation was displeasing to Versailles, whose only
consolation was ministered by the hope that it would be rejected at London. This
hope was not deceived. England could not resolve upon acknowledging the
Americans to be really independent; though they were not to be called to the
conferences which were to have taken place; though France could not negotiate
for them; though their interests were to have been taken care of solely by a
mediator who was not bound to them by any treaty, and who, perhaps, at the
bottom of his heart, was not desirous of their prosperity; though her refusal
threatened her with an enemy the more.

It is in such a circumstance as this; it is in the time when noble pride
elevates the soul superior to all terror; when nothing is seen more dreadful
than the shame of receiving the law, and when there is no doubt or hesitation
which to choose between ruin and dishonor; it is then, that the greatness of a
nation is displayed. I acknowledge however, that men, accustomed to judge of
things by the event, call great and perilous resolutions, heroism or madness,
according to the good or bad success with which they have been attended. If
then I should be asked, what is the name which shall in years to come be given
to the firmness, which was in this moment exhibited by the English, I should
answer, that I do not know. But that which it deserves, I know* I know that the
annals of the world hold out to us but rarely, the august and majestic
spectacle of a nation, which chooses rather to renounce its duration than its
glory.

The British ministry had no sooner given their determination, than the court
of Madrid espoused the quarrel of that of Versailles, and consequently that of
the Americans. Spain had then sixty (...) ships of the line, and six on the
stocks. France had eighty of the line, and eight upon the stocks. The United
States had but twelve frigates; but a great number of privateers.

To (...) this united force, England had to oppose but ninety five ships of the
(...) with twenty three upon the st^^ks. The sixteen which ^ere to be seen in
her ports, over and above, were (...), and had been converted into prisons or
hospitals. Inferior in instruments of war, she was still more so in means of
all sorts for their employment. Her domestic dissentions still weakened the
resources which remained. It is the nature of governments truly free to be
agitated during peace. It is by this intestine motion that the spirit^ preserve
their energy and the continual remembrance of the nation's rights. But in war,
all ferments ought to cease, all hatred; to (...) extinguished, all interests
to coalesce and be mutually subservient to the public good. It happened quite
otherwise, at this time, in the British isles. Never were there more violen^
dissentions. Never did contrary pretensions show themselves in any circumstance
with less reserve. The public good was by either faction audaciously trodden
under foot. Those houses of parliament, in which the most important questions
had formerly been discuss^d with eloquence, with dignity, and with power, now
rung but with the clamours of rage, but with the grossest insults, but with
altercations as hurtful as they were indecent. The few true friends of the
nation who were remaining, called loudly for another Pit, for the minister who
like him should have neither relations nor friends; but this extraordinary man
did not appear. And indeed it was pretty generally imagined that this people
would now give way, notwithstanding the high spiritedness of its character,
notwithstanding the experience of its admirals, notwithstanding the bravery of
its seamen, notwithstanding that energy which a free nation must acquire from
vibrating with concussion.

But the empire of chance is a very wide one. Who knows in favor of which side
the elements shall declare? By a gust of wind, is a victory given or snatched
away. The discharge of a gun disconcerts a fleet by its admiral's death.
Signals are not seen or heard; are not obeyed. Experience, valor skill, are
thwarted by ignorance, by jealous^, by treachery, by an assurance of impunity.
A fog covers contending navies, and separates or confounds them. A tempest or a
calm equally preserves, or equally destroys. Forces are divided by the unequal
ce^^^^y of ships. The propitious moment is missed, by pusillanimity which
lingers, or by rashness which rushes on. Plane shall have been formed with
wisdom; but their success shall fail for want of concert in the movements of
execution. By an inconsiderate order of the court, what might have proved a
proud day, is decided to dishonor. Projects are changed by a minister's
disgrace or death. Is it possible that a strict union should long subsist
amongst confederates of characters so opposite, as the hasty, light, disdainful
Frenchman, the jealous, haughty, sly, slow, circumspective Spaniard, and the
American, who is secretly snatching looks at the mother country, and would
rejoice, were they compatible with his independence, at the disasters of his
allies? Will these nations long delay, whether they act separately or
conjointly, mutually to accuse, complain, and be embroiled? Ought not their
greatest hope to be, that multiplied ill successes may do no more than replunge
them into that humiliating state from which they endeavored to emerge, and
firmly fix the trident in the hand of England; whilst a considerable defeat or
two would bring down this ambitious people from ever ranking again amongst the
principal powers of the European world?

Who shall decide then, who can foresee, the event? France and Spain united,
have powerful means to employ; England the art of employing here is. France and
Spain have their treasures; England, a great national credit. On one side, the
multitude of men; on the other, the superiority in the art of working ships,
and, as it were, of subjecting the sea in fighthing. Here, impetuosity and
valor; there, valor and experience. In one party, the activity which absolute
monarchy gives to designs; in the other, the vigor and elasticity which
liberty supplies. There, losses and grudges to revenge; here, their late glory,
with the sovereignty of America, and of the ocean, to recover and preserve. The
allied nations have the advantage with which the union of two vast powers must
be at ended, but the inconvenience likewise which must result from this very
union, by the difficulty of harmony and concord both in their designs, and in
the execution of them by their respective forces; England is abandoned to
herself, but having only her own forces to direct, she has the advantage of
unity in designs, and of a more sure and perhaps more ready disposition in
ideas: she can more easily range her plans of defense and offense under a
single view.

In order to weigh the matter with exactness, we should yet put into the scales
the different energy which may be communicated to the rival nations by a war,
which is in a great many respects but a war of kings and ministers, on one
si^e; but, on the other, a truly national war, in which the greatest interests
of Englands are concerned; that of a commerce which produces her riches, that
of an empire and a glory on which her greatness tests.

In short, if we consider the spirit of the French nation, opposite to that of
the nation with which it is at variance, we shall see that the ardour ^f the
Frenchman is as quickly extinguished as it is inflamed; that he hopes every
thing when he begins, that he despairs of every thing as soon as an obstacle
shall retard him; that, from his character, h^s arm must be nerved by the
enthusiasm of success, in order to reap more success: that the Englishman, on
the contrary, less presumptuous, notwithstanding his natural bondness, at the
beginning, knows how, ^hen occasion calls for it, to struggle courageously, to
raise himself in proportion as the danger rises, and to ^ather advantages even
from disgrace: ^ke the robust oak to which Horace compares the Romans, which,
mutilated by the axe, springs afresh under the strokes worth are given it, and
draws vigor and spirit from its very losses and its very wounds.

History shows us likewise that few leagues have divided the spoil of the
nation against which they have been formed. A hens victorious over Persia; Rome
saved from Hannibal; in modern times, Venice escaped from the famous league of
Cambray; and, even in our days, Prussia rendered by the genius of one man
capable to cope with Europe; should suspend our judgment upon the issue of the
present war.

But let us suppose that the house of Bourbon have the advantages with which it
may have been flattered. What ought to be its conduct?

France is in all points of view the empire the most strongly constituted, of
which any remembrance has been preserved in the annals of the world. Without
being able to bear any comparison with her, Spain is likewise a very powerful
state, and her means of prosperity are continually increasing. The most
important concern then of the house of Bourbon ought to be, to obtain pardon of
its neighbors for the advantages which it has from nature, which it owes to
art, or which have been bestowed on it by events. Should it endeavor to
augment its superiority, the alarm would become general, and it would be
thought that an universal slavery was threatened. It is perhaps to be wondered
at, that the other nations of Europe have not yet thwarted it in its projects
against England. The resentment which the injustice and the haughtiness of this
proud island have every where inspired, must be the cause of this inaction. But
hatred is silent when interest appears. It is possible that Europe may think
the weakening of Great Britain in the old and the new hemisphere contrary to
its safety; and that, after having enjoyed the humiliations and dangers of this
lofty and tyranny power, she may at length take arms in its defense. Should it
be so, the courts of Versailles and Madrid would see themselves fallen from the
hope which they have conceived of a decisive prepondence upon the globe. These
considerations should determine them to ha^ten their attacks, and not give
time, for the forming of new dispositions, to a prophetic or even a jealous
policy. Above all, let them stop in time, and not suffer an immoderate desire
of humbling their common enemy to make them blind to their own interests.

The United States have shown openly the project of drawing all North America
to their league. Many measures, that in particular of inviting the people of
Canada to rebellion, have given cause to believe that this was likewise the
wish of France. Spain may be suspected to have equally adopted this idea.

The conduct of the provices which have shaken off the yoke of Great Britain is
simple, and such as was to be expected. But would not their allies be wanting
is foresight, if they should have really the same system?

The new hemisphere must be detached one day from the old. This grand seissure
in prepared in Europe, by the collision and fermentation of our opinions; by
^ur being deprived of our rights, which constituted our courage; by the luxury
of our courts and the misery of our countries; by the hatred, the endless
hatred, between men without heart, honor, or vigor, who possess all else, and
robust men, and even virtuous men, who have nothing but life to lose. It is
prepared in America, by the increase of population, of cultivation, of
industry, and of knowledge. Every thing forwards this rupture, as well the
progress of evil in the old world, as in the new the progress of good.

But would it be right for Spain and France, whose possessions in the new world
are an inexhaustible source of riches; would it be right for them to
precipitate this rupture? Now this rupture is the thing that would precisely
happen, were all the north of those regions subjected to the same laws, or
bound together by a common interest.

No sooner would the liberty of this vast continent be established, than it
would become the asylum of all the offscouring amongst us, of man of
intriguing, seditious spirits, b^^sted characters, or ruined fortunes. Culture,
arts, commerce, would have no charms for such refugees as these. They must have
a less laborious and more agitated (...). This turn of mind, equally distant
from labor or repose, would direct itself toward conquests; and a passion
which has so many attractions would easily captivate the first colonists,
diverted by a long war from their accustomed occupations. The new people would
have completed their preparations for invasion before the report of it had
reached our climates. They would choose their enemy, the field and the moment of
their victories. Their thunder would fall always upon seas without defense, or
on coasts taken at unawares. In a little while the southern provinces would
become their prey, and supply by the riches of their productions the mediocrity
of those of the northern. Perhaps the possessions of our absolute monarchies
might even be candidates for the honor of being admitted to a confederacy with
a free people, or would detach themselves from Europe in order to belong but to
themselves.

The part which the courts of Madrid and Versailles should take, if they are
free to choose, is to let two powers subsist in North America* who may watch,
restrain, and counterpoize each other. Then will ages roll away, before England
and the republics formed at her expense can come together. This reciprocal
distrust will prohibit them from any distant enterprise; and the
establishments, belonging to other nations, in the new world, will enjoy
without disturbance that tranquillity, which, even down to our own times, has
been so often troubled.

In all probability, indeed, it is the very order of things which would be most
suitable even for the confederate provinces themselves. Their respective limits
are not regulated. A great jealousy subsists between the countries to the
northward and those to the southward. Political principles vary from one river
to another. Great animosities are observed between the inhabitants of the same
town, between the members of the same family. Each would throw off from himself
the heavy burden of public expenses and debts. A thousand principles of
division are generally springing in the bosom of the United States. When
dangers are once at an end, how is the explosion of so many discontents to be
retarded? how are so many unsettled minds, and angered hearts, to be held
attached to a common center? Let the true friends of America reflect upon it,
and they will find that the only means to prevent disturbances, amongst that
people, is to leave remaining on their frontiers a powerful rival, always
disposed to profit by their dissentions.

Monarchies thrive best with peace and security; inqui^^tudes, and formidable
enemies, make republics flourish. Rome had need of Carthage; and he who
destroyed the Roman liberty was neither Sylla, nor Caesar; it was the first
Cato, when his narrow and austere politics took her rival away from Rome, by
lighting, in the senate, those torches which burnt Carthage to the ground. Even
Venice, perhaps, would not have had her government, and her laws, these four
hundred years, had she not had at her door powerful neighbors, who might
become her enemies or her masters.

But, supposing them thus situated, to what degree of happiness, splendour, and
power, may the United Provinces in time be raised?

Here, in order to form a sound judgment, let us immediately begin with laying
aside the interest which all hearts, not excepting those of slaves, have taken
in the generous efforts of a people, who exposed themselves to the most
dreadful calamities to be free. The name of liberty is so sweet, that all they
who fight for it are sure to interest our secret wishes. Their cause is that of
the whole human race; it becomes our own. We revenge ourselves of our own
oppressors, by giving vent, at least, with liberty, to our hatred against those
oppressors who cannot punish it. At the sound of breaking chains, it seems as
if our own were about to become lighter; and we think for some moments that we
breathe a purer air, in learning that fewer tyrants are to be counted in the
world. These great revolutions of liberty, moreover, admonish despots. They
warn them not to trust to too long patience in the people, not to trust to
impunity without end. Thus, when the laws of society execute vengeance upon the
crimes of private individuals, the good man hopes that the punishment of the
guilty will, by its terrible example, prevent the commission of new crimes.
Terror sometimes supplies the place of justice to the thief, and conscience to
the assassin. Such is the source of the warm interest we feel in all the wars
of liberty. Such is that with which we have been inspired for the Americans.
Our imaginations have been inflamed in their favor. We seem to be present at,
and to feel as they do, all their victories and their defeats. The spirit of
justice, which is pleased in compensating past misery by happiness to come, is
pleased in thinking that this part of the new world cannot fail of becoming one
of the most flourishing countries upon the globe. Nay, it has been even
supposed, that there is cause to fear lest Europe should one day find her
masters in her children. Let us dare to stem (...) torrent of public opinion,
and that of public enthusiasm. Let us not be led astray by imagination, that
embellisher of all things; nor by passion, which loves to create illusions, and
realizes all it hopes. Our duty is to combat every prejudice, should it be even
that which is most conformable to the wishes of our heart. To be true, above
all things, is our chief concern, and not to betray the pure and upright
conscience which presides over our writings, and dictates every judgment that
we pass. At this moment, perhaps, we shall not be believed: but a bold
conjecture, which is verified at the end of many ages, does more honor to the
historian, than the recital of a long series of facts which cannot be
contested; and I write not only for my contemporaries, who will but some years
survive me. Yet a few revolutions of the sun, and they and I shall be no more.
But I deliver over my ideas to posterity and to time. It is for them to judge
me.

The space occupied by the thirteen republics, between the mountains and the
ocean, is but of sixty-seven sealeagues; but upon the coast their extent is, in
a strait line, three hundred and forty five.

In this region the lands are, almost throughout, bad, or of a middling
quality. Scarcely any thing but maze grows in the four most northern colonies.
The only resource of their inhabitants is fishery, of which the annual product,
in money, does not amount to above two hundred and sixty or seventy thousand
pounds.

Corn sustains principally the provinces of New York, Jersey, and Pennsylvania.
But the soil there is so rapidly become worse than it was, that an acre, which
formerly yielded full sixty bushels of wheat, now produces but very rarely
above twenty.

Though the soil of Maryland and Virginia is much superior to all the rest, it
cannot be said to be very fruitful. The old plantations do not yield above a
third of the tobacco which they formerly produced. It is not possible to form
new ones; and the cultivators have been obliged to turn their views toward
other objects.

North Carolina produces some corn, but of a quality so inferior, that it is
sold for five and twenty, or thirty per cent. less than the other, in all the
markets.

South Carolina and Georgia have a perfectly flat face of country, for the
distance of fifty miles from the seaside. The excessive rains which fall
there, finding no means of discharge, form numerous ma^s^^^ or ^akes, in which
rice is cultivated, to the great detriment of the slaves and the freemen
occupied in this labor. On the intermediate spaces left by these multitudinous
little seas, grows an inferior kind of indigo, which must have its place
changed every year. Where the country rises from ^he level, it is but with
ungrateful sands or frightful rocks, interspersed, from distance to distance,
with pastures of the nature of rush.

The English government, seeing that North America could never enrich them by
the productions proper to that country, thought of the powerful motive of
premiums, for the creating, in this part of the new world, of linen, wine, and
silk. The poverty of the soil, which would not bear flax, obstructed the first
of these views; the badness of the climate, which would not agree with vines,
opposed the success of the second: and the want of hands permitted not the
third to take place. The society established at London, for the encouragement
of arts, manufactures, and commerce, was not more happy than the ministry had
been. Its premiums did not give birth to any one of the objects which it had
proposed to the activity and industry of those countries.

Great Britain was obliged to content herself with selling every year to these
countries, merchandise to the amount of something more than two millions. The
consumers of this merchandise delivered up to her, exclusively, their indigo,
their iron, their tobacco, and their f^r^. They delivered up to her whatever
money, and raw material^, the rest of the globe had given them for their wood,
their cuts, their fish, their rice, and their salted provisions. Yet the
balance was always so much against them, that, when the troubles began, the
colonies owed from five to six millions to the mother country, and had no cash
in circulation.

Notwithstanding these disadvantages, there had been successively formed,
within the thirteen provinces, a population of two millions nine hundred and
eighty-one thousand six hundred and seventy eight persons, including four
hundred thousand negroes. Oppression and intolerance were continually driving
thither new inhabitants. The war has now barred this refuge to the unhappy; but
the peace will open it to them again; when they will flock thither in greater
numbers than ever. They who shall go with projects of cultivation will not have
all the satisfaction which they may promise themselves, because they will find
the good land, and even the middling, all occupied; and there will be nothing
to be offered them but barren sands, unhealthy marshes, or sleep mountains.
Emigration will be more favorable to manufacturers and artists, though even
they may, perhaps, gain nothing by their change of country and climate.

We cannot determine, without rashness, what may one day be the population of
the United States. Such a calculation, generally pretty difficult, becomes
impracticable for a region where the land degenerates very rapidly, and where
the expense of labor and improvement is not proportionably answered by the
reproduction. If ten millions of men ever find a certain subsistence in these
provinces, it will be much. Even then the exportation will be reduced to
nothing, or next to nothing: but interior industry will replace foreign
industry. The country, within a little, will be able to suffice for itself,
provided that the inhabitants know how to make themselves happy by economy and
with mediocrity.

Ye people of North America, let the example of all the nations who have gone
before you, and above all that of your mother country, serve you for
instruction. Fear the affluence of gold, which brings with luxury the
corruption of manners, the contempt of laws. Fear a too unequal distribution of
riches, which exhibits a small number of citizens in opulence, and a great
multitude of citizens in extreme poverty; whence springs the insolence of the
former, and the debasement of the latter. Secure yourselves against the spirit
of conquest. The tranquillity of an empire diminishes in proportion to its
extension. Have arms for your defense; have none for offense. Seek competency
and health, in labor; prosperity, in the culture of lands, and the workshops
of industry; power, in manners and virtue. Cause arts and sciences, which
distinguish the civilized from the savage man, to flourish and abound. Above
all, watch carefully over the education of your children. It is from public
schools, be assured, that come the wise magistrates, the capable and courageous
soldiers, the good fathers, the good husbands, the good brothers, the good
friends, the good men. Wherever the youth are seen depraved, the nation is on
the decline. Let liberty have an immovable foundation in the wisdom of your
laws, and let it be the indestructible cement to bind your provinces together.
Establish no legal preference amongst the different forms of worship.
Superstition is innocent, wherever it is neither persecuted nor protected; and
may your duration, if it be possible, equal the duration of the world!

FINIS.

