AN ESSAY ON THE CAUSES, NATURE, AND CURE, OF CONSUMPTIONS.

IN A LETTER TO A FRIEND.

BY JOHN MOORE, M. D. To which is Prefixed, THE CHARTER OF THE Massachusetts
Medical Society.

While wilful you, and fatally secure,
Expect Tomorrow's more auspicious Sun,
The growing Pest, whose Infancy was weak
And easy vanquished, with triumphant Sway
Over powers your Life. For want of timely Care,
Millions have died of medicable Wounds.
ARMSTRONG. BOSTON: PRINTED BY ROBERT HODGE, FOR WILLIAM GREEN.

TO THE PRESIDENT AND FELLOWS OF THE Massachusetts Medical Society,
THIS REPUBLICATION OF DR. MOORE's ESSAY, ON PULMONARY CONSUMPTIONS, With the
ACT of their Incorporation prefixed,

Is humbly Dedicated by Their most obedient Servant, WILLIAM GREEN.

Commonwealth of Massachusetts. In the Year of our LORD, 1781.
An ACT to incorporate certain Physicians, by the Name of The Massachusetts
Medical Society.
AS Health is essentially necessary to the Happiness of Society; and as its
Preservation or Recovery is closely connected with the Knowledge of the Animal
(Economy, and of the Properties and Effects of Medicines; and as the Benefit of
Medical Institutions, formed on liberal Principles, and encouraged by the
Patronage of the Law, is universally acknowledged:

Be it therefore enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives in General
Court assembled, and by the Authority of the same, That Nathaniel Walker
Appleton, William Baylies, Benjamin Curties, Samuel Danforth, Aaron Dexter,
Shirley Erving, John Frink, Joseph Gardner, Samuel Holten, Edward Augustus
Holyoke, Ebenezer Hunt, Charles Jarvis, Thomas Kast, Giles Crouch Kellogg, John
Linn, James Lloyd, Joseph Orne, James Pecker, Oliver Presco^t, Charles
Pincheon, Isaac Rand, Isaac Rand, junior, Micaijah Sawyer, John Sprague,
Charles Stockbridge, John Bernard Swett, Cotton Tufts, John Warren, Thomas
Welsh, Joseph Whipple, William Whiting, be, and they hereby are formed into,
constituted and made a body Politic and Corporate, by the Name of The
Massachusette Medical Society; and that they and their Successors, and such
other Persons as shall be elected in the Manner hereafter mentioned, shall be
and continue a Body Politic and Corporate by the same Name for ever.

And be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Fellows of said Society
may, from Time to Time, elect a President, Vice President and Secretary, with
other Officers, as they shall judge necessary and convenient; and they the
Fellows of said Society, shall have full Power and Authority, from Time to
Time, to determine and establish the Names, Number and Duty of their several
Officers, and the Tenure or Estate they shall respectively have in their
Offices; and also to authorize and empower their President, or some other
Officer, to administer such Oaths to such Officers, as they, the Fellows of
said Society shall appoint and determine for the well-ordering and good
Government of said Society, provided the same be not repugnant to the Laws of
this Commonwealth.

And be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Fellows of said Society
shall have one common Seal, and Power to break, change and renew the same at
their Pleasure.

And be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That they the Fellows of said
Society, may sue and be sued in all Action, real, personal or mixed, and
prosecute and defend the same unto final Judgment and Execution, by the Name of
The Massachusetts Medical Society.

And be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Fellows of said Society
may from Time to Time, elect such Persons to be Fellows thereof, as they shall
judge proper; and that they, the Fellows of said Society, shall have Power to
suspend, expel or disfranchise any Fellows of said Society.

And be it enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Fellows of said Society
shall have full Power and Authority to make and enact such Rules and Bye-Laws
for the better Government of said Society, as are not repugnant to the Laws of
this Commonwealth; and to annex reasonable Fines and Penalties to the Breach of
them, not exceeding the Sum of Twenty Pounds, to be sued for and recovered by
said Society, and to their own Use, in any Court of Record within this
Commonwealth proper to try the same; and also to establish the Time and Manner
of convening the Fellows of said Society; and also to determine the Number of
Fellows that shall be present to constitute a Meeting of said Society; and
also, that the Number of said Society, who are Inhabitants of this
Commonwealth, shall not at any Time be more than Seventy, nor less than Ten;
and that their Meetings shall be held in the Town of Boston, or such other
Place within this Commonwealth, as a Majority of the Members present in a legal
Meeting, shall judge most ^it and convenient.

And whereas it is clearly of Importance, that a just Discrimination should be
made between such as are duly educated and properly qualified for the Duties of
their Profession, and those who may ignorantly and wickedly administer
Medicine, whereby the Health and Lives of many valuable Individuals may be
endangered, or perhaps lost to the Community.

Be it therefore enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the President and
Fellows of said Society, or other such of their Officers or Fellows as they
shall appoint, shall have full power and Authority to examine all Candidates
for the Practice of Physic and Surgery (who shall offer themselves for
Examination, respecting their Skill in their Profession,) and if upon such
Examination, the said Candidates shall be found skilled in their profession,
and fitted for the Practice of it, they shall receive the Approbation of the
Society in Letters Testimonial of such Examination, under the Seal of the said
Society, signed by the President, or such other Person or Persons as shall be
appointed for that Purpose.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid. That if the said
President, and such other Person or Persons so elected and appointed for the
Purpose of examining Candidates as aforesaid, shall obstinately refuse to
examine any Candidate so offering himself for Examination as aforesaid, each
and every such Person so elected and appointed as aforesaid, shall be subject
to a Fine of One Hundred Pounds, to be recovered by the said Candidate, and to
his own Use, in any Court within this Commonwealth proper to try the same.

And be it further enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That the Fellows of said
Society may, and shall forever, be deemed capable in Law of having, holding and
taking in Fee Simple or any less Estate by Gift, Grant or Devise or otherwise,
any Land, Tenement or other Estate Real or Personal; provided that the annual
Income of the whole Real Estate that may be given, granted or devised to, or
purchased by the said Society, shall not exceed the Sum of Two Hundred Pounds,
and the annual Income or Interest of said Personal Estate, shall not exceed the
Sum of Six Hundred Pounds; all the Sums mentioned in this Act to be valued in
Silver at Six Shillings and Eight Pence per Ounce: And the annual Income or
Interest of the said Real and Personal Estate, together with the Fines and
Penalties paid to said Society, or recovered by them, shall be appropriated to
such Purposes as are consistent with the End and Design of the institution of
said Society, and as the Fellows thereof shall determine.

And be it further enacted, That the first Meeting of the said Medicial Society
shall be held in some convenient Place in the Town or Boston; and that Edward
Augustus Holyoke, Esquire be, and he hereby is authorized and directed to fix the
Time for holding the said Meeting, and to notify the same to the Fellows of
said Medical Society.

In the House of REPRESENTATIVES, October 30, 1781. This Bill having had three
several Readings, passed to be enacted. NATHANIEL GORHAM, Speaker.
In SENATE, November 1, 1781. This Bill having had two several Readings, passed
to be enacted. SAMUEL ADAMS, President. Approved, JOHN HANCOCK. A true Copy,
Attest, JOHN AVERY, Secretary.


ON THE CAUSES, NATURE, AND CURE, OF CONSUMPTIONS.
NAPLES, --,
YOUR account of our friend's state of health, gives me much concern; the more,
as I cannot approve the change he has made of a physician. You say, the Doctor,
under whose care he is at present, has employed his mind so entirely, in
medical researches, that he scarcely displays a grain of common sense, when the
conversation turns on any other subject; and that, although he seems
opinionative, vain, and oftentatious in his profession, and full of false and
absurd ideas, in the common affairs of life, yet he is a very able physician,
and has performed many wonderful cures. Be assured, my dear Sir, that this is
impossible; for medical skill is not like the rod of an inchanter, which may be
found accidentally, and which transfers its miraculous powers indiscriminately,
to a blockhead, or a man of sense. The number of weak, gossipping men, who have
made fortunes by this profession, do not prove the contrary. I do not say, that
men, of that kind, cannot make fortunes; I only assert, they are not the most
likely to cure diseases. An interest with the apothecaries, nurses, and a few
talkative old ladies, will enable them to do the first; but a clear
understanding, and a considerable share of natural sagacity are qualities
essentially necessary for the second, and for every business which requires
reflection. Without these, false inferences will be drawn from experience
itself; and learning will tend to confirm a man in his errors, and to render
him more completely a coxcomb.

The profession of physic is that, of all others, in which the generality of
mankind have the fewest lights, by which they can discern the abilities of its
professors; because the studies which lead to it are more out of the road of
usual education, and the practice more inveloped in technical terms and
hieroglyphical signs. But I imagine the safest criterion by which men, who have
not been bred to that profession, can form a judgment of those who have, is,
the degree of sagacity and penetration, they discover on subjects equally open
to mankind in general, and which ought to be understood by all who live in
society. You do not mention particularly what has been prescribed by either;
only, that the former physician seemed to rely almost entirely on exercise and
regimen, whereas the present flatters our friend with a speedy cure, by the
help of the Pectoral and Balsamic Medicines which he orders, in such abundance,
and which he declares are so efficacious in pulmonary consumptions.

Having lamented with you the mournful events which render the name of that
disease peculiarly alarming to you, and knowing your friendly solicitude about
Mr. --, I do not wonder at your earnest desire to know something of the nature
of a distemper with which he is threatened, and which has proved fatal to so
many of our friends. But I am surprised that you have not chosen a more
enlightened instructor, when you have so many around you. Though conscious that
I have no just claim to all the obliging expressions which your partiality to
my opinion has prompted you to make use of, yet I am too much flattered by some
of them, to refuse complying with your request. My sentiments, such as they
are, will at least have the merit of being clearly understood. I shall observe
your prohibition, not to refer you to any medical book; and shall carefully
avoid all technical terms, which you so much abominate. With regard to your
showing my Letter to any of the faculty; if you find yourself so inclined, I
have not the smallest objection; for those who have the greatest knowledge in
their profession, are best acquainted with its uncertainty, and most indulgent
to the mistakes or errors of others.

Alas, my friend! how is it possible that physicians should avoid mistakes? If
the ablest mechanic were to attempt to remedy the irregular movements of a
watch, while he remained ignorant of the structure and manner of acting of some
of the principal springs, would he not be in danger of doing harm instead of
good? Physicians are in the situation of such a mechanic; for, although it is
evident that the nerves are the organs or motion and sensation, yet their
structure is not known. Some anatomists assert they are impervious cords;
others, that they are slender tubes, containing a fluid. But what the nature of
this fluid is; whether it serves only to nourish the nerves themselves, or is
the medium by which they convey feeling and the power of motion to other parts,
is not ascertained even by those who argue for its existence; far less is it
explained in what manner ideas, formed within the brain, can, by the means of
solid cords, or by a fluid contained in tubes, communicate motion at pleasure
to the legs and arms. We are ignorant why the will, which has no influence over
the motion of an animal's heart, should find the feet obedient to her dictates;
and we can no more explain how a man can move one leg over the other by
volition, or the mere act of willing, than how he could, by the same means,
move Ossa on the top of Olympus. The one happens every moment, the other would
be considered as a miracle; but they are equally unaccountable. While parts so
infinitely essential to life are not understood, instead of being surprised
that so many diseases baffle the skill of the physician, we have more reason to
be astonished that any can be alleviated or cured by his art.

The pen of the satirist, no doubt, may be fairly aimed against the presumption
and ignorance of many individuals of this, as of every other profession; but
cannot with justice be directed against the art itself: since, in spite of the
obscurity which still involves some parts of the animal economy, many
disorders are relieved, and some of the severest and most disagreeable to which
the human body is liable, are cured with certainty by the art of medicine.

Unfortunately for mankind, and in a particular manner for the people of Great
Britain, the pulmonary consumption is not of the number.

This disease may originate from various causes:

1st. An external bruise or wound.

2d. The disease called pleurisy, including in that term an inflammation of the
lungs themselves, as well as the membrane which covers them.

3d. The bursting of some of the blood vessels of the lungs, independent of
external injury, and owing to a faulty conformation of the chest, and the
slenderness of the vessels.

4th. Certain small tumors, called tubercles, in the lungs.

The first cause I have mentioned is an external bruise or wound.

An accident of that kind happening to the lungs, is more dangerous and
difficult to cure, than when the same takes place in most other parts of the
body; because the lungs are vital organs, essentially necessary to life, and
when their motion is impaired, other animal functions are thereby injured;
because they are of an uncommonly delicate texture, in which a rupture having
once taken place, will be apt to increase; because they are in constant motion
and exposed to the access of external air, both of which circumstances are
unfavourable to the healing of wounds, and because the mass of blood
distributed to the whole body passes previously through the lungs, and
consequently the blood vessels of this organ are more numerous than those of
any other part of the body.

When we consider these peculiarities, it is natural to conclude, that every
wound of the lungs must necessarily prove mortal; but experience has taught the
contrary. Many wounds of the lungs heal of themselves, by what is called, the
first intention. The physician may prevent a fever, by ordering the patient to
lose blood in proper quantities, and he may regulate the diet; but the cure
must be left to nature, which she will perform with greater certainty, if she
is not disturbed by any of those balsams which the wounded are sometimes
directed to swallow on such occasions. But when the wound, either from
injudicious treatment, or from its size, or from the bad habit of the patient,
degenerates into an ulcer, attended with hectic symptoms, the disease must be
treated as if it had arisen from any of the other causes.

The pleurisy, or inflammation of the lungs, is a disease more frequent in cold
countries than in mild; in the spring, than in the other seasons; and more apt
to seize people of a sanguine constitution than others.

Plentiful and repeated bleedings, fomentations, blisters near the affected
past, and a cooling, diluting regimen, generally remove it, without its leaving
any bad consequence. Sometimes, by the omission of bleeding in due quantity at
the beginning and sometimes in spite of all possible care, it terminates in an
abscess, which, on bursting, may suffocate the patient; or, if the matter is
coughed up, becomes an open ulcer, and produces the disease in question.

The third cause of the pulmonary consumption above mentioned, is, a spitting
of blood, from the bursting of vessels of the lungs, independent of external
wound or bruise. People of a fair complexion, delicate skin, slender make, long
neck, and narrow chest, are more subject to this than others. Those who have a
predisposition to this complaint, by their form, are most apt to be attacked
after their full growth: women from fifteen to three-and-thirty; men two or
three years later. In Great Britain, a spitting of blood generally occurs to
those predisposed to it, in the spring, or beginning of summer, when the
weather suddenly changes from cold to excessive hot; and when the heat is
supposed to ratify the blood, before the solids are proportionably relaxed from
the contracted state they acquire during the cold of winter. When a spitting of
blood happens to a person who has actually lost brothers or sisters, or other
near relations, by the pulmonary consumption, as that circumstance gives reason
to suspect a family taint or predisposition, the case will, on that account be
more dangerous.

Violent exercise, may occasion the rupture of blood vessels in the lungs, even
in those who have no hereditary disposition to such an accident; it ought
therefore to be carefully avoided by all who have. Violent exercise in the
spring, is more dangerous than in other seasons; and, when taken at the top of
high mountains, by those who do not usually reside there, it has been
considered as more dangerous than in valleys. The sudden diminution of the
weight of the atmosphere cooperating with the exercise, renders the vessels
more apt to break. Of all things the most pernicious to people predisposed to a
spitting of blood, is, playing upon wind instruments. Previous to the spitting
of blood, some perceive an uneasiness in the chest, an oppression on the
breath, and a saltish taste in the spittle; but these symptoms are not constant.

Nothing can be more insidious than the approaches of this disease sometimes
are. The substance of the lungs, which is so full of blood vessels, is not
supplied so liberally with nerves; the lungs, therefore, may be materially
affected before danger is indicated by acute pain. And it sometimes happens,
that people of the make above described, are, in the bloom of life, and
generally in the spring of the year, seized with a slight cough, which
gradually increases without pain, soreness in the breast, difficulty of
respiration, or spitting of blood. A slow fever supervenes every night, which
remits every morning, with sweats. These symptoms augment daily; and, in spite
of early attention, and what is thought the best advice, the unsuspecting
victims gradually sink into their graves.

Those who by their make, or by the disease having in former instances appeared
in their family, are predisposed to this complaint, ought to be peculiarly
attentive in the article of diet. A spare and cooling regimen is the best. They
should avoid violent exercise, and every other exciting cause; and use the
precaution of losing blood in the spring. If their circumstances permit, they
ought to pass the cold months in a mild climate; but, if they are obliged to
remain during the winter in Great Britain, let them wear flannel next the skin,
and use every other precaution against catching colds.

The fourth cause above enumerated is, tubercles in the lungs.

The moist, foggy, and changeable weather, which prevails in Great Britain,
renders its inhabitants more liable, than those of milder and more uniform
climates, to catarrhs, rheumatisms, pleurisies, and other diseases proceeding
from obstructed perspiration. The same cause subjects the inhabitants of Great
Britain to obstructions of the glands, scrophulous complaints, and tubercles in
the substance of the lungs. The scrophulous disease is more frequent than is
generally imagined. For one person in whom it appears by swellings in the
glands below the chin, and other external marks, many have the internal glands
affected by it. This is well known to those who are accustomed to open dead
bodies. On examining the bodies of such as have died of the pulmonary
consumption, besides the open ulcers in the lungs, many little hard tumors or
tubercles are generally found; some, with matter; others, on being cut open,
discover a little blueish spot, of the size of a small lead shot. Here the
suppuration, or formation of matter, is just going to begin; and in some the
tubercle is perfectly hard, and the color whitish, throughout its whole
substance. Tubercles may remain for a considerable time in the lungs, in this
indolent state, without much inconveniency; but, when excited to inflammation
by frequent catarrhs, or other irritating causes, matter is formed, they break,
and produce an ulcer. Care and attention may prevent tubercles from
inflammation, or may prevent that from terminating in the formation of matter;
but when matter is actually formed, and the tubercle has become an abscess, no
remedy can stop its progress. It must go on till it bursts. If this happens
near any of the large air vessels, immediate suffocation may ensue; but, for
the most part, the matter is coughed up.

From the circumstances above enumerated of the delicate texture, constant
motion, and numerous blood vessels of the lungs, it is natural to imagine, that
a breach of this nature in their substance, will be still more difficult to
heal, than a wound from an external cause. So unquestionably it is; yet there
are many instances of even this kind of breach being repaired; the matter
expectorated diminishing in quantity every day, and the ulcer gradually
healing; not, surely, by the power of medicine, but by the constant disposition
and tendency which exists in nature, by inscrutable means of her own, to
restore health to the human body.

It may be proper to observe, that those persons whose formation of body
renders them most liable to a spitting of blood, have also a greater
predisposition than others to tubercles in the lungs. The disease, called the
spasmodic asthma, has been reckoned among the causes of the pulmonary
consumption. It would require a much greater degree of confidence in a man's
own judgment, than I have in mine, to assert, that this complaint has no
tendency to produce tubercles in the lungs; but I may say, with truth, that I
have often known the spasmodic asthma, in the most violent degree, attended
with the most alarming symptoms, continue to harrass the patients for a long
period of time, and at length suddenly disappear, without ever returning; the
persons who have been thus afflicted, enjoying perfect health for many years
after. It is not probable that tubercles were formed in any of these cases; and
it is certain they were not in some, whose bodies were opened after their
death, which happened from other distempers, the asthma having disappeared
several years before.

Certain eruptions of the skin, attended with fever, particularly the
smallpox, and still oftener, the measles, leave after them a foundation for
the pulmonary consumption. From which ever of the causes above enumerated this
disease takes its origin, when once an ulcer, attended with a hectic fever, is
formed in the lungs, the case is, in the highest degree, dangerous. When it
ends fatally, the symptoms are, a quick pulse, and a sensation of cold, while
the patient's skin, to the feeling of every other person, is hot; irregular
shiverings, a severe cough, expectoration of matter streaked with blood,
morning sweats, a circumscribed spot of a crimson color on the cheeks, heat of
the palms of the hands, excessive emaciation, crooking of the nails, swelling
of the legs, giddiness, delirium, soon followed by death.

These symptoms do not appear in every case. Although the emaciation is greater
in this disease than in any other, yet the appetite frequently remains strong
and unimpaired to the last; and although delirium sometimes comes before death,
yet in many cases the senses seem perfect and entire; except in one particular,
that in spite of all the foregoing symptoms, the patient often entertains the
fullest hopes of recovery to the last moment.

Would to heaven it were as easy to point out the cure, as to describe the
symptoms of a disease of such a formidable nature, and against which the powers
of medicine have been directed with such had success, that there is reason to
fear, its fatal termination has been oftener celerated than retarded by the
means employed to remove it! To particularise the drugs which have been long in
use, and have been honored with the highest encomiums for their great efficacy
in healing inward bruises, ulcers of the lungs, and confirmed consumptions,
would in many instances be pointing out what ought to be shunned, as
pernicious, and in others what ought to be neglected as futile.

Salt water, and some of the mineral springs, which are unquestionably
beneficial in scrophulous and other distempers, have been found hurtful, or at
least inefficacious, in the consumption; there is no sufficient reason to
depend on a course of these, or any medicine at present known, for preventing
or dissolving tubercles in the lungs. Mercury, which has been found so powerful
in disposing other ulcers to heal, has no good effect on ulcers of that organ;
-- though some physicians imagine it may be of service in the beginning to
dissolve tubercles, before they begin to suppurate; but as there is no absolute
evidence, during life, of indolent tubercles being formed, there can be none
that mercury cures them.

Various kinds of gums, with the natural and artificial balsams, were long
supposed to promote the healing of external wounds and ulcers, and on that
account were made the basis of a vast variety of ointments and plasters. It
was afterward imagined, that the same remedies, administered internally, would
have the same effect on internal ulcers; and of course many of those gums and
balsams were prescribed in various forms for the pulmonary consumption. The
reasoning on which the practice was established, however, seems a little
shallow, and is far from being conclusive; for although it were granted, that
these balsams contributed to the cure of wounds, when applied directly to the
part, it does not follow that they could carry their healing powers,
unimpaired, from the stomach to the lungs, through the whole process of
digestion. But more accurate surgery having made it manifest, that the
granulations which spring up to supply the loss of substance in external
wounds, and the healing or skinning over of all kinds of sores, proceeds from
no active virtue in the plasters or ointments with which they are dressed, but
is entirely the work of nature, and best performed when the mildest substances,
or even dry lint only is applied; and that heating gums, resins, and balsams,
rather retard than promote their cure; the internal use of such remedies ought
to be rejected now, on the same principles they were adopted formerly.

No kind of reasoning ought to have weight when opposed by fair experience. But
physicians have formed contrary and opposite conclusions, with respect to the
effect of the natural and artificial balsams, even when they have laid all
theory and reasoning aside, and decided on their powers from practice and
experience only. This is sufficient to prove, at least, that their efficacy is
very problematical. For my own part, after the fairest trials and the most
accurate observations, I have been able to make, I cannot say that I ever knew
them of service in any hectic complaint proceeding from an ulcer in the lungs;
and I have generally found those physicians, on whose judgment I have more
reliance than on my own, of the same opinion.

It is far from being uncommon to see a cure retarded, not to say any thing
stronger, by the means employed to hasten it; and physicians who found their
practice on theoretical reasonings, are not the only persons to whom this
misfortune may happen. Those who profess to take experience for their sole
guide, if it is not directed by candor, and enlightened by natural sagacity,
are liable to the same. A man may, for twenty years, order a medicine, which
has in every instance done a little harm, though not always so much as to
prevent nature from removing the complaint at last; and if the reputation of
this medicine should ever be attacked, he may bring his twenty years experience
in support of it. It ought to be remembered, that as often as the animal
constitution is put out of order, by accident or distemper, nature endeavors
to restore health. Happily she has many resources, and various methods of
accomplishing her purpose, and very often she succeeds best without medical
assistance. But medical assistance being given, she frequently succeeds
notwithstanding; and it sometimes happens, that both the physician and patient
are convinced, that the means which did not prevent have actually performed the
cure.

A peasant is seized with a shivering, followed by feverishness, and
accompanied with a slight cough -- he goes to bed, and excessive heat and
thirst prompt him to drink plentifully of plain water; on the second or third
day a copious sweat bursts from all his pores, and terminates the disorder. A
person of fortune is seized with the same symptoms, arising from the same
cause, and which would have been cured by the same means, in the same space of
time; but the apothecary is called, who immediately sends pectoral linctuses to
remove the cough, and afterward gives a vomit, to remove the nausea which the
linctuses have occasioned: the heat and fever augment; the physician is called;
he orders the patient to be blooded, to abate the violence of the fever, and
gives a little physic on some other account. All this prevents the natural
crisis by sweat; and the patient being further teased by draughts or powders
every two or three hours, nature cannot shake off the fever so soon by six or
seven days, as she would have done had she been left to herself. She generally
does her business at last, however; and then the physician and apothecary glory
in the happy effects of their skill, and receive the grateful thanks of their
patient, for having cured him of a dangerous fever.

Every body of common penetration, at all conversant in medical matters, must
have seen enough to convince them that the above description is not
exaggerated; but it is not to be inferred from this, that the art of medicine
is of no use to mankind. There are many diseases in which nature sinks, without
medical assistance. It is the part of the penetrating and experienced physician
to distinguish these from others, and leave it to the knavish and weak to
assume the merit of cures in cases where they know, or ought to know, that
medicine can do nothing.

Some physicians, who have abandoned the other resins and gums, as useless or
hurtful in hectic complaints, still adhere to myrrh as a beneficial medicine;
but from what I can learn, the cases in which this gum has been thought
serviceable, are hectic complaints, from debility, in consequence of excessive
evacuations of various kinds, and not proceeding from ulcerated lungs. After it
is fully established, that myrrh is of use in such instances, it will still be
worthy of investigation, whether it is of more or less than Jesuits bark. I
have repeatedly mentioned blood-letting, and a spare, diluting regimen, as the
most powerful means of preventing and curing all affections of the lungs that
depend on inflammation. In the case of external wounds, or bruises of the
lungs, this method facilitates the immediate cure by the first intention. It is
the chief thing to be depended on for the cure of pleurisies, and it is often
owing to a neglect, or too sparing an use of this evacuation, that the
complaint terminates in an abscess. In people predisposed by the form of their
bodies, or the nature of their constitutions, to a spitting of blood, it may
prevent the turgid vessels from bursting; and in those who have tubercles in
the lungs, it is of the greatest utility, by preventing those tumors from
inflaming, and becoming ulcers; but after the ulcers are actually formed, I
have great doubts with regard to the propriety of attempting a cure by repeated
bleedings, even in small quantities. This method has been often tried; but I
fear the success with which it has been attended, gives no encouragement to
continue the practice. That symptoms may be such, in every period of this
disease, as to require this evacuation, is not to be denied; but there is a
great difference in the application of what is considered as an occasional
palliative, and that from which we expect a radical cure. In the one case, it
will only be used when some particular symptom strongly urges; in the other, it
will be used at stated intervals, whether the symptoms press or not; and may
tend to weaken the already debilitated patient, without our having the
consolation of knowing, with certainty, that it has had any other effect.

Blisters do not weaken so much; they are of undoubted use in pleurisies;
perhaps, by exciting external inflammation, they may contribute to draw off the
inflammatory disposition within the breast: perhaps -- But in whatever way they
act, I imagine I have frequently seen blisters and setons, particularly the
latter, of considerable service, even after the symptoms indicated the
existence of an ulcer in the lungs.

As for the numerous forms of electuaries, lohochs, and linctuses, composed of
oils, gums, and syrups, and by the courtesy of dispensatory writers called
pectoral; I am convinced they are of no manner of service in this complaint,
and seldom have any other effect than that of loading the stomach, and
impairing the digestion of salutary food. So far from being of any permanent
service, to the disease, they cannot be depended on for giving even a temporary
relief to the cough; when that symptom becomes troublesome, gentle opiates will
be found the best palliatives. Some practitioners object to these medicines, on
a supposition that they check expectoration; but they only seem to have this
effect, by lulling the irritation to cough; the same quantity will be
expectorated in the morning, after the influence of the opiate is over. It is
surely better that the matter should accumulate, and the patient spit it up at
once, than allow him to be kept from rest, and teased with coughing and
spitting through the whole night. These palliatives, however, are to be managed
with great caution; never exhibited while the patient enjoys a tolerable share
of natural rest. Small doses should be given at first, and not increased
without absolute necessity. Exhibited in this manner, they cannot do harm; and
those who reject the assistance of a class of medicines, which afford ease and
tranquillity in the most deplorable state of this disease, ought to give better
proofs than have hitherto appeared, that they are able to procure their
patients more valuable and lasting comforts than those they deprive them of.

The known efficacy of the Peruvian bark, in many distempers, especially in
intermittent fevers; the remission of the symptoms, which happens regularly
every day at a particular stage of the pulmonary consumption, and in some
degree gives it the appearance of an intermittent, joined to the failure of all
other remedies, prompted physicians to make trial of that noble medicine in
this disease. In consequence of these trials, the bark is now pretty generally
acknowledged to be serviceable in hectical complaints, proceeding from
debility, and other causes, exclusive of ulcerated lungs; but when the disease
proceeds from this cause, the bark is supposed, by some very respectable
physicians, always to do harm. I am most clearly of the first opinion, and
perhaps it would not become me to dispute the second. It may be permitted,
however, to observe, that the most discerning practitioners may be led into a
notion that a very safe medicine does harm, when it is exhibited at the worst
stage of a disease, in which hardly any medicine whatever has been found to do
good. In every stage of this disease, elixir of vitriol may be used. It is a
pleasant and safe medicine, but particularly efficacious when the patient is
troubled with wasting sweats.

Having, in obedience to your request, delivered my sentiments freely, you will
perceive, that, besides the objections already mentioned to the person under
whose care our friend is at present, I cannot approve of his being directed to
take so many drugs, or of his being detained in town, at a season when he may
enjoy, in the country, what is preferable to all medicine; I mean air,
exercise, and, let me even add, diet.

Had I known of our friend's complaints earlier, I should have advised him to
have met the advancing spring in the South of France; but at the season in
which you will receive this letter, the moderate warmth and refreshing verdure
of England, are preferable to the sultry heats and scorched fields of the
South. From the view I have of his complaints, I can have no hesitation in
advising you to endeavor to prevail on him to quit his drugs, and to leave
London without delay. Since he bears riding on horseback so well, let him enjoy
that exercise in an atmosphere freed from the smoke of the town, and
impregnated with the flavor of rising plants and green herbage; a flavor
which may with more truth be called pectoral, than any of the heating resins,
or loathsome oils, on which that term has been prostituted. Let him pass the
summer in drinking the waters, and riding around the environs of Bristol. It
will be easy for him to find a house in the free air of the country, at some
distance from that town, and it will be of use to have an additional reason for
rising early, and riding every morning. It is of the greatest importance that
he continue that exercise every day that the weather will permit: a little
cloudiness of the sky should not frighten him from it; there is no danger of
catching cold during the continuation of that movement which assists digestion,
promotes the determination of blood from the lungs to the surface of the body,
and is more salutary in the morning than after dinner.

With respect to diet, he should carefully observe the important rule of taking
food frequently, in small quantities, and never making a full meal; that the
digestive organs may not be overpowered, or the vessels charged with too large
a quantity of chyle at a time; which never fails to bring on oppressive
breathing, and augments the fever and flushing, which in some degree succeeds
every repast.

Since all kinds of milk are found to disagree with his constitution, that
nourishment, which is in general so well adapted to similar complaints, must be
omitted, and light broths, with vegetable food, particularly of the farinaceous
kind, substituted in (...) place.

Acids, especially the (...) acid of vegetables, are remarkably agreeable and
refreshing to all who labor under the heat, oppression and langour, which
accompany hectic complaints. It is surprising what a quantity of the juice of
lemons the constitution will bear, without any inconveniency. when it is
accustomed to it by degrees; and in those cases where it does not occasion
pains in the stomach and bowels, or other immediate inconveniences, it has
been thought to have a good effect in abating the force of the hectic fever.

I have met with two cases, since I have been last abroad, in both of which
there seemed to be a quicker recovery than I ever saw, from the same symptoms.
The first was that of a young lady, of about seventeen years of age, and
apparently of a very healthy constitution. In bad weather, during the spring,
she caught cold: this being neglected in the beginning, gradually grew worse.
When physicians were at length consulted, their prescriptions seemed to have as
bad an effect as her own neglect. By the middle of summer her cough was
incessant, accompanied with hectic fever and flushings, irregular shiverings,
morning sweats, emaciation, expectoration of purulent phlegm streaked with
blood, and every indication of an open ulcer in the lungs. In this desperate
state she was carried from the town to a finely situated village in
Switzerland, where, for several months, she lived in the middle of a vineyard,
on ripe grapes and bread. She had been directed to a milk and vegetable diet in
general. Her own taste inclined her to the grapes, which she continued, on
finding, that, with this diet only, she was less languid, and of a more natural
coolness, and that the cough, fever, and all the other symptoms gradually
abated. She seemed to be brought from the jaws of death by the change of air,
and this regimen only; and she returned to her own home in high spirits, and
with the look and vigor of health. The ensuing winter, after being heated with
dancing at the house of a friend, she walked home in a cold night? the cough,
spitting of blood, and other symptoms immediately returned, and she died three
months after.

In the other case, there was not such a degree of fever, but there was an
expectoration of matter, frequently streaked with blood, and evident signs of
(...) in the (...). The p^^^^^ who labored under these symptoms, had tried the
usual remedies of pectorals, pills, linctuses, etc. with the usual success. He
grew daily worse. He had formerly found much relief from bleeding, but had left
it off for many months, on a supposition that it had lost all effect; and he
had allowed an issue to be healed, on the same supposition; though he still
persevered in a milk regimen. I mentioned to him the case of the young lady, as
it is above recited. He immediately took the resolution to confine himself to
bread and grapes for almost his only food. I advised him at the same time to
have the issue opened, and to continue that drain for some time; but this he
did not comply with, He forsook, however, the town for the country, and passed
as much of the morning on horseback, as he could bear without fatigue. He soon
was able to bear more; and after about three weeks or a month, his cough had
greatly abated. When he had persisted in this regimen between two and three
months, he had very little cough; and what he spit up was pure phlegm, unmixed
with blood or matter. He has now been well above a year; and although I
understand that he occasionally takes animal food, he has hitherto felt no
inconveniency from it. He passed the second autumn, as he had done the first,
at a house in the country, surrounded with vineyards. The greater part of his
food consisted of ripe grapes and bread. With such a diet he had not occasion
for much drink of any kind; what he used was simple water, and he made an ample
provision of grapes for the succeeding winter.

Though I have no idea that there is any specific virtue in grapes, for the
cure of the pulmonary consumption, or that they are greatly preferable to some
other cooling, sub-acid, mild fruit, equally agreeable to the taste, provided
any such can be found; yet I thought it right to particularize what was used on
those two occasions; leaving it to others to determine, what snare of the happy
consequences I have enumerated were owing to the change of air, how much may
have flowed from the exercise, how much from the regimen, and whether there is
reason to think, that the favorable turn in both cases depended on other
circumstances, unobserved by me.

I have now, my dear Sir, complied with your request; and although I have
endeavored to avoid technical verbosity, and all unnecessary detail, yet I
find my letter has swelled to a greater size than I expected. I shall be
exceedingly happy to hear that any hint I have given has been serviceable to
our friend. If the cough should still continue, after he has passed two or
three months at Bristol, I imagine the most effectual thing he can do, will be,
to take a voyage to this place; he will by that means escape the severity of a
British winter. The voyage itself will be of service, and at the end of it he
will have the benefit of the mild air of the Campag a Felice, be refreshed and
nourished by the finest grapes, and, when tired of riding, he will have
continual opportunities of sailing in this charming bay.

THE END.
WILLIAM GREEN, AT HIS SHOP IN CORNHILL, HAS FOR SALE, (Well Printed, and
neatly Bound) the following NEW PUBLICATIONS:

FRIENDSHIP in DEATH: In Twenty Letters from the Dead to the Living. To which
are added, Moral and Entertaining Letters, in Prose and Verse. In Three Parts.
By Mrs. ELISABETH ROW.

LETTERS on the Improvement of the FEMALE MIND. By Mrs. CHAPONE.

* To deserve the Admiration, and merit the Respect of the Virtuous and Good,
is certainly the Wish of every young Lady of Sentiment, and which Mrs. CHAPONE,
in her excellent Letters, inculcates in the wannest Manner. -- Happy the Young
Ladies who follow her Instructions; they will be the Pride and Delight of their
Families, and an Ornament to Society.

ADDRESSES to YOUNG MEN. By JAMES FORDYCE, D. D. On the Respect due to Young
Men. On the Reverence which Young Men owe to themselves. On Honor as a
Principle. On Honor as a Reward. On the Desire of Praise. On Love. On
Friendship. On a Manly Spirit, as opposed to Effeminacy. On a Manly Spirit, as
opposed to Cowardice. On the Beauty of Humility. On the State of the Times,
considered as a Motive to Early Piety.


ALSO, A very Elegant Collection of the most Modern BOOKS, by the best Authors
in the English Language.

In the Press, and Speedily will be Published, THE ART OF SPEAKING.

CONTAINING,

I. An Essay, in which are given Rules for expressing properly the principal
Passions and Humors, which occur in Reading or public Speaking.

II. Lessons taken from the Ancients and Moderns, (with Additions and
Alterations where thought useful) exhibiting a Variety of Matter for Practice
-- the emphatical Words printed in Italics, with Notes of Direction referring
to the Essay.

To which are added,

A Table of the Lessons, and an Index of the various Passions and Humors in
the Essay and Lessons.

By Mr. BURGH, Author of the Dignity of Human Nature, and the Political
Disquisitions.


