AN ORATION DELIVERED March 5th, 1782.

AN ORATION DELIVERED MARCH 5th, 1782. AT THE REQUEST of the INHABITANTS OF THE
TOWN OF BOSTON; TO COMMEMORATE the BLOODY TRAGEDY OF THE FIFTH of MARCH, 1770.

By GEORGE RICHARDS MINOT.

Quid tantum insano juvat indulgere dolori,
-- non haec sine numine divum
Eveniunt. --
VIRG. AEN. 2d. 776. Inde genus durum sumus, experiensque laborum;
Et documenta damus, qua simus origin nati.
OVID. METAM. lib. 1. 414. BOSTON: Printed by B. EDES and SONS, By Order of the
Town of BOSTON. 1782.

At a Meeting of the Freeholders and other Inhabitants of the Town of Boston,
duly qualified and legally warned in public Town-Meeting assembled at Faneuil-
Hall, on Tuesday the 5th of March, A. D. 1782.
On a Motion made, Voted
(...) John Brown, Nation Frazier, William Cooper, John (...), John Scollay,
and Ezekiel Price, Esquires (...), and hereby are appointed a Committee to wait
upon Mr. George Richards Minot, and in the Name of the Town to thank him for
the spirited and elegant Oration delivered by him at their Request, in
Commemoration of the horrid Massacre perpetrated on the Evening of the 5th of
March, 1770, -- by a Party of Soldiers of the 9th Regiment, under the Command
of Capt. Thomas ^^^^ton; and to request of him a Copy thereof for the Press.

Attest, William Cooper, Town Clerk.

GENTLEMEN,
I AM sensible that the following Oration is not without the Incorrectness of a
hasty Performance; and I submit it to the Press, with the fullest Confidence,
that the very short Time allowed me for preparing it, will be considered as an
additional Claim to the Reader's Indulgence.

I am, with the greatest Respect, Gentlemen, your most obliged, and most humble
Servant, GEORGE RICHARDS MINOT.
Boston, March 5th, 1782.
AN ORATION.
Fathers, Friends, and Fellow-Citizens,
WHEN I consider the important occasion from which this anniversary derives its
origin, and the respectable characters that have exerted themselves to
perpetuate its history, I confess there is an unusual security in my feelings;
since no mistaken effort of mine can injure an institution, founded on so
memorable an (...) supported by names so justly claiming the applause of
posterity.

WHILE I rely then, upon that honesty of intention, which is itself the best
apology for its errors, permit me to employ the present hour, which your united
voices have annually made sacred to the commemoration of our country's wrongs,
in recapitulating the most injurious of her sufferings, among which that on the
tragical fifth of March is by no means the least, and in recounting the
blessings which have followed from measures as really disgraceful to those who
adopted them, as they were intentionally destructive to those against whom they
were levelled.

A NATION falling from those great principles of justice and virtue which had
made her respectable; subverting the boasted improvements of her arts to the
savage purposes of revenge; with venality and corruption entrenched on her
cabinet; affords a spectacle too serious for the amusement of the beholder. He
turns for relief to the annals of those people whose masculine virtues have
obstinately, will he not say wisely? resisted the refinement of a civilized
world. But from the misfortunes of such a nation much is to be learned. As she
is hurried onwards by the vortex of that immeasurable gulf in which empires
sink to rise no more, let her serve us as a signal to avoid the first impulse
of its resistless tide.

TO trace Great Britain through the whole progress of her ambition in this
country, would be to step back to a very early period: for, long before she
avowed her system of colonial slavery in the Stamp Act, the liberties of our
ancestors had endured the most alarming innovations from her throne. Without
cause and without notice she had invalidated their charters; laid impositions
upon their trade; attempted a most dangerous influence over their internal
government, by endeavoring to make it independent of the people; -- and all
this with the same confidence as though her policy and foresight, and not her
persecutions, had settled them on this side the Atlantic.

BUT the full display of her despotic policy was reserved to add accumulated
disgrace to the inglorious reign of the Third George. Then, intoxicated with
the idea of taxing America, she slumbered upon the tottering pillars of her own
constitution; the hand of slavery rocked her at she lied on the giddy height;
falsehood gilded her visions and bound her senses with the enchantment of
success; while her blind ambition alone remained awake, to misdirect the
ordinary assistance of fortune, and to make her fall equally certain and
complete.

THE genius of Britain once interred, the first spectre which shot from its
tomb was the Stamp Act. This promulgation of a scheme so repugnant to the
fundamental principles of the late English constitution, announced the fall,
but did not obliterate the memory of that much respected system in this
country. America saw the act bore not a single feature of its reputed parent,
and having detected its illigitimacy, effectually resisted its operation. But,
as though conviction must ever be productive of obstinacy, Britain desisted not
to rend in pieces the charters of her colonies, which served to remind her of
the violence she committed on her own. Her administration affecting to realize
the fables For some of these fanciful misrepresentations see a vindication of
the town of Boston. from many false and malicious aspersious contained in
certain letters written by Governor Bernard and others, published by order of
the town, 1769.
of its minions whose very fears were as subservient to its purposes as their
hopes were dependant on its venality, and making pretense of trespasses which,
if real, the laws were open to punish, unmasked its true designs, by quartering
an armed force in this metropolis in a time of peace.

WHERE was the citizen whose indignation did not flush at this undisguised
attack on his liberties? the soldiers pride too grew sanguinary at the idea of
contempt from the people he himself had been taught to despise; and, as though
Heaven designed to effect its greatest purposes by the sacrifice of what men
conceive to be the dearest objects of its guardianship, the lives and rights of
cizens were delivered over to the scourge of military rancour.

See Abbe Reynal's hist. American revolution, page 65.
VENERABLE patrons of freedom, wherever your country may lie! boast not that
the reason and speculative truths of this our common cause armed an extensive
world in support of its justice. Turn to the tragedy we commemorate as
imprinted by the bloody hand of the tyrant, and view the highest outrage his
power could commit, or the forbearance of humanity (...). There (...) of
slaughtered citizens were offered at the ^^^ine of cursed (...). -- What can we
add to their memories through whose wounds their country bled; whose names are
handed round the globe with the great occasion on which they fell; and whose
tomb shall ever stand a basis to the (...) pillar in the temple of freedom?
Heaven has avenged their fall by realising the prophecy of the indignant
American, as he vented his anguish over their rankling blood. These are indeed
my country's wounds, (...)
but oh! said he, the deep and tremendous restitutions are at hand; I see them
with a prophetic eye this moment before me. Horrors shall be repaid with
accumulation of horror. The wounds in America shall be succeeded by
deep-mouthed gashes in the heart of Britain: The chain of solemn consequences
is now advancing. Yet, yet my friends, a little while, and the poor, forlorn
One, who has fought and fallen at the gate of her proper habitation for
freedom, for the common privileges of life, for all the sweet and binding
principles in humanity, for father, son and brother, for the cradled infant,
the wailing widow, and the weeping maid; yet, yet a little while and she shall
find an avenger. Indignant nations shall arm in her defense. Thrones and
principalities shall make her cause their own, and the fountains of blood that
have run from her exhausted veins shall be answered by a yet fuller measure of
the horrible effusion -- blood for blood and desolation for desolation; O my
injured country! my massacred America!

MELANCHOLY scene! the fatal, but we trust the last effect in our country of a
standing army quartered in populous cities in a time of peace.

BRITAIN having thus violated the greatest law nations or individuals can be
held by, to use the language of the ancients, threw a veil over the altars of
her gods whom she was too haughty to appease. Would to heaven, for her sake, we
too had a veil to hide from the eye of justice, the ashes of our desolated
towns, and the tracts which her ravages have imprinted through every quarter of
our once peaceful land.

IF (...) crimes and punishments, p. 1^
"every act of authority of one person over another for which there is not an
absolute necessity is tyrannical," and if tyranny justifies resistance, to have
remained inactive under these injuries had been a kind of political stoicism,
equally inconsistent with the laws of nature and of society. On such principles
arose the memorable declaration of July 1776. A declaration which at once gave
life and freedom to a nation; dissolved a monopoly unnatural as unjust; and
extended the embraces of our country to the universe. A declaration which
heaven has since ratified by the successful event of her arms. For, when we
consider the number of her victories; the disadvantages under which they were
obtained; with the chain of important consequences which depended upon the very
moment of their decision; who but must acknowledge, after allowing to our
military actors every thing heroism can claim, that there appeared peculiar
marks of more than human assistance? The surrender of entire armies to a power
which they affected to look upon rather as an object of their chains than of
their swords, was a degree of glory no enemy that ever passed the Roman yoke
afforded to that republic. Hapless Britain! for even those whom you injure must
pity you, how has fortune added acrimony to her fickleness, in choosing for a
scene of your disgrace that climate where, in a late war, she so loudly vaunted
the invincibility of your arms!

AMERICA once unfettered, nobly relied upon the uprightness of her cause and
the bravery of her sons. But, as though the virtues of one crown were to
apologize for the merciless cruelty of another, a monarch, equally wise in
council as brilliant and powerful in arms, met her in an alliance which must
ever enliven her gratitude; exalt the honor of France; and, we trust too,
promote the interest of both.

AMONG the advantages which have arisen from these great events to the people
of Massachusetts, that of securing their lives, their liberties, and property,
the great object of all civil government, by a constitution of their own
framing, is not to be accounted the least. Dismembered from a government, which
had long stood by the exactest balance of its powers even against the
corruption of its ministers, they found themselves accustomed to principles,
which age had stamped with authority, and patriots sealed with their blood. The
cause of their separation had taught them the avenues through which despotism
insinuates itself into the community, and pointed out the means of excluding
it. Under these circumstances they produced a system which, we trust,
experience will evince to be an improvement Is it not so in the equality of
representation and mode of election*
upon the best mankind have hitherto admired. The quick return of all delegated
power to the people from whom it is made to spring, and the check which each
part of the government has upon the excesses of the other, seem to warrant us
in placing on it all the confidence human laws can deserve. But,

LET us not trust to laws: an uncorrupted people can exist without them; a
corrupted people cannot long exist with them, or any other human assistance.
They are remedies which at best always disclose and confess our evils. The body
politic once distempered, they may indeed be used as a crutch to support it
awhile, but they can never heal it. Rome, when her bravery conquered the
neighboring nations, and united them to her own empire, was free from all
danger within, because her armies being urged on by a love for their country
would as readily suppress an internal as an external enemy. In those times she
made no scruple to throw out her kings who had abused their power. But when her
subjects fought not for the advantage of the Commonwealth; when they thronged
to the Asiatic wars for the spoils they produced, and preferred prostituting
the rights of citizenship upon any barbarian that demanded them, to meeting him
in the field for their support; then Rome grew too modest to accept from the
hands of a dictator those rights which she ought to have impaled him for daring
to invade. No alteration in her laws merely, could have effected this. Had she
remained virtuous, she might as well have expelled her dictators as her kings.
But what laws can save a people who for the very purpose of enslaving
themselves, choose to consider them rather as councils which they may accept or
refuse, than as precepts which they are bound to obey? A conscience more
serupulous than it is probable Sylla ever had, would be apt to imagine this
general disposition of the people wiped away the guilt of enslaving them from
any hand that effect'd it. If in any case, it is in this that we may apply the
maxim volenti non fit injuria.
with such a people they must ever want a sanction and be contemned. -- Virtue
in a republic is a most simple thing; it is a love for the republic; it is a
sensation, and not a consequence of acquired knowledge: a sensation that may be
felt by the meanest as well as by the highest person in the state.

Spirit of laws, book 5th. chap. 2d.


Virtue and long life seem to be as intimately allied in the political as in
the moral world: she is the guard which providence has set at the gate of
freedom.

TRUE it is when the nature and principles of a government are pure, we have a
right to suppose it as the farthest possible distance from falling. But when we
consider that those countries The politic Greeks who lived under a popular
government, knew no other support but virtue. The modern inhabitants of that
country are entirely taken up with (...), and luxury.

Spirit of laws, b 3d. c 3d.


in which the wisest institutions of republican governments have been
established, now exhibit the strongest instances of apostasy, we cannot but see
the necessity of vigilance. Commerce, which makes perhaps, the greatest
distinction between the old world and the modern, having raised new objects for
our curiosity, habitual indulgence has at length made them necessary to our
infirmities. Thus effeminated, can we hope to exceed the rigor of their
principles who even forbad the mentioning of a foreign custom, and whose
sumptuary laws are held up in our age as objects of astonishment? Such nations
have mouldered away an uncontrovertable proof, that the best constructed human
governments, like the human body, tend to corruption; but as with that too,
there are not wanting remedies to procrastinate their final decay.

AMONG the causes of their fall there are none more common or less natural than
that of their own strength. Continual ware making a military force necessary,
the habit of conquest once acquired and other objects being wanting, history is
not without For a complete collection of these. I beg leave to refer to the 3d
book of the political disquisitions.
instances of its turning itself inwards, and knawing as it were, upon its own
bowels. Happy are we in the frequent change of our soldiery. The design of
society being to protect the week against the more powerful, whatever tends to
taking away the distinction between them, and to putting all its members upon
the same level, must be consonant to its first principles. This was an object
with the old republics; Rome obliged her citizens to serve in the field ten
years, between the age of thirteen years and forty seven.

Vid. Reflections on the rise and sell of the Romans Emp. c. 10, last (...).
This seems to be the best antidote against such an evil. It prevents that
lethargy which would be a symptom of death in the citizen at home; and checks
that immoderation in the soldier which is apt to mislead his virtues in the
field. By this exchange of their qualities they mutually warrant happiness to
each other and freedom to their country.

AMERICA once guarded against herself, what has she to fear? Her natural
situation may well inspire her with confidence. Her rocks and her mountains are
the chosen temples of liberty. The extent of her climate, and the variety of
its produce, throw the means of her greatness into her own hands, and insure
her the traffic of the world. Navies shall launch from her forests, and her
bosom be found stored with the most precious treasures of nature. May the
industry of her people be a still surer pledge of her wealth. -- The union of
her states too is founded upon the most durable principles: the similarity of
the manners, religion and laws of their inhabitants, must ever support the
measure their common injuries originated. Her government, while it is
restrained from violating the rights of the subject, is not disarmed against
the public foe.

COULD Junius Brutus and his colleagues have beheld her republic erecting
itself on the dijointed neck of tyranny, how would they have wreathed a laurel
for her temple as eternal as their own memories! America! fairest copy of such
great originals! be virtuous, and thy reign shall be as happy as durable, and
as durable as the pillars of the world you have enfranchised.

FINIS.

