SALVATION FOR ALL MEN, Put out of ALL DISPUTE.

By TIMOTHY ALLEN, A. M. and V. D. M. Granville, Massachusetts.

Did I not believe absolute Predestination, I could not believe a Providence;
for it would be most absurd to suppose, that a Being of infinite Wisdom could
act without a Plan: for which Plan, Predestination is only another Name.

King WILLIAM's Ans. to Bish. BURNET. Topl. on P^ed. p. 11. "Si non credis, non
tibi passus est Christus."

Ambrose. "My Counsel shall stand, and I will do all my Pleasure."

Isaiah XLVI. 10. HARTFORD: Printed by NATHANIEL PATTEN, a few Rods North of
the Courthouse.

The Reader is desired to correct the following Escapes of the Press, viz.
Page. Line. read 3. 19. sinful lassitude. do. 20. a colon, after preface, 4.
6. lift up a standard. do. 19. world are come. 5. 6. gross error. do. 21. and
so tend. 7. 5. has wrested. do. 6. numerous avocations. do. 4. sm. bot. every
high conceit. 9. 16. used even. 10. 7. sense of the text in question. 13. 6.
sm. bot. semicolon, after God. 15. 11. the whole context. do. 12. sm. bot. text
is sooteer. do. 2. sm. bot. Scultetus observes in his evan. Exe^. 16. 10. and
11. we believe. do. 8. fm. bot. world is Kosmos. do. 4. sm. bot. Critic. Sac.
17. 12. it means only. do. 13. it is used with. do. 15. peri olou. do. 8. sm.
bot. expressly excludes himself. 18. 17. fm. bot. will keep thee. do. 8. and 5.
f. b. wondered. do. 3. fm. bot. then, by drawing. 20. 19. in this text. do. 9.
sm. bot. things in heaven. do. 2. fm. bot. ana Kephelaiosasthai. do. 1. sm.
bot. ZANCHY. 21. 1. BEZA. 23. 7. so that as all. 24. 11. sm. bot. and CHAMIER.
25. 10. sm. bot. Codex Fatidicus 28. 16. signify absolute. 29. 12. alla
enoch^r. ^0. 14. sm. bot. in eterno suo. 33. 16. eis tou Topon. 34. 7. Chasma
aflerigmenon. 39. 9. on the supposition. do. 4. sm. bot. it is effected. 42. 20
indicative of the same. 43. 20. there is no need. 44. 1. and 2. the wages of
sin is death. do. 15. and then his own. 46. 10. impends them still. do. 19. and
20. always suffixed to. 48. 13. in this text. do. 8. sm. bot. of its being. 52.
12. sm. bot. infallibly. 53. 16. men n^ 55. 14. shake a^

EPISTLE To all such Readers as are not so far possessed by the stupifying
Doctrine, of SALTATION FOR ALL MEN, as to be quite insensible of the Nature and
Importance of SCRIPTURAL EVIDENCE.
THE Author of the following Tract, has lately seen an anonymous pamphlet,
entitled, SALVATION FOR ALL MEN. In which, though the author kept himself
behind the curtain, he ventured to name several of his favorite authors, and of
them he gives great assurance to the public, that they were skilful demagogues,
and worthy of undoubted confidence. And we must be very skeptical if we don't
consider this publisher, as their cordial devotee. He had also seen a serious
answer to that nameless pamphlet, done by the venerable Dr. Mather. Also a
printed letter to the doctor, in which the author appears to display HIMSELF.
The author of this piece has also been favored with another reply to the above
nameless pamphlet; styled THE DOCTRINE OF FUTURE PUNISHMENT ILLUSTRATED. And
was agreeably stimulated by its kind, but just reproof of "sinful latitude, and
spiritual sleep." p. 4. Preface addressed to all who see gross attacks made on
the revealed system, profess honor for it, and yet with MEROZ of old, come no
forth to the help of the Lord, against the mighty. For though nothing great,
has been exhibited in the last attack, except the unbelief, and daring front,
which it indicates. Yet as all opposition to the bible, is patronized by the
prince of darkness; so it becomes all who disavow his dominion, to take the
alarm, and beat to arms. The leaders of this attack boast of antiquity; yet
they seem cautious of the true original, which we have from authority quite
indisputable. Genesis iii. 4, in these words "ye shall not surely die." They boast
also of the number and importance of their abettors; but they do not care to
speak out, and say "our name is Legion." And yet all who tremble at the word of
the Lord, consider them as acting the legionary part, and executing the import
of that early delusion: no, no, "ye shall not surely die." But all may be
admonished, that this flattery, is not less malignent, for making its
appearance again, at so late a period: nor its circumvention, less certain; or
its tragical tendency less tremendous in its nature, than at first. But the
reigning Lord of the world, has pleged himself "to bruise the serpents head.
And he never suffers this first opposer of his designs, and corruptor of his
truth to prevail, any farther than he both knows how, and is inflexibly
determined, to terminate in the accomplishment of his purpose. For in defiance
of all opposition, "he will do all his pleasure, and nothing shall stay his
hand." Yea, though "the enemy come in like a flood," he will lift up a hundred
against him. Isaia lix. 19. This therefore gives strong consolation to all who
tremble for the ark of God, at this day. He knew the council of the Syrians in
their bedchamber. He heard the reproachful words of SENACHERIB, against the
living God. And he dares all opposition still, when he says "associate
yourselves, O ye people, and ye shall be broken in pieces; and give ear, all ye
of far countries: gird yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces; gird
yourselves, and ye shall be broken in pieces. Take council, and it shall come
to naught; speak the word, and it shall not stand: for God is with us." Isaia
viii. 9, 10. Now all these things are written for our admonition, upon whom the
ends of the world are to come. I. Co^. x. 11. And the^e are mighty swasives to
induce all, who with purpose of heart choose to serve the Lord, and to whom his
word is precious, to attend to it, confide in it, and do it unusual honors, in
this day of rebuke and blasphemy: viz.

1. When the words of many in MALACHI's time, were stout against the Lord: and
they stood upon their vindication, insisting on it, that they have reason to
allege against divine ordinations; and counted the proud who did so, the happy
men; and even celebrated and extolled those who boldly wrought wickedness, and
tempted God. Mal. iii. 13, 14, 15. Even then, those who feared the Lord, did
openly speak, appear, and act in testimony for him. And it pleased the Lord, he
hearkened and heard their testimonies, and kept a memorial thereof in their
favor, in his book of remembrence. V. 16.

2. He will render to every man according to his deeds: so those who by
constant patience in doing good, exert themselves in seeking the honor and
glory of God, and in maintaining the honor of his holy word, he will render
eternal life. Which to all who contentiously oppose his revealed nature and
will, and so do not obey the truth; but actually obey righteousness, in respect
to sentiment, profession and practice, contrary to the establishment of his
holy word: to every soul of them "he will render indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish." Romans ii. 6, -- 9.

3. Another motive on all such as dearly love God's law, to espouse its
quarrel, in such a day of insult upon it, as we now behold is; there is a
natural connection among heresies; one gross war induces many: and when the
flood gate is drawn, if it is not speedily shut down, an inundation may follow.
The perfect connection and uniformity of the divine system is such, that an
avowed opposition to one branch of it, infers a strong necessity of denying all
the rest. Put nomo repent fit pessimus. Heriticks don't arrive at their full
growth suddenly. The shocking heresy of this day, begun without any sensible
deviation from the truth of God: viz. In avowing the grace of salvation, to be
"free grace." Which is the doctrine of God. But the ringleader of falsehood
always did, and always will employ his subtilty and power to suppress, or
corrupt the purity of this doctrine; he well knew, if he could induce his
omissaries to avow, and maintain the notion of salvation for all men, and put
it to the account of "free grace;" it would be a corruption of that doctrine,
and so stand to its final suppression. Both as it must introduce various other
errors, of the same tendency; and as its nature, being unsupportable from the
scriptures, is to discredit, and so to extirpate that radical principle of
Christianity. The doctrine of free grace, in the justification, and salvation
of sinners, according to the bible, is the eyesore of hell, as well as the
object of enmity to all wicked hearts. There is an assential difference between
the free grace of the bible, and the universal grace, now proclaimed. The
former supposes moral ruin; the latter, human existence. The former proceeds
on the merit of atonement, according to the letter of the bible; the latter on
such as men please to assign for it. The former really makes new creatures; the
latter has the word of men to make happy ones. The former is by God himself
restrained to the seed of ABRAHAM; the latter, in defiance of the word of God,
is extended to all the seed of fallen ADAM. The former powerfully cultivates
the fear of God, and true holiness; the latter evades both, and invites all
licenciousness.

Besides, This doctrine of universal salvation, necessarily excludes that most
merciful doctrine of gracious election; which is essentially necessary to the
certainty of salvation for any at all. For if salvation is certain to any, it
must be in consequence of an unfrustrable purpose in God. And this, to such as
cant deserve it, must be the effect of mere grace. So that their salvation is
wholly owing to election of grace. Romans xi. 5. They are chosen in Christ,
according to the good pleasure of his will. Ephesians. i. 3, 4, 5. Even the whole
system of the gospel is founded in the doctrine of election by mere grace. But
the notion of universal salvation, both excludes this doctrine; and therein the
first principle of the christian system. And yet this is not all, for if
election is excluded, the absolute sovereignty of God is also excluded. And his
claim to do what he will with his own, is also vacated. And of course, there is
no certain monument of his inflexible righteousness. On this occasion every
reader is desired to attend carefully to the bible, on these points? and for
his help, to re^d heartily what the very judicious Mr. E^ISHA COALS, Mr. COOPER
of Boston, and Mr. AUGUSTUS TOPLADY, Vicar of Bro^d Hembury, Devon; and
Chaplain to LORD HOLLAND; have written on these points. Whose evidences for the
truth of them were never ene^vated, nor ever will be. And besides all the above
aberrations from the infallable standard; the free will of man, as the
immediate spring and reason of his salvation, must again be attested. And the
possibilty of repentance in hell, or of final salvation without it, must be
p^imed (...) us. Cretat ille quem Deus dem^nta^. Or, which none can be ^eve,
till bereft of understanding. Nay the old doctrine of purgatory must be
submitted to; and reason is as good, to submit to all the rest of that system
The reply above mentioned has a pertinent remark (...) the case of those, who
for obvious reasons, are assigned to a temporary damnation, by the universal
device, and then to be released and admitted to glory. when they have suffered
equal to their sin. P. 25. It Is of this tenor, viz Then they are their own
redeemers; they have satisfied divine justice by suffering, and so are not
obliged to christianity at all, for their salvation. And if they take
possession in their own right, they must hold it so forever. Consequently their
songs of praise must be to themselves, not redeeming love. Whereas we know, for
certainty, that the song of all in heaven, and their multitude shall be
perfectly innumerable, will be "salvation to our God, and to the Lamb." Rev.
vii. 9, 10. And that because "he has washed us from our sins in his own
blood." Indeed we need nothing to set us right, in our judgment of these
matters, but to attend to the infallible oracles, and no wonder, those that set
them aside go astray.

The author of this piece has rested some time from his numerous vocations, to
give some scriptural light, to the leading passages of scripture, by which some
impose on, and abuse the credulity of those who attend to them. In doing which,
he was confined to brevity, but has endeavored plainness. His abhorrence of
such use of the sacred text, as he thinks he discerns in the nameless pamphlet
beforementioned, was very trying. He has endeavored however, in his remarks to
be governed by plain text. And desires his readers candid attention to whatever
he may judge is his main design. He does indeed consider the matter before us,
to be too high, important, and interesting, to admit of soothing and leniency.
No trimming! no daubing! should doubtless be the mo^to in such cases. God once
enjoined on all his people, most fearful severities, against such as endeavored
to seduce them from the purity of his commandments, in which they were bound to
walk. Deuteronomy. xiii. in the 13th and following verses. they were directed in this
manner; if thou shall hear say, that certain men, the children of Beliel, have
withdrawn the inhabitants of their city, to serve other gods. i. e. are
endeavoring to corrupt their faith and manners, and thou find the thing
certain, that such abomination is wrought among you. Then the highest penal
execution was to be made upon them. God in the mean time forbid his people to
consent, or hearken at all to their most pernicious device, or to exercise pity
or lenity toward them. 8. v. To all which the word of God, as the sword of the
Holy Spirit, now corresponds. Which should excite every Christian to study that
word, and be much in prayer, that he may be able to weild it dexterously. The
holy apostle referring to it, says, II. Cor. x. 4, 5, "The weapons of our
warfare are mighty through God," and he tells us to what purposes, viz. To
pulling down the strong holds of Satan in the minds of men; and casting down
their imaginations. The word is logis^ous, reasonings, and very high conceit
which exalts itself against the knowledge of God.

The author has added in the close, a miscellany of evidential sentiments, to
show his reader in the shortest way he could, the essential absurdity of some
of those corrupt notions, which are appendages to the universal doctrine; and
would have endeavored against them all, if his circumstances had allowed him.
If what is here exhibited, may give some light and refreshment to such as are
seeking for it; and the pleasure of restoration and confirmation to such as are
oppressed with darkness on those points, it will compensate this labor of
their unworthy friend and servant.

The Author.
Granville, March 5, 178^.
The Doctrine of Salvation for all Men put out of all Dispute.
The first PART.
THE first pretended divine authority, which has of late been advanced in
support of the doctrine of salvation for all men, is, I. Tim. ii. 4. The words
are "Who will have all men to be saved." The inspired word here rendered saved,
is sootbeenai, and is often rendered to be kept, or preserved. It is used also,
Matt. v. 23. to signify what JAIRUS wanted for his daughter, viz. to be healed,
or preserved from dying. It is used also Matt. xiv. 30. and it is rendered
save, as in the text in question; but every body knows what Peter meant by it,
viz. "Lord preserve me from drowning. Again it is used Mark v. 28. where also
it is plain, the woman afflicted with her bloody issue meant, that she should
be healed, that so her health and life might be preserved. The disciples also
used it, when christ told them LAZARUS sleeps. They say then he will do well.
Meaning it is a sign he is recovering. And it is used ever in the same form, as
is the text before us, viz. Sootheenai. Acts xiv. 9. Respecting the impotent
man of LYSTRA, his having faith to be healed, i. e. restored to the use of his
limbs. And so we gain easy light about the sense of this word as used in Matt.
xxiv. 22. Where it is rendered saved, as in the text in question; showing that
the seditious and murderous Fraction of the Jews, were so singularly shocking
and ruinous, that unless God had shortened the time of their ravagings, they
would have destroyed every man of their nation; but God to preserve his elect
among them, brought the Roman army on them; which brought the tragedy to a
speedy issue; and so saved i. e. delivered and preserved his own elect. And as
passages of scripture should be always understood consistently one with
another: and as all judges of languages know that soozoo, the theme of the word
in question, properly signifies to keep, preserve, etc. And not always to save,
as it means future blessedness. So the text in question teaches us that God
will have all men, in common, provided for, and preserved; that he may
accomplish the design of his government and grace among them. And for this end,
he has himself made all necessary natural provision.

Collateral evidences for this sense of the question are:

I. It is of so much importance to the accomplishment of divine purposes among
men, that in common, they should be kept and preserved; that he himself has
taken it emphatically for his style: "The Preserver of men." Job vii. 20. Psalm
xxxvi. 6.

II. He has made it one of the principle laws of his moral government in this
world, by which men are bound in all their conduct one toward another. Witness
the 6th commandment.

III. The text itself in question indicates this sense; for it is allowed on
all hands, that "the knowledge of the truth" is the qualification for final
salvation; which qualification is some ^anes expressed as it is here, by
"knowing truth," often by "believing truth;" and by other equivalent
expressions: yet these qualifications are never placed after their object; viz.
The salvation to which they relate. No text of scripture says be saved, and
believe. But the reverse universally. Consequently, no man who forms his notion
of scriptural things, by scriptural expressions, would imagine that final
salvation is so much as thought of, in the text in question. What a solicism is
this! "God will have all men to be saved, and then come to the knowledge of the
truth." Or, "and so come to the knowledge of the truth." And no man who holds
faith of the divinity of the Bible will boldly censure the form of its inspired
expressions. But submissivly allow the divine author understood the propriety
of language, as well as the nature of its divine materials. And of course,
conclude, that as the qualification of "knowing truth," is in the inspired
order of this text, placed after the doctrine of being saved; therefore the
notion of saved, in this text means something previous to the knowledge and
belief of the truth, and refers to it as its object. And this gives clear light.

I. Why the order of expressions were so placed, viz. Because the nauture of
their materials were in this order, in the nature of their cases: and so it is
beautiful.

II. That though some form of this Greek word is often used for final
salvation, yet it is often used otherwise: and therefore we are never to
conclude, that because some form of the word so^zoo, is used in a text of
scripture, it must therefore intend final happiness; for the contrary is
certain by the instances abovementioned.

III. That when we read the word save, or saved, in the translation, we are
never to conclude it necessarily means final happiness: because it is certain
it often means otherwise, as has been showed.

IV. That a certain rule by which to judge of the import of this Greek word,
and of the word save or saved, in the translation, is,

1. Analogy, or agreement with the general run of scripture, for inspiration
uses words in strictest propriety; keeping his eye on other texts where they
are used, and on the nature of the case.

2. When the doctrine of the text, and the previous qualifications dictate the
sense of these words to be final hapness, we must understand them so, and never
otherwise.

Obj. 1. But it is here said that "God our Savior wills" that all men should
be saved.

Ans. 1. God our Savior wills every thing, which he brings to pass in this
world; and so whatever is the object of his efficiency, it is necessary he
should will its existence.

2. The word rendered will is theelei, which in, I. Cor. vii. 7. signifies to
wish. And in Mark. x. 35. it signifies to desire. But the desireableness of an
object, of itself, in no case gives certainty of its existence. And when this
word is used of God, it is certain it can imply no more necessarily, even with
respect to the salvation of men, than what he declares Ezekiel. xviii. 32, that
the perdition, even of the wicked, in itself, and for its own sake, never
pleases him: his perfect benevolence, has no relish for that object, on its
own account, but the contrary, viz. That they should "turn and live." But this
never affects the desired object; for this object never takes place but in
consequence of absolute determination, and answerable actual efficiency.

Obj 2. But I apprehend this text means, that God wills the knowledge of truth,
in order to salvation, though it is named afterward.

Ans. This is natural enough; inferiors often have a vicious pleasure in
dictating to, and correcting their superiors; but it is quite shocking when
such as we are, have the front to correct their lawgiver; implicitly saying,
"Lord I conceive thou have not spoken the thing as it is; and as I presume thou
did really intend." J^b indeed with evident propriety accuses BILDAD, for
not having declared the thing as it is. Job xxvi. 3. But after God had spoken,
he takes shame to himself, for "uttering that he understood not, and saying
things too wonderful for him." JOB knew he was neither able nor worthy to
dispute a point with his Maker. Job ix. 14, etc. And when he understood the
mind of God, his answer was, "I know it is so of a truth." Job ix. 2.

It has been proved already, that the word rendered saved in I. Tim. ii. 4. is
used for very different purposes; and of course, the hope of future happiness,
cannot be built on the use of it in this text. It has also been proved, that
whenever qualifications for future happiness are named, in connection with that
end, as their object, the order of their nature is observed; as, "he that
believes shall be saved, the pure in heart shall see God, etc." And never the
reverse. Therefore the "saved" here expressed, is not that salvation which
follows any knowledge of truth whatsoever.

Another text on which some have harped, as hoping thereby to serve a turn, is
I. Tim. ii. 6. "Who gave himself a ransom for all." These men conduct very ill,
in catching a bit from wisdoms table, and running, as if for fear of
correction, nor do they pay due regard to that maxim of moral philosophy, viz.
"Search and see if these things are so." Otherwise they would easily find a
clue, which would guide them to a clear and consistent understanding of this
divine passage, viz. That Paul, the writer of this epistle was a Jew; and had
been thoroughly versed and rooted in the Jewish notions of GOD and religion;
according to that summary which our Savior reasoning with the woman of
Samaria, couched in this aphorism, "Salvation is of the Jews." which the
apostle illustrates, when he says, "Whose are the Fathers, and of whom as
concerning the flesh, Christ came, to whom also belonged the adoption, the
glory, the covenants, the giving of the law, the service of GOD, and the
promises. Romans ix. 4, 5. All this the Jews knew, and also that from their Zion,
was the law to go forth; and the word of the Lord from their Jerusalem. Isa.
ii. 3. In consequence of all this, the Jews appropriated every favorable
consideration of God. Jesus Christ, Bible, religion, holy duties, and
acceptible obedience to their own nation. This laid the foundation of their
prejudices and zeal against christianity, and occasioned the primary and
arduous labors of the apostles, to convince them that GOD was determined to
show himself the GOD of other nations as well as of the Jews; and this point
labored extremely in the apostolic age. It was a capital article with the
apostle Paul, especially after he turned to the Gentiles, to root out this deep
prejudice of his nation; for he knew that the gospel and its blessings going to
the Gentiles did not at all prevent hope to the Jews. He is therefore often
inculcating this great and glorious benevolence of their GOD, to attract and
gain them over to a like catholic and benevolent mind. This is the obvious
reason of Paul's using this universal monosyllable ALL, exceeding often. He knew
also that his dear son Timothy was nearly related to the Jews, for his mother
was a Jewess; and it seems his father was a proselyte to them; and this son had
from a child, been brought up in the strictest observance of the Jewish system.
II. Tim. iii. 15. Now in view of this general state of things, observe the
tenor of this context.

The apostle assures Timothy what principles he was possessed of, viz. faith, as
to what God had made him understand of his designs: and love, as of the same
kind with what God had displayed in converting, and calling him to the gospel
ministry; and which must therefore flow in the extensive channel of its
original, the love of God, so as by faith he believed Gods mind revealed
toward poor Gentiles, so his love drew him the same way; and all this he has
in Christ Jesus. 1 Timothy i, 14. for though Jesus Christ was humanely of the
Jews, yet his perfect merit was displayed, and his blood shed without those
walls, as giving hope, and being full of promise to other nations as well as
that.

2. The source of these principles was the grace of God, which could flow to
Gentiles as freely as to Jews, because his motive is in himself.

3. He points out his pattern and example, Jesus Christ who came into the
world, not Jewry only, but the world, his business therefore was to save
sinners. 15. v. not professing Jews only, but such as were most notoriously
without deserving, poor Gentiles. Implying at the same time all this was
couched in choosing me, whose ill-deserving exceeded all: and in this he gave
pattern to those, who by men were judged to have no claim at all on the
fountain of goodness, viz. the Gentiles. 16, v. On this he builds his eminent
celebration of the only wise God, that he should display such extensivness of
heart. 17. v. and then proceeds to his solemn charge to his son Timothy, 18, v.
that he should not conduct himself according to the narrow and contracted
principles in which he had been educated; but keep the faith, 19. v. that his
conscience might be reduced to the government of what God showed was his will,
viz. that Gentiles should be equally the subjects of his mercy as the Jews. The
apostle knew it always was the design of God that Japhe^ should dwell in the
tents of Shem, Genesis ix. 27. and God had made him see and know that it was now
to be fulfilled, in Gentiles being brought into the privileges of the visible
church, he therefore urges it on his son Timothy by every means as the
determined object of divine counsels: and therefore a summary of what he and
Timothy had to do, and this is the reason why he begins and proceeds in this
second chapter, with this matter of his faith full in his eye; insisting on it
that Timothy should not confine his prayers to the Jews, either as a nation, or
as a church; but should extend them constantly to all men, to Gentiles as much
as Jews, and to kings which could not be among the Jews, at that time; the
reason he assigns for all this, is, for this pleases God, 3, v. whose will is,
that all those privileges tending to salvation, should be extended to
Gentiles, just as they used to be indulged to the Jews; for he now intends
Gentiles shall be saved as well as Jews, 4, v. and therefore they must have the
means of knowing the truth, And then crowns all,

1. With a mighty argument to his purpose, drawn from the unity of the divine
nature, 5 v. as if he had said, there is but one God; the Gentiles are as much
his creatures as the Jews, and his sufficiency of power and grace are as equal
to their case, as to that of the Jews, according to Romans iii. 29. and they have
as much to attract his good will.

2. He argues equally from the oneness of mediatorship; there is but one
mediator, and he always proposed his object to be world, not Jewry only; nay
the place of his death, being without the walls of Jerusalem, as well as the
avowed design of his mission, had an eminently promising aspect to the
Gentiles. yea,

3. The object of his mediatorship in this world, determines the same point;
this was not Jews, but Men. 5, v. now Gentiles are men, as well as Jews;
therefore for Gentiles he gave himself a ransom, as well as for Jews, and so it
appears from the tenor of the whole contest, that by giving himself a ransom
for all, 6, v. there is no design to show the efficacy of his death, as to the
number of its individual objects; but that its general object was as much
Gentiles as Jews, it will be proved to certainty, in the sequel, that every
individual among either Jews or Gentiles were never actually savingly
benefitted by that ransom nor ever will be, but that the Gentiles had equal
advantages by it as the Jews, and as this is evidently the design of the text;
what folly, must it appear for any to risk his imaginary expectation of eternal
life, on this ALL? which has no respect to the individual objects of the
ransom; but only affirms an equal general respect to Gentiles, as to Jews, to
induce Timothy to comport with the revealed will of God in that case; and no
longer restrain his views, prayers and labors to Jews only, as supposing they
were the only objects of that ransom; intended equally for others, as for them.

Another text of scripture which some lean upon, who seem to want more support
to their hope, than the God of hope has given them, is, I Tim. iv. 10. which is
thus rendered, "the living God, who is the savior of all men". On which we
should observe,

I. That the word rendered savior in this text is soofl^as, which is commonly
rendered by servator, i. e. keeper, or preserver, and not by salvator, which
indeed is savior, and that God is eminently the preserver of men, and
therefore of all men, in common, is witnessed by Job vii. 20. and by Neh. ix.
6. where the preserving of every thing in heaven earth and sea, is equally
ascribed to him, and the psalmist also says, "thou preservest man and beast",
Psalm. xxxvi. 6. by which we may determine, the saviorship named in this, I.
Tim. iv. 10. is equally displayed on beasts as men; yea, on the whole material
creation, and as Sue^t^tus observes in his war, Exer. Lib. 1. cap. 52. he is
equally employed in preserving both angels and devils, we see then what ground
those build on who expect universal salvation from this text.

II. It is not the manner of the scripture, to ascribe the salvation of men,
immediately to the first person in the sacred Three. It is not consistent with
the revealed order of operation, with those sacred personalities. But the style
"living God," of whom the Saviorship of this text is predicated, is known to
be the emphatical distinction of the first personality. By Mat. xvi. 16. "Thou
art Christ, the son of the living God." Also by John vi. 69. "We belief and are
sure, thou art that Christ the son of the living God." It therefore follows
that suture salvation is not so much as thought of in this text.

III. Those who build their hope of universal salvation on this text, must
suppose, either that some are saved without believing, or that the salvation of
believers is a different thing in itself from that of others, because this text
says "he is the the Savior of all men, especially of those who believe". There
is something in the salvation of believers, according to those men, specially
distinct from that of others, and it must be their having says, which some who
are saved have not, or in the quality of their salvation, whereas in the true
sense of this text, there is no difficulty; for God is indeed the preserver of
all men; but he especially watches over, and cares for such, as by believing
put their trust in him, so it appears, those who flatter themselves about a
universal salvation, have no ground at all in this text.

In the next place our attention is called to a text of scripture upon which
some venture their universal building, right or wrong; and which they have
forced into the service of their imaginition, and it is, I. John ii, 2. "He is
the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, by also for the sins of
the whole world." All we have to do here is to find the mind of God, in these
last words, "the whole world." Now this expression is used variously in the
Bible; let us carefully attend to it. The word in this text rendered world is
rosmos. But this word in Romans xi. 12. means the Gentiles, exclusive of the
Jews, as any one may see. But then we begin to see that this word in the text
in question may not mean every body. And Mr. LEIGH, Critc. Ver. Says it means
the Gentiles in opposition to the Jews. It is certainly used in John. xv. 18.
etc. For only a part of mankind; which will appear by turning to the passage.
For it is used as a distinction for such as opposed the Apostles. So we have
another evidence, it does not mean all men, in John xvi. 8. The same word is
expressly limited to unbelievers; exclusive of all who believe in Christ; -- so
in John xiv. 17. It is used for such as cannot receive the spirit of truth;
exclusive of those who receive him, and in the 17, v. of the same chapter, for
all except the disciples, of course this word don't necessarily mean all men it
is used with like limitation, John xv, 19. and xvii, 9, v. it means those for
whom the savior of man did not so much as ask for salvation, and in I. Cor.
vi, 2. it means only such as shall be finally judged by the saints, in Heb. xi,
7. he means only such as were condemned by Noah's conduct in building the ark,
it is said with like limitation, II. Pet. ii. 5.

But we shall be told the expression in this, I. John ii, 2. is much more
emphatical, it is peri co ou tou Kosmo^. For the whole world. Yet we shall soon
see to certainty, that other texts of equal authority prove, that this phrase
is no foundation for the notion of universal salvation. We are told, Romans i. 8.
that the faith of the Roman Christians was spoken of "throughout the whole
world." And yet every body knows, that those who sit in darkness, and saw no
gospel light; even whole nations, who at that day, had neither heard, or
thought of the christian faith, are not included in this expression. Of course,
it is rash, and dangerous, for creatures of yesterday, and going before an
inflexible and righteous judge, to build their hope of universal salvation on
an expression which the scriptures use in a limited sense. "The whole world"
through which the faith of a few believers at Rome, was celebrated, at that
time, could not likely be more than the "Roman empire;" and it is probable that
several he^then nations within that monarchy, never heard, thought, of
concerned themselves at all about the faith of a few individuals at Rome. Yet
in such a limited sense is this phrase used in the holy word. See I. John v.
19. "The whole world lies in wickedness," and yet in the same verse he
expresses himself, the Parthian christians, and all who are of God. So far
therefore is this expression from serving the purpose of those who in a very
mistaken manner confide in it. Many other scriptures of the same sense which
use the word all instead of the whole, are evidently used, with like
restriction. For as Ta^novius, says, pa^, all, and olos, the whole, are
indifferently used, the one for the other in the Bible. And every body knows
the whole of any thing, is all of that thing; and all is the whole; and are
used so, except where restriction in their import is sufficiently made
manifest. Of course, no considerate man will draw conclusion, absolutely
universal, from universal expressions, till he finds whether the same authority
or the nature of the case, has not restrained their real import. We may see an
instance in Luke ii. 1. "There went out a decree from Caesar Augustus, that all
the world should be taxed." And yet it is obvious, that no more can be meant,
than such parts of the world, as were under CAESAR's jurisdiction; which though
it was extensive, yet far, very far from being absolutely universal. Just so it
is with regard to the subjects of the christian propitiation. They shall be a
number beyond the possibility of numerical calculation. Rev. vii. 9. Yet no
more than were elected to salvation from among men, and were called, justified
and sanctified, as will be proved hereafter. Another universal phrase we have
Mat. iv. 8. which is necessarily restrained, by a very figurative meaning. It
is said the Devil showed to our Savior "all the kingdoms of the world." But
there is no spot in the universe which gives advantage to any corporeal
eyesight to see so much; nor any visive faculty in nature sufficient for it.

So it is certain that none of those who try to confide in the universal form
of expression, in the text in question; can give themselves any assurance of
safety in it, we find an instance of this kind of expression in Rev. iii. 10.
"I will keep the from the hour of temptation, which shall come on all the
world, no doubt this hour of temptation was that most shocking scene of
persecution, practiced by heathen Romans, against christianity, for above two
hundred years before Constantine the great, in what a restrained sense is every
man obliged to understand this expression; when, long and bloody as it was, it
could extend no further than the bounds of the Roman Empire? another instance
of a like limited sense, to a like unlimited phrase is in Rev. xiii, 3. and all
the world, wandered after the beast, but the vii, v. says he made war with the
saints, did ^he saints wander after the beast? no surely! or if they did, did
the beast make war with such as wandered after him? then this universal
expression, cannot be understood universally, we can get nothing then, drawing
conclusions in such cases, which the Bible itself, will not warrant, nor the
common sense of considerate men, support.

Let us now confine a little more to the text in question. He is the
propitiation for the sins of the whole world. Let me freely ask the reader, do
you think he is so for those liars, described in the 4. v. who do not his
commandments; and of whom he says the truth is not in them? is he the
propitiation for the sins of those who walk not as he walked? 6. v. is he so,
for such as walk in darkness, even until now? 9. v. is he so for such as hate
their brethren, walk in darkness, and know not whither they go, 11. v.? for
such as love the world, and have not the love of God in them? 15. v. nay, for
such as are totally governed by the lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eye,
and by the pride of life, which the same apostle says are not of the father,
but are of the world in opposition to the father? 16, v. the very supposition
that all these are yet the subjects of that saving propitiation, is to make the
scripture absurd, inconsistant, and perfectly uninteligible, and he who holds
this sentiment, would be ashamed to allege any thing out of the same Bible in
support of it.

The truth of the whole affair is this; this epistle was written to such Jews,
as had been driven out of their own country by former persecutions, and large
numbers of them had found sanctuary in Parthia, a country far from their own
land, in the eastern part of Asia, and having no communication with their
native country, nor means to know how it fared with christians there, since
they left that land, and their brethren distressed with persecution,
inspiration directs this apostle, to write them this epistle to inform them
what the father of light had taught them, since their expulsion, and how the
christian interest succeeded, and among many documents, he tells them that
christianity was yet triumphant, not only among the Jews in a measure, but also
among the Gentiles; insomuch that contrary to a^ their old traditions, the true
religion obtained, and remission of sins was granted equally to the Gentiles,
as to the Jews, so that the propitiation was applied to, was evidently as
effectual for the rest of the world, as it was at first for those Parthians,
and many others among the Jews, therefore he says, "not for our sins only, but
for those of the whole world," that is, just so for others wherever its
doctrine comes, as it was at first for us. The apostle knew, that those
Parthians knew that only some of the Jews had saving benefits formerly by the
propitiation; just so, says he it is now among the Gentiles. The world in
common, whom we were wont to deem accursed, and cast of by God, have now the
same privilege as we had at first. The partition wall is now broken down, and
to this sense of World, whole World, all the World, etc. all the instances
above quoted, and many others, perfectly agree, and in no other sense of this,
and other such like passages of scripture, does the Bible agree, either with
itself, or with providential executions. As surely therefore as the Bible is a
system, consistent with itself, or with its faithful and universal executor,
divine prodence; so surely this and no more than this, is the true construction
of the text in question.

Another passage which has been wrested out of its evident latitude to favor
the desired universality, is. Tit. ii. 11. "For the grace of God, which
brings salvation has appeared to all men." Every man who reads the Bible,
and is attentive to what he reads, may observe this text refers to time then
past, "has appeared." But to all such leaders, it is evident enough, that at
that time, the Bible and (...) contents, had appeared to but a very few of
mankind. And so it is certain at first sight, that the device of salvation for
all men universally, has no support of this text. It was indeed true then, and
so it is still, that wherever the Bible comes, it appears plainly enough to all
who are rationally attentive to what they see in it, that it is a scheme of
grace, very free grace: and that eternal salvation is its object. And that by
its grace, the worst of men, may happily attain to that object. But it is just
as evident from all parts of this divine system, that it never designed every
individual to that happiness, as it is from the letter of this text, compared
with those times, that they had not attained to it then.

The next object of our attention must be a passage in Ephesians. i. 10. "That he
might gather together in one, all things in Christ, both which are in heaven,
and which are on earth." Also a passage of li^e import in Col. i. 20. "To
reconcile all things to himself, whether they be things on earth, or in
heaven." It is natural for mankind to distinguish between men and things. These
texts of scripture speak of Things, ^u pa^a, as if it was designed to admonish
all readers, that they were so far from meaning all men that they did not
primarily and ^h^y design any men at (...) However a few remarks will show us
their intention.

The capital ve^b in the first of these texts, rendered gather together, is
anakephail^bas^bai. Signifiing to sum up all into one sum. ZARCHY, therefore
renders it, colligere ^muia sub uno capite. To collect all things under one
head. BEZO and PI^CATOR render it in summam ac compendium redigere. To reduce
to one compenaious sum. The apostle having spoken of Jesus in the foregoing
context, proceeds to delineate the design of divine wisdom respecting him;
which was so to order every thing, that all the numerous prophecies, types and
figures of Jesus Christ, even from the beginning of the world should all be
summed up, and center in him; for the evident fulfilling of all such
prophecies, the support of divine truth in them, and for the incontestible
demonstration of his being the real object.

2. Of course, it appears that all men cannot be the object of design in these
texts, both because things only are named, and not men at all, and also because
the universality, even of things, is limited and restrained, by the nature of
their cases. For,

1. Holy angels in heaven are not so gathered into Christ, and made to center
in him, as some men, and all tipical things are.

2. An infinite multitude of things on earth, besides all beasts are
necessarily excluded from the meaning of both these texts. Besides, one
character of devils, is, that they "go to and fro in the earth, a^ walk up and
down in it. Job i. 7. Yet they are so far from being included in the import of
these texts, that they do not desire it, their destiny will not admit of it,
and divine justice forbids it.

3. It is evident that all things absolutely in heaven and earth cannot be
included in the design of these texts; both because a great many are naturally
incapable of it; and because it is absurd to be supposed of some other. It is
impossible for instance, that holy angels should he included in this
reconciliaton, because they never hated any view of the divine nature and will.

4. The above sentiments on the first of these texts are confirmed by the
supplement in the 11th v. viz. In whom also we, the Ephesian saints, "have
obtained an inheritance." This also shows that the Ephesian christians were not
in the above collection; for the supposition of it would make this passage
tautologous, and absurd. And to show that by all things in the last of these
texts, is not meant all men; a like supplement is also added including some of
the Colossians, in the following verse. So it is evident (...) the notion of
salvation for all men, has no support at all from either of these texts. The
next portion of inflexible truth, in which some are seeking room for their
notion of salvation for all men, is in Romans v. 18. "The free gift came upon all
men."

1. The assertors of universal salvation, ought to have been very sure that the
word all, certainly means every individual of the kind, before they place such
importance on it in this text, or any other. But in order to gain such
certainty, they must make great alterations in the following scriptures, viz.
Acts xxii. 15. Which says that Paul should be "God's witness to all men." But
this is fully explained by the 21st verse. "I will send thee to the Gentiles."
For when divine administrations and missions, which had been peculiar to the
Jews, because common to Gentiles with the Jews, then they were common to all
men, because Jews and Gentiles, were all men. Although there were innumerable
multitudes of both sorts which Paul never saw; and to whom his testimony never
did, nor ever will arrive. Especially those who never saw him in life, and have
since passed into eternity, without the advantage of it. So also I. These. ii.
15. "They are contrary to all men." Yet surely not to themselves! nor in
general to their own nation; but to the Gentiles, whom the Jews despised and
opposed in general; but not universally, for some Gentiles were well accepted
proselites. Also Ephesians. iii. 9. Paul was to make "all men see the fellowship of
the gospel-mystery." Yet surely, not such as he never saw, nor who ever saw or
heard of him; which is much the greatest part of human nature, both before and
since. But it is endless, as well as needless, to multiply instances of the use
of these universal phrases in a very partial and limited sense. And is it the
part of any rational being to venture eternity on so precarious a foundation?

2. But the true key to this text is the words even so. For this text contains
a noted parity between the first and second Adam; showing the medium through
which justification flowed to some by the second Adam, was of the same kind,
with that by which condemnation flowed to all men, from the first Adam. But
what was that medium in case of the first Adam? The answer is federal headship.
Now put the words of equation, or correspondency, even so; and then we shall
see the truth of the text, viz. As all who were in the first federal headship,
suffered by the offense of one; even so. Just so, all who were in the second
federal headship, live by the second Adam. And this is the plain sense of
another text by which many through inattention seem to be seduced, viz. I. Cor.
xv. 22. "For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive."
For a federal headship was the only mean of imputation, in the first case; even
so it was in the last. So that all those who are in the covenant of works are
dead in Adam: just so, all who are in the covenant of grace are alive in Jesus
Christ. So it appears that these two alls, are measured by the medium of
connection with their respective principal. And so we see that want of
attention to the word of truth, or a worse cause, has occasioned all the
confidence about universal salvation on this text of scripture.

Another holy expression, which much against its own mind, has been pressed
into the service of universal salvation, is, Luke ii. 10. In which the angel
said to the shepherd, "I bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to
all people." The inspired expression is panti too l^. Which is omni populo; to
every people. A very general expression. BEZA, says in Mat. iv. It is not
simply universal, but indefinite. And so this universal particle is used, I.
Cor. x. 23. where the apostle says "all things are lawful for me." Of which
every body knows it is not meant of absolute universality. It is several times
used with like limitation, I. Cor. ix. 22. and exceeding often elsewhere. So
Christ is said to heal "all diseases," Mat. ix. 35. That is, some of all kinds;
to show that none exceeded him, either by being of long standing, or great
malignancy. In a like general sense, the angel's tidings were matter of great
joy, not to the Jews only, among whom the holy Babe was born; but to all
people, to Gentiles as well as Jews, without one thought of respect to every
individual of any people. So when any great good occurs to a country or people,
it is matter of great joy, although a thousand individuals are not benefitted
by it; as independence to America: though malcontents count it the ae^a of
their ruin. Its being matter of great joy to all people, that the Messiah was
born in Bethlehem, is no evidence that every person will have saving benefit
thereby; it was matter of great joy to the angels themselves; but they had no
thought of salvation thereby. But it being the very highest instance of
benevolence, demanded great joy from all people, without regard to so little an
object as personal benefit; though it were that of salvation by it. In this
view the passage in question agrees with all the rest in the Bible; and with
all the rest of the Bible agrees to reject the crude imagination of salvation
for all men.

Another portion of consistent truth which has been adduced to support the
above antiscriptural notion of salvation for all men, is, I. Tim. vi. 13. "I
give thee charge in the sight of God who quickneth all things." Doubtless every
judicious reader, will judge the a bettors of this notion of salvation of men,
are straightened for encouragement from the Bible, when they allege such a
passage as this for their support. But all who are taught of God to guard
against dangerous subtilties; should be thankful that men are not able to bury
such a snare deep, nor guard it with one good divine evidence. The inspired
expression in this text is zooopoiountos ta panta. Who makes all things alive.
On which observe,

I. This text relates not to men, but to things. At least, no more to mankind,
than to all other creatures, which receive life and quickening from God, the
universal Quickner. Therefore this same word is used Romans viii. 11. For the
efficatious cause of the resurrection; because exerted on mere matter, to cause
life and motion to commence where it was not. Again it is used, I. Cor. xv. 36.
as having equal respect to the germination of wheat after sowing, as to the
raising of dead bodies at the last day. It is used also, Romans iv. 17. As
importing the efficacy by which ability for coition was revived in Abraham; and
by which creation itself recieved existence.

II. The word here rendered quickneth signifies to make alive. And so has no
relation to the case which it is named to serve. And CHANICER, one of the
ancients says, there is no place in the New Testament, where it does not
signify, vitam accipere, qua^ quis non habebat. Leigh in verb. i. e. to recieve
a life which the subject had not before. It is admitable therefore that this
text should be thought of, as a support to the above named doctrine.

Now we must attend to what is named for the same purpose in Rev. v. 13. The
sum of which is, "every creature in heaven, earth, and under the earth, and in
the sea, said, blessing and honor and glory and power, be to him who sits on
the throne, and to the Lamb for ever and ever." And does the reader think that
every great celebration of God and the Lamb implies the salvation of all men?
But we have often been told, that the argument which proves too much, does in
fact prove nothing at all. Now if all the actors in this notable triumph, are
supposed to be the subjects of the great salvation; then not only all men, but
all the angels in heaven, nay all the beasts on earth, and monsters of the
deep, are as much the subjects of that salvation as men. Some indeed have so
far disintangled themselves from the restraints of common sense, and also of
the word of God, as to pretend salvation finally for devils, but what have
beasts, either by land or sea to do with it? And it is as certain holy angels
are not saved by the cross of Christ. So that this argument engrosseth much
more than can be true; and consequently answers no purpose at all; except to
display a disposition for trifling with sacred things, and to anticipate a
certain shame and confusion of face.

Besides the word rendered Creature, in this text is Ktisma. And I. Tim. iv. 4.
using the same words, says, "every creature of God is good." Where it evidently
means our daily food, or common means of nourishment. By which it might seem,
the triumph of the text in question is somehow ascribed to the material
creation. And so it is a figure of speech called Anthro^epathy, by which the
passions and affections of men are ascribed to inanimate things; which is
exceedingly common in the Bible. The prophet Isa. lv.c. 12. v. having
commemorated many great works of God to his people in that state of the church;
and given assurance that he would send the Messiah to them, first describes
their joy, and then carries over their affections to the material world, and
says, "the mountains and hills shall break forth into ^ging; and all the trees
of the field shall clap their hands." Just so the text in question employs the
material creation (...) praise of the Lamb's appearing to open the C^dex
f^tal^s, of book of God's decrees and purposes respecting his church. And it is
truly admirable that the followers of theirs own ^ui tatnus, about salvation
for all men, have never called to mind that trees are a noted H^roglyphic for
men; and so confidently supported their cause by the last text abovementioned,
because it is there expressly said "that all the trees shall clap their hands"
on the news of the Messiah's undertaking. Perhaps this and a thousand other
such like figurative expressions are in reserve, for the next sott of evidences
to support the cause. And doubtless there will be time enough to advance them
all before God's sealed ones shall be seduced. This same word is also used
James i. 1^. where the apostle draws a parallel between those among men, whom
God will accept to salvation, and the first fruits under the law. Now only the
first fruits, under the law were offered to God; they were his portion of all
the fruits of the field. And this was the figure of those among men, who should
be saved. Therefore we read, Rev. xiv. 4. "These are they which follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes; those were redeemed from among men, being the first
fruits to God and the Lamb." Therefore,

1. It appears, that the text in question is so far from supporting the
doctrine of salvation for all men, that it says not one word distinctly about
men at all. But in order to celebrate the dying love of Christ, for his first
fruits among men; the creation in general is animated with songs, and made to
second the shouts of those who are redeemed in praise of their redemption.

2. And the reason of this form of triumph is 3. v. because inquisition had
been made through all created nature, for some one, able to open the
abovementioned book of God's designs, and execute its import; but none was
found able, till the lion of the Tribe of Judah appeared. And as all creatures
are some way interested in the sovereign determinations of God concerning this
world; so the nature of their case is represented, by this universal triumph;
importing now we shall all know the true state of things, and the whole of
divine counsels about us: and as "the Lord is righteous in all his ways;" so no
fear of the consequence; for if our nature and taste are not served, and fully
suited by every execution; yet two things are infallible; and both worthy of a
God, and both worthy of highest acclamations from us all: viz. His own honor,
and the general good of the creatures, are both secure.

Another portion of scripture by which some endeavor to support their notion of
salvation, is, I. Cor. xv. 27. "He has put all things under his feet." On
which observe,

1. The word of action in this text is upetaxen. Which signifies that God put
every thing in its proper place and order, under the dominion of the Lord Jesus
Christ; and according to this appointment, he rules the world, the seasons, the
beasts of the field, the wilderness, and the sea. And so this text is a comment
on the words of Christ. Mat. xxviii. 18. "All power is given me, in heaven and
earth." And can of course, no more imply salvation for all men, than for the
brutal world, and holy angels. Besides,

2. This construction of the text is confirmed by what follows; which shows
that nothing was excluded from this absolute subjection to Jesus Christ, but
the Father only.

3. This text verifieth the royal prophecy, Psalm vii. 6. "Thou made him,"
viz. Jesus Christ; "to have dominion over the works of thy hands; thou have put
all things under his feet." Which confirms the object of this text, to be the
material creation. And so it is immediately examplified by the Psalmist; 7 and
8. v. "All sheep and oxen, yea and the beasts of the field; fowls of the air,
and fishes of the sea." Which may guard all people against the abuse of this
text.

4. Therefore the ancients rendered this Greek word, not be obedient, as of
intelligent subjects; but be ye subject, as implying mere absolute dominion;
and some of them passivly, be ye subjected. And Heb. ii. 8. supports this
construction. "Thou have put all things in subjection under his feet; and have
left nothing that is not put under him." Therefore such as support their notion
of salvation of men from this text, must either mean that the material creation
is the subject of christian salvation; or they use scripture without consulting
its import. But such as fear God, will not trifle with his word, nor carelessly
deceive their fellow men.

The Second PART Containing a Miscellany of evidential Sentiments, showing the
Vanity of the Pretense, that all Men will be saved; as also the Absurdity and
Impossibility of several other Tenets involved with that of universal Salvation.
I. THOSE who propogate the notion of an universal salvation of men, find it
necessary to study an evasion of that establishment of God. I. These. i. 8.9.
Which assures us that all those "who know not God, nor obey the gospel of his
Son, shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the
Lord, and from the glory of his power."

Now these men cannot force themselves into a confidence, that all men, will in
this life have the necessary qualifications to pass immediately into glory
after death; and so necessarily must take place among the damned. But rather
than their decree for the saving of all men should fail, they have it seems,
agreed to set aside the decree of their Maker; and promised the unbelieving,
most profane, and finally impenitent, a discharge from that place of torment,
to which they allow they must first go: after they have endured punishment for
a certain duration, according to their demerit.

Now we should attend to a few Points, that we may see if these Things are so.

I. They say there is no text of scripture which necessarily implies eternal
punishment. And they insist that neither the Greek ^ioon, or Hebrew gnolam does
sufficienly prove against them. Now though it will soon be proved that these
words incontestibly signifying absolute eternity often in the Bible; yet it is
to be noted especially of the first of them, that it does not always signify
so; but signifies the duration of its subject, be the same longer or shorter.
Therefore when the subject of which this word is predicated, is of interminable
duration, either by its own nature, or by appointment, in all such cases the
import of this word is necessarily eternity. This must be further cleared by
instances of its divine use.

As to the Greek aioon, and its derivatives, the reader may see the divine use
of them in the following instances. Mat. vi. 13. uses it thus "for thine is
the kingdom and the power, and the glory Eisten aiconas, forever." Now if the
reader judges that the subject, of which this word is pred^ated here, viz. The
kingdom, power and glory of God is of quite endless duration, then he will
allow that such is the import of this word in this case.

It is also used Mat. xii. 32. describing the nature and consequence of the sin
against the Holy Ghost; concerning which, this text says, "it shall not be
forgiven him, viz. The finning person, out en toutoo too atoo^i, ^u^a a^ too
^elents Neither t^ thi^ world, nor in that to come." Here our adversaries
triumph, because aioon^ is rendered this world. But it is easy enough to
understand the mind of the text, it shall not be forgiven him as long as this
world lasts, nor as long as the next lasts. And does not this sense extend to
eternity? For this i^ p^ly a Peripbra^, of the ^en^ff^ity of this ^n.

This word is also used Mat. xxi. 19. about the cursed fig tree, "Let no fruit
grow on thee henceforward, eis ton a^oona, forever. Does the reader think that
fig tree has ever come to life again? Or is he not sufficiently satisfied it
never will? But then the duration of this sentence is quite interminable.

Another instance of the use of this word is Mark iii. 29. "He who blasphemeth
the Holy Ghost, has never forgivenness, eis ton aio^na. This prohibition of
forgiveness extends through all duration. And does not this necessarily point
the idea of eternity? This sense is confirmed by the next words alla ^nothos
est^n aioonion Kris^oos. But is h^ld fast by the eternal judgment. BEZA says
tenebitur judicio, he will be holden by the judgment. As long therefore as
that judgment of the unchanging God lasts, so long that transgressor will be
holden. And is there any alteration in the judgment of God? The judgment of God
is necessarily according to truth, Romans ii. ^. And it must stand as long as
power and right attend it; but the power and right of God are coeval with his
nature. So therefore is this sentence.

This word is again used John iv. 14. "He who drinks of the water I shall
give him, shall never thirst;" i. e. thirsting is excluded, or prevented to
him, eis ton aioona, forever. And is not this a deliverance quite interminable.
This sense is confirmed by what follows. "But the water that I shall give him,
shall be a well of water springing up, eis zooa^n aioonian, to eternal life. If
then the water of life is of eternal efficacy, eternity is certainly the import
of this word.

So also, in John vi. 51. If any man eat of the living bread which came down
from heaven he shall live eis ton aioona, forever. And if there is no end to
forever, then eternity is the import of the word here also.

So John vi. 58. He that eats of this bread which came down from heaven shall
live ais ton aioona, forever. If then the bread of life has eternity in its
virtue, such import is in this word.

It is also used John viii. 51. and confirmed with "verily verily, if any man
keeps my sayings he shall never see death." The inspired expression is eis ton
aioona, and if to never see death; necessarily implies eternity of life: then
so this word means.

It is twice used in John x. 28. "And I give them (...) aioonian, eternal life"
and it is confirmed by adding, "and they shall never perish;" the words are ais
ton aioona. And if this text implies eternal existence, then that is the import
of aioona.

Also John xi. 26. "Whosoever lives and believes in me shall never die." The
words are ais ton aioona. And if never to die necessarily implies eternity of
life, then this word implies eternity.

Once more John xii. 34. "We have heard that Christ abides ais ton aioona,
forever. As plainly then as eternity is ascribed to Christ; so plainly it is
imported in this word. LEIGH's Crit. Sac. in Verb. says it signifies Eternity.
And that the ancients held that punishment eternal, on which this word was
predicated. And this is evidently the sense of the word in the abovementioned.
Mat. xii. 32. and Mark iii. 29.

And as to the Hebrew word Guolam, the critic abovenamed says it designs
"absolute perpetuity, eternity;" when it affirms of God, or things in their own
nature eternal; and it will be still further proved in the sequel, that future
punishment is so. The abovenamed Reply observes that the import of those words
is measured by the subject to which they apply; ^f to the Jewish state of the
church, or its ordinances; the mountains, etc. The durability imported in these
words is equal to that of their subject. So when they apply to God, his
gracious covenant, or the future state of existence, they import duration equal
to their subject. And it has been proved by plain texts, that the above Greek
word often necessarily means eternity. Therefore the schoolmen say, that wicked
men are justly punished in eterno Dei, who have sinned in eterno Deo. i. e.
They shall be punished through eternity, as measured by God, who have sinned
through their whole life here. And this Hebrew word certainly means eternity in
the most absolute sense in Psalm x. 16. "The Lord is king for ever and ever."
And in Exodus xv. 18. "The Lord shall reign for ever and ever." Besides,

II. Sinful men are of a totally depraved nature, and a totally morally
depraved nature; as such, cannot possibly be happy; happiness must be according
to consciousness. If conscience witnesses only of moral evil, it can only
accuse without cessation; and so give sense of misery. Besides, such subject
can receive nothing but penalty in a righteous government. And so both from
itself, and from the government over it, must be miserable. And this case must
be as durable, as the internal propensities of man. If then his time of
probation is spent in sinning, the nature of his case will make him miserable
as long as his nature lasts.

III. Such a nature, retaining its predominant propensities, cannot cease from
sinning; its own propensities will act out their own nature; and of course,
sins will, and must increase during existence. And so there will be the same
sort of reason for infliction of punishment, as at first; and this is the
natural subjective reason, for punishment at all, and for the eternity of it.

IV. The demerit of sin, is measured by its object, the direct object of sin,
is the holy law, its ultimate object is the divine nature; both are of perfect,
unlimitable, and so eternal rectitude and goodness. Exactly answerable thereto
is the demerit of their contempt. But the sinning subject is very finite;
consequently punishment cannot be adequately endured, but by duration equal to
its object. And this is the natural objective reason for the necessarily
endless duration of future punishment.

V. Of some sinners it is said Heb. vi. that it is impossible to renew them to
repentance. And will any dare to hold, that it is not only possible, but
certain, that salvation shall be had, where God their Maker, has said it is
impossible?

VI. They talk of some making atonement for their own sins, by suffering an
answerable space in hell. It will be no honor to Jesus Christ, for such to
arrive at, and dwell in heaven; for thereby they get only what they have
earned, and deserved. They do not arrive there by Jesus Christ's merit, but by
their own. They have balanced the account with divine justice, by their own
sufferings. Perhaps the reader will judge this is another instance of the
devils scheme acted over again. "Ye shall not surely die, but ye shall
yourselves be as Gods."

VII. The following scriptures absolutely six the eternity of future
punishment, viz. Mat. xxv. 46. "These shall go away into Kolafin aioonion,
everlasting punishment. But the righteous eis zooeen aioonian, into life
eternal. The antithesis fixes the equality of these two representations of
eternity. The same word, which generally signifies eternity, as has been
proved, is equally used for them both. Therefore they are both of equal
duration.

So Jude vii. "The people of Sodom and Gomorrha are set forth an example,
suffering the vengeance pur^s aio^niou, of eternal fire." They could not be an
Example, unless others in like case were to copy it out. This text therefore
fixes certainty to eternal punishment.

Also I. Peter i. 25. "The word of the Lord endures ei^ ton ai^ona, forever."
And doubtless his word of sentence on vessels of wrath, as well as on any other
word.

Again, II. Peter ii. 14, -- 17. The apostle speaks of some as "cursed
children, for whom is reserved the mist of darkness ei^ aioona, forever." Now
the word called cursed here is kataras. But this word is the measure of the
import of Christ's death, in Gal. iii. 13. He was made a curse. It that was
infinite, the idea of infiniteness is contained in this cursedness; which for a
mere creature to endure, necessarily requires eternity.

And Rev. xiv. 11. speaking of the worshippers of the beast faith, "The smoke
of their torment ascends, eis aioena^ aio^nas, forever and ever;" as if
eternity was multiplied into itself, to denote an absolute incomprehensible
duration, which must be absolute eternity. But some may imagine the assertors
of universal salvation do not mean to include Papists But pray why not? are not
Papists men? And many of them far from being the greatest sinners, for want of
the clearest light. Besides, these Universalists have adopted some badges of
Popery, besides their acknowledgement of purgatory; which should induce them to
be tender of their brethren the worshippers of the beast; however terrible the
last mentioned text is to all who simbolize with them.

And Rev. xix. 3. speaking of the same sort of men, under the character of a
great Whore who corrupted the earth, by corrupting the word of God, and
seducing men; says. "And her smoke rose up eis ^o^s aioonas t^en aioonocu,
forever and ever." A like emphatical description of duration quite endless, as
before.

Though there are innumerable passages of scripture, wherein God, who can not
lie or deceive, has determined the point of the eternity of future punishment,
yet the last to be named now is Rev. xx. 10. saying, "And the devil who
deceived them," viz. The innumerable multitude from all quarters of the earth,
which shall constitute the army of Gog and Magog, "was cast into the lake of
fire and brimstone, where the beast and the false prophet are, and shall be
tormented day and night, eis tous ai^onas toon ai^onoon, forever and ever."
Doubtless these therefore will not be saved. And the reason of the case,
concludes against all their abettors. And such a have any mark of the beast, or
false prophet about them, had need be ware. For the duration of their
punishment is quite interminable.

III. The third of these miscellaneous sentiments is, God swore in his wrath,
that some should not enter into the rest of Canaan. Psalm 95.11. But he has
told us Heb. iv. 11. that their failure was example to us, by which to take
heed least we enter not the heavenly state, which was the antitype of Canaan's
rest. If then that affair was all type of this; then the oath of God bars
entrance now, to the same sort of men: and so it is as impossible all should be
saved, as the oath of God be broken.

IV. Judas went eis ton l^pen ton i^io^, to his own place. The words import
properly, he went where he belonged. Property is founded in right. God is the
vindicator, never the violator of right. If then Judas's right is there, he
must remain there, for "far be it from God, that he should do iniquity." Job
xxxiv. 10. But then all men cannot be saved; nor can Judas be released from his
possession; but of course it must be eternal.

V. The soul of the Antideluvians are said to be in prison, I. Pet. iii. 19.
i. e. in t^tir^. Leighs. ^rit. Sac. in Hell.

The wo^d is, Ph^lak^e, a place of custody, not a place of release and
discharge; it is rendered by C^rc^r, a prison; and it is such a burning prison,
as the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone does kindle, Isa. xxx.
33. and this breath of the Lord is not liable to cessation; it is necessary
breath, and therefore must be eternal. From this prison none can come forth,
till they have paid the uttermost farthing. Mat. v. 25 But for a finite being
as man, to pay the uttermost farthing of an infinite debt, necessarily employs
eternity, as has been showed. Therefore all men are not saved; not can those
who perish be discharged.

VI. Mat. xxvi. 24. Says of Judas "it had been good for him, if he had not been
born." But if in any future period of duration, he should be discharged from
his own place, and enjoy the happiness of the heavenly state thenceforward
forever; then this text would be evidently not true; for a perfect blessedness,
for a thousandth part of that happy duration, must be in some sense, infinitely
better than never to be born. So the Universalists have the choice now, to
charge themselves, or the author of the Bible, with a wrong view of this matter.

VII. In Luke xvi. 26. it is said, "there is a great gulf fixed between the
happy and the miserable." And it is a gulf which is unpassable. The inspired
words are Mega Chasma este nigneno^, i. e. firmiss^um D^ ^e utum, or a statute
of God most firmly established so firmly that it is quite inviolable. But how
then shall any soul come from among the miserable, as long as divine
sufficiency for maintaining this gulf continues?

VIII. In Mat. xxv. 41. the final sentence of banishment from the presence and
enjoyment of God is in these words: "Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting
fire prepared for the devil and his angels." On which we may note,

1. The word in this sentence rendered everlasting, is a^co^ian, which has been
proved already to signify eternal, in its utmost sense.

2. And this notion of the word, is confirmed by its allowed derivation from
aei, always, and, ^on, being, naturally therefore implying to be always. And
surely always is forever.

3 The word rendered cursed is Kateeramenoi, which is devored; finally and
forever given up.

4. This devotion is to the state, portion, and punishment of the devil and his
angels. Of course, while that state of punishment is the portion of the devil
and his angels, these devoted souls must inhabit with them. Either therefore
the damnation of devils is limited, or that of wicked men is unlimited. For the
latter are given up to the very same place and portion as the former.

5. The very notion of burning in these figurative descriptions of hell,
implies sensible hopelessness, or knowledge of interminability of suffering. If
there was a possible hope of escape, or terminability, the essence of this idea
of burning, would cease. Those sufferings would be very great, but not burning.
That the notion of burning implies absolute desparation, appears,

1st By the purity between the burning fire, and the knawing worm. Mark ix. 44.
Isai. lxvi. 24. They are of equal efficacy and duration. Make the fire
quenchable, and the worm instantly ceases to know. This worm is conscience
sensible of guilt and punishment. But the remonstrances of conscience are
always according to ^ight from God. The wicked in this life have the fire and
the worm, but not burning Fire, nor never dying Worm. But when the worm gets to
be Outeleuta never to be finished; then the fire also becomes burning fire.

2. It appears from the corrosiveness of burning fire, that fire exists in a
thousand instances, where it is not burning fire. But as soon as it is burning
fire, it corrodes. It Is absolute desperation, or knowledge of interminability
of suffering, that corrodes and totally destroys all self enjoyment or hope;
and this is absolutely burning. Therefore the Bible speaks the thing as it is,
everlasting burning!

So the Universalists have not only devised an escape finally from the
sufferings to which GOD has assigned the wicked hereafter, but they have
quenched the burning fire while they are in punishment, and also prevented the
preying worm. But is not all this a daring opposition to divine establishment?
And as penalty is the support of all law, so they have by this means enervated,
and made void the laws of GOD. And we know what is the portion of such -- they
shall have their part taken out of the book of life, out of the holy city, and
out of the blessings written in the gospel. And they who add their own
imaginations to things written in the Bible, God shall add to them the plagues
written in the holy book. Rev. xxii 18 -- 19. Nay,

GOD has expressly and repeatedly declared, That this burning fire never shall
be quenched. Mark, ix. 43, 44, 55, 48. also, Isaiah lxvi 24. In all which
passages the immortality of the worm, and the unquenchableness of the fire, are
exact parrellels, which is inconsistent with salvation for all, and with any
discharge from punishment.

XI. If sin in vessels of wrath fitted to destruction, is quite connatural to
them, then either they must be converted in Hell, or never be discharged from
it: but conversion is a work of grace any where, and no such display of grace,
can at all be expected, but according to the words of grace, in the Bible; but
there is not one word in the Bible, about displaying such grace in Hell.
Therefore there never will be any discharge from that state of punishment.

X. If it is necessary for the glory of God that any should be punished with
destruction from the presence of the Lord, according to II. These. i. 19. then
it is at least, equally necessary, that such destruction should be everlasting:
But it is necessary that some should be punished with destruction from the
presence of the Lord, this our adversaries confess. Therefore it is at least,
equally necessary, that such destruction should be everlasting. For,

1. The word of inspiration in this text is aioonion, which, as has been
proved, is genuine evidence, that the judgment of God is, that it should be
everlasting.

2. Every reason for punishing any with destruction from the presence of the
Lord at all, makes it at least, as necessary to continue the same execution
forever, if the execution of this punishment at first, was necessary as a
reward of evil deeds, then as long as evil deeds continue, the reason of this
execution continues. But there can be none but evil deeds in Hell; therefore
the reason of that punishment can never cease. If this punishment was inflicted
at first, in honor to divine justice, then as long as divine justice remains
the same, so long the reason for this puninishment remains. If this execution
was made at first to testify Gods abhorrence of sin, then as long as that
abhorrence remains, this execution must remain. God, right, and the moral
nature of things, never change: whatever therefore, in the nature of God, of
right, or of morality, induced and justified the first execution in this case,
will at least, justify it forever. I I^som Canbus ^adem est Ratio, in like
cases the same reason obtains. No evasion can be made from this argument, but
that the damned, will in some period of their misery cease from sinning, and so
may be discharged. Against which supposition the following things lie, viz.

1. Such supposed cessation from sinning must be from a motive ab ^tra, or ab
extra, from within, or from without; from within, it cannot derive without a
new heart, and there is not one indication in the word of God, or nature of
things, that a new heart will be given in hell, if there was, the nearest
prospect of good to some men, would be their speedy arrival among the damned;
and from without, this supposed cessation from sinning cannot derive: both
because the applications of redemption are peculiar to this life, according to
the Bible; and because the wrath of God, and nothing else is revealed
respecting the damned; and lastly, because the oath of an unchanging God bars
all hope, Heb. iii. 11.

2. Another thing which lies against the above supposition is, their old sinful
habits having full possession of their nature, must continue, while that
endures; also their old sins, having in their nature eternal demerit
necessarily bind to an eternity of suffering. The intrinsic malignity of all
sin is measured, by the revealed dignity of its object. An offense committed
against the known authority, and dignity of a prince, by his subject, differs
vastly in its intrinsic malignity and demerit, from that of the same action
materially against a peasant. As much grosser is the case before us, as God is
above a fellow sinner; now this difference is in all views quite infinite. Such
therefore is the demerit of all sins against God, and how should the subject
possibly open a new account, while the old remains necessarily unballanced.

3. The very nature of all disappointed, displeased and tormented spirits, is
self-vindication, self-excusing, and to conceive accusing allegations against
the source of their trouble. This is obvious both to observation and sensation;
but all this is essentially sin, and wickedness against God; yet such sin and
wickedness must from the nature of the case, eternally employ the damned,
without exception of one sensation, or act of volition; till they become
cordially pleased with the pains of damnation, and if this is perfectly
impossible, then it is equally so, that such sin and wickedness should cease,
or their consequently deserved punishment.

XI. If eternity of punishment, on supposition of its certainty, is an infinite
good in the intelligent system; then to deny the eternity of punishment, is to
deny what is an infinite good in the intelligent system. But an eternity of
punishment, supposing it to be certain, is an infinite good in the intelligent
system. Therefore to deny the eternity of future punishment, is to deny what is
an infinite good in the intelligent system. Now that future eternal punishment
is such infinite good, shall be proved.

1. If for thinking beings, subjects of a supreme perfect government, to be
made circumstantially acquainted with, and well assured of the mind of their
Supreme, and the designs of his government is an infinite privilege; and an
infinite privilege is an infinite good; then the consequence avails: But for
such subjects to be so informed and assured of the mind and designs of their
Supreme, is an infinite privilege, and such privilege is an infinite good:
Therefore future eternal punishment is an infinite good in the intelligent
system. So that if it was not made certain, it is most desirable that it should
be so. But a belief of divine perfections, and that his government, and whole
plan, are just like himself, in propriety and righteousness, implies a belief,
that every desirable and perfect good for his system is contained in it; and
that for such subjects to be so made acquainted with, and assured of the mind
and designs of their Supreme, and of his universal dominion, is a privilege,
will not be denied; nor will any deny it to be an infinite privilege, who
believe such Supreme to be infinite in all views, and who believe the nature
and design of his government to be of infinite importance to the subjects of
it. And doubtless the same light will determine all who have it, that such an
infinite privilege is an infinite good. But then it follows, that future
eternal punishment is an infinite good, in the intelligent system, as plainly
as either the nature and reason of the case, make it evident to be true; or as
the word of GOD shows it to be certainly a part of his plan. Both which have
been proved already.

2. That which has infinite weight, from its own nature, to prevent infinite
evil, both moral and penal, and to commend and urge infinite good, both
subjectivly and objectivly, to entelligent creatures, is itself an infinite
good to them: But the consideration of future eternal punishment, is from its
own nature, of such infinite weight; therefore it is an infinite good to such
creatures. For it is an argument of infinite weight against all sin and its
consequence; and for all good and happiness forever. Consequently those who
deny it, remove a mean of infinite weight, for the good of mankind and the
glory of God.

3. If future eternal punishment has influence to the honor of God, and of all
divine objects; it is an infinite good; but the former is true; therefore such
punishment is an infinite good in the system.

1. It is an everlasting monumental evidence, that there is no unrighteousness
in God. And that which supports the honor of infinite righteousness, truth, and
goodness, is itself, for that reason, infinitely good. God has well informed
men of the nature and demerit of sin; and has given assurance that in case of
disobedience, he would assign them, to this very punishment; which is therefore
the proof in fact, that "just and right is be." Whereas the denial, and removal
of this evidence, casts the reproach of falsehood, and delusion on the nature,
name and word of God.

2. Everlasting punishment reflects honor on the laws of God. It is penalty
supports the honor of all laws. Divine laws being infinite in all views, their
honor can be supported by nothing less than punishment answerable to their
nature.

3. It reflects light on the nature, and shows the reason, of such christian
atonement as the Bible discribes. The a toner being of infinite dignity, could
not be subjected to such sufferings, but on that supposition of the infinite
demerit of sin, which is the necessary implication of eternal punishment; That
one who was God-man must endure as Jesus Christ did, has the self-same
occasional reason, as eternal punishment has. They reflect light on each other,
and doubtless must stand and fall together.

4. Eternal punishment reflects such an honor on that holy law, whose penalty
is there executed, as it is not possible it should have on any other
supposition. It speak that law, whose penalty it is, to be infinite in
excellency. Whereas a small or temporary punishment, degrades the law, whose
penalty it is. Therefore we see every mitigation of future punishment, relaxeth
moral bonds.

5. Therefore without this doctrine of future eternal punishment; the honor of
all divine attributes, the value of the atonement, the dignity of the holy law,
the truth of the Bible; all fail, and are depreciated. And if the mean of all
these infinite honors is an infinite good, in the moral system; then eternal
punishment is an infinite good in the moral system.

6. The scriptural notion of future punishment, justifies, and honors the
faith, hope and conduct of all true believers. Their faith was founded in what
they saw in the Bible; this gave spring to their hope, and holy lives, and
sufferings. If the Bible is never honored with this future execution; it
infinitely weakens and dishonors all their religion. For one reason of their
religion was a refuge from that eternal storm. Heb. vi. 18. Isaiah xxv. 4.

7. The honor of Jesus Christ's saviorship in part depends on the reallity of
eternal punishment. For salvation always respects the evil from which, as well
as the good to which it is affected. Consequently as much as is taken from the
eternity of future punishment, just so much is taken from the glory of
salvation by Jesus Christ. For only by him are any saved from the wrath to
come. I. These. i. 10.

8 Future punishment is the foil to set of off distinguishing grace to those
who are saved; gives reason for, and animates the songs of such, in praise of
God and the Lamb; and it will be as necessary in all future periods of
eternity, as it was at first.

9. It is the truth and certainty of eternal punishment, which emphatically
gives character to God, as a righteous judge; and gives weight, to and supports
his revealed judgment, about the nature and difference of sin and holiness.
Consequently,

10. As it will be equally necessary, that all these purposes should be served
in all periods of eternity, as at any of them; so the same reason which
justifies damnation at all, will equally prove the necessity of its eternity.

11. And as each, and every one of these purposes served by eternal future
punishment, is a good of infinite value; so it is evident that future eternal
punishment is an infinite good; in the intelligent system.

12. Nay more, for as innumerable infinite goods, must be of more worth and
value than all the loses sustained by a finite number of finite creatures, in
that future punishment; so that future punishment, must on the whole, be a
pure, and abstract good, a most rational and worthy object of joy and praise,
for the intelligent system, and so we are arrived exactly at the divine
testimony. Rev. xvi. 5. "thou art righteous O Lord, who art and wast and shall
be because thou have judged thus". And now we may understand the cxxxvi Psalm,
10.14.17.18.19.20. as a song of praise for penal execution, and each ascribed
to mercy, and that as a reason which endures forever, to which therefore all
must concur who love mercy. And therefore respecting such as do not so concur,
God will be justified when he speaks, and clear when he judges, Psalm, lvii, 4.

XII. The twelfth sentiment evidential of eternal punishment is, it is probable
the damned would rather choose, on their own principles, continuance in their
state, than the company and employments of the beatific vision, if they had
opportunity of free choice. This in some measure appears,

1 Because the devil, who loves ease, honor and happiness, as well as any; when
he had opportunity of free conversation with his judge, as in the case of Job.
Job, i. 6. etc. And also in the affair of Ahab, I. Kings, xxii. 21.22. And of
Jesus Christ, whom satan knew to be his sovereign. Mat. iv. 3. etc. He never
moved one word, for a reversion of the decree of his punishment.

2. The natural aversion of sinful men to all holy objects, which in the Bible
is called enmity; is such, as doubtless render the state of the damned, more
consonant to the feelings, of those who are in it; than the immediate glory of
God, and the holy world would be death and damnation, make no moral alterations
in the subjects; and the same disposition of heart; which makes aversion to all
holy objects here, no doubt operates according to its nature there.

3. When Dives, one of the damned, had opportunity of free conversation with
Abraham, a fellow man; he offered not one word, for a place in Abraham's bosom:
he only wanted some mitigation of misery, in his own situation.

But as the device of salvation for all men, excludes the noted doctrine of
election; it is necessary a testimony should here be given to the truth of this
doctrine of God. Therefore,

XIII. If God has chosen a number of persons out of the body of mankind, to be
saved, then all mankind will not be saved: But God has chosen a number out of
mankind to be saved; therefore all men will not be saved.

Election is thus described, ex omnibus Electio ad salutem, i. e. a choosing
some out of all, to salvation. So Peter writing to the believing strangers, I.
Pet. i. 2. says "they were elect, according to the foreknowledge of God". And
Paul says, Romans xi. 5. "there was a remnant in his time, answerable to
Elijah's seven thousand, according to the election of grace", and he says of
the Thessalonian church, "God has from the beginning chosen you to salvation,"
Jesus Christ says of his followers, "I have chosen you out of the world."
Therefore Romans xi. 5. he says, "the election has obtained it, and the rest
were blinded," but "as many as were ordained to eternal life believed." Acts
xiii. 48. but though it is a prostitution of such evidence, to urge it on such
as are not influenced by scriptural authority; yet for the sake of such as
reverence the judgment of God, a few more evidences may be given to this
essential article in the divine system.

1. If the scriptures are the infallible word of God, and do affirm the
doctrine of election, in the sense above explained, then this doctrine must be
believed at infinite peril* But that the scriptures ^e the word of God, is
generally confessed, and that they do affirm this doctrine, of God's choosing
some of mankind to salvation, and that therefore all men cannot be saved, has
already been proved, and shall be made further evident; therefore this doctrine
must be believed, at the peril of giving the lie to God and the Bible, and that
in a multitude of instances. So at the period of this world, when those who are
heirs of glory, are to be received to that possession, the account of it, which
is perfectly right, says, Mat. xxiv. 31. "He shall send his angels, and they
shall gather together his elect, from the four winds." And of these God has
declared, I. These. v ix. "That he has not appointed us to wrath, but to obtain
salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ." And there are about a score of instances
in the Bible wherein some form of the word ELECT is used to the same purpose;
and consequently so many evidences, quite incontestible against the device of
Salvation for all men. And twice that number of texts, wherein some form of the
word CHOSEN is used to the same purpose; each determining the truth and right
of the doctrine of election in the above sense. Besides a number of instances,
wherein the word APPOINT in some of its forms, is used, as indicative of the
sovereignty, and to the same purpose. Also a number of texts might be named,
wherein the word ordained is used to the same purpose. As Acts xiii. 48.
forenamed, "as many as were ordained to eternal life believed." And about fifty
passages of scripture, indicate the same sovereignty, and to the same purpose,
by the expression I will and the like, as to the display of distinguishing
grace among men, respecting final salvation. As Exodus xxxiii. 19. "I will be
gracious to whom I will be gracious; and I will show mercy, on whom I will show
mercy." So Isaiah lviii. 8. "With everlasting kindness will I have mercy on
thee, says the Lord thy redeemer." And Romans ix. 16. "It is not of him who
wills, nor of him who runeth, but of God who shows mercy."

But because a number of objections, against this hated display of the divine
nature, seem plausible to the inconsiderate. A very brief hint of reply may be
given to some of them.

Obj. 1. But this does not agree with that love which God has for men in common.

Ans. No scripture implies that God has saving Love for mankind in common. Many
scriptures which are perverted (...) ^o^t that dictate of pride have been
proved already to have no such import. But God, as the God of all nature, does
so love men in common, as to send his own son in their nature, to set an
example for them all; and to make actual and perfect atonement, for such of
them, as it pleased God to give him, in the covenant of redemption. He does so
love them in common, as to give them being, life, breath, and all the mercies
they enjoy. "He makes his sun to rise on the evil and on the good; and sends
rain on the just, and (...) the unjust. And so his tender mercies are on them
all.

Obj. 2. This makes God a respector of persons, which is contrary to Acts x. 34.

Ans. No personal consideration at all, commends any person to the grace of
God; he neither loves or hates any, because they are black or white, Jew or
Greek, rich or poor, or for any thing else merely personal. "Not for your
sakes, do I this, says the Lord God, be it known to you." Ezekiel. xxxvi. 32.
Saving grace is all for Christ's sake, not for ours.

Obj. 3. Then there is need of good works.

Ans. And art thou one of those who expect to be saved by good works? No works
of ours are the means, or reasons of election, or consequent salvation. Those
who are saved are elected to do good works, as much as to salvation, and as an
evidence of their title to it, and qualification for it. "They are chosen to
salvation through sanctification of the spirit, and belief of the truth." II.
These. ii. 13.

Obj. 4. But the threatenings of the law are made in common to all.

Ans. They be so, as a mean to make them see their danger, and need of a
savior, and "they that hear shall live." John v. 25. This is a mean
established to bring about the end and design of election.

Obj. 5. Then God made multitudes on purpose to damn them.

Ans. It is not true. The first object of design with God, in all his works is,
"to make his name known in all the earth." Romans ix. 16. i. e. to show to all,
who he is, and what he can do. That he may be feared, obeyed, and trusted.
Indeed he always knew who would regard him, and who not^ and it always was his
decree, "the soul that sins shall d^e." Ezekiel. x^ 2^ Wickedness chosen, and held
fast is a certain mean of destruction. "The ways of sin are death." Romans vi.
23. But damnation of men never was the leading object of design with God. He
cannot have taste for that object in itself. Yet he delights to glorify his
justice, on those who have abused his measure. "Jesus knew from the beginning
who they were that believed not, and who should betray him." John vi. 64.

Obj. 6. But the doctrine of election tends to relax the bonds of morality.

Ans. All men are bound to holiness, both in principle and practice; and these
bonds cannot be relaxed, but by choice of their subject. And what such subject
knows not can give no just cause to such choice; but no man knows the object of
election; till he finds Jesus Christ is the object of his own election. And
that his own principle prevents remissness to holiness.

Obj. 7. But absolute election renders means of grace useless.

Ans. If by means of grace is meant any thing in this world sufficient of
itself to give grace; it is as wide from the Bible, as the denial of election.
But if the objection designs means appointed and used by God to beget grace; it
is most injudicious. How should God's choosing some to salvation, hinder his
bestowing grace on them? No man ever was chosen immediately to salvation;
election is immediately to the privilege of divine institutions; and so to the
blessing of God attending them, and so to salvation following thereupon. II.
These. ii. 13. "God has chosen you to salvation* through sanctification of the
spirit, and belief of the truth."

2. If the doctrine of election is necessary to the honor of all divine
perfections, then it ought to have a place among eternal truths, but the former
is true, therefore the letter must be allowed. A few things must be premised to
clear the truth of this hypothesis.

1. That Jesus Christ was designed from eternity to the office of redeemer of
sinners, this will be allowed, and this is the reason why he is called "the
Lamb slain from the foundation of the word." Rev. xiii. 8. To this end was he
"foreordained, before the foundation of the world." I. Peter i. 20.

2. That the p^i^e of redemption intentionally paid by him then, was infinitely
great and valuable. This also will be allowed.

3. That the moving reason of all this was THE WILL OF GOD. Therefore said
Psalm xl. 7, 8. "Lo I come, I delight to do thy will, O my God." And John x.
18. I lay down my life, this commandment have I received of my Father.

4. Then it became necessary for the honor of all divine perfections, that his
reward should be assigned him, by the same sovereign will, and made infallibly
secure, that he might know certainly what he should have, for the travail of
his soul.

1. The honor of divine justice became interested, in Christ's having a reward
assigned him, and this made infallibly certain. For it is a^ule of natural
righteousness, "the labourer is worthy of his hire," Luke x. 7. but how this
costly atonement should succeed, or whether it should certainly succeed at
all, could not be made quite certain to Jesus Christ, but by an absolute
determination or decree, wherein God pledgeth himself to the redeemer, to cause
to be effectuated such success and reward infallibly. There is nothing in all
existence absolutely infallible but God. The reason of this case demanded
infallibility of security to Jesus Christ. Therefore Romans v. viii. 29. speaks
in this manner, he did Predestinate, or absolutely decree and appoint, those
whom he foreknew, to be conformed to the image of his son; that he, i. e.
Christ, might be quite sure that he should be the first born among many
brethren. therefore it is said, in Gal. iii. 17. that the law could not
disannul the covenant which was confimed before of God in Christ, and Isaiah
describes this righteous settlement thus, Isa, liii 10. "when thou shall make
his soul an offering for sin, he shall see his seed", and when all this is
fulfilled in fact, then justice is honored, for God the father has dealt justly
by his suffering son.

Obj. But we make this reward the greater, and more honorable, by excluding
election; and allowing the whole humane race to Christ, instead of an elect
number.

Ans. That is no honor at all, but an infinite reproach, which advances one
attribute of God, at the expense, and infinite dishonor of another.
Righteousness and justice are attributes of God, immediately dishonored by sin,
and they have a primary demand for reparation of honors; but in the device of
salvation for all men no equal monument of honor, to these divine attributes is
allowed at all.

It is indeed said, that Jesus Christ supplied this defect, by equal honors to
those divine attributes, but we all know that no man knows any thing at all
about this affair but what he finds in the Bible, we also equally know not only
that the Bible says no such thing, but affirms, and uniformly maintains the
reverse, viz. that Jesus Christ did not make his soul an offering for all
sinners, as has been proved, but for those only whom God had chosen, or elected
in Christ, according to Ephesians. i. 4. therefore Rev. xiv. 4. says, "these are
they which follow the Lamb; these were redeemed from among men," consequently
no atonement was actually made so the rest of mankind; therefore u^ppeased
wrath impends him still; and eternal punishment is prepared for them, as has
been proved already.

So that the denial of the doctrine of election, implies infinite dishonor to
the righteousness of God; which can be solved no way but on the avowed
principle of the bible, viz. that Jesus Christ did perfect honor to inju^ed
justice, by an equal atonement, for all who were given him, by the father in
the covenant of redemption; and the same divine attribute is honored, as to all
others by infliction of the penalty always suffered to the breach of the law.

2. So also the mercy of God is honored by the doctrine of election. Therefore
on the plan of the Bible, which always implies this doctrine, the ^xxxv Psalm,
10. v. says, "mercy and truth are met together: righteousness and peace have
kissed each other." And this in consequence of the salvation wrought out by
Christ, named in the foregoing 9. v. And on the same account the Apostle says,
Ephesians. i. 4.5.6. that God's having predestined those whom he had chosen, or
elected in Christ, to the adoption of children, by Jesus Christ to himself,
according to the good pleasure of his will, is to the praise of the glory of
his grace, and the same Apostle teaches Romans ix. 23. that "the riches of his
glory are made known, on the vessels of mercy before prepared unto glory." Nay
mercy is eminently honored by election, two ways.

1. Because mercy, love, and goodwill to men, are the source of it. Therefore
the Apostle ascribes election, which is according to the foreknowledge of God
the father, to the abundance of his mercy, I, Pet. 1.2.3. so it is called
election of grace, or mere mercy, Romans xi. 5.

2. Because abounding mercy is the effect and consequence of election, "he has
chosen you to salvation;" and to holiness and faith, as the only way to that
salvation. II. These. ii. 13. they who are elected, "have grace and peace
multiplied to them," I. Pet. i. 2. election infallibly issues in "a lively
hope, of the inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, and that fades not away,
reserved in heaven for them," I. Pet. i. 4. and they are surely "kept by the
power of God, through says to that salvation," 5. v. but for men to ascibe to
mercy, the salvation of all men, without any warrant from God, is such a
dishonor to the mercy of God, as weakens the scriptural testimony about it; and
destroys the ground and reason of christian confidence in it; because of
course, the Bible is not to be depended on about it. The like might be alleged
of every other attribute of God.

So it appears that it was necessary there should be an election of some to
eternal life, that Jesus Christ might have infallible assurance of seeing the
travail of his soul, and of being satisfied, that as many as were given him, in
that inflexible decree, should certainly be with him, to behold his glory, and
shout his praise forever and ever. And it was necessary as an infallible ground
of assurance and certainty, that every attribute of God, should be seen and
held, honorable and glorious forever. For nothing at all, in a scheme of favor
to sinners, can be an infallible ground of certainty, but a decree of God. Nor
any thing make the import of such decree publicly certain, but proper
assurance that it derives from the inflexible, and rightfully sovereign WILL OF
GOD: having in view the glory of all his attributes, and the infallible display
of infinite mercy in the salvation of some sinners; which indeed, as the case
is, is a number past all numbering, "which no man can number. Rev. vii. 9.

XIV. If the doctrine of salvation for all men, and so of course, the exclusion
of the divine doctrine of gracious election, imports a supposition of the
natural sufficiency of the will of man, to any good work; then that doctrine of
salvation for all men, with its consequent implications, is to be avoided, with
most serious detestation. Some reason for this conclusion shall be given.

1. The doctrine of salvation for all men, implying as is above supposed, is
certainly inconsistent with the evidences of the mind and will of God,
above cited; and with innumerable others; a specimen of which now follows, II.
John, ix. 10.11. "whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the doctrine of
Christ, has not God: he that abides in the doctrine of Christ, has both the
Father and the Son. If there come any to you and bring not this doctrine,
receive him not into your house; neither bid him God speed, for he that bids
him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds." The capital idea in this passage
of scripture, is in the word "transgresses." Some evidence of its sense and
pertinency in this case, must be added.

1. This word in the original is Parahainoon, Erasmus renders its theme by
P^a^varicor, but this word signifies to betray a cause, to plead false; to take
the side of an adversary. Consequently such is the meaning of "transgresses,"
in this text, and such is the matter we are warned against in it. BEZA, renders
the greek word, by aherro, which signifies ^o go a s^ray from an established
rule, such therefore is the meaning of "transgresses" in the text, and against
all who do so we are warned in it.

2. The word of inspiration rendered "a bideth" in this text is menoon, Leigh's
crit. sac. says it signifies, Constantiam, et penitissiman Inhesionem, a
constant and most deep inhesion in the doctrine of Christ, implying that all
who do not so, are to be avoided by this command of God, on its own fearful
penalty.

3. The above mentioned word rendered "transgresses," is used Mat. xv. 3. to
signify making void, or setting aside, the doctrine, or commandments of God, by
mere devices of men, such therefore as do so, we are warned against in this
text,

4. The margin of the Bible refers the reader to I. Cor. v. 11. as of a
parrellel nature and importance, but there the counsel subjoined is; "with such
an one no not to eat." It also refers to I. Cor. xvi. 22. which is, "if any man
love not the Lord Jesus Christ;" of which his principles and practice must be
evidence, "let him be an^thema maranatha," he also refers to G^. i. 8. "if we,
or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel to you, than that we have
preached to you, let him be accursed," and to show how much God himself
insisted on keeping the entire system of the gospel uncorrupted: it is repeated
again in the next verse, "let him be accursed."

Indeed the author of the Bible, so well knew its perfection as a system: and
the most important necessity, of it, being preserved pure, and considered as a
perfect test of Right; both in things to be believed, and in things to be done;
that though he approved the Church of P^rgamos, in most points, yet he charged
them, with having among them such as held the doctrine of Ba^aa^, the crime of
which was, casting a stumbling block before the children of Israel. They had
also those who held the doctrine of the Nicholaitans, which God hated. which
admonishes all people, as they fear God, and would be conformed to his perfect
system, and so be acceptable to him; that they avoid and oppose a set of
notions, so palpably inconsistent with the whole Bible as this of salvation for
all men, with its appendages, have been proved to be.

2. The doctrine of salvation for all men is an open affront to the letter, as
well as evident meaning of plain scripture. The Bible assures us, that God of
his abounding grace, designed some, yea, many of the fallen race of men to
salvation, by Jesus Christ, and gave them to him for that purpose, and these
are they for whom he made satisfaction; which is the plain sense of the
following expressions of the mind of God. viz. John xvii. 6. etc. "I have
manifested thy name to the men whom thou gave me out of the world, thine they
were and thou gave them me, I pray for them, I pray not for the world, but
for them which thou have given me. They are not of the world, even as I am not
of the world. For their sakes I sanctify myself; that they also may be
sanctified through the truth." John xviii. 9. "Of them which thou gave me, I
have lost none." John i. 12. "To as many as received him, to them gave he power
to be sons of God." John iii. 16. "That whosoever believes in him should not
perish." John x. 29. "My Father who gave them me, is greater than all." John
vi. 39. "And his will is, that of all which he has given me, I should lose
nothing." The apostle's object was "to save some." "All men have not faith."
II. These. iii. 3. The flock of God is "a little flock." Yet it is "the
pleasure of God to give them the kingdom." Luke xii. 32. Only they who have
part in the first resurrection, are written in the Lamb's book of life. Rev.
xiii. 8.20.6. Only those "whom he fore-knew did he predestinate to be conformed
to the image of his son." Romans viii. 29. Spiritual blessings are peculiar to
such as are chosen in Christ; they only being predestined to the adoption of
children. Ephesians. i. 3.4.5. These are the elected, or chosen generation; the
purchased people I. Pet. ii. 9. 'In no wise shall any enter into the kingdom of
heaven, but they who are written in the Lamb's book of life." Rev. xxi. 27.

3. The doctrine of salvation for all men, tends to deceive multitudes with
hopes of salvation, to whom God has given no hopes of it. For only such as
believe and are conformed to the Bible, can have salvation. Mark xvi. 16. "To
every soul of them who obey unrighteousness, shall be rendered indignation and
wrath." Romans ii. 8, 9. "The wicked shall be turned into hell, with all the
nations who forget God. Psalm. ix. 17. Be not deceived, the unrighteous shall
not inherit the kingdom of God. I. Cor. vi. 9. And the holy book abounds with
such sentences. To all which, the device of salvation for all men, is a most
daring; opposition; and the fairest way to support a pretense of this device,
is to deny the divinity of Jesus Christ, and the Bible. And after Deism, the
road is open to Atheism, and either of these will decide the point, who shall
be saved and who not. But it is affecting to consider multitudes, without any
qualifications for future happiness, pacifying their consciences with this,
that some men, and perhaps, because of advantage, they call them great and
good, affirm that Christ died for all, and of co^ that all shall be saved. So
because this better pleases a slothful wicked heart, they turn a deaf ear to
the bible, and to all who urge its contents, for they cannot hold both to be
true, since they are directly opposite to each other. And as God will not
bestow salvation in a way dishonorable to Jesus Christ and the Bible, so all
such must perish.

Hoping what has been offered on the foregoing topics, may excite some hand
more at leisure, and better furnished to do them justice; a few corollaries
will conclude the whole.

1. The doctrine of election has divine authority, i. e. absolute assurance was
given to the redeemer, for whom, and how many, he should make satisfaction to
divine justice, which number of mankind being as has been shown quite
numberless; is in the scripture called the Lord's inheritance; his people, his
portion, heritage etc. which being chosen for his part, he will never leave nor
forsake. Heb. xiii. 5. to these the kingdom of heaven is secured by covenant.
Heb. ix. 15. and it must be high arrogance to assign to that kingdom any among
men, not quallified according to charter, and who cannot be named in the LAMB's
book of life.

2. Then the great God is absolute sovereign; and it is lawful for him to do
what he will with his own. Mat. xx. 15, all mankind were his sole property: and
he dealt bountifully with them. They have gone astray, and wasted his goods;
though he had given them a summary of his law, by which they knew, the demerit
of sin was death in all senses. Now all their goods are forfeited; and they
have no claim, but execution of penalty. Yet this was the time of love, he
passed by, and said to his Jerusalem, as a type of his elect, LIVE. Ezekiel. xvi.
6. and when he saw there was none to save them, his own arm brought salvation,
he said, "I will redeem them from death." Hos. xiii. 14. and as the source of
this hope, was the mere benevolence of God, so when he had glorified himself in
such a purpose; he held himself obliged to glorify himself again in an
answerable accomplishment. John xii. 28.

3. To what purpose then can it be, to palm on him, a more extensive
inheritance, among men, than he who is Lord of all, chose for that purpose?
Especially as no manner of title can be given, for want of authority. Will he
thank them for it? surely no. Will he not rather reprove them, and set these
things in dreadful order before their eyes? Psalm l. 21.22.

4. Then perfect righteousness may be affirmed of every word, and every work of
God. "He is a rock, his work is perfect, all his ways are judgment, a God of
truth, and without iniquity just and right is he." Deuteronomy. xxxii. 4. Therefore he
curses them who pervert judgment. Deuteronomy. xxvii. 19. And will surely reprove
them who deal deceitfully for him. Job xiii. 7, 8, 9, 10, 11.

5. Then it certainly becomes us, to regulate our sentiments and conduct,
exactly according to the determinations of his most perfect system; for every
deviation from it, will receive a just recompense of reward. Heb. ii. 2.
Besides, by this word shall we all be judged at the last day. For when the
three books, which are the public registers of the kingdom, shall be opened,
of which the Bible is one; while omniscience and conscience, are the other two;
all men will be judged out of the things written in these books; just as they
have treated them. Rev. xx. 12. So it is the highest interest, as well as duty,
of all men to govern themselves entirely, by the most legible of these books;
the Bible. For "it is a quick discerner of the thoughts, and intents of the
heart." Heb. iv. 12.

6. By attention to the Bible we gain the reasons, which influenced the divine
mind, in concerting his plan, especially as to his choosing some of mankind, and
not all to salvation, viz.

1. That he might thereby establish a witnessing monument, of the righteous
sovereignty, of which he knew himself well possessed; and which he knew it was
best for men to know and revere. For he knew all men were his absolute
property; and that they were all bankrupts; having totally forfeited all good,
and lost all ground of claim to a restoration. He knew also that his justice
was as honorable as his mercy; yea that both were alike honorable. And though
he was under no bonds to show mercy at all; yet such is his benevolent nature,
that mercy pleased him. But some of men, were due to his justice, as a monument
of its righteousness. And the judge of all the earth must do right. Some
ancient evidences of his righteous sovereignty, are not to be disputed. He
defeated the council of "AHITH^PHEL, to the intent that he might bring evel
upon ABSALOM." II. Sam. xvii. 14. And did in fact give order in such manner, as
should issue in the final blindness of many. Isaiah vi. 9, 10. To this end he
sent strong delusions to some, that they might be damned. II. These. ii. 11,
12. So his righteousness appears, in making the wicked for the day of evil.
Prove. xvi. 4. And disobedient ones were appointed to stumble at the word. I
Pet. ii. 8. And some as natural brute beasts made to be destroyed, shall
utterly perish. II. Pet. ii. 12.

2. That he might make his grace appear as self-sufficient, in making salvation
infallible sure to some, who deserved it no more than those who were before
ordained to damnation. Jud. iv. And to bind them, by the strongest bonds to
honor his laws, and praise his grace forever. And they will forever "sing unto
the Lord, because he has done marvelous things." Psalm xcviii. 1.

3. That he might furnish the Lapis lydius, or effectual touchstone; by which
to try the spirits of mankind. Men often say, "I go sir." But when they find
the evident drift of the Bible, is to exalt the Lord alone, and to humble the
pride of all flesh; then they turn back, and walk no more with it. They say
these are hard sayings; and they are offended. For "they are lovers of their
own selves." II. Tim. iii. 2. And cannot endure what God has given for sound
doctrine. II. Tim. iv. 3. And sometimes they "shoot their arrows, even bitter
words" against christianity and turn Deists. And so make their folly manifest
to all men. II. Tim. iii. 9. But God "will render to every man according to his
deeds." Romans ii. 6.

7. Then to hold the salvation of all men, is no evidence of love either to God
or man. It is no evidence of love to God, for love to God, always coincides
with his written word. Therefore Christ says, "If ye love me, keep my
commandments." John xiv. 15. And "if any man love me, he will keep my words."
John xiv. 23. Whereas the notion of salvation for all men, is not only no part
of the word of God; but most palpably inconsistent with it, as has been proved.

Nor does this notion indicate love to man. For love to man never flatters them
in sin, never leads into snares indulgently; nor leaves them in evident danger.
All which is true of encouragements of salvation to any, in a way directly
contrary to the word of God. For the constant manner of the word of God, is to
urge faith and holiness, as the only support of a hope of salvation, and to
denounce damnation to all destitute of these qualifications. Love seeks the
good, not the harm of its object. Faith and holiness are the honor, as well as
happiness of their subject. These therefore are the first design of the Bible;
and it gives assurance to the subjects of them be they otherwise who, and what
they may; that they shall be happy forever. And there is no hope to any other;
for "the wicked shall be turned into hell, with all the nations that forget
God." Psalm ix. 17.

8. Then it is the part of inhuman cruelty to flatter men with the hopes of
heaven, in a way utterly inconsistent with the determined counsel of the God of
heaven. And so in a way which must necessarily terminate in eternal misery;
from he nature of the case, as well as from the word of God. For sin and guilt
are the natural constituents of misery. "Deceive not with thy lips," is an
express law of God. Prove. xxiv. 28. There is a word of doctrine by the slight
and craftiness of men, whereby they lie in wait to deceive. Ephesians. iv. 14. There
can be no peace to such as take measures to destroy men. What peace had ZIMRI
who slew his master?

The author therefore begs the liberty of a few words in friendly freedom with
these men, who support the doctrine of salvation for all men.

Dear Sirs, You allow the Bible is the word of God; you make use of it as such;
you allow its authority is well established. How can you fall to see the
importance of its analogy, i. e. the consistency of one part with another? God
is one; and his system is like himself. It is like the coat which Christ wo^e,
without seam, woven throughout. You must have some difficulty to reconcile your
views, with many parts of the scripture. How much safer would it be for you to
suspect a scheme of sentiments, of which you must have the trouble of doubting
whether it will be owned, or not, in the burning day? Than to run a
presumptious venture, of the final displeasure of your judge, for perverting
his word, and for teaching men so. It is most certain that they who love his
word in its most manifestly consistent sense, must have peace, the peace of God
which passes understanding. Their consciousness must happify them. But
presumers in divine matters, cannot have the witness within them, that in
uprightness and godly sincerity, they hold their religious conversation. It
will not do, to run risques in matters of eternity. When our hearts are sound
in God's statutes, they will feel blessedness. And God will love them who
unfeignedly love his holy laws. God has certainly communicated his mind to us
in the scriptures as he thought best. Why are you not willing he should judge
for you in that matter: Since you allow the divinity of the system? Our Savior
says, "if it were not so, I would have told you." John xiv. 2. His kindness and
wisdom certainly concerted the whole scheme of the Bible. Can you suppose on
serious consideration, that if he really intended the salvation of all men; he
would not have told us so, plainly enough? What could be his motive to conceal
that matter; when doubtless, if it was his mind, he could have made it quite
indisputable? He was certainly at liberty to say what he pleased about it. Why
did he not say it, and say it always: that so important a matter, might be out
of all doubt? But you see he has not. Was he uncertain about the mind of God,
in that affair, himself? Surely not. Why did he not speak out then? And not
leave us so embarrassed. Whereas he has given us one concise emphatical
counsel; which if duly attended to, would relieve us entirely, viz. John v. 39.
"Search the scriptures they are they which testify of me." The word rendered
search is ereunate; its theme is rendered by S^ru^or; please to admit a few
words from the noted Mr. PERKINS on the import of this word. Leigh's Crit. Sac.
in Verb. He says, "the word is Metaphorical, taken from such as search in
mines, for silver and gold. They will dig deep, they will break the several
clods of earth to pieces, to find the golden o^e. Thus must we deal with the
scripture. Search as we would for gold, or some precious thing, which we would
fain find." Prove. ii. 4. "Search. i. e. shake and lift them, as the word
signifies. Search narrowly, till the true force and meaning, of every sentence;
yea of every word and syllable, nay of every letter and iota therein, is known
and understood; compare place with place, the scope of one place, with the
scope of another. Things going before, with what comes after, yea compare word
with word, letter with letter; and so search it thoroughly." Thus he. And is not
divine counsel worth this pain? Is not our own information, peace, and eternal
interest worth it? Would not all this labor be well repaid, if by that mean,
we got evidence of the mind of God? Well, he has said "then shall we know, when
we follow on to know the Lord." Hos. vi. 3. And doubtless giving good heed to
these counsels, would prevent much darkness and trouble; and secure us from
many dangerous sentiments and practices. Besides, you are sensible, my friends;
that you are somewhat unhappy, not only by the dissension of many from you; but
for want of some more clear and convincing scripture light, in your favor. And
because you are sensible there is some appearance of evidence against you in
the Bible. Now what if through imperfection, or something; for you know you are
not infallible: it should appear at the last day, that you was utterly
mistaken; for God will have his own way, for all you, or me? And it is
certainly reasonable to call it in question. If so, he will probably say,
something like this; I told you, on the whole plainly enough; my people in
generations before you, understood it well. But you precipitately made your own
conclusions; you said, I would save all men, but I did not tell you so; and you
know I told you many things in my word, quite inconsistent with it: but you
willingly kept your own sentiment about it. And now see the crowds yonder, who
were made secure in sin by your doctrine; pleasing themselves that all would be
saved, and so they were safe. And now their day is over; I have dealt with
them, just (...) I told you, and them, that I would. They came here in their
sins, and I have banished them to hopeless chains forever and ever: according
to the plain word of the Bible. And now as judge, and righteous avenger, I
require the blood of all that multitude, at your hands, who were the means of
their destruction. The very thought is shocking! And it is no mark of an honest
heart, to slight a hint of such importance. It is absolutely necessary that
this matter be settled happily in a finding time; before despair shall render
it useless.

THE END.
The Reader is desired to correct the following E of the Press, viz.
Page. Line. read 3. 19. sinful lassitude. do. 20. a colon, after preface. 4.
6. lift up standard. do. 19. world are come. 5. 6. gross error. do. 21. and so
tend. 7. 5. has wrested. do. 6. numerous avocations. do. 4. fm. bot. every high
conceit. 9. 16. used even. 10. 7. sense of the text in question. 13. 6. fm.
bot. semicolon, after God. 15. 11. the whole context. do. 12. fm. bot. text is
sooteer. do. 2. fm. bot. Sc^t^tu observes in his evan. E: 16. 10. and 11. we
believe. do. 8. fm. bot. world is Kosmos. do. 4. fm. bot. Critic. Sac. 17. 12.
it means only. do. 12. it is used with. do. 15. p^i olou. do. 8. fm. bot.
expressly excludes himself. 18. 17. fm. bot. will keep thee. do. 8. and 5. f.
b. wondered. do. 3. fm. bot. then, by drawing. 20. 19. in this text. do. 9. fm.
bot. things in heaven. do. 2. fm. bot. ana Kep^elaiosastbai. do. 1. fm. bot.
ZANCHY 21. 1. BEZA. 23. 7. so that as all. 24. 11. fm. bot. and O^MIER. 25. 10.
fm. bot. Co^ex Fatiaicus 28. 16. signify absolute. 29. 12. a^ enocho. 30. 14.
fm. bot. in ^erno s^. 33. 16. eis to^ T^pon. 34. 7. Chasma a^rig^non. 39. 9. on
the supposition. do. 4. fm. bot. it is effected. 42. 20 indicative of the same.
43. 20. there is no need. 44. 1. and 2. the wages of sin is death. do. 15. and
then his own. 46. 10. impends them still. do. 19. and 20. always suffixed to.
43. 13. in this text. do. 8. fm. bot. of its being. 52. 12. fm. bot.
infallibly. 53. 16. men never. ^^. 14. shake and (...)


