A NARRATIVE OF THE Strange Principles, Conduct AND CHARACTER Of the People
known by the Name of SHAKERS: Whose ERRORS have spread in several Parts of
NORTH AMERICA, but are beginning to diminish, and ought to be guarded against.

In TWO NUMBERS.

By Amos Tailor.

Late of their Number, and acquainted with them in five different Governments
for ten Months.

NUMBER I.

Wherein their whole Constitution is laid open, more particularly the Method
used by that People in making their Proselytes.

WORCESTER, (Massachusetts) Printed for the AUTHOR. MDCCLXXXII.

A NARRATIVE OF THE Strange Principles, Conduct and Character of the SHAKERS.
WHEN we consider the infant state of civil power in America, since the
revolution began, every infringement on the natural rights of humanity, every
effort to undermine our original constitution, either in civil or
ecclesiastical order, saps the foundation of independency. To see a body of
more than two thousand people, having no will of their own, but governed by a
few Europeans conquering their adherents into the most unreserved subjection,
argues some insatuating power; some deep, very deep design at bottom. To
describe what this power is will be the design of the following Natrative, and
by what means this people are supported in their delusion.

There are sew people in this land no doubt but what have heard of the contents
of VALENTINE RATHBUN'S Narrative, in which some gross absurdities in point of
doctrine and worship are pointed out. But since this people have increased in
numbers, they have established such orders and founded such institutions among
themselves as renders it very easy to trace them in their discipline to the
seat and foundation of their power. For this purpose the writer thinks proper
to lay open to the learned world, more particularly, the whole body of their
discipline, that the public may be able to judge for themselves what this
power is, and from what it proceeds.

The predominant principle in the heart of man is the love of dominion and
preeminency. Pride is the root of all sin. From this principle the whole
fabric of that religion is founded. These people are artful, designing men,
especially their leaders. The common people who are imposed upon are many of
them very sincere. If any person opens his mind to them, as the confession of
sin is termed, they commonly gain their point. The reason of their success may
be attributed on the one hand to a very extraordinary skill which these people
have acquired in hearing confessions; and on the other to a likeness of
principle and motive which creates a peculiar sympathy and union. They are
universally of one spirit in belief of, obedience to, and raised expectations
from their church. Their discipline is founded on the supposed perfection of
their leaders: The Mother, it is said, obeys God through Christ; European
elders obey her; American laborers obey them: The common people obey them
while confession is made of every secret in nature, from the oldest to the
youngest. The perpetual labors of which gives their teachers experience and
skill. By this means the people are made to believe themselves to be seen
through and through in the gospel glass of perfection by their teachers, as
they express themselves, for hundreds of miles in an instant, and that they are
arrived to that state of glory by which they behold not only the estate of the
living, but of the dead, with innumerable worlds of spirits good and bad.

When the extraordinary appearance of strange exercise in their way of worship
causes a doubt in the minds of any spectator, they frequently inculcate the
innocence of laying open the secrets of life, provided a confession is kept
concealed, intimating the benefit of the experience of their leaders in
particular cases of conscience, as being privileged thereby with especial
opportunities to judge for themselves concerning the truth of their profession.

Such like arguments to a mind that begins to be open to their insinuations,
especially where there has been the weight of some burden on the conscience
beforetime, will by the allurement of these people, introduce a person partly
from curiosity, or some impression from these instructions, to use a
familiarity of laying open the whole of his life, upon which the greatest
condescension is paid to the intended proselyte.

His principles and practices in life are all laid open -- predominant vices
exposed -- habit of mind and thoughts of his heart are drawn from him. The
person thus exposed receives instruction applicable to secret cases of
conscience; is told that there is no delusion but only in sin. That is it which
they warn him against. And these people have a faculty to draw the attention of
new proselytes into a belief of extraordinary perfection in resolving the
difficulties laid before them, studiously disengaging their attachment to
common vice into a spirit of idolatry in respect to them and their
instructions, effectually to secure their dominion over the conscience. The
adherent finds some consistency of moral instructions and skill in determining
cases of conscience; an easy conquest over former vices; suddenly grows perfect
in his own imagination; sees on the one hand great conformity in their society,
alike in sentiment, each one forgoing his old habitual course, comented
together in opposition to a world of persecution, having one will to govern
them though of the female sex. Which sympathy, love, power and union in this
delusion they believe to be of God. On the other hand observing some spirit of
intemperance among those who are not acquainted with this splendid scheme of
new religion, he is thereby confirmed in his error. Sometimes they endeavor to
frighten those whom they cannot allure, by throwing out a censorious spirit; by
judging all who fall not in with their way; which has the defired effect, more
especially with persons of a timorous make and constitution, which is but a
stavish scheme in their delusion. Subservient to their purposes, are strict
injunctions laid on every adherent, not to weaken one another by scruples of
conscience, trials and darkness, such cases being reserved to their elders and
teachers; besides all records and general orders are kept concealed, excepting
from the individuals who are particularly concerned.

The doctrines which are more clearly come to light since the first rise of
their religion, are as follows, viz.

First. That God, through Jesus Christ in the Church, is reconciled with man.

Second. That sins confessed to God's witnesses are forgiven in the Church as
soon as forsaken.

Third. That Christ is come a light into human nature, to enlighten every man
that comes into the world without distinction.

Fourth. That no man is born of God until by faith he is assimulated into the
character of Jesus Christ in his Church.

Fifth. That in obedience to that Church a man's faith will increase until he
comes to be one with Christ in the millenium Church state.

Sixth. That every man is a free agent to walk in the true light, and so to
choose or reject the truth of God within him.

Seventh. Of consequence that it is in every man's power to be obedient to the
faith without which he shall suffer so much loss.

Eighth. That this is the gospel of the first resurrection which is now
preached in that Church.

Ninth. That all who are born of God (as they explain the new birth) shall
never taste of the second death.

Tenth. That those who are said to have been regenerated among Christians are
only regenerated in part, therefore are not assimulated into the character of
Christ in his Church while here in the body, of consequence not tasting the
happiness of the first resurrection, cannot escape in part the second death.

Eleventh. They hold that the word everlasting when applied to the punishment
of the wicked, refers only to a limited space of time, excepting in the case of
those who fall from their Church.

Twelfth. That the second death having power over such as rise not into the
character of Christ in the first resurrection, will in due time fill up the
measure of his sufferings beyond the grave.

Thirteenth. That the righteousness and sufferings of Christ in his members are
both one; that every man suffers personally for himself, with inexpressible woe
and misery for sins not repented of notwithstanding this union, until final
redemption.

Fourteenth. They believe Christ will never make any public appearance as a
single person, but only in his saints: That the judgment day is now begun in
that Church.

Fifteenth. They believe no salvation out of obedience to the sovereignty of
their dominion; That all sin which is committed against God, is done against
them, and must be pardoned for Christ's sake through them, for which confession
must be made to them.

Sixteenth. They believe that their Church is come out of the order of natural
generation, to be as Christ was; that those who have wives are as though they
had none; that by these means Heaven begins upon earth, and they thereby loose
their sensual or earthly relation to Adam the first, and come to be transparent
in their ideas in the bright and heavenly visions of God.

Seventeenth. They hold to a travel and labor for the redemption of departed
spirits.

There are other articles less important which they occasionally advance, which
for brevity's sake must be omitted but the above are a summary of their
principles.

The writer will now proceed in order to trace them to that seat of power which
produces those strange operations that are frequent among them. By the same
caution they use in the first introduction of their proselytes, they carefully
lead them by several degrees into the belief of their tenets, and of
consequence into the several exercises of their worship. They firstly inculcate
a principle of passive obedience, as introductory to some future knowledge of
divine mysteries to which they will attain by a strict adherence to Church
precepts. They are exhorted not to despise (by strict order) the things they
understand not. And being supposed to have some resolution of warfare against
their sins by personal labors, they are bid to judge of the safety of
communion with that society by the victory they obtain against predominant
vice, not to inquire into principles any faster than as they shall come into
vision by leaving their sin.

And since the human frame and construction of man is such, that great effects
may be produced merely by, as it were, a mechanical operation on the nerves,
they improve them to excite the attention of mankind, as if it were the strange
work spoken of in Scripture, which should be brought to pass in the latter
days. They therefore exhort their adherents, with great solemnity in their
addresses, to cherish such kind of motions upon themselves as are frequently
observed on the human body of others, telling them the operations of God's
spirit are in scripture said to be diverse. And that as they become more
acquainted with them, although they carry some outward appearance of gross
absurdities in the eyes of the world, yet will they assuredly find an inward
spirit of piety and holiness running through the whole of their exercises: Tell
them that God therefore owns them, and his holy spirit moves them to such
extraordinary ecstasies of mind and motions of the body. Thus are their
proselytes duped into the belief of something more than common, and are led to
judge of every whimsical passion of animal nature, separate from grace to be a
part of their religion, while they at the same time, through a misled judgment,
condemn the grace of God in the hearts of those who make not so much of human
passion. It has been observed that persons who newly open their minds to this
society, leave immediately the company of their old neighbors and
acquaintances, some of their old vicious habits, and all their old religion,
and experiences, and are cemented into the union of deep delusion, resigning
their former wills to this new mother, to be governed by her, through her
elders, tutors and laborers, which of consequence, produce likeness of
sentiment and raised elevation of mind. However mysterious it may seem,
numberless instances can be produced where liars, swearers, drunkards,
extortioners, unclean, unjust, covetous persons, proud, self-willed, heady,
high minded, etc. at least many of these characters have all been brought down
to confess, and absolutely for a time to leave their ordinary and common vices
for the sake of uniting into one general spirit of downright idolatry, crying
out with one voice as in Acts xix. 34, great is Diana of the Ephesians; or,
great is the Elect Mother of the Shakers! These people gain advantage to rise
in authority by judging in matters of conscience; giving out their precepts;
receiving perpetually confession from their converts; elevating their minds in
their several exercises; reforming them from the common delusion of ordinary
vice for this grand delusion, still more notoriously absurd, of worshipping the
creature, instead of the Creator, who is God blessed forevermore. Some have
been ready to query if these operations can be performed without the assistance
of some supernatural power. The delicacy of an answer to which requires
moderation in determining a matter of universal enquiry. It will be granted
however, by what has been already written, that great appearances of more than
common power may proceed from the union and fellowship of such a deluded body
of people, whose affections and animal spirits are cemented into a likeness of
passion and transport, being bewitched, as it were, or enchanted with the
splendid show of perfection: Should this be the most favorable circumstance in
regard to that people, and they be ignorant of any absolute league, but only
among themselves; it is most worthy of being truly distinguished from pure and
vital religion, and ought to be abhorred and utterly detested by all, even as
an infringement on the common rights of humanity. For there is a perpetual
scene of trembling, quivering, shaking, sighing, crying, groaning, screaming,
jumping, singing, dancing and turning, which strikes the animal part, operating
on the nerves of the greatest opposers, in following which the adherent finds
an easy transition from favor with them to go into their several exercises, to
mourn and rejoice with them, to kneel, to leap, and dance, to turn and shake,
and sometimes to utter forth their unknown mutter, so gibberish that a person
not deluded would imagine they were a company of madmen, by whom their passions
in different colors are artfully displayed; this they call the gift of new
tongues, by which their opposers oftentimes find themselves severely scolded
at, sometimes mocked, entreated or flattered, according to the operation of
their several humors, frequently gathering round some one of their own company
who is not quite obedient enough for them, like spiteful birds in fighting, and
peck upon him in their unknown mutter, as if they would pick his flesh from
him. If this will not do in such a case of discipline, the common people are
informed of his secret sins, long before confessed to the elders, and gone
before hand to judgment who now begin to hold their disobedient rebel in open
derision, showing the anger of God toward him, as they term it. They tell him
that God has revealed to them that he has been guilty of such and such sins,
that he has never repented of them; for if he had, these sins would never have
come up again to judgment; that he is in danger of falling away; that it is
impossible for their church to lay any thing upon him which is contrary to the
will of God. All hands fall to, and justify some injunction he complains of as
a matter of grievance. If his mind is perplexed, and he seeks to know the
reason of particular orders, they entangle him in his difficulty to make him
comply with his duty, warning him at his peril not to dispute the authority of
the church, not suffering him to enjoy any peace until bewitched with the
effect of their discipline, he finally gives up his reason, sense, judgment,
will and affection, being overcome with their apparent harmony among
themselves, and excessive severity toward him. He then receives double
congratulations from their whole society, in full rejoicing over him as a
sinner that is brought to repentance. By which time this conquered one is
prepared for new battles, in order to help subdue the next rebellious wretch
who dare dispute the mighty canons of that august assembly.

A particular account of the writer's experience in five different governments
is now fitting for the press: In which every useful matter of intelligence
concerning the rise of that people, and their several advances in this new
system will soon be published in the Second Number.

Some of the principal heads of this people are said to be born in the town of
Manchester, in the west of England, and members of West's separate church
there. -- The names of those who have resided in Harvard, Commonwealth of
Massachusetts, from May 1781, to February 1782, are Anna Leese, the Mother,
William Leese, her natural brother, John Parkinton, formerly a Baptist preacher
in England, James Whittiker, chief speaker in the Assemblies, James Shepherd
said to have been a merchant in England, besides two women of that church,
seven in all: The rest of the European Shakers have still resided in
Nisqueunia, above Albany, since their first settlement there, among whom Elder
Ocknell, as he is called by that people, is chief.

The above Mother and four Elders have had the lead of government at Harvard,
over all their adherents for hundreds of miles round them, who have kept up a
store of provision, sufficient for eighty or an hundred people at a time; and
on their settlement first at Harvard, their meeting was kept up by day and
night, chiefly in singing, until after they had got some footing, when it was
immediately turned into heavy dancing, generally about forty or fifty men
together, and as many women separate by themselves in different rooms. Their
meetings consisted of a constant variety of some newly come, and others just
ready to leave them; -- some would stay two, some six, some ten, and some
twenty days on a visit; -- some would come twice, some thrice, some five, and
some ten times a piece; -- some would come twenty, some fifty, some an hundred,
and some two hundred miles: Besides they have had laborers constantly going
and coming, making new proselytes, and confirming their old ones further and
further in this millenium state of their church as they profess; the whole of
which is manifestly done to introduce popery and ecclesiastical power. -- Their
meetings generally continued every night until about two o'clock after
midnight, and very frequently until the break of day; no distinction on the
sabbath, excepting on the account of hard labor.

These people are generally instructed to be very industrious especially at
their own dwelling places of abode, to bring in their ability to keep up their
meeting. Multitudes spend their whole time this way, and are supported by
others; they generally come, and always go, by order. They vary in their
exercises -- their heavy dancing, as it is called, is performed by a perpetual
springing from the house floor, about four inches up and down, both in the
men's and women's apartment, moving about as thick as they can crowd, with
extraordinary transport, singing sometimes one at a time, and sometimes more
than one, making a perfect charm.

This elevation draws upon the nerves so as that they have intervals of
shuddering as if they were in a strong sit of the ague. -- They sometimes clap
hands and leap so as to strike the joyce above their heads. They throw off
their outside garments in these exercises, and spend their strength very
cheerfully this way; their chief speaker oftentimes calls for their attention,
when they all stop and hear some harrangue, and then fall to dancing again.
Sometimes when they are weary of this heavy exercise of body, they stop and
fall on their knees and make a sound like the roaring of many waters, in groans
and cries to God, as they say, for the wicked world who persecute them.

There might be written a volume if it were necessary to settle their character
that way; but the writing will be brief, therefore shall conclude this first
number by requesting those who are masters of language to excuse his manner of
style, as not being reviewed by any man of learning, but wrote chiefly at first
hand, and committed to the press, promising to accept of the best assistance in
the next number -- Warning all men to guard against these destructive errors;
desiring to give public praise to God for his own escape from that delusion.

It is to be hoped from all people knowing to any part of their character, that
necessary matters of intelligence will be minuted down and communicated for the
press, so that any evidence of witchcraft, or unchaste behavior more
particularly may be produced from good authority, if any such things there be,
which the writer shall cheerfully give notice of in his next publication.

That God may preserve the United States of America from public innovations is
the desire of the writer, and that this people may brought to see their mistake
will be the unfeigned wish of every considerate person, as it is of

AMOS TAILOR.

GENERAL ADVERTISEMENT, intended to promote Printing, and the manufacture of
paper more generally in the United States of America.

ALL Printers who think it worthy of notice are requested to re-publish it in
their several newspapers, and every Bookseller and Paper-Maker, who may think
it will be of service, is requested to circulate it, in order that Rags may be
more universally saved and the prices of paper and printing be reduced, so that
reading may more generally prevail among the poor and common sort of people,

AMOS TAILOR, PRESENTS the following proposals to the Public, viz.

First. It is expected in point of honor, and usefulness to the public, that
the Printers will enter into an agreement not to reprint the original copy of
any general publication, without the knowledge and consent of him who gives the
original copy. Second. It is expected that all printing will be performed
cheaper in proportion to the number of copies struck off at one impression.

Third. It is expected that paper for the press will be disposed of from the
paper-maker, cheaper in proportion to the spirited disposition of the public
to procure ample supplies of stock for the paper-mills.

Fourth. It is expected to this end that every Legislative body and individual
Representative will see the necessity of Committees being appointed and
encouraged in collecting supplies for the paper-manufacture.

Fifth. It is expected that no person taxed will complain of any additional
grievance or expense, when teachers of the rising offspring in the present age,
call upon each child of five years old, to lay up every waste shred of linen
cloth for purchasing new books to promote the art of letters from Committees
aforesaid.

Sixth. It is expected that the whole Bible will be anatomised into the most
perfect order of spelling, and hereafter be introduced into schools of early
piety, by Committees appointed to look after supplies as aforesaid.

All persons are therefore desired to save Rags for the advertiser, or his
order, and deliver the same to the several gentlemen printers, paper-makers,
booksellers and others, where any of his copies may be lodged, until Committees
are appointed by order.

Useful intelligence concerning the people called Shakers, is earnestly desired
to be forwarded by the Massachusetts Representatives to Boston State-House, and
from thence to the author hereof; with any copies for the press, on subjects
likely to promote public virtue and the paper-manufacture withal.

Among the general copies expected to be published by the advertiser, there
will be the first and second Numbers of the Narrative concerning a certain
people known by the name of Shakers; wherein the rise of that people, and the
several advances they have made in their errors, since the common Narrative of
Valentine Rath-bun was published, are laid open.

II. A Book of Poems on the rising glory of the American Empire, founded on the
benefit of training up the blooming offspring of the land in schools of common
learning and early piety.

III. A small book for children, entitled, The Religious Instructor calling for
virtue in the tender breast of every little master and miss belonging to a
school, to lay up each waste shied of cloth for the purchase of a new book to
encourage learning.

IV. A small book for children, entitled, American Babes Instructed to sing an
Anthem of Praise to their divine redeemer, or Religious Singing into schools of
common education, with an easy method of settling schools among the poor sort
of people, for teaching the art of letters in loud schools, so called.

Post-Riders and others will be and hereby are desired, as these copies shall
be published, to distribute and lodge convenient numbers of them in public
places for sale, by order of the following receipt, where credentials of
character are known to be good.

I the subscriber received of (...) the precise number of (...) for the purpose
of collecting good clean linen and cotton and linen rags therefore, at the usual
price given, and to convey them from whence said copies were received without
fail, or otherwise according to order of the author thereof.

These receipts being given, gentlemen in the interior part of the country
will please to promote the following subscription.

WE the Subscribers engage to promote the sale of copies originally wrote by
Amos Tailor, jun. such as shall be revised and recommended by the learned, and
thereby to supply the paper-manufacture of America.

The public are desired to excuse the above form.

AMOS TAILOR.
Harvard, April 15, 1782.

