THE NOVELTY OF NOVELTIES EXAMINED.

THE Novelty of Novelties examined: OR, The New System of RELIGION compared
with Ancient SCRIPTURES, AND Found to be CONTRARY to them ALL. BEING Some
friendly REMARKS on Mr. WINCHESTER's late SERMON, ENTITLED The SEED of the
WOMAN bruising the SERPENT's HEAD.

BY DAVID THOMAS. A. M.

The ruling Passion (be it what it will)
The ruling Passion conquers Reason still.
POPE's ESSAY ON MAN. TRY THE SPIRITS. 1. JOHN iv. 1. PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED FOR
THE AUTHOR. M,DCC,LXXXII.

THE Novelty of Novelties examined, etc.
THE Sermon now before us is certainly a paragon of the kind. Its equal, in all
respects, has perhaps never yet appeared in any language since that unhappy
epoch, the confusion of tongues.

BUT since we are by divine authority commanded to prove all things, before we
venture to imbibe any of those drops the author proposes to impart, we shall
not scruple to bring his water to the criterion of truth, nor make any apology
for seriously trying it by the infallible standard of verity, the Word of God.

WE have been taught not to believe every spirit. This watchword puts us on
our guard, and makes us cautious, lest the potion offered, not flowing from the
ocean of love, nor springing from the fountain of life, but rather from some
stygian lake, should deceive us; and, instead of refreshing our souls, or
exhilerating our spirits, by its pestiferous quality infect our constitutions,
if not poison us to death!

UPON perusal, this discourse is found to be a composition of History and
Divinity. There are also a few sketches of Philosophy and Logic intermixed. The
whole being embellished with many sublime phrases, and enforced with the
strongest expressions of assurance. It is the two principal parts that shall be
now taken into consideration.

AFTER a short introduction, and brief elucidation of the general plan, we are
presented with a concise history of the old creation. The narration is truly
curious; and the project not a little amusing. Every page reflects the author
in a strong light, and shows him to be a person of extraordinary invention.
But, yet, alas! there is one material blemish, which, as a muddy stream, runs
quite through his performance. This single flaw, like a dead fly, corrupts the
whole box of ointment, and causes it to emit a nauseous savor. The misfortune
is, it does not in several particulars at all accord with the three first
chapters of Genesis. So that it is plain either the ancient Prophet, or the
modern Preacher, erred in vision, and stumbled in judgment, when describing
this stupendous production of Almighty Power.

MOSES, indeed, gives us no account of either the creation or fall of angels.
Nor has any other inspired writer left a word on record relating to their
formation. But Mr. Winchester has supplied this defect. He says, they were
created out of nature, which was at first pure, transparent, heavenly,
substantiality, etc.

THIS, surely, is a late revelation, and newly come out of the mint. But
whether it may be allowed to pass as current coin, or ought to be condemned as
a counterfeit, shall be left to more skilful judges to determine. However, this
may be affirmed, it needs an expositor of profound erudition, being much harder
to understand than the darkest vision or most abstruse mystery contained even
in the apocalypse of St. John. But let us attend to the event.

WE are told in the same page, That one of these angels, Lucifer by name,
seeking to enter into the first properties of life, etc. fell, with all his
legions (who in number were one third of the celestial host) into the dark
center of nature. And thus we account for the earth being without form, and
void, and darkness covering the deep.

Now MOSES seems to intimate, that this formless mass was the original
substance of the afterward visible world. That the succeeding operations of
Omnipotence were only to reduce this primogenious matter into just order and
regularity. And that, after this work was completed, Infinite Wisdom, passing
his verdict upon the whole amazing system, pronounced it good, yea, very good.
But, if these apostate spirits had gained so early a possession of nature,
while as yet it remained but a rude and indigested chaos, it seems strange that
any good should ever come out of such a Nazareth! An Apostle assures us, that
the rebel angels were cast down to hell. And according to our author, this
horrible pit was nothing else but the dark center of nature. If so, we might
have expected to hear that the world, and all it contained, was bad, yea, very
bad, from its first appearance, seeing it was made out of such infernal
particles, such luciferized ingredients. Upon this hypothesis, he might have
spared all his labor to prove a general redemption from hell. For, in reality,
there neither is now, nor ever was such a place since man was brought into
existence. No! no! The dismal tartarean prison was illuminated on the first day
of the creation, and by the seventh totally demolished; or rather turned into a
splendid and magnificent palace. How much to be regretted is it, that those
malicious troublesome spirits were not converted at the same time! especially
as it is to be their happy lot at last, according to Mr. Winchester's doctrine!
For it is plain they have not only entered into our world since it was first
made, but into the very hearts of all its inhabitants; and are evidently, this
day, driving multitudes of them, like the swine in the gospel, down the steep
and slippery declivities of vanity and delusion, into the great sea of eternal
wrath, into the bottomless gulf of everlasting perdition! And they are likely,
-- likely did I say? nay, without repentance, they will assuredly perish in the
great waters! But as this world, and all its inhabitants, were created without
fault, and made perfect in their several kinds, we are fully persuaded that
Satan had no possession of nor dominion over any of them, until he had seduced
our First Parents into disobedience, and brought them into the same
condemnation with himself.

IN the book of Genesis we are informed, that the terrestrial Paradise was
situated in and extended no farther than one particular spot, viz. the east of
Eden. But in the Sermon we are certified, that this Paradise covered the whole
earth; hid the curse, which was already broke out in it; and brought forth its
proper fruit. But while the good and evil were at strife, the Divine Artificer
joining his power to the first property of the desire, it became an Almighty
Fiat, which prevented any more wrath and darkness to be introduced into nature.
And to effect this benign and salutary transmutation, the Spirit of God
brooding on the face of the deep, baptized the same with light; that the
heavenly properties might be awakened, or stirred up, etc. etc.

IT seems, by this account, the whole creation (the inanimate parts not
excepted) was conceived in iniquity, born in sin, and under a horrible
malediction from the very womb! So that there was a necessity of dipping it
into some ocean of light (for no river would be sufficient) that by this
celestial immersion it might be washed of its native filth, and purified from
its original pollution. And which is yet more, that the Angels might be
prevented for the future from introducing any more wrath or darkness into
nature.

How well would it be for the christian world, if their water baptism had such
beneficial effects on the subjects of that holy ordinance! But it is not, alas!
it is not so. Yet, if Moses may be depended on, this design proved abortive,
and was soon frustrated. For Adam and Eve were not yet formed. And after this
the serpent prevailed with them to eat the forbidden fruit, and thereby
introduced, if possible, a still greater cloud of wrath and darkness into
nature. For hereupon we find them both turned out of the happy garden, and the
very ground cursed for their sakes. Nor has it to this day been delivered from
that bondage of corruption in which it was then involved.

So that this is altogether a very gloomy representation of the affair. But
what the author means by these phrases, viz. The first property of the desire;
This congealing the whole into solid bodies, etc. is a midnight shade too thick
for my penetration. It Is all palpable obscurity! gross darkness, without a ray
of light! Such unintelligible jargon may serve to amuse the vulgar, and set the
populace a staring, who are mostly fond of what they cannot understand, but can
afford no satisfaction to people of discernment.

MOSES tells us, in his plain way, That God formed man out of the dust, and
breathed into his nostrils the breath of life. By this account we naturally
conclude, that the corporeal part of the human frame was produced out of the
earth, and the soul immediately created out of no pre-existent matter, and by
the divine afflation infused and united to the body. But Mr. Winchester says,
the whole man was formed out of the three principles, viz. fire, water, and the
principle called the third, viz. of this lower world, or nature.

BUT what this third principle was we are not told. Probably it was some occult
and nameless element! Nor is it easy to conjecture what it might be, unless it
was that strange, complex ghost, the wrath and darkness which Lucifer had
irritated and stirred up in nature. But if so, surely man was not created in
the image of God, but rather in the image of the Devil. No wonder then that he
so readily hearkened to that degraded seraphim.

ACCORDING to the sacred history, we used to conceive that Adam was no more
than a man when first brought into being. That he was in a solitary state. And
that the woman was formed some time afterward. And that to this end God caused
a deep sleep to fall upon Adam, during which he took a rib out of his body, of
which he made a creature of somewhat different shape and quality, who was
appointed to be the future companion of his life. But in the Sermon we are
given to understand, that Adam was primarily of the commune of two genders:
that is, he was both male and female at once. Monstrum horrendum! What an odd
idea of our venerable progenitor does this description convey! *******! Mr.
Winchester tells us, that Adam was lulled asleep by the power of lust, which
shows his defection was begun, to prevent the completion of which, Jehovah
separated the woman from him. But Moses shows us very clearly that Eve began to
lust in the first place, and at the serpent's instigation swallowed the
interdicted bait; and then allured her husband into the same transgression.
Whereas, agreeable to the Sermon, Adam fell a lusting, and was led astray by
the force of inherent concupiscence, before the woman had any apparent
existence; unless he will say the female lusted in him before her separation,
which would not be good logic, except she was that third principle of which he
so often speaks, and to which he attributes some unaccountable wonders.

THE forbidden tree, by the scripture, appears to have been planted at the same
time with the rest, and to have been placed in the midst of the famous garden.
But the Sermon might induce us to suppose, that it sprung up by some
spontaneous power of vegetation. Where this pernicious tree stood is not told
us; but it looks as if it germinated in Adam's flesh, and budded, and flowered,
and fructified, and brought forth its mortiferous fruit in the man's own breast.

IF that was the case, pray how came the woman to have access to its fatal
branches? How came she to behold the apples? For it seems they were pleasant to
her eyes. This is, perhaps, an harder question than any the Queen of Sheba
proposed to King Solomon, when she paid him that celebrated visit. Though the
royal Philosopher readily answered all the queries she offered, yet in my
opinion this one would have brought him to his ne plus ultra, notwithstanding
his peerless wisdom and understanding.

THE inspired writer mentions no consort that Adam ever had, but one, and calls
them, the man and his wife. But our author certifies, that he was first joined
to the pure virgin of divine wisdom, who was the wife of his youth. In
pursuance of this, our mother Eve must have been his second bride. What pity it
is, that he has not completed this part of his history! Why has he not told us
what number of children Adam had by this miraculous woman? How many of each sex
were born to them, as pledges of their conjugal endearment? And what became of
the whole progeny at last? etc. etc. etc. For it is likely they all died, or
were some how extinct, before Moses wrote the book of Genesis. And perhaps he
never heard that there had been such a generation upon the earth.

Sed pudet hoec opprobria! I grow weary of animadverting on such mystic
whimsies. Great part of his history is quite fabulous; and some of it perfect
puerility. It puts me in mind of Ovid's Metamorphoses; though the mythology of
the Pagan Poet is much more rational than that of this Christian Preacher. Such
enthusiastic reveries, such prodigious blunders, and misconstructions, and
absurdities, and contradictions, are too tedious for patience itself to dwell
upon. Indeed, they expose themselves; and to an intelligent reader require no
confutation. We shall therefore dismiss the historical; and proceed to consider
the doctrinal part of this notable discourse.

UPON inspection, we find the latter affords no better entertainment than the
former. The author's scheme of divinity differs as far fron the gospel of
Christ, as his account of the creation does from the history of Moses.

THE professed scope of our author is, to prove an universal redemption, or the
final restoration of all things. So that not only the whole human race, but
even the fallen angels likewise (though he did not think proper to assert it,
perhaps out of modesty) shall, after certain revolutions of time, be fully
manumitted from their infernal confinement, and be enfranchised into all the
immunities of the blessed. This is his most delightful theme. This the minion
of his affection. This the favorite, the darling, on which he doats. But how
he defends it shall be our present enquiry.

IN the sermon it is observed, that the glorious Deity can have but one will
toward all his creatures, which always continues the same, and alters not
through the fall of any of them. But the gospel very positively asserts the
contrary. Therein we are assured, that it is not the will of God that some
persons should perish in any sense of the word, and that he is willing to make
his power known in the destruction of others.

That there is, that there can be but one power of volition in the Supreme
Being, is readily granted; but that this power cannot, or that it does not act
variously, according to the several objects with whom it is concerned, is
utterly denied. For was that the case, all rational creatures must of
consequence be equally happy, or equally miserable, both during time and
throughout eternity. But we daily see a very wide difference in the
circumstances of nations and countries, and families, as well as of individuals
in this world. And we are abundantly certified in the gospel, that their
stations hereafter, according to their several characters, will vary just as
much as the joys of Heaven and the torments of Hell are contrary one to the
other. The blessed God, without any doubt, wills the felicity of all men, on
condition of their persevering obedience to his injunctions, and constant
compliance with his commands. He will assuredly reward his faithful servants
with peculiar tokens of his approbation, and he will as certainly make all
irreclaimable offenders sensible of his displeasure, by punishing them in a
just proportion to the several aggravations of their crimes. The same
munificent hand that imparts a royal diadem to one person, may smite another to
death. This similitude is pregnant to the purpose, and needs no illustration.
Nor do these discriminating acts of retribution cause the lead variation in the
righteous Judge. No, he is the very same still, without any shadow of turning.
The change is only in his creatures. Their perdition is not of God. Their
rueful catastrophe is the effect of their wilful rebellion. Their eternal
damnation is their own voluntary option, and the just wages of their conduct.
So that this assertion of Mr. Winchester's is either nothing to his purpose, or
else a very dangerous mistake. If he means that the Divine Will, considered as
an attribute, is but one, it can have no relation to his doctrine, and is no
more to his purpose, than if he had emphatically declared there is but one God.
-- But if he means that this Will does never act in a different manner, as
aforesaid, it contradicts the whole tenor of the Bible, and is as opposite to
the gospel revelation, as the most arrant falsehood is to the plainest truth
that was ever published to the world.

WE are told in the same page, That fury, wrath, or anger, can never dwell in
the fountain of love. -- Yet every one that reads the holy Scriptures must
surely know, that all these are very frequently attributed to the Supreme
Being. We find him threatening the wicked, if they repent not, that his fury
shall come upon them as an unquenchable fire; that his anger is poured out as
an overwhelming inundation, we are often assured; and that his wrath is
revealed from heaven against all the ungodly without distinction, is a solemn
declaration recorded in the gospel itself. But what signifies quoting
particular passages in confirmation of this point. It shines conspicuously
through the whole book, and to prove it is as unnecessary, as lighting a taper
to show the sun at noonday. It is true, fury in God is not a turbulent
passion, as it is in fallen creatures, and is only ascribed to him by a figure.
Yet it shows us, that he will deal with incorrigible sinners as the most
choleric and incensed Potentate would with the vilest of traitors; i. e.
condemn them according to law, and order their execution without the least
indulgence or mitigation of the sentence. The anger of the Almighty is no
anxious commotion or perturbation of mind. No! It is nothing but the sedate,
deliberate, undisturbed accomplishment of his Word. Is it therefore the less to
be dreaded? Not at all. Nay, this renders it infinitely more formidable than
the united resentment of all creatures together! The wrath of God, being the
cool, dispassionate performance of his immutable decrees, is unutterably
fearful! is inconceivably terrible! and to deny that fury, in any sense, dwells
in the Deity, is a contradiction to his revealed will, and a dishonor to his
holy name.

WAS some favorite Minister of State not only to proclaim it with his tongue,
but publish in print, that his royal master was of so tender a complexion, and
so eminent for clemency, that it was impossible to provoke him to wrath, or to
rouse his indignation, insomuch that the most insolent and flagitious
malefactor had nothing to fear from him: His subjects might renounce their
allegiance, take up the arms of rebellion, and even attempt to dethrone their
lawful Sovereign, and yet not as much as doubt of escaping with impunity. For
he never did, nor ever would condemn any man to death, however criminal his
deportment might be. Who sees not that every person endued with common sense
must either believe this to be a false aspersion cast upon the King, a lying
report invented to serve some sinister end of this haughty and malignant
Courtier, or that the Monarch was altogether unfit to fill a throne, and
shamefully unqualified to sway the scepter of Majesty? The application is easy.
Mr. Winchester calls himself a Minister of Christ, and professes to be an
Ambassador of God. But he has sent his Sermon abroad, in which he assures every
reader, that in the fountain of love is neither fury, or wrath, or anger, for
him to fear. And what is the native tendency of such a doctrine? Is it not
directly calculated to lull wretched mortals into the deepest slumbers of
carnal security? To make them believe that God has little or no regard for the
honor of his government, and will never arise to assert his dominion, vindicate
the equity of his law, or maintain his own authority? Instead of a curb to
restrain their vicious propensities, will it not serve as a sharp pointed spur,
exciting them to run precipitately, and without control, into all the crooked
paths of licentiousness? To encourage obdurate wretches, like those complained
of by the Prophet, to turn (notwithstanding all amicable and compassionate
attempts to reclaim them) every one to his own way, as the horse rushes into
the battle?

THE deity, if we will believe his gospel, claims the prerogative, and even
glories in the right of recompense: Vengeance is mine; I will repay, says the
Lord. And St. Paul tells us, that knowing the terror of the Lord, both he and
his brethren persuaded men. But Mr. Winchester, it seems, knows of no such
thing. Nay, he positively declares, and asserts it without the least hesitation
or circumlocution, that neither fury, or wrath, or anger, can dwell in the
fountain of love. Upon this plan, men may gratify all their sensual
inclinations, run into the wildest excess of riot, and perpetrate the most
heinous enormities, without the least hazard of being ever called to an account
for their misdemeanors. For if the case be so, it is needless to prove a general
redemption from hell. No, certainly! there never was, nor ever will be a single
person doomed either to that or any other punishment at all. If this is not
depriving mankind of the strongest barrier against vice, and removing one of
the most cogent motives to religion and virtue, then some poor christians are
incapable of discerning between black and white. This is gospel indeed! good
news with a witness! Was this brilliant notion universally embraced, what
shocking effects may we not suppose would naturally follow thereupon? As
corrupt as our world is at present, it is doubtless a heaven, in comparison of
what it would soon become! What depravity of manners! What detestable
villainies, would quickly burst out from this invenomed source of every
abomination! In a word, the old proverb is by experience still found to be a
true one: All that glitters is not gold. This sparkling piece of ore, when
weighed in the sacred balances, proves abundantly too light for our reception.
Neither will it bear the touchstone of truth. It is therefore deservedly
rejected.

CONCERNING Adam's probation, we are notified, that his trial was not
arbitrarily imposed upon him by God, neither was the tree of knowledge planted
in the garden on purpose to tempt him, as is commonly supposed. But if so, may
it not be enquired, what this strange tree was planted at all for? What purpose
could it answer? Adam, we read, was ordered not to eat of it on pain of death.
And pray what could be the design of this prohibition, unless it was to tempt
him, or to try his obedience, which is but the same thing? The author allows
that Adam was in a state of trial. But what was there to try him by, if this
tree be excluded from that design? We read of no other injunction laid upon
him, but a perpetual abstinence from the fruit thereof. It follows, therefore,
that it was appointed for no other end but to tempt, or prove, or try him, call
it which you will. And it is also manifest that his trial was imposed upon him
arbitrarily by God, or as an absolute Sovereign, who is responsible to none of
his creatures, nor under any obligation to give an account of his matters to
men or angels. He does according to his will, in the armies of heaven, and
among the inhabitants of the earth.

GOD indeed tempts none of us to evil: Yet he may, and often does do so for our
good. It would have been infinitely to the advantage of our first parents, had
they suffered this temptation without erring as they did. They would doubtless,
in due time, have been confirmed in their original rectitude. They would very
probably have received signal tokens, some peculiar evidences of their Maker's
regard. But we may be sure they would have had the ravishing consolation of
transmitting righteousness, and purity, and life, and consummate felicity to
all their yet unborn posterity. So that it was evidently an act of perfect
goodness, and condescending favor in God, to vouchsafe them such a favorable
opportunity of advancing their own happiness, and that of their offspring to
all succeeding generations. To be brief This position of Mr. Winchester's
cannot be found in the catalogue of orthodox doctrines. It does not harmonize
with divine revelation. It does not at all correspond with the gospel of
Christ. Therein we are assured, that it was by one man's disobedience many, i.
e. all his posterity, were made sinners. And who was this man but Adam? He was
constituted our federal head, or representative in the first covenant. And as
he broke it, his sin is very justly imputed unto us. So that in Adam all die.
But we are told of no sin he committed save only this one, his eating the
forbidden fruit. Which proves to a demonstration, that the aforesaid tree was
actually planted in the garden to tempt, or try him, as was already observed.
What his design, in denying the arbitrary imposition of Adam's trial, is
difficult to conceive; unless this engine was contrived to batter down the
precious doctrine of God's supreme Sovereignty. For Adam, surely, might have
been tried with a flower, or herb, or any other tree, had it been the good
pleasure of his Maker to have ordered it so. The Council of the most high shall
stand, whatever cavils wretched mortals may raise against him, or his
dispensations. But according to this Sermon, Adam was tried, and yet not tried.
He was tempted, and not tempted. He fell, yet there was nothing to hold him up,
nor any thing to throw him down. Neither good nor evil spirit had the least
hand in the tragedy. Into what monstrous inconsistencies! into what stupid
rhapsodies will men run, when once they begin to swerve from the truth, and are
turned unto Fables!

THE author affirms, that the promise in his text was no sooner revealed to the
parents of mankind, but it immediately took effect. The seed of the woman was
instantaneously planted in their breasts as a spark of the Divine Light, from
which moment Christ's incarnation and man's restoration was begun. That the
same seed is derived unto and dwells in all their posterity, as an inspoken
seed of the woman. And that it is of this immortal seed that we must be born
again, in order to our entering the Kingdom of Heaven. etc. etc. etc. That this
promise took a salutary effect on both Adam and Eve, some time after its
promulgation, is indeed commonly supposed. Yet it is at most but a probable
conjecture. It is not in any man's power to prove that it did so. How then
could he assert it with such a plerophory of assurance? But it seems Mr.
Winchester thought so, and his opinion is sufficient authority to ratify and
establish any article whatever.

BUT that this divine seed is propagated by ordinary generation to all, or to
any of their posterity, does not yet appear. Nay, it is as contrary to the
Gospel of Christ, as the rotund apex of a mushroom is to the blooming foliage
of a tulip. The Apostle assures us, that in human flesh, as far as
unregenerated, there "dwells no good thing." That while unconverted, all men
are without Christ. And that not Christ but Satan, works in the children of
disobedience, etc. Now how this can be consonant to the inherency of that feed,
which he declares is really Christ himself, the reader is left to judge.

IN confirmation of this strange doctrine, Mr. Winchester quotes two texts of
Scripture, viz. St. John, i. 9. and I. John, iv. 3. As to the first of these
citations, the Evangelist's design in that whole chapter was to prove our
Savior's Divinity, which was even then strenuously opposed by one Cerinthus,
and his followers, who maintained that he was no more than a mere man. And this
he does by many nervous and irrefragable arguments, among which this is not the
least, that our Lord was in reality no less a person than the Great Autophoos,
or true Light, which lights every man that comes into the world. That is, he
is the Creator as well as Redeemer of mankind. The almighty author of our
understanding, and reason, and conscicence, and every other faculty that human
nature is endowed with, and by which we are dignified, and distinguished from
the beasts of the field, etc. Although he is the light only of the regenerate,
by spiritual illumination.

As to the other text, the Apostle is evidently proving our Lord's humanity
against one Cerdon and his adherents, who denied his humanity: Contending that
he only appeared in the shape of a man, and assumed but the shadow of a body.
Wherefore St. John declares that such teachers, who withstood the doctrine of
Christ's actual incarnation, or real assumption of our nature, were not of God,
i. e. were not sent by his authority to preach the gospel, but were in truth
the instruments of Antichrist. These scriptures, therefore, are no more to his
purpose, than if he had quoted the two first chapters of the first book of
Chronicles to prove that George the third was or is the rightful King of China
or Japan.

THAT our Lord comes into the souls of all true believers, and dwells in their
hearts by his spirit, is very readily granted. He is in them the hope of glory.
But that he is even in their flesh, so that it may be called his incarnation,
is utterly disowned. How much less is he in all mankind in that, or any other
proper acceptance of the word! For were it so, there would be just as many
incarnate Deities as there ever were or shall be men and women in the world.
Shocking! to avow that Christ is incarnatively dwelling in every dissolute
profligate, in every abandoned reprobate! what epithet does this deserve! what
appellation shall be given it! nameless may it remain!

BUT, he says, Christ called the Pharisees to behold that the Kingdom of God
was within them: Luke xvii. 20. and if in them, who are elsewhere called
Serpents, etc. etc. then certainly in all mankind.

IT is true, the question that occasioned this discourse was proposed by the
Pharisees. But that our Lord directed his answer to them is not so certain. --
It seems more likely that our Savior, turning or pointing to his Disciples,
addressed this instruction unto them, in whom, no doubt, his kingdom of grace
was erected. -- Or if he spoke to those wicked men, he could mean no more than
that their long expected Messiah was really come, being no other but himself,
who was now in their country, and present among them, causing the joyful sound
of his gospel, that melody of Zion, to ring in their ears. So that it was in
vain to look any farther, for salvation was not to be found in any other. And
that our Lord could not intend to intimate that either the grace, or spirit, or
seed of God, was in them, is evident. For at another time, he told the same
kind of people, and perhaps the same persons, I know you, that you have not the
love of God in you. But according to this author, not only the love of God, but
he himself was in these whited sepulchers, these detestable hypocrites, though
they were daily plotting his death, and hourly thirsting for his blood. They
were, as Jesus well knew, implacable enemies both to truth and virtue. And he
pronounced them entirely evil, for he very clearly saw through the disguise,
and plainly perceived that they covered their hatred with lying lips. While
they pretended to the highest degree of sanctity, the Son of God esteemed them
the worst of men, and the vilest of sinners. And yet, according to our sermon,
he declared they had in them the seed of all good. He must be a connoisseur in
the rules of logic, who can reconcile these things to reason.

On this head, we are presented with the peculiar characteristic of Christ's
true ministers. They take him for their only pattern, and make his sermons the
sole model of their preaching. He directed man to the seed of the woman, which
is within, and so do they. But all deceivers take another way, etc. Yet we do
not find that Christ ever once mentioned such a direction in the whole course
of his ministry. Read the history of his life and death. He never as much as
mentions this seed, nor speaks a single word about it, in any of his sermons,
or parables, or private discourses.

NOR did his Apostles at any time give this direction to their hearers or
readers. There is not in the New Testament one expression that can be construed
to that import, without a manifest perversion of the sacred text. The constant
scope of the inspired writers, instead of directing men to something within
them, is to urge them to a speedy renunciation of themselves, and a believing
application to Jesus Christ, who now sits on the right hand of God, not in
their hearts, but in the highest Heaven. The effrontery of this man must be
great indeed, when he so rashly condemns the Apostles, and at least a great
majority of their faithful successors, as a malignant junto of impostors and
deceivers of mankind. Certainly he was not in the spirit of meekness, as he
pretends elsewhere, when he shot this random dart, when he hurled this surly,
malapert, virulent invective against the generation of the Righteous. But
(aliquando bonus dormitat Homerus) it is a rare steed that never stumbles.
However, we shall claim the liberty of judging for ourselves; and profess to
believe there have been and still are a goodly number of ministers, and of
different denominations too, who will be accepted at the last day, as faithful
servants of Christ, and sincere lovers of mankind, though they never as much as
thought of directing people to this inspoken seed, of which we can find no
account in the Holy Scriptures, which, blessed be God! are able to make us wise
unto salvation, though ELHANAN WINCHEST, had never existed.

THIS divine seed, we are informed, is the only beginning and possibility of a
new life. Unless the means of grace can reach that hidden spark, they can do us
no good, any more than the sun, etc. could cause a flint to vegetate. Nothing
can rise up but according to the possibilities of nature. Nay, God himself
could not raise us up in an arbitrary manner, without this seed to work upon,
etc. etc. etc. There is nothing arbitrary: All is natural throughout the whole
process.

IF the case be so, it is a little strange how our first parents came to be
raised? It Is plain this seed could not be sown in them till at least some time
after their fall. And why may it not be disseminated in the hearts of their
children at any age, though it was not born with them? Is any thing too hard
for the Lord? Our regeneration in Scripture is called a new creature; or, as it
may be rendered, a new creation. Now to create, every body must know, is a
producing some substance out of no pre-existent matter; or making some being
out of nothing. But agreeable to this sermon, regeneration is but blowing the
hidden spark into a flame, or raising the latent seed to a stalk, which is but
a resurrection at most; nor can it be called a creation in any sense whatever,
When God Almighty blesses men with his saving grace, he puts his spirit within
them, which was not there before. And the same Agent puts his laws of faith and
love into their hearts, to both which, in their natural estate, they are all of
them without exception utter strangers. St. Paul, when delineating that great
change, gives us this beautiful description of it: God, who commanded the light
to shine out of darkness, has shined into our hearts, to give the light of the
knowledge of the glory of God, in the face of Jesus Christ.

HERE the Apostle evidently alludes to the first creation. The primitive chaos
was covered with total darkness until God said let there be light. So is the
heart of every man by nature. It is not only a dark region, but darkness
itself. Obscurity in the abstract. And thus it remains until the new creation
commences. Then the same irresistible power, that gave light to the natural
world, bestows it also on the spiritual world, the before absolutely blind,
dark and ignorant soul of man. A glorious ray from the Sun of righteousness
enters the understanding, and with amazing effulgence irradiates the mind: Even
as the terraqueous globe was illuminated in a moment, when the divine fiat was
uttered. Truly, the earth in its original form was an apt emblem of our native
depravity, and the light which was immediately communicated is a lively image
of God's grace freely imparted, and which alone effects our new birth and
conversion. Was there nothing arbitrary in the first creation? Did this
material world spring up only according to the possibilities of nature? Did it,
with all its stupendous phoenomena, arise as a stalk out of some pre-existent
seed? No surely! Unless we hold that the substance of all viable things was
from eternity, as it is reported the old Peripatetic Philosophers really did.
Neither does the new creation proceed from any principle hid in a man's breast
before, but is produced out of nothing, just as the old creation was. Therefore
the sermon, in this particular also, differs very widely from the Gospel of
Christ. The author, in the mean while, gives us to know the cause why all are
not regenerated. And this he illustrates by an elegant similitude: If the seed
is covered with stones, or rocks, or mountains, the sun cannot reach it: Even
so, all are not brought to the divine life, because of the oppositions made to
it, and obstructions that hinder it. But does not Mr. Winchester know, that
there is a very great disparity between corporeal and spiritual things? Though
we take comparisons from the former to assist our conceptions, yet we never
expert them fully to represent the latter; and that because of their vastly
superior excellency. It is true, the great ruler of the day cannot pierce
through rocks, etc. to quicken the grain that is concealed beneath them: But is
almighty perfection as impotent as the creature he has made? Can omnipotency
operate with no more energy than a lifeless luminary, all whose splendours were
kindled with his breath? Is he not able to raise up children unto Abraham out
of the stones? Are not the rocks thrown down by him? And do not the perpetual
hills bow, and the everlasting mountains melt at his touch, and flow down at
his presence? God can overcome all opposition, and remove every obstruction
just when he pleases; for he works all things according to the counsel of his
own will.

IT is true, men can and always do withstand this good work. And it is certain
that some of them have resisted the Holy Ghost so wilfully, and so long, till
God has given them up as incurable patients, and sworn in his wrath ye shall
not enter into my rest. These are smitten with judicial blindness, and their
conversion becomes impossible, as the scriptures clearly testify; and that
because it is inconsistent with the truth of God to give them his saving grace
afterward. Therefore, where people were quite hardened in unbelief, our Lord
could not do many mighty works as man, because he had no commission to heal
such obstinate despisers of his salvation. This also made him say, that it was
hard for such as had riches to enter into the kingdom of God. Because such, who
trust in riches, as it is explained in another place, do certainly reject all
the means of salvation; and while they continue to do so, it is not only
difficult but impossible for them to receive Jesus Christ, or be made partakers
of his benefits. Yet with God nothing is impossible. When he resolves to
convert a sinner, no impediment whatever can hinder his design. No obstacle has
force sufficient to prevent the certain execution of his sovereign purpose. He
speaks, and it is done. He commands, and it stands fast for ever.

HAVING paved his way with the polished stones of error thus far, our author
comes at last to a more particular consideration of his main point, the
glorious doctrine of the final restoration of all things. This his most beloved
sentiment, he supposes, naturally follows from his preceding observations. But
the misery is, it does neither follow from scripture, or reason, or the common
sense of mankind. He says it has been for a long time greatly clouded over with
antichristian darkness. If so, it is a pity this cloud was ever dispersed. Even
the shades of night may sometimes prove advantageous to men. It may hide
several loathsome objects from their eyes. And if antichristian darkness served
for a long season, as he tells us, to cover such a putrid mass of heresy, and
conceal it from the christian world, it was indeed a benefit, instead of an
injury.

BUT, by his leave, this doctrine was never as much as once heard of, until
Antichrist had stirred up abundance of wrath and darkness in the primitive
church, as he assures us Lucifer did formerly in the profound center of nature.
We have no account of it during the two first centuries. This notion of a
general redemption from Hell was first broached by one Origin, who lived in the
year of our Lord two hundred and thirty. With this, the same man held many
other monstrous opinions, which were afterward propagated by his followers,
who, after his name, were called Origenists. These prevailed and infested the
church until the sixth century, when they were condemned in general council,
and Origen's books on such subjects censured as dangerous, and forbidden to be
read. Of this Origin it is reported, that he was endowed with a memory so
tenacious, that he could readily repeat the whole Bible by heart. I have also
heard the same thing of Mr. Winchester; and probably they were born under the
same planet. However that may be, the said Origin does not appear to have been
any great artist in construing the scriptures. For he, understanding our
Savior's words, there be some who have made themselves Eunuchs for the Kingdom
of Heaven's sake, in a literal sense, thereupon laid violent hands on his own
virility, and cruelly emasculated himself. Just as if our Lord had recommended
castration as the only way to immortal glory. This shows that the glorious
doctrine we are examining sprung at first from no very creditable source; for
what dependence can be put on authors, however eminent for parts or learning,
when it is well known they have fallen into such splenetic dreams, into such
pitiful and distracted dotages!

ON this topic Mr. Winchester flourishes in all the pomp of heroism. His
magnanimity appears in every line. Having pressed several precious texts of
Scripture into his service, he ranges his arguments in due form, and, mustering
his whole force, fires his syllogisms like chained shot. But, though his
courage is evidently great, military skill is wanting. His artillery is but
poorly served, for his balls do little or no execution. Some of them fly too
high, others too low, and every one falls short of the mark.

UNLESS all creatures become guilty of sin, and miserable in consequence of
their fall, be at last restored to happiness, he declares the promise in his
text can never have a perfect accomplishment; yea, upon the common systems, it
has scarce any meaning at all. God has sworn by the Prophet, that to him every
knee shall bow, and every tongue shall swear; and by an Apostle repeats the
same solemn declaration. It is promised that God will reconcile all things to
himself. Death shall be destroyed, etc. etc. etc. No enemy shall be left. God
is able, and he is willing to restore all things. Therefore it shall be done,
etc. etc.

BUT, under correction, we cannot yet help thinking that a leading malefactor
may be totally subdued by a Prince, and yet retain his enmity to his government
as long as he lives. And why may it not be properly said that the serpent's
head is bruised, and his works destroyed, though neither he nor any of his
incorrigible confederates should ever be reconciled to God?

SUPPOSE some powerful tyrant had, by usurpation, seized a considerable part of
a certain King's dominion, whose royal title was indisputable, had drawn many
of his former subjects into rebellion, had very strongly entrenched and
fortified himself, bidding defiance to the lawful Monarch, and daily spreading
terror and devastation all around. In the mean while it was foretold by
several, who pretended to the gift of prophecy, that the King would in some
future period of time send his own son to make war upon this tyrant, and that
he should by force of arms utterly overthrow him, and take all his illegal
acquisitions out of his hands. At last the illustrious hero appears, and lays
siege to the tyrant's capital city, and having battered down the walls, and
forced an entrance by storm, he sets up his white flag, and by sound of trumpet
causes it to be proclaimed through all the country, that such who had been
seduced by the tyrant should be accepted to his Majesty's favor, and be
honored again as the subjects of his kingdom, provided they would, in such a
term as specified, throw down their arms, confess their folly, and sue for
pardon and reconciliation. But whereas but few, comparatively, choose to comply
with his gracious overture, the conquer condemns not only the tyrant, but
likewise all who refused to receive quarters, either to immediate death, or
dooms them to perpetual banishment into some foreign realm, and consigns them
to the most abject servitude and irrecoverable slavery. Now, this done, was
some haughty politician, in order to display the superiority of his judgment,
to declare that the ancient prediction was false, for the conquest was far from
being complete, nor can it ever be perfected till this tyrant, with all his
accomplices in hostility, are redeemed from their bondage, called home to the
King's Court, and not only so, but are dignified with all the immunities, and
indulged with the same privileges which his best subjects enjoy; nay, they must
be admitted into the King's palace, they must feast at his table, -- yea, which
is still more, they must be raised to the throne, and be made partners in his
crown; for until all this is done, the victory is but partial, and the hero's
triumph but mock pageanty and illusive ostentation. Would not such reasoning be
universally exploded as ridiculous to the last degree? And what could the
impertinent author justly expect, but to be hissed out of countenance, and
esteemed as a madman wherever he went? Yet this is the exact picture of Mr.
Winchester's elaborate ratiocination on this subject. His arguments, in all
their formality, have just as much force to prove, that unless wicked men and
devils are in general released from their infernal torment, the promises of God
cannot be fulfilled, nor will Jesus Christ ever see the entire travail of his
soul, and be satisfied. In short, it is very clear that all the scriptures this
author has recited in these pages, or in any other part of his performance, do,
when put together, prove nothing more than this, viz. that our glorious
redeemer shall reign till all his enemies are made his footstool. Heaven, and
earth, and hell, shall eternally resound with his peerless exploits, and
angels, men and devils, with one everlasting shout, recognize his matchless
achievements. His friends shall voluntarily give all possible glory to the
Lamb, and his foes shall yield him an equal tribute of praise, though by
compulsion. For surely a slave may vow allegiance unto and bow down to a
conqueror, though he does both with the greatest reluctance. A felon may
acknowledge the authority of his Judge, and confess the equity of the sentence
passed upon him, though at the same time his heart may be filled with an
implacable antipathy to his person, insomuch that, was it in his power, he
would gladly stab him with a mortal wound, and rejoice in the perpetration of
so horrid an act. So here, the reprobate world shall doubtless bow, and kneel,
and confess, and swear, and deeply submit to Jesus Christ, owning his absolute
and incontroulable Sovereignty. But all this is far from arguing their
emancipation. It does not at all prove their future enlargement. For this, all
this they may, yea, and shall do in their infernal prison. All this they shall
do with sempiternal sorrow, and anguish, and weeping, and gnashing of teeth,
without the least hope of any deliverance from the fiery dungeons into which
they will be cast, as abhorred of the Lord, and rueful victims of his
inexorable fury, and wrath, and anger, and indignation!

IN the conclusion of his discourse the author lays down five propositions, on
which he says the glorious doctrine is built, all which must be proved to be
false, before it can be overthrown. In these, he lets us know, consists the
merit of his cause; these are the foundation principles or which the mighty
superstructure rests; and till these are overthrown, all attempts against the
doctrine are vain. So, then, far as we have proceeded, we have scarcely yet set
out upon our journey. And behold! mountain upon mountain, in terrible
gradation, placed before us. To remove them, it seems, is impracticable, and to
climb over them at least very difficult, if not altogether impossible; and one
or the other we must do, or renounce particular redemption, and embrace the
glorious doctrine, the restoration of all things. A perplexing dilemma indeed!
However, fortune favors the brave. Encouraged by this good old apothegm, we
shall attempt the latter; i. e. we will endeavor to make our way over all
these craggy cliffs, rather than give up the truth. And by permission, we shall
take a view of his propositions in order.

1st. GOD is love, essentially and communicatively, and loves all the beings he
has made, considered as his creatures, and is constantly seeking to do them
good. This is all true; and if so, we may be sure he will use the best means in
his power to prevent their falling into sin, and thereby involving themselves
in misery. And what means could be so likely to effect this most loving design
as the assuring them, that if they ventured to transgress they must suffer his
everlasting displeasure, as the natural consequence of their rebellion!

IF GOD would rule his creatures at all, he must appoint certain laws for their
observation. For without laws, there can be no government. But laws are of no
validity, without some penalties annexed; and penalties would be of no force,
without a strict execution. Is it inconsistent with a supreme magistrate's
affection to his subjects for him to put the laws in execution? Does it
discover a disregard to their welfare to punish thieves, and robbers, and
murderers, and traitors, etc. etc. with death? Quite the reverse. Neither is it
contrary to the essential or communicative love of God to fulfill his righteous
threatenings, in the everlasting perdition of all his obstinate and
irreclaimable enemies, and especially those whom he often called to repentance,
promising them remission of their guilt, provided they would return to their
duty. If, after all, many of them pertinaciously persist in their wickedness
until the act of indemnity is repealed, who, I beseech you, is culpable of
their eternal ruin but themselves? God can and does still love them, considered
as his creatures, but not as his inveterate foes. As such he hates, and will
punish them, and that in perfect proportion to their several deserts. So then
we have happily passed the first of these mountains.

2dly. GOD's design, in creating intelligent beings, was to make them happy in
the knowledge and love of his glorious perfections.

3dly. GOD's absolute ultimate designs cannot be eternally frustrated. But, as
they were free agents, their happiness depended on their perfect obedience
during the space of their probation. But in case any of them revolted, one of
God's absolute designs was, according to his threatening, and as appears by the
event, that they should suffer for so doing. Therefore, though many of them are
left to perish in and for their sins, God's designs are neither temporally nor
eternally frustrated by their fall. Thus we have gained a passage over two of
these mountains at once.

4thly. CHRIST died for all men (he should have added for all devils too) and
died not in vain.

THAT the merit of our dear Redeemer's death is sufficient in value to save all
men, is granted: For his blood cleanses from all sin. If men, therefore,
refuse to apply this remedy, what can they expect but to die under the curse of
God's holy law? It is an Apostle's interrogation, How shall we escape, if we
neglect so great salvation? Neither is the virtue of our Savior's passion
lost, though multitudes perish by undervaluing it. No medicine, however
powerful to heal, will prove beneficial until applied. If a sick person rejects
the physic offered unto him, and dies by his obstinacy, whose fault is it?
Whose but the patient's* The physic remains as efficacious as if he, and ten
thousands more, had taken it, and had all been restored to health by its
operation. Besides, all mankind do actually receive several benefits in this
world, in consequence of our Lord's mediation. All that temporal felicity that
nations, as well as particular persons, are indulged with, flows from no other
fountain but the merit of his blood. The gospel, considered only as a system of
morals, is doubtless in itself the greatest blessing any kingdom or
commonwealth can be favored with; and where that gospel is truly preached,
though but a small number, comparatively, may be savingly converted, yet
multitudes have been greatly reformed thereby, -- their corruptions have been
and still are in a great measure restrained, and innumerable iniquities
prevented, which otherwise they would have committed. Now, as it is as clear as
Scripture light can make it that there is a considerable inequality even in the
torments of hell, reason says these persons cannot be as miserable in a future
state as the atheist, the blasphemer, the persecutor, the deceiver of men, the
hypocrite, and those profane wretches who declare their sin as Sodom, and hide
it not.

THEREFORE Christ is the greatest blessing: -- Christ is the choicest donation
that could be conferred on our world, even if it had no relation to the next.
It follows, then, that this objection, if all men (yea and devils too) are not
at last crowned with glory, and exalted to the regions of endless honor,
Christ died in vain, is but a groundless surmise, without either Scripture or
reason to support it. So we are got beyond another mountain.

5thly. CHRIST came to destroy the evil principle, or sin, out of the universe,
which he will finally effect, and then misery shall be no more. Had he said,
that Christ came into this world to destroy sin, and banish misery out of it,
which he will certainly effect, the whole proposition would have been granted,
nemine contradicente. But that he will destroy it out of hell is denied.
Because we are assured by inspiration, that the fire that burns there is
absolutely unquenchable; that the torment suffered in that flaming pit is in
duration eternal; and that the pains of damnation are strictly and properly
everlasting, and will continue in secula seculorum, forever, yea, forever and
ever. Christ never descended into hell, neither did nor will he ever redeem any
of its inhabitants. Thus we have made a shift to surpass all these mountains,
-- and, through mercy, are not yet quite out of breath, and hope we shall have
more level ground to walk on for the future.

BUT Mr. Winchester, in his appendix, labors to prove that the words eternal,
and everlasting, and forever, yea, and forever and ever, are as often, in the
holy Scriptures, used to denote a limited duration, as an endless eternity. The
words he assures us are equivocal; so that no conclusive argument can be formed
from them to prove the endless torments of the damned. But he is obliged to
allow, that they are sometimes applied to an endless duration. Why then should
we not understand, that the meaning of the inspired writers was to let us know
that the misery of the wicked, as well as the happiness of the righteous, shall
be really eternal? especially as they describe both by one and the same term.
When our Lord declares, that the former shall go away into everlasting
punishment, but the latter into life eternal, it is well known that the word,
though varied in our translation, is the very same in the original. So that, if
the reward of grace is eternal, the penalty of justice must be of equal
duration, according to our Savior's very plain representation of the last
judgment. And to accuse the Prophets and Apostles, yea, the Holy Ghost and
Christ himself, with speaking to poor sinners in equivocal terms, or words of a
double meaning, is an impeachment that does not at all become the tongue or pen
of a Christian. Was this insolent charge as true as it is false, what
dependence could be put in Divine Revelation? Nay, that can be no revelation at
all, but rather a riddle, that is delivered in such a manner. Alas! into what
pernicious blunders! Yea, into what shocking and nefarious blasphemies will men
fall by error and delusion, when they have once espoused their interest, and
are engaged to plead their cause for some secular emolument!

BUT that the words mentioned above are all, or any of them, used as much as
once in the whole Bible to signify a limited duration, is an assertion I
absolutely deny. Nor does the instances he has produced, nor all he can collect
hereafter, evince the contrary. They constantly and every where import nothing
short of a perpetual existence of the thing spoken of, whatever it is.

To have a clear conception of this important truth, we must consider that the
various ceremonies of the Levitical law, as well as the several predictions of
the Jewish Prophets, had for the most part, if not always, a direct reference
to the gospel dispensation. For instance, the land of Canaan, promised to
Abraham and his seed, was a type of heaven, which is an eternal inheritance,
and shall be possessed by all his spiritual children forever and ever. The
covenant of circumcision typified the covenant made with Christ, and in him
with all the elect, which is doubtless eternal, and will remain in full force
and virtue forever and ever. The priesthood of Aaron represented the priesthood
of Jesus Christ, which is eternal, and will by him be continued without
cessation or interruption forever and ever. The horrible flame kindled to
consume Sodom and Gomorrah was a striking figure of hell fire, which is
eternal, and will burn forever and ever. The fire continually preserved by the
sons of Aaron on the altar was emblematical either of the love of God to his
people, or his wrath against his enemies, both of which are eternal, and will
continue forever and ever. Even so, all the promises divulged, and the
threatenings denounced by the ancient Prophets, although they had a primary
respect to temporal blessings or curses, yet without dispute they bore a
relation to spiritual rewards and punishments, both of which are likewise
eternal, and will endure forever, yea, forever and ever.

THUS the words, even in the Old Testament, always extend to an unbounded
duration: How much more so in the New! But our author insists upon it, and
repeats it over and over again, that these words signify ages, and ages of
ages, and periods, and periodical eternities! Tremendous doom! This is worse
and worse! We only plead that the wicked shall suffer but one eternity; but he
avers they shall suffer, some of them at least, several eternities, and nobody
can count how many! Where he found such idle, insipid, as well as fallacious
stuff, whether in the Alcoran of Mahomet, or in the writings of Jacob Boehman,
or whether it be the fiction of his own fertile genius, he best knows. One
thing is certain, there is nothing any how resembling it in the Book of God.

As to his reasonings about the unpardonable sin, had he noticed what is very
visible in the divine oracles, he would have lost all the assistance he fancies
can be derived from our Savior's words concerning it. The verb to forgive, in
sacred dialect, sometimes signifies no more than to exempt from present
punishment. So Moses reminds the Lord, that he had forgiven his people Israel
from Egypt until now, though we are assured he visited their iniquities upon
them, and that with terrible judgment afterward. Thus God may forgive whole
nations and communities for several years, yet punish them, and very severely
at last. Thus God winked at the sins of the heathens in the times of their
ignorance; i. e. he bore their provocations with long suffering and patience,
because they had not the means of knowing better. But this was not the case
with the Jews, especially in our Savior's days. They sinned against the clear
light both of his doctrine and miracles, and thereby brought down the most
grievous calamities on themselves that ever befell any nation. Therefore, when
our blessed Lord says that that sin shall never be forgiven, he evidently means
that the Pharisees, and all others who proved guilty of it, should suffer his
highest displeasure, not only in hell hereafter, but even in this present
world, as we know they did. So that this declaration is far enough from proving
that all other sins shall be pardoned in the next life, as he vain-gloriously
asserts.

AND although Job and Jeremiah wished they were never born, this was only
spoken with regard to their present afflictions; i. e. had they no prospect of
a beter life hereafter, they supposed it more eligible to have had no being at
all. According to the Apostle, if in this life only we have hope, we are of all
men the most miserable. So that these expressions of those holy men don't at
all prove that Judas might be saved, though our Lord declared it were good for
that man if he had never been born.

WE might proceed to consider the other scriptures, which he tells us are
objected against his glorious doctrine, and which he maintains are rather for
than against him; but it is judged needless at present. It would swell this
piece beyond the intended dimensions, -- and prolixity on any subject is my
aversion. I shall, therefore, only take a little more notice of that inspoken
seed he so zealously recommends, and then come to a conclusion.

WE are told that this seed lies in unregenerate men, covered with death and
darkness, until Christ, by his gospel, reaches and draws it into motion. It
seems, then, that it is invisible, and not to be seen even by the souls in
which it is buried. Nor do we find that it is to be heard by them, for it is
dead and buried. How then can it speak? And according to this description, it
is impossible to comprehend the nature of this seed. Nor can we conceive what
it is good for. If Christ, the Sun of righteousness, must reach it, previous to
its vivification, it is certainly useless, and answers no purpose at all. For
one single ray of divine light flowing from Jesus Christ, and darted into the
sinner's heart, is abundantly sufficient to effect the blessed change, without
borrowing any assistance from this inanimate and sepultured seed. Moreover, in
what part of the unconverted sinner is this seed to be found? In his
understanding? No; that is all darkness. In his mind? No; that is all enmity
against God. In his will? No; that is all rebellion. In his affections? No;
they are all pollution and carnality.

THE author tells us, that immediately after their fall the bodies of our first
parents became like beasts, and their souls like fallen angels. Now Moses says
Adam beg at children in his own image. It follows then that all his posterity
are born in the perfect likeness of Adam, whatever that is. And if you enquire
what it is, the famous Mr. Whitefield, in one of his Sermons, answers, man, in
his natural state, is half beast, half devil! With this good man, Mr.
Winchester exactly agrees. There is a perfect consonance in the import of their
expressions, only the latter chooses to be a little politer in the more
disagreeable part of the portraiture. Perhaps he was afraid he should offend
some of his ablest friends, had he uttered his sentiments in such harsh and
grating language as the other did. The picture, however, is odious enough. Nor
does it at all exceed the truth. And if the person of a graceless man is indeed
such a motly mixture of beastiality and devilism, in what part shall we find
the dreary sepulcher where this admirable seed lies interred? In the brutal
part? No, certainly! For there can be no divinity in a beast. In the
diabolical? Surely no! For if no divine principle can dwell in a beast, much
less can it find an abode in the devil. Therefore, after the most accurate
scrutiny and assiduous investigation, we are obliged to give up, and conclude
with this conviction, it is to be found no where!

THERE is in this seed something superlatively strange! It is a beam of light,
yet it is not perceptible. It is a spark of fire, but without heat. It is an
orator, yet not audible. It is able to teach us all we need to know, and yet it
is quite silent, and as dumb as death! It can be no substantive, for it is not
to be seen, heard, felt or understood. Neither is it an adjective; for it is
descriptive of no quality whatever. It is not white, nor black, nor hot, nor
cold, nor great, nor small, nor good, nor bad. In short, it is just what the
ingenious Dr. Watts makes space to be, viz. a mere vacuum, a nonentity, a
nothing but a name.

THIS seed, or spark, it appears by the whole current of the sermon, is that
most benevolent shepherd, who shall at last lead the whole flock of once
despairing goats out of the infernal desert, shall transform them into amiable
sheep, and gather them into the sold of celestial glory, where they shall bleat
forth one eternal hallelujah to their adored deliverer. Nor will Lucifer and
his angels be left behind. No! They shall all of them be partakers of the
triumph, and gladly join the universal acclamation of praise. Though this will
prove a very tedious enterprise; nor can it be accomplished, it seems, until
many ages are elapsed; nay, until numberless, long, reluctant, tardy,
slow-circling, periodical eternities have performed their several revolutions;
and then sin and misery shall be no more.

BUT what are some wicked men sent to hell for at all? One would think that the
sun would reach this seed, and bring it up while they were on earth; or that if
it fails here, their case will be hopeless: For the nearer the sun, the more
and stronger influence it must have on any substance. And hell, every body must
allow, is farther from heaven than our earth is. If he says the fire of Tophet
will rend or melt these rocks that now cover the seed, does not this attribute
more saving virtue to the flames of hell, than to the blood of Christ? Though
he tells us, that when it was shed, it evidently had a physical virtue over
nature itself. It caused the earth to shake, the rocks to rend, and the graves
to open. And yet all this power, and virtue, and efficacy, is not of sufficient
energy to quicken this seed, until the soil in which it is sown is purged in
the furnace of damnation. In order to which, some parts of it at least must
burn during innumerable eternities.

THIS is purgatory with a contradiction. But was that all, it would be a trifle
in comparison.

IT is, alas! it is a shameful disparagement to his blood, who is the true God
and eternal life! But can he tell us, by whose manuduction the devils shall
regain their freedom? For he says it, nay he repeats even to tautology, that
all things shall be restored, and of consequence these abased spirits shall
regain their ancient honors, and re-ascend their heavenly thrones. Did Christ
die for them? He will hardly say Christ died for them also. For he took not on
him the nature of angels. Nor have we received the least account that God has
provided any Mediator for those wretched spirits. If, therefore, they are ever
redeemed, it must be by an arbitrary dispensation; though Mr. Winchester will
have nothing arbitrary in the whole process, when it suits him. But, if God
saves the reprobate angels by a sovereign act of his will, without any
atonement or satisfaction made to his justice, why might not men be saved by a
like act of sovereignty? Does not this represent the manifold wisdom of God, in
contriving the plan of our redemption, as horresco refer! As what I dare not
name? Upon this supposition too, our condescending, our amible and
compassionate Redeemer might have spared all his labor, and sweat, and pains,
and blood!

BUT we are told this light of Christ within man is not something distinct from
divine revelation, much less in opposition to it, but the beginning of it.

If so, a written revelation is altogether unnecessary. For what use has he of
a candle, who enjoys the sun in all its meridian glory? How were all the
Prophets and Apostles deceived! They, honest men, thought they had some
extraordinary instructions given them immediately by God, which the rest of
mankind were not favored with. But it seems they were utterly mistaken. No,
no, weak men, you might have kept your histories, and prophecies, and gospels,
and epistles to yourselves! All men, without exception, have had, and still
have the very same and equal share of inspiration, which you either out of
simplicity or roguery made a monopoly of. According to this allegation, the
light in us is not to be examined by the holy Scriptures, but they are to be
tried by it. So that the outward revelation must always yield to this inward
pedagogue. No wonder Mr. Winchester could so easily and clearly prove his
glorious doctrine from the constant tenor of both Old and New Testament, and
find it every where confirmed with "Thus says the Lord." Why did he take so
much pains to quote particular pages from them? He might have presented the
whole Bible at once, and told us, as some pious preachers do of late* This is
my Confession of Faith! This one argument would have been as forcible as all
that he has offered both in his sermon and the appendix, as the whole
concatenation of citations, and repetitions, and reflections, and exclamations,
and syllogisms, etc. etc. etc. It is only for him to say, with a serious and
reverend air, it was the light of Christ within that taught me my history of
the creation, and my scheme of divinity too, and therefore they cannot be
contrary to the scriptures; and for any of you to think or speak otherwise is
only to betray your weakness; for all you can say against them is fighting
against God!

WHAT can we oppose to such masterly reasonings as these? Ipse dixit! We must
not gainsay. No! We must lay our hands upon our mouths. The point is decided.
Both men and devils shall certainly obtain a glorious restoration. We have,
some of us, for years past observed sundry newfangled notions prevailing. A
variety of strange opinions, with respect both to doctrine, worship and
discipline, have, like Jonah's gourd, sprung up in a night; and indeed some of
them also withered in a night. Not long ago, we were told that God had no mercy
at all. That compassion did not belong to the Divine nature in any sense. But
behold! now this same Being is all mercy, and little or no justice. In him
there is neither fury, warth nor anger. Formerly it was positively affirmed
that the elect were justified from eternity, that Christ died only for that
chosen number, and never shed a drop of his blood for the rest of mankind, and
that none but they were to be invited to come to a Savior by any means. But
lo! this wind is quite turned -- and what weather next? Why, the whole race is
now exactly on a par. Christ died equally for them all, yea, he is in them all.
And they are all to be invited, and exhorted, and commanded, and persuaded, and
entreated to receive him. Though, at the same time, they all have him in full
possession, he dwells in them all as an inspoken seed.

A year or two past it was publicly proclaimed in this State, that the war was
at an end, our independency was established, and the sound of battle and
destruction should no more be heard in our land. But since that, alas! the
sword has reached even to the soul of Virginia, many of our brave patriots have
been quite impoverished, and some have lost their lives by the hand of the
enemy.

ABOUT the same time we were assured, with the greatest prophetic confidence,
that the latter-day glory was just now breaking forth, that the illustrious
morning had already begun to dawn, and we should very soon see the sun. All
nations would speedily be converted, the whole church become of one mind, and
Christ himself descend, in all the pomp and magnificence of heaven, personally
to reign among them, and exalt his once poor, hated, despised people to riches
and honors, to principality and power, and might, and dominion, and renown;
and in a word, elevate his followers, as Mahomet promised to do his, to the
very summit of earthly grandeur, and introduce them to the full fruition of all
sensual enjoyments, and the plenary gratification of every carnal and fleshly
appetite. But ah, how have we been disappointed! We are still fed with the
bread of tears, and have the water of gall to drink! We see not our signs,
neither is there any that can tell us how long! We have ever since been with
longing eyes gazing toward the east, but Aurora still hides her rosy face, not
a single blush of radiance appears to dissipate the nocturnal gloom; nay, we
are not so much as satisfied that the morning star is yet risen. For though
others may judge Mr. Winchester's sermon to be it, yet we in Virginia rather
take it to be an ominous comet, which, instead of portending prosperity to the
nations, forebodes still greater judgments in reversion, and shakes baleful
influences, wars, famines, pestilences and desolation from its horrid hair!

ONCE more. We used to be taught, that none but a very small part of mankind
had the least chance of obtaining salvation at all. But now, even Judas, with
the Beast, and the False Prophet, -- yea, and all the blackest fiends below,
shall at last be cleansed, and purified, and turned into angelic beauties, and
be made equally happy with the glorious army of martyrs, and the first born
sons of light! And pray, what is this but a new edition of purgatory, only a
little corrected and amended? And what will follow? What but the extreme
unction, prayers for the dead, Peter Pence, pilgrimages, auricular confession,
pardons, indulgences, transubstantiation, supererogation, etc. etc. etc.

WE were altogether at a loss, in times past, to know from what origin such
ingenious innovations sprung; but this Sermon has obliged us with a friendly
evolution of the whole mystery. It is, doubtless, by the superior documents of
this inherent Preacher, that the children of this generation are grown so much
wiser than their Fathers. The author might have spared his vehement ejaculation
for the poor deists; for who but this supreme Pontiff taught them to espy so
many glaring blemishes in divine revelation? And indeed he is daily teaching
others the noble sciences of self-conceit, and the contempt of serious piety,
conformity to this world, scoffing at religion, crying up the dignity of human
nature, despising the gospel, vilifying its faithful Ministers, and pride, and
wantonness, and atheism, and infidelity, and profaneness of every kind. And now
he has brought forth a lesson, which, if it does but succeed, will do the whole
effectually. Rejoice, ye sons of Belial! shout loud, all ye children of
disobedience! for that eternal hell, at which you used to be terrified, which
freqently checked you in the jovial career of vanity, that restrained your
corruptions, and often, often embittered your mirth, and mingled wormwood with
your golden cup of pleasure, that eternal hell is now no more! It is found at
last to be nothing but a melancholy fiction, an idle dream, mere priestcraft,
and nothing else!

REJOICE, ye devils, also! Yea, let all your dark dungeons resound with the
voice of jubilation! No longer need you to believe and tremble! No, no, -- Wait
but for a little moment, and your iron chains shall burst asunder! Your prison
walls, though of adamant shall be broken down! You seraphic wings shall be
restored! You shall regain your primeval velocity, and in the twinkling of an
eye reach you former habitations! This is a joyful proclamation indeed But,
whatever some men on earth may do, I am persuade there is not a single devil,
or damned spirit in hell, that pays the least credit thereunto. They, alas!
they all know that it is an egregious falsehood.

HOWEVER, let this doctrine be ever so glorious in other peoples esteem, to me
it is very certain it is a doctrine that is not of God.

THAT doctrine, which contradicts the plainest dictates of reason; that
doctrine, which disagrees with the experience of all true christians; that
doctrine, which depreciates the efficacy, and derogates from the value of
redeeming blood; that doctrine, which is directly opposite to the whole scope
of divine revelation, which is dishonorable to God, and plainly tends to ruin
precious souls, by encouraging them to go on in sin without restraint; that
doctrine is not, that doctrine cannot be of God. But such is this glorious
(alias) inglorious doctrine of the restoration, as this author holds it
Therefore it is not of God. That the doctrine we have been examining does
evidently bear all these characters, however odious, has appeared in part
already, and might easily be made more fully to appear; but let what has been
written to that purpose suffice at present.

THE author, before he finishes his appendix, tells us, he has aimed at the
glory of God, and the welfare of mankind, in publishing and in maintaining his
doctrine. Well! what his aim was is not for me to determine, but one thing is
too clear to be concealed -- he has taken a very unlikely method to promote
either of these ends.

AND for my part, though I think it my duty very strenuously to oppose his
doctrine, yet I find not the least inclination to reproach the man, nor cast
any contempt on his person. No, verily, my soul loves, pities and prays for
him. May God give him eyes to see his error, and grace to retract it, before it
does any more mischief! For though it may a little ruffle his meek spirit, we
must rank his doctrine of universal redemption among the vilest of Heresies.
And it does really appear to be one of the most dangerous and destructive that
was ever yet propagated among mankind. Let all those, therefore, who desire
salvation, beware of this inward instructor, and at least closely try him,
before they espouse his principles or embrace his tenets. Let them take heed
lest what is recommended to their notice as the seed of the woman should,
instead of that, be nothing but the serpent's head. Remember, precious souls,
remember that alarming text: Satan himself is transformed into an angel of
light. Suspect, oh suspect the voice of adulation. Shun, carefully shun the
snare of the fowler, and the noisome pestilence. Take heed, lest the light that
is in you should prove to be darkness. Fly, quickly fly from the paths of the
destroyer. Hasten, oh hasten, not to the light within, but to the light without
you; even to Jesus Christ, who saves sinners only in this world, which is the
only one that he has redeemed. To him be glory, for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.

