A DOOR OPENED FOR EQUAL CHRISTIAN LIBERTY, AND NO MAN CAN SHUT IT. This proved
by plain FACTS.

Brethren, ye have been called unto LIBERTY; only use not liberty for an
occasion to the Flesh, but by love serve one another.

Gal. v. 13. Behold, I have set before thee an open Door, and no man can shut
it.

Rev. iii. 8. BOSTON: Printed for the AUTHOR, and sold by PHILIP FREEMAN, at
the GLOVE, in UNION-STREET.

With this PIECE, may be had -- A few copies of the Author's HISTORY of
NEW ENGLAND, and his Discourse against UNIVERSAL SALVATION.

A DOOR OPENED FOR CHRISTIAN LIBERTY.
THE return of PEACE to the nations, and to this land in particular, with its
circumstances and privileges, is a very great event indeed; which calls loudly
to all for gratitude and thankfulness, to be manifested by a wife improvement
of the favors granted us, and a faithful discharge of duty in our several
stations. And as contentions about religious liberty have caused much
difficulty among ourselves, whereby our enemies hoped to have got advantage
against us, it may be of public benefit to lay open the prospect we now have of
their being happily terminated.

The east parish in Attleborough, supposing that our laws about worship were
the same as formerly, taxed and made distress upon several persons, for the
support of their worship, who did not attend thereon. One of them thought
proper to try how our laws now are in that respect; and for that end sued their
assessors before a justice of peace in Norton, February 22, 1782; when and
where he fully proved, that he had usually attended public worship with the
first baptist church in Attleborough, ever since May 1780, and had communicated
to its support to their satisfaction. Yet judgment was given against him; from
which he appealed to the county court at Taunton. And it being a matter of
great importance, to have points of law well defined and settled under our new
constitution of government, both parties agreed to have the case tried by the
honorable justices of the court; namely, Walter Spooner, Thomas Durfee,
Benjamin Williams, and William Baylies, Esquires. The council for the appellant
were the honorable William Bradford, and James-Mitchel Varnum, Esquires. For
the appellees was the honorable Robert Treat Pain, Esquire attorney general for
this Commonwealth.

The latter, when pleading for said parish, owned that religion must at all
times be a matter between God and individuals, and declared that he disclaimed
all subordination of any one sect to another: but pleaded, that the
certificates, formerly required by law, were not tokens of subordination of one
sect to another, but of subordination to the government; and accused the
baptists of refusing to be subordinate to government. He also pleaded, that the
appellant was born in the second parish in Attleborough, was baptized there,
and therefore was to all intents a member of that society; so that if he
thought he had cause to leave thein, the law, reason, and even common civility,
required that he should give them notice of it, which he had not done.

The chief pleas for the appellant were, that RELIGION was prior to all states
and kingdoms in the world, and therefore could not in its nature be subject to
human laws; that the certificates heretofore required, were given to parish
officers, officers of one particular sect, and not to officers of government;
and as our constitution says, No subordination of any one sect or denomination
to another, shall ever be established by law, those laws are repealed thereby.
And as the constitution was established by the people, it is stronger than any
law the assembly can make, it being the foundation whereon they stand. Also the
society to which the appellant joined, is as regular a society as the other
that taxed him.

These points were learnedly discussed, on March 16, 1782; after which the
justices retired a little by themselves, and then returned, and declared, that
they were unanimously agreed in giving the appellant damages and costs. Which
judgment not only settled the controversy in Attleborough, but has been
extensively beneficial elsewhere.

As far as my memory and judgment serve me, this is a fair representation of
those transactions; and if any can set them in a more just light, they are
welcome to do it. And since some in Attleborough accused the baptists of great
inconsistency, in protesting against the third article in our bill of rights,
and yet now making use of it against them, I shall take leave to make a few
remarks upon this subject.

1. It is well known that on December 2, 1779, three months before the
constitution was finished, as agent for our churches, I published that article
in the independent chronicle, with exceptions against the power claimed
therein; when I declared, that I fully concurred with that part of it which we
have now made use of; and none could tell how it would operate but by
experience.

2. If natural birth, and the doings of others, could make a person a member of
a religious society, without his own consent, we should have no objection
against the way of withdrawing from such a society, that our opponants plead
for. But since religion is ever a matter between God and individuals, how can
any man become a member of a religious society without his own consent? And how
can a man who believes it to be impossible, practically say, that it is
possible, without contracting guilt to his conscience? This is the exact state
of our controversy about religious liberty. We have been very far from
perfection in our behavior therein; but we have not been accused of
disobedience to government, and of disturbing the public peace, because of our
ever invading the rights of others; but only because we will not give up our
own. It is because we have chosen sufferings, rather than to sin against God.
We believe that attendence upon public worship, and keeping the first day of
the week holy to God, are duties to be inculcated and enforced by his laws,
instead of the laws of men; but we have had no controversy with our rulers
about that matter. The town of Boston must now look at home, for a want of
subordination to government in that respect. A law about these things was made
here last fall, which, after repeated meetings, is not obeyed by this town.


3. The first, and most essential article in the order of Christ's kingdom, is
that no man can see it, nor have any right to power therein, until he is born
again. John i. 12, 13. iii. 3. And the fathers of the Massachusett government
paid such a regard to this truth, that, during their first charter, none were
admitted to full communion in their churches, nor to govern in the choice and
support of ministers, without a credible profession of that great change. And
their excluding of all others from a vote in civil government, and yet
compelling of them to attend and support their worship, gave the most plausable
handle that the British court ever had, to rob us of the stipulated privilege
of choosing our own governors, while they demanded our property to support
governers arbitrarily set over us. And contentions upon this point was the root
of the late bloody war, which has cost a multitude of lives, and involved both
countries amazingly in debt. Yet many are still attached to the errors of our
fathers, while they are resolutely set against their virtues.

After a glorious reformation, the first church in Middleborough, were bereaved
of their beloved pastor, in April 1744. The church then consisted of above an
hundred male communicants; but after they had voted to hear Mr. Silvanus Conant
four sabbaths upon probation, the parish committee went and got another
minister to supply the pulpit the same days. And a council of six ministers,
approved of their so doing, and advised them to persist in that way. By this
means the society was divided; and a pastor chosen by three quarters of the
church, and who proved to be one of the best ministers in the county, had no
better place than a barn to preach in, till they built a new meeting house for
him. The ministers who caused that division, Rom xvi. 17.
belonged to Situate, Hingham, Hanover, Pembroke, and Bridgewater. And the
setting up of the world to govern the church about soul-guides, was the evident
cause of the following profane, cruel, and scandelous actions.

Mr. Richard Lee, a gifted member of one of our churches, having labored with
success in Situate, was earnestly requested by a man in Hingham, to come and
hold a meeting at his house, which he consented to. The meeting was appointed
to be in the evening of May 28, 1782; but as the people were assembling for
worship, a large mob came up, armed with clubs and staves, and warned Lee and
his friends to depart out of Hingham immediately, or it would be much worse for
them. He enquired whether they came with any authority? and finding that they
did not, he, with the bible in his hand, began to exhort the people to fear God
rather than man. Upon which one of them violently seized him by his arm and
collar, and others also laying hold of him, halled him away out of the house,
and out of the town. When he attempted to speak, and to recite passages of
scripture, they repeatedly smote him on his mouth, with the palms of their
hands, and also made loud noises to prevent his being heard. As one who had
hold or him blundered down, and another shook a club over his head, and swore
that if he slung another down, he would sink Lee to hell in a moment. He then
said, I look upon this holy bible to be the very best law that ever I heard of.
Upon which it was spitefully struck out of his hand, and stamped under foot,
with curses and execrations too horrid to be here repeated! When the mob had
got him over the town line, their captain shook a club over Lee's head, and
swore, that if he ever came into that town again, he would tie him up, and whip
him thirty stripes. Said our suffering brother, that is not so much as they
whipped Paul. What! d -- n you, said one, do you compare yourself with Paul! A
Hingham man said, Mr. Lee may go and hold a meeting at my house. -- But others
declared that if he did, they would burn his house down, and carry him out of
town. One of the mob cast soft cow dung in Lee's face, and then they insulted
him because of that defilement, with a great deal more of abuse to men, and
blasphemy against God. Two other baptist brethren were then hauled by violence
out of Hingham, and they went and held a religious meeting in Situate the same
night.

In the above actions they tore Mr. Lee's clothes considerably, and also
bruised and injured his body so much that he was ill for some days, and then he
returned home to Gloucester in the county of Providence. In July I met him at
Situate, where we were credibly informed, that his safety, and even his life,
were still threatened by those rioters. We then went to Boston to ask advice;
and many there as well as in the country, advised him to present a complaint to
the grand jury of Suffolk county, against those rioters, as a necessary means
of securing the public peace, and the liberties of mankind. This was
accordingly done, when the county court sat at Boston in October. Thirteen men
were named in the complaint, which was supported by the testimony of eight
witnesses; and a warrant was granted against live of the rioters, four of whom
were taken, and pleaded not guilty before the court; upon which their trial was
appointed to be on January 14, 1783.

Snow, ice, and a very sharp air, caused the traveling to be exceeding
difficult; yet Mr. Lee traveled seventy miles from his house to Situate, and,
with other witnesses, twenty-three more from thence to Boston, at the appointed
time. But after an expensive attendance of two days, the case was put off till
April. And the ill treatment he then met with made him determine not to appear
there again, without somebody from a distance to speak for him; and the event
justified this determination. For no sooner did a lawyer from Providence appear
for him in Boston, on April 23d, than a proposal was made to leave the whole
affair to chosen men to settle it. This was agreed too; and the gentlemen
appointed met upon it in Bridgwater the 6th instant. But then the defendants
could not bear to have their case publicly opened; and Mr. Lee was prevailed
with to settle the matter with them, upon their promising to pay a sum far
short of what many thought they ought to have done. So that none can justly
charge him with prosecuting them out of a revengeful spirit, nor with taking
all the advantages of them that the law would have given him. And their names
are not omitted in this publication, out of any fear of not being able fully to
prove every article; but because we could expose, and give proper warnings
against such actions for the future, without mentioning their names; and we
hope and pray for their repentance and salvation.

The fathers of this town and government mistook the work of civil rulers so
much, as to imagine that they were to inflict corporal punishments upon men, as
sinners against God, and not only for crimes against the community. In Israel
God was their only lawgiver; and our fathers run into their error, by
attempting to form a christian common wealth, in imitation of the Theocracy of
the Jews. These things I mention, not out of disrespect to them, but for our
instruction.
They therefore banished several persons upon pain of death for adultery,
before they did any for heresy; and some were hanged here for adultry near
twenty years before they hanged the quakers. But the Apostle has plainly taught
the churches, to put away wicked persons out of their communion; and says upon
it, Them that are without God judges. 1 Cor. v. 13. And in the parable of the
tares of the field, our Lord has commanded his servants, to let the children of
his kingdom, and the children of the wicked one, grow together in the world,
till the end of it. Which divine laws have ever been violated by all those who
have confounded the government of the church and state together. On the one
hand they have been deficient about, if they have not wholly neglected, gospel
discipline in the church; while they have ever invaded their neighbors rights
in the state, under religious pretenses. And for twelve or thirteen centuries,
all colleges and places for superior ^^rning, were under the government of men,
who assumed the power to lay religious bands upon children before they could
choose for themselves, and to enforce the same by the sword of the magistrate
all their days. But I congratulate my countrymen upon the arrival of more
agreeable times, and upon the prospect of a much greater reformation before us.
For the following reasons convince me, that God has now set before us an open
door for equal christian liberty, which no man can shut.

1. Not only America, but all the kingdoms and states of Europe, who have
acknowledged the authority of our Congress, have set their seal to this truth,
that the highest civil rulers derive their power from the consent of the
people, and cannot stand without their support. And common people know, that
nothing is more contrary to the rules of honesty, than for some to attempt to
convey to others things which they have no right to themselves; and no one has
any right to judge for others in religious affairs.

2. All former taxes to support worship, were imposed in each government by a
particular sect, who held all others in subordination thereto; which partiality
is now expressly excluded from among us.

3. No man can take a feat in our legislature, till he solemnly declares, I
believe the christian religion, and have a firm persuasion of its truth. And as
surely as it is true, Christ is the only HEAD of his church, and she is
COMPLETE in him, and is required to do all her acts IN HIS NAME; and all
worship of a contrary nature, is will worship, and is only to satisfy the
flesh. Col. ii. 10, 19 -- 23. iii. 17. And all ministers who were supported by
tax and compulsion among us before the late war, received that power in the
name of the king of Great Britain, and not King Jesus; and they are the only
officers in this land, that have retained the power over the people, which they
have received in that name. Whatever gifts and graces any of them have received
from Jesus Christ, let them faithfully improve the same according to his
direction; but, as they would appear loyal to him, or friends to their country,
let them renounce the holding of any earthly head to the church.

4. If this be not done, none can tell who they will have for their head. For
the name protestant is no longer to be a test of our legislators; and to
pursuade the people to yield thereto, the compilers of the constitution said to
them, your delegates did not conceive themselves to be vested with power to set
up one denomination of christians above another; for religion must at all times
be a matter between God and individuals. This is a great truth; and it proves,
that no man can become a member of a truly religious society without his own
consent; and also that no corporation that is not a religious society can have
a right to govern in religious matters. Christ said, who made me a judge, or a
divider over you? And Paul said, what have I to do to judge them also that are
without? Luke xii. 14. 1 Cor. v. 12. Thus our divine Lord, and the great
apostle of the Gentiles, explicitly renounced any judicial power over the world
by virtue of their religion. And to imagine that money can give any power in
religious matters, is the doctrine of Simon the sorcerer; and by such sorceries
the whore of Babylon has deceived all nations. Acts viii. 18, 19. Rev. xviii.
23. It was from thence that the Pope, on May 4, 1493, the year after America
was first discovered, presumed to give away the lands of the heathen therein.
And the same power was claimed by the crown of England, in granting several
charters of this country; from whence some of the states were lately contending
in Congress with others, about the western lands on this continent.

5. All the power that the constitution gives our legislature in this respect,
is to make suitable provision for christian teachers; and, according to their
declaration, divine revelation must determine what is suitable; and that
determines that they shall live of the gospel. 1 Cor. ix. 14. Those who under
the law collected support for religious teachers by force, brought complete
destruction upon themselves therefore 1 Samuel ii. 16, 25. Micah iii. 5 -- 12.
Christianity is a voluntary obedience to God's revealed will; and every thing
of a contrary nature is antichristianism. And all teachers who do not watch for
souls as those who must give an account to God; and all people who do not
receive and support his faithful ministers, as they have opportunity and
ability, are daily exposed to punishments infinitely worse than men can
inflict. Luke x. 3 -- 12. Gal. vi. 6 -- 9. Heb. xiii. 7, 17, 18.

6. Reason and revelation agree, in determining that the end of civil
government is the good of the governed, by defending them against all such as
would work ill to their neighbors; and in limiting the power of rulers there.
And those who invade the religious rights of others, are selfcondemed, which of
all things is the most opposite to happiness, the great end of government. Romans
xiii. 3 -- 10. xiv. 10 -- 23.

7. If men will refuse to be happy themselves, yet their power to enslave
others is now greatly weakened. And a faithful improvement of our privileges
will weaken it more and more, till there shall be no more use for swords,
because their shall be none to hurt or destroy in all God's holy mountain.
Isaiah xi. 9. Micah iv. 1 -- 4. And who would not be in earnest for that
glorious day?

ISAAC BACKUS.
BOSTON, MAY 10, 1783.

