A SERIOUS ADDRESS TO THE RULERS OF AMERICA, On the Inconsistency of their
Conduct respecting SLAVERY: FORMING A CONTRAST Between the ENCROACHMENTS of
England on American LIBERTY, AND American INJUSTICE in tolerating SLAVERY.

As for me, I will assuredly contend for full and impartial liberty, whether my
labor may be successful or vain. TRENTON: Printed by ISAAC COLLINS, M. DCC
LXXXIII.

A SERIOUS ADDRESS, etc.
A Sound mind in a sound body, is said to be a state of the highest human
happiness individually; when these blessings are separate, a sound mind, wise
and prudent conduct, tend much to support and preserve an unsound body: On the
other hand, where the body is sound, the constitution strong and healthy, if
the mind is unsound, the governing principle weak and feeble, the body feels
the injuries which ensue, the health and constitution often become enfeebled
and sickly, and untimely death closes the scene. This reasoning holds good
politically, being sometimes realized in bodies politic, and perhaps never
more so than in the conduct lately exhibited to mankind by Great Britain. Her
constitution was sound, strong and firm, in a degree that drew admiration from
the whole world; but, for want of a sound mind, her directing and governing
powers being imprudent and unwise, to such a debilitated and sickly state is
this fine constitution reduced, that, without a change of regimen, her decease
may not be very remote. America is a child of this parent, who long since, with
many severe pangs, struggled into birth, and is now arrived to the state of
manhood, and thrown off the restraints of an unwise parent, is become master of
his own will, and, like a lovely youth, has stepped upon the stage of action.
State physicians pronounce his constitution strong and sound: the eyes of the
world are singularly attentive to his conduct, in order to determine with
certainty on the soundness of his mind. It is the general Congress, as the
head, that must give the coloring, and stamp wisdom or folly on the counsels
of America. May they demonstrate to the world, that these blessings, a sound
mind in a sound body, are in America politically united!

IT was a claim of freedom unfettered from the arbitrary control of others, so
essential to free agents, and equally the gift of our beneficent Creator to all
his rational children, which put fleets and armies into motion, covered earth
and seas with rapine and carnage, disturbed the repose of Europe, and exhausted
the treasure of nations. Now is the time to demonstrate to Europe, to the whole
world, that America was in earnest, and meant what she said, when, with
peculiar energy, and unanswerable reasoning, she plead the cause of human
nature, and with undaunted firmness insisted, that all mankind came from the
hand of their Creator equally free. Let not the world have an opportunity to
charge her conduct with a contradiction to her solemn and often repeated
declarations; or to say that her sons are not real friends to freedom; that
they have been actuated in this awful contest by no higher motive than
selfishness and interest, like the wicked servant in the gospel, who, after his
Lord had forgiven his debt which he was utterly unable to pay, showed the most
cruel severity to a fellow servant for a trifling demand, and thereby brought
on himself a punishment which his conduct justly merited. Ye rulers of America
beware: Let it appear to future ages, from the records of this day, that you
not only professed to be advocates for freedom, but really were inspired by the
love of mankind, and wished to secure the invaluable blessing to all; that, as
you disdained to submit to the unlimited control of others, you equally
abhorred the crying crime of holding your fellow men, as much entitled to
freedom as yourselves, the subjects of your undisputed will and pleasure.

HOWEVER habit and custom may have rendered familiar the degrading and
ignominious distinctions, which are made between people with a black skin and
ourselves, I am not ashamed to declare myself an advocate for the rights of
that highly injured and abused people; and were I master of all the resistless
persuasion of Tully and Demosthenes, could not employ it better, than in
vindicating their rights as men, and forcing a blush on every American
slave-holder, who has complained of the treatment we have received from
Britain, which is no more to be equalled, with ours to negroes, than a barley
corn is to the globe we inhabit. Must not every generous foreigner feel a
secret indignation rise in his breast when he hears the language of Americans
upon any of their own rights as freemen, being in the least infringed, and
reflects that these very people are holding thousands and tens of thousands of
their innocent fellow men in the most debasing and abject slavery, deprived of
every right of freemen, except light and air? How similar to an atrocious
pirate, setting in all the solemn pomp of a judge, passing sentence of death on
a petty thief. Let us try the likeness by the standard of facts.

THE first settlers of these colonies emigrated from England, under the
sanction of royal charters, held all their lands under the crown, and were
protected and defended by the parent state, who claimed and exercised a control
over their internal police, and at length attempted to levy taxes upon them,
and, by statute, declared the colonies to be under their jurisdiction, and that
they had, and ought to have, a right to make laws to bind them in all cases
whatsoever.

AFRICA lies many thousand miles distant, its inhabitants as independent of us,
as we are of them; we sail there, and foment wars among them in order that we
may purchase the prisoners, and encourage the stealing one another to sell them
to us; we bring them to America, and consider them and their posterity forever,
our slaves, subject to our arbitrary will and pleasure; and if they imitate our
example, and offer by force to assert their native freedom, they are condemned
as traitors, and a hasty gibbet strikes terror on their survivors, and rivets
their chains more secure.

THE American Congress in their declaration, July 1775, say,

"IF it were possible for men who exercise their reason to believe that the
divine Author of our existence intended a part of the human race to hold an
absolute property in, and an unbounded power over others, marked out by
infinite goodness and wisdom, as the objects of a legal domination never
rightly resistible, however severe and oppressive; the inhabitants of these
colonies might at least require from the parliament of Great Britain some
evidence, that this dreadful authority over them has been granted to that body.
But a reverence for our great Creator, principles of humanity, and the dictates
of common sense, must convince all those who reflect upon the subject, that
government was instituted to promote the welfare of mankind, and ought to be
administered for the attainment of that end."

DOES not this forcible reasoning apply equally to Africans? Have we a better
right to enslave them and their posterity, than Great Britain had to demand
Threepence per pound for an article of luxury we could do very well without?
And Oh! America, will not a reverence for our great Creator, principles of
humanity, nor the dictates of common sense, awaken thee to reflect, how far thy
government falls short of impartially promoting the welfare of mankind, when
its laws suffer, yea justify men in murdering, torturing and abusing their
fellow men, in a manner shocking to humanity?

AGAIN they say, -- "By this persidy (Howe's conduct in Boston) wives are
separated from their husbands, children from their parents, the aged and sick
from their relations and friends, who wish to attend and comfort them."

HOW abundantly more aggravated is our conduct in these respects to Africans,
in bringing them from their own country, and separating by sale these near
connections, never more to see each other, or afford the least comfort or
tender endearment of social life. But they are black, and ought to obey; we are
white, and ought to rule. -- Can a better reason be given for the distinction,
that Howe's conduct is perfidy, and ours innocent and blameless, and justified
by our laws?

"WE most solemnly before GOD and the world declare, that exerting the utmost
energy of those powers which our beneficent Creator has graciously bestowed
upon us, the arms we have been compelled by our enemies to assume, we will in
defiance of every hazard, with unabated firmness and perseverance, employ for
the preservation of our liberties, being with one mind resolved to die freemen
rather than live slaves."

THOU wicked servant, out of thine own mouth shall thou be judged. -- Is a
claim to take thy property without thy consent so galling, that thou will defy
every hazard rather than submit to it? And at the same time hold untold numbers
of thy fellow men in slavery, (which robs them of every thing valuable in life)
as firmly riveted by (...), as thou art resolved to use the utmost energy of
thy power, to preserve thy own freedom?

"WE exhibit to mankind the remarkable spectacle of a people attacked by
unprovoked enemies, without any imputation, or even suspicion, of offense. --
They boast of their privileges and civilization, and yet proffer no milder
conditions than servitude or death."

HAVE the Africans offered us the least provovation to make us their enemies?
-- Have their infants committed, or are they even suspected of any offense? And
yet we leave them no alternative but servitude or death.

"IN our own native land, in defense of the freedom that is our birthright,
and which we ever enjoyed till the late violation of it; for the protection of
our property acquired solely by the honest industry of our forefathers and
ourselves; against violence actually offered, we have taken up arms."

THE unenlightened Africans, in their own native land, enjoyed freedom which
was their birthright, until the more savage christians transported them by
thousands, and sold them for slaves in the wilds of America, to cultivate it
for their lordly oppressors.

IN a resolve of Congress, October 1774, they say,

"THAT the Inhabitants of the English colonies in North America, by the
immutable laws of nature, are entitled to life, liberty and property; and they
have never ceded to any sovereign power whatever a right to dispose of either
without their consent."

WITH equal justice may negroes say, By the immutable laws of nature, we are
equally entitled to life, liberty and property with our lordly masters, and
have never ceded to any power whatever, a right to deprive us thereof.

To the people of Great Britain.

"KNOW then that we consider ourselves, and do insist, that we are and ought to
be, as free as our fellow subjects in Britain, and that no power on earth has a
right to take our property from us without our consent."

DOES this reasoning apply more forcibly in favor of a white skin than a black
one? Why ought a negro to be less free than the subjects of Britain, or a white
face in America? Have we not all one father? Has not one God created us? Why
do we deal treacherously every man against his brother? Mal. ii. 10.

"ARE the proprietors of the soil of America less lords of their property than
you are of yours? etc. -- Reason looks with indignation on such distinctions,
and freemen can never perceive their propriety; and yet, however, chimerical
and unjust such discriminations are; the Parliament assert, that they have a
right to bind us in all cases without exception, whether we consent or not;
that may take and use our property when and in what manner they please; that we
are pensioners on their bounty for all we possess, and can hold it no longer
they vouchsafe to permit."

DO Americans reprobate this doctrine when applied to themselves? And at the
same time enforce it with tenfold rigor upon others, who are indeed pensioners
on their bounty for all they possess, nor can they hold a single enjoyment of
life longer than they vouchsafe to permit?

"IF neither the voice of justice, the dictates of the law, the principles of
the constitution, or the suggestions of humanity, can restrain your hands from
shedding human blood in such an impious cause: we must then tell you, that we
never will submit to be hewers of wood or drawers of water for any ministry or
nation on earth. And in future, let justice and humanity cease to be the boast
of your nation."

You who have read a description of the in-human scenes occasioned by the
slave trade, in obtaining, branding, transporting, selling, and keeping in
subjection millions of human creatures; reflect a moment, and then determine
which is the most impious cause: and after this, if neither the voice of
justice nor suggestions of humanity, can restrain your hands from being
contaminated with the practice; cease to boast the christian name from him who
commanded his followers "to do unto others as they would others should do unto
them."

To the inhabitants of the colonies.

"WEIGH in the opposite balance, the endless miseries you and your descendants
must endure, from an established arbitrary power."

WHO would believe the same persons whose feelings are (...) exquisitely
sensible respecting themselves, could be so callous toward negroes, and the
miseries which, by their arbitrary power, they wantonly inflict.

Declaration of independence in Congress, 4th July, 1776.

"WE hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal, that
they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights; that among
these are life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness."

Declaration of rights of Pennsylvania, July 15, 1776.

"THAT all men are born equally free and independent, and have certain natural
inherent, and unalienable rights, among which are, the enjoying and desending
life and liberty, acquiring, possessing and protecting property, and pursuing
and obtaining happiness and safety."

Declaration of rights of Massachusetts, Sep. 1, 1779.

" All men are born free and equal, and have certain natural essential and
unalienable rights; among which may be reckoned the right of enjoying and
defending their lives and liberties; that of acquiring, possessing and
protecting property; in fine, of seeking and obtaining safety and happiness."

IF these solemn truths, uttered at such an awful crisis, are self-evident:
unless we can show that the African race are not men, words can hardly express
the amazement which naturally arises on reflecting, that the very people who
make these pompous declarations are slave-holders, and, by their legislative
conduct, tell us, that these blessings were only meant to be the rights of
whitemen not of all men: and would seem to verify the observation of an eminent
writer; "When men talk of liberty, they mean their own liberty, and seldom
suffer their thoughts on that point to stray to their neighbors."

THIS was the voice, the language of the supreme council of America, in
vindication of their rights as men, against imposition and unjust control: --
Yes, it was the voice of all America, through her representatives in solemn
Congress uttered. How clear, full and conclusive! "We hold these truths to be
self-evident, that all men are created equal, and endowed by their Creator with
the unalienable rights of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness." "By the
immutable laws of nature all men are entitled to life and liberty." We need not
now turn over the libraries of Europe for authorities to prove that blacks are
born equally free with whites; it is declared and recorded as the sense of
America: Cease then ye cruel taskmasters, ye petty tyrants, from attempting to
vindicate your having the same interest in your fellow men as in your cattle,
and let blushing and confusion of face strike every American, who henceforth
shall behold advertisements offering their brethren to sale, on a footing with
brute beasts.

BUT what shall I say! Forgive it, Oh Heaven, but give ear, Oh earth! while we
are execrating our parent state with all the bitterness of invective, for
attempting to abridge our freedom, and invade our property; we are holding our
brethren in the most servile bondage, cast out from the benefit of our laws,
and subjected to the cruel treatment of the most imperious and savage tempers,
without redress, without advocate or friend.

OUR rulers have appointed days for humiliation, and offering up of prayer to
our common Father to deliver us from our oppressors, when sighs and groans are
piercing his holy ears from oppressions which we commit a thousand fold more
grievous: pouring forth blood and treasure year after year in defense of our
own rights; exerting the most assiduous attention and care to secure them by
laws and sanctions, while the poor Africans are continued in chains of slavery
as creatures unworthy of notice in these high concerns, and left subject to
laws disgraceful to humanity, and opposite to every precept of christianty. One
of these in effect gives Fifteen Pounds for the murder of a slave; that is,
after a slave has absconded a certain time, Twenty Pounds is given to any one
who shall bring his head, and but Five Pounds if he is brought alive. Another,
which empowers certain officers to seize negroes set free, and sell them for
the benefit of government: And, even during the present contest, negroes have
been seized with the estates of persons who had gone over to the British, and
sold by public auction into perpetual slavery, and the proceeds cast into
stock for the defense of American liberty. Of the same complexion is an
instance in New Jersey: A female Quaker, about seven years since, manumitted
her negroes; the times having reduced her so as to be unable fully to discharge
a debt for which she was only surety, the creditor, a great declaimer in behalf
of American freedom, although he was offered his principal money, obtains a
judgment, levies on these free negroes, who by the assistance of some real
friends of freedom, procured a habeas corpus, and removed their case before the
justices of the supreme court. How many such mock patriots has this day
discovered, whose flinty hearts are as impervious to the tender feelings of
humanity and commiseration as the nether millstone; can sport with the rights
of men; wallow and riot in the plunder, which their unhallowed hands have
squeezed from others! But only touch their immaculate interests, and what an
unceasing outcry invades every ear. A love for my country, a regard for the
honor of America, raises an ardent wish, that this picture may never be
realized in her rulers.

IT may be objected that there are many difficulties to be guarded against in
setting of negroes free, and that. were they all to be freed at once, they
would be in a worse condition than at present. I admit that there is some
weight in these objections; but are not these difficulties of our own creating?
And must the innocent continue to suffer because we have involved ourselves in
difficulties? Let us do justice as far as circumstances will admit, give such
measure as we ask, if we expect Heaven to favor us with the continuance of our
hard earned liberty. The work must be begun, or it can never be completed. "It
is begun and many negroes are set free." True, it is begun, but not in a manner
likely to produce the desired end, the entire abolition of slavery. This is the
business of the superintending authority, the main spring which gives motion to
the whole political machine; which, were they to undertake in good earnest, I
have no doubt but we should soon see a period sixed, when our land should no
longer be polluted with slave-holders, nor give forth her increase to feed
slaves: And indeed it has been a matter of wonder to many, that that body, who
have been so much employed in the study and defense of the rights, of humanity,
should suffer so many years to elapse without any effectual movement in this
business. Had they, with the declaration of independence, recommended it to the
different Legislatures to provide laws, declaring, that no person imported
into, or born in America after that date, should be held in slavery: it would
have been a step correspondent with our own claims, and in time, have completed
the work, nor can I see any impropriety, but what the nature of the case will
justify, to have it still take place.

TO show the necessity of this matter taking its rise at the head, if any thing
effectual is done. I may instance the Quakers. Some among them, it is said,
always bore a testimony against slavery from its first introduction, and the
uneasiness increasing, advices were given forth cautioning their members
against being concerned in importing slaves, to use those well whom they were
possessed of, school their children, etc;. but some of the foremost of that
society having experienced the profits of their labor, no effectual stop could
be put to the practice, though many became uneasy, and set their negroes free,
until the difficulties attending the late French and Indian war, brought the
rights of men into a more close inspection, when a rule was agreed upon,
prohibiting their members from being concerned with importing, buying, or
selling of slaves; and some years after a further rule was made, enjoining all
those who held slaves to set them free, otherwise to be separated from
religious membership. -- The work was then soon accomplished, and they now say
there are very few members belonging to the yearly meeting of Philadelphia who
hold a slave.

WHEN a grievance is general, it is but trifling to apply partial means; it is
like attempting to destroy a great tree by nibbling at its branches. It is only
the supreme power which pervades the whole that can take it up by the roots. --
The disquisitions and reasonings of the present day on the rights of men, have
opened the eyes of multitudes who clearly see, that, in advocating the rights
of humanity, their slaves are equally included with themselves, and that the
arguments which they advance to convict others, rebounds with redoubled force
back on themselves, so that few among us are now hardy enough to justify
slavery, and yet will not release their slaves; like hardened sinners,
acknowledge their guilt, but discover no inclination to reform. It is true
these convictions have occasioned the release of many slaves, and two or three
states to make some feeble efforts looking that way; but I fear, after the
sunshine of peace takes place, we have little more to expect, unless the
sovereign power is exerted to finish this sin, and put an end to this crying
transgression.

LET me now address that august body, who are by their brethren clothed with
sovereign power, to fit at the helm, and give a direction to the important
concerns of the American union. You, gentlemen, have, in behalf of America,
declared to Europe, to the world, "That all men are born equal, and, by the
immutable laws of nature, are equally entitled to liberty." We expect, mankind
expects, you to demonstrate your faith by your works; the sincerity of your
words by your actions, in giving the power, with which you are invested, its
utmost energy in promoting equal and impartial liberty to all whose lots are
cast within the reach of its influence -- then will you be revered as the real
friends of mankind, and escape the execrations which pursue human tyrants, who
show no remorse at sacrificing the ease and happiness of any number of their
fellow-men to the increase and advancement of their own, are wholly regardless
of others rights if theirs are but safe and secure. We are encouraged in this
expectation by the second article of your nonimportation agreement in behalf of
America, October 1774, viz. "That we will neither import nor purchase any slave
imported after the first day of December next, after which time we will wholly
discontinue the slave trade, and will neither be concerned in it ourselves, nor
will we hire our vessels nor sell our commodities or manufactures to those who
are concerned in it." -- And much would it have been for the honor of America,
had it been added and confirmed by laws in each state (nor will we suffer such
a stigma to remain on our land, as that it can produce slaves, therefore no
child, born in any of the United States after this date, shall be held in
slavery.) -- But the children of slaves are private property, and cannot be
taken from their masters without a compensation! What! After it has so often
been echoed from America, "All men are born equally free." "No man or body of
men can have a legitimate property in, or control over their fellow-men, but by
their own consent expressed or implied. Shall we now disown it in order to hold
our slaves? Forbid it all honest men; it is treason against the rights of
humanity, against the principles upon which the American revolution stands, and
by which the present contest can only be justified; to deny it, is to justify
Britain in her claims, and declare ourselves rebels. Wherefore our rulers
undoubtedly ought to give these principles, these laws which themselves have
declared immutable, a due force and efficacy. This every wellwisher to their
country, either in a religious or political sense have a right to ask and
expect. But we have laws that will maintain us in the possession of our slaves:
"The fundamental law of nature being the good of mankind, no human sanctions
can be good, or valid against it, but are of themselves void, and ought to be
resisted," Lock. Therefore none can have just cause of complaint, should so
desirable an event take place, as that no person brought into, or born within
any of the United States after the declaration of independence, shall be held a
slave.

WHEN I read the constitutions of the different stares, they afford a mournful
idea of the partiality and selfishness of man; the extraordinary care, and wise
precautions they manifest to guard and secure our own rights and privileges,
without the least notice of the injured Africans, or gleam of expectation
afforded them, of being sharers of the golden fruitage, except in that of the
Delaware state, who, to their lasting honor, while they were hedging in their
own, provided against the invasion of the rights of others. By the twenty-sixth
article of their constitution they resolve, that "No person hereafter imported
into this state from Africa, ought to be held in slavery under any pretense
whatever; and no negro, indian or mulatto slave, ought to be brought into this
state for sale from any part of the world." Had they went further and made
provision by which slavery must at length have terminated within their
jurisdiction, it would have been doing something to the purpose; and, as this
is the only constitution in which posterity will see any regard paid to that
abused people, I hope the same humane considerations which led them so far,
will induce them to take the lead When this was written I had, by information,
been led to believe, that the late Pennsylvania slave law was very partial and
inadequate, but have since learned, that it is a judicious and well constructed
law, which provides for the entire abolition of slavery in that state.
in doing their part toward putting an effectual end to this crying evil, which
will ever remain a stain to the annals of America.

AND you who in the several states are clothed with legislative authority, and
have now an opportunity of displaying your wisdom and virtue by your laws freed
from every foreign control, although this people were below notice, and their
rights and interest thought unworthy of a sanction in your constitutions; let
me beseech you, if you wish your country to escape the reproach and lasting
infamy of denying to others what she has so often, and in the most conclusive
language, declared were the rights of all; if you wish to retain the name of
christians, of friends to human nature, and of looking up acceptably in prayer
to the common father of men to deal with you in the same tenderness and mercy
as you deal with others; that you would even now regard the rigorous
oppressions of his other children, and your brethren, which they suffer under
laws which you only can abrogate. View your negro laws calculated not to
protect and defend them, but to augment and heighten their calamitous
situation! Cast out and rejected by the regulations formed for the defense and
security of the rights and privileges, and to guard and improve the morals and
virtue of the whites: Left open to the gratification of every passion and
criminal commerce with one another, as though they were brutes and not men;
fornication, adultery, and all the rights of marriage union among blacks,
considered beneath the notice of those rules and sanctions formed to humanize
and restrain corrupt nature, or the regard of those whose duty it is to enforce
them. Yes, blush Americans! Ye have laws, with severe penalties annexed,
against these crimes when committed between whites; but, if committed by
blacks, or by white men with black women, with the aggravated circumstances of
force and violence, they pass as subjects of mirth, not within the cognizance
of law or magistrates inquiry, and lose the very name of crimes. Hence children
often become familiar with these scenes of corruption and wickedness, before
they are capable of distinguishing between the duties of christianity, and the
appetites of unrestrained nature. No marvel then if slave-holders are often
scourged by the vices of their own offspring, which their untutored slaves have
been a means of inflicting -- children who, instead of being educated in the
nurture and admonition of the Lord, are too often nurtured in pride, idleness,
lewdness, and the indulgence of every natural appetite; that, were there no
other inducement, this singly is sufficient to cause every real christian to
lift a hand against, and exert their utmost influence in, bringing this hydra
mischief to a period.

but when we consider the accumulated guilt, in other respects, abundantly set
forth by other writers on this subject, brought on this land through the
introduction of this infernal traffic, at a time when we were denied the
privilege of making laws to check the mighty evil; and that near ten years have
now elapsed since this restraint has been removed, and no effectual advance
yet made toward loosing the bands of wickedness, and letting the oppressed go
free, or even of putting it in a train whereby it may at length come to an end;
I say, it is matter of anxious sorrow, and affords a gloomy presage to the true
friends of America. Have we reason to expect, or dare we ask of him whose ways
are all equal, the continuance of his blessings to us, whilst our ways are so
unequal.

I shall now conclude with the words of Congress to the people of England, a
little varied to suit the present subject.

"IF neither the voice of justice, the dictates of humanity, the rights of
human nature, and establishment of impartial liberty now in your power, the
good of your country, nor the fear of an avenging God, can restrain your hands
from this impious practice of holding your fellow-men in slavery; making
traffic of, and advertising in your public prints for sale as common
merchandise, your brethren possessed of immortal souls equal with yourselves;
then let justice, humanity, advocates for liberty, and the sacred name of
christians, cease to be the boast of American rulers."

A FARMER.
February, 1783.
FINIS.

