THE OBLIGATIONS OF THE Confederate States of North America TO PRAISE GOD. TWO
SERMONS. Preached at PEQUEA, December 13th, 1781, the day recommended by the
honorable Congress to the several States, to be observed as a DAY OF
THANKSGIVING TO GOD, for the various interpositions of his providence in their
favor, during their contest with Great Britain, particularly those of the
present year, crowned by the capture of Lord Cornwallis with his whole army.

BY ROBERT SMITH, A. M. Minister of the Gospel at Pequea.

PUBLISHED BY REQUEST.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by FRANCIS BAILEY, in Market Street. M.DCC.LXXXII.

PREFACE.
To the Reader.
THE author shall say nothing of the dress in which these sermons appear, or of
the method of handling the subject, only that they are such as he judges to be
most conducive to the benefit of his readers in common. Gentlemen of
observation and studies can select arguments from the public prints, from
dissertations, or general harangues: But the bulk of mankind need to have these
selected for them, ranged in some order, and particularly illustrated and
enforced. He is sensible that several of his arguments are very common, having
been frequently treated by the politicians of the day, and treated to great
advantage; which, in some respects, is no very favorable circumstance for him
as an author, especially as the taste of the times is chiefly for something
new, and but little for piety. However, the religious cast he has attempted to
give them, and the illustrations from scripture, by which they are enforced,
are, in a great measure, new. For these reasons he expects they will be the
more relishing to serious minds, that wish to see them more fully turned into a
religious channel; and, by the blessing of God, may be the means of leading
some others to think more seriously upon those interesting subjects. These are
his hopes, and his principal motives for this publication. It is certainly high
time for us to awake out of sleep, and pay a most pious attention to the very
great and interesting events of our day. That this essay may be blessed to
those ends, is the hearty desire of a well-wisher to his country, and a servant
of the church for Christ's sake.

THE AUTHOR.

SERMON, etc.
Psalm lxvii. 5. Let the people praise thee, O God! Let all the people praise
thee.


"PRAISE Ye the Lord: for it is good to sing praises to our God: for it is
pleasant, and praise is comely." It is comely: for of all the exercises upon
earth it bears the nearest resemblance to the worship of heaven, and highly
becomes us as reasonable creatures, but much more as christians. Our
obligations to the duty are founded as well on our own indigence, as on the
glory of Jehovah, and his goodness to us. Every one daily receives innumerable
mercies from his unwasted fullness, which daily lay him under fresh obligations
to praise the bountiful author of them. Communities, as collective bodies, are
bound to praise him no less than individuals. By the common laws of society,
the good of the whole and of individuals mutually affect each other, which
obliges them to offer praise respectively, not only from self-interest, but
from the purer springs of benevolence. This more evidently appears in some
public scenes of providence, which are so (...), that he who runs may read
the peculiar favors of heaven to the whole and to the individuals: then more
especially let all the people praise God. And as all the people are bound to
praise God on such occasions; so it is most harmonious, animating and many ways
useful for the whole to unite in his praises at the same time.

This day, my brethren, we and all the inhabitants of the United States are
called to give thanks to the LORD of lords and KING of kings, for the many
peculiar favors he has of late vouchsafed to us, as a people appearing in
defense of our invaluable privileges. At this important call let every
individual, let every family, let every congregation, let every town, let every
state, let all our confederate states unite in praising our God, as with one
heart and one voice.

To this noble exercise the royal psalmist most pathetically exciteth us in the
psalm where my text lies, which is most happily adapted to, and composed for, a
day of public thanksgiving. It was sung by the Jews, and with greater propriety
may be sung by Christians, on such occasions; for to us it had an ultimate
reference, and the moral reasons of the song shine with brighter evidence in
the new testament dispensation than in the old.

The motives to praise expressed in the psalm, are, God's saving health, or
salvation by Christ, to be made known to all nations; and his moral government
of the world, who shall judge the people righteously, and govern the nations
upon earth. It is this last motive I shall chiefly insist upon.

The importance of the duty, and zeal with which it should be performed, we
learn first from the rhetorical and affecting repetition in the text of the
very words expressed in the third verse, in which the mind of the psalmist
appears to have been wrapped in his subject, like one most intent upon, and
earnest in the pursuit of his object. Secondly, from the beautiful and
transporting climax by which the song ascends: Let the people praise thee, O
God! let ALL the people praise thee.

To comply with the design of my text and of this day, I shall point out and
illustrate some of the leading obligations upon all the inhabitants of the
confederate states of North America to unite in praise to God, for the signal
interpositions of his providence in their favor, during our contest with Great
Britain; especially those of the last campaign, crowned by the capture of lord
Cornwallis with his whole army.

Those obligations arise from the nature and importance of the cause contested
-- the fatal consequences to us and to our posterity had we lost the cause --
the strong and numerous obstacles that stood in our way -- our apparent
inability for the mighty conflict -- some noticeable steps of providence
toward us in giving us a few, though they might seem to be inadequate,
preparatives for the war. The various and remarkable successes God has granted
to our troops especially those of the last campaign -- several incidents
interspersed through the scene, which were overruled by a wise and good
providence in our favor, though at first sundry of them might seem to stand
much against us -- and from the glorious prospects to us and to our posterity,
opened by the several successes of our arms, and the manner in which they have
been granted.

I. The nature and importance of the cause contested lay us under the strongest
obligations to praise God for pleading our cause. The great object in contest
is, whether our essential and unalienable rights and privileges, as well civil
as sacred, shall be in our own power, or at the sovereign will of tyrants. Take
these from the people, and commit them to any absolute lord, or lords, and no
man has a security for the rights of conscience, for life, or for property and
the means of procuring it.

It has long been the boast of the British constitution, that it secures those
privileges to the subjects, because it is founded upon the two grand pillars of
liberty, a right to dispose of our own property, and a right to have our claim
to life and property tried by a jury of fellow cititizens. But these rights the
British court and parliament have by every artifice endeavored to undermine,
attempting to lead us to own either directly or indirectly, the justness of
their claim of right to tax us at pleasure, to oblige some of our citizens to
take their trial in Britain, and to alter and virtually destroy our forms of
civil government. They long shrouded their real design by specious pretexts;
but their artifice failing them, they own the extent of their claim, viz. an
omnipotent power to make laws "to bind us in all cases whatsoever." And in
order to confiscate all the states to the crown, they declare us to be in a
state of rebellion, and arise to execute their horrid plot by open violence,
not doubting that they would make an easy conquest of us.

To justify their violent measures, they employ their whole policy to confound
law and constitution, and make the world believe, that our opposition to their
iniquitous unconstitutional acts was an opposition to the constitution itself,
and a rising against lawful authority. This is the idea of our conduct held up
by them to their own nation, and to all Europe, to excite their detestation at
us, as a rebellious and lawless mob. And with this lie they fill the mouths of
their ignorant officers and soldiers, and inspire their breasts, as well with
violence as with thirst for plunder and blood.

Nothing could be more cruel or more false! America betook herself to arms in
opposition to the most unlawful exercise of power, and in defense of privileges
which the unalienable rights of mankind absolutely forbid her to yield! And
this she did not, till she had tried every other means in vain, and till
Britain had wantonly shed the blood of her sons! In those circumstances it was
not only our indispensible duty to oppose force to force; but it was the duty
of all Britain to resent so violent an infraction upon their own constitution;
for they might expect the next stroke to fall upon themselves.

But the glorious Sovereign of the earth and heavens has lifted up a banner
for you, O ye highly favored Americans! and has saved you by his right hand.
He has raised up many friends for you, sent you many aids, and made you to be
pitied by many nations! He has scattered your clouds, silenced your fears,
encouraged your hopes, defended your persons and property, and he will defend
them, if ye wisely improve the blessings of his merciful providence! Ye shall
worship your God, and none shall make you afraid! Ye shall enjoy your
possessions undisturbed, for which ye have labored and sweat, and for which
many of your bravest sons have risqued their lives in the high places of the
field, and many of them have spilt their dearest blood! Grim tyranny hangs his
head! Fair liberty has erected her banner! Therefore ye shall sit secure under
the protection of laws founded upon this firm basis! Nor may the blessings of
your virtuous struggles be confined to yourselves; other nations beholding them
may open their eyes upon their own duty and privilege. Your liberty secured,
like the sun bursting through the cloud, may shed its healing beams over the
nations long shut up in darkness and bondage! For all these mercies let all our
nation offer the acceptable sacrifice of praise! And let the whole earth
uniting in our song, praise him who judges the people righteously, and
governs the nations upon earth!

II. The fatal consequences to us and our posterity, had we lost the cause,
furnish a most fruitful source of motives to praise our great deliverer. The
greater the evils are from which a people are saved, the greater are their
obligations to their savior. But the evils which threatened us were many and
most grievous. No people upon earth are in a condition more wretched than we
should have been reduced to, had the British arms prevailed. A government would
have been established over us, the form of which is no where existent, and none
so destructive of the liberties of the people. Aristocracy and absolute
monarchy are usually esteemed the two worst kinds of government. But the
strongest efforts were made to unite both virtually in the government to be
fixed upon us; or rather it would have been an aristocracy sanctioned by
monarchy, which is infinitely worse than pure absolute monarchy. If neither of
these are its proper name, it is hard to say by what name it should be called.

So strong was the British sovereign's, thirst to establish despotism, that he
created forty lords, from the beginning of his infamous reign to the
commencement of the present war, who had not a claim to a foot of land in
Britain; that being pensioners upon the crown, they might throw their weight
into the scale, to destroy the liberties of the people. How many more he has
created since that time I know not. How are these numerous unlanded lords to be
supported? principally, no doubt, from the spoils of North America. To this
instance of his folly he adds another, viz. favoring a scheme to render his
parliament absolute. Folly I call it, as well as wickedness. For those petty
tyrants might, by virtue of their authority, make the royal tyrant himself feel
the weight of their power, should he at any time happen not to coincide with
their views. But he had no other way to establish tyranny, and force from the
people whatsoever his covetous heart lusted for, but by allowing to them the
enormous power of making laws to bind the people in all cases whatsoever. And
they, fond of so great an extent of power, favor the king's ambitious and
tyrannical views, which otherwise they might perhaps have opposed.

Under such a government who could live? It would he hard to be subjected to
the will of one tyrant -- harder still to be subject to more than 500 tyrants,
all plotting with their cruel master to fleece and distress the subjects -- But
hardest of all to be under the command of their viceroys, at the distance of
3000 miles from the seat of authority, all governing according to the arbitrary
orders of so many unmerciful despots, and making such representations to them,
as their ambitious, covetous, or revengeful passions might dictate. Such
motives and such opportunities for the exercise of tyranny could no where be
found. Of this America has already had a taste in their introductory steps to
bring us under the yoke; and but a taste, compared with what she would feel,
when their villainous scheme should have been completed.

Add to all this the tithes of your whole produce every year for the support of
the church, and the rapacity and cruelty of the harpies, officers and others,
to whom districts of the country would be parcelled out, for their services in
reducing us to a state of bondage. It is no chimerical idea to suppose such
appointments and such grants would be made to them. Whence is it that so many
parts of Germany, Britain and Ireland groan under the yoke of oppression, but
from the dukedoms, counties, etc. granted to the ancestors of their petty
tyrants, for their aid either in money or in the field. And it is more than a
conjecture, that lands were promised to the British soldiers, and districts of
the country to their officers, as encouragements to them to engage in the
service.
Who could bear the insolence and rapacity of a Cornwallis, a Knyphausen, a
Galloway, an Arnold, a Tarleton, or a Simcoe, either as a governor or a
landlord?

Now, Americans, what would be your distresses, when, besides the support of
governors and other necessary expenses of government, you would be obliged to
give the tenth of all your produce every year, for the support of the clergy,
and those too not of your own choosing; -- to pay the whole demands of a greedy
landlord, and the whole claim of a tyrannical prince, to aggrandise his
numerous family, to maintain his pensioned lords, and to discharge a debt of
more than seventy millions, contracted to enslave you?

These things duly weighed, are sufficient to set springs to the gratitude of
all, for the preservation of their liberties, and put a check to the murmurings
of some, who account it hard to give a moderate competency for the maintenance
of the few honest ministers amongst us, and discharge, for a time, the expenses
of a war so just and so necessary. Had Britain made a conquest of us, we and
our posterity would have multiplied taxes, of a much greater amount, to pay
every year perpetually, with every circumstance of aggravation and bitterness.
Every species of cruelty has breathed from, and as far as was in their power,
has been practiced by the tyrants and their tools, as a specimen of what
America had to expect. They have hired and prompted their barbarous allies to
shed Christian blood; -- armed slaves against their masters; -- wantonly burned
towns; -- robbed, plundered and destroyed private property; -- and treated with
the greatest barbarity persons of every sex and age. They may plead, as they
have done, that these are casualties incident to war. Some of them might be so;
but many, perhaps most of them, were not so. Soldiers durst not act so
barbarously in common, did they not know it to be agreeable to their officers;
nor officers, did they not know it to be agreeable to their cruel masters.
Every circumstance in the conduct of the court and army clearly manifests, that
their orders and design were to proceed against us upon the plan of cruelty and
terror. And they have carried on the war with a barbarity unknown in Europe or
any civilized nation.

The malice of the tyrants would have put an aggravation into all the other
sufferings of America, by robbing her of her most precious jewels. The leading
members of Congress, and others who have appeared most eminent in the cause of
their country, might have fallen the first sacrifice to their wrath. Ministers
of the gospel of a patriotic stamp would have shared no mercy. Many indubitable
testimonies induce us to believe this.

But I do not think it is in the power of description fully to paint all the
shocking consequences to our country, had she been subjugated to British
tyranny. O! how great is our salvation, and how great the praises due for it!
Praise ye the Lord, all ye brave statesmen, who dared to step forth in your
country's cause. Praise him, every brave officer and soldier, who dared to face
the greatest dangers in defense of your country. Praise him, every honest
minister of the sanctuary, whose blood the enemy thirsted for* And ye honest
hearted friends to your country, throughout all the states, praise ye the Lord;
for he has delivered you from your heavy chains. O give thanks unto the Lord,
for he is good: for his mercy endures forever. Let the redeemed of the Lord
say so, whom he has redeemed from the hand of the enemy.

III. The strong and numerous obstacles which stood in our way, demand our
warmest praises to HIM who enabled us to surmount them all. We had the most
powerful nation upon earth to oppose, all things considered, and the most
dangerous. A nation whose sovereign is despotic, obstinate and cruel; their
statesmen subtle, treacherous, insidious, swollen with a sense of their own
importance, and long practiced in the arts of government and deceit; their
officers and troops generally esteemed equal, if not superior, to any in
Europe; their fleet the most formidable of any in the world. With their ships
of war they shut up our ports, covered their troops, and easily transported
them from state to state. A nation whose treasury was respectable, their credit
great, and their resources from their numerous manufactures, their extensive
trade, the fertility of their lands, and the riches of their settlements in the
East and West Indies, were great and numerous! We had the flower of their army
to oppose, with twenty thousand foreign mercenaries, and a coast of many
hundred miles to defend!

Our ancient forms of government, the prejudices of custom, and our doting
affection for Britain, were strong bars in our way. The governors of the
colonies were creatures of the crown, their connexions together with the
British merchants upon the continent generally in the interest of the crown. To
these I might add Tories and Refugees, a set of the most infamous sycophants,
murderer, plunderers, robbers and liars, that ever polluted any land; sundry of
whom were persons of fortune, and sundry of them crafty, plausible, and
intrigueing, having been long employed in state business. These all united
their efforts and policy to distress, to intimidate, to sow discord, to spread
false reports, and to blind the eyes of the people. Sometimes they represented
the power of Britain to be so great, that nothing could stand before it; and
therefore we would fall an easy prey to their arms, and none would have
security for their persons or property, but those who would take an active part
against their country, or remain in a state of neutrality. At other times they
tried to deceive the vulgar by asserting that the powers of Europe, accounting
it their own interest to keep the colonies in subjection to Britain, would join
with her in order to subdue us. With these and several other fabulous stories
they deceived some, whose simplicity, timidity, or religious principles favor
their design. When the appearance of the French fleet and army detects the
fallacy, they change their notes, insinuating that the Congress are about to
introduce popery amongst us by their alliance with France, who has it only in
view to seize the states for themselves, when Britain shall have been subdued.
Nothing can more fully discover the deceit of those filthy hypocrites than
this; for their temper and practice plainly show, that of all the religious
principles professed upon earth, pure protestantism would be their last choice.
Were it worth while to reason with them, I would say, there is nothing in the
treaty itself, nothing in the interest of the nation, and nothing in their
apparent disposition to favor the opinion. That it is wholly against the
concern of all Europe to maintain the balance of power, and that the imputation
of favoring popery can no more justly be fixed upon us from our alliance with
France, than it could upon any other protestant nation from their alliance with
them, or with any other popish power. Every one who will open his eyes upon the
truth must see, that a civil league by no means implies a religious one. If
Luther in promoting the reformation accepted the protection of popish princes,
why may not we in defense of our liberties civil and religious? We should bless
God for the help he sends us, and trust him for futurity. For my own part, I
freely confess, that there is scarcely a popish prince in Europe, with whom I
would not more freely entrust my religious liberties than with the debauched
court and parliament of Britain. Especially I would much sooner entrust them
with our generous ally, who has rescinded all the laws in his kingdom that
stood against protestants, chose a protestant financier, and allowed him a
chapel to accommodate himself and his friends, and has sent to our aid a
protestant regiment with a protestant chaplain to preach to them. But our
enemies have been slily slipping round to the other side. Who formed the Quebec
bill? Gracious George and his generous parliament, with which lord Pit
severely upbraided them, especially the spiritual lords! Did the people ask it?
no! Was any religious profession in America, except popery, ever established by
an act of parliament? no! It is plain that that bill was devised as an engine
of future slavery to the colonies in its fullest extent.


All these difficulties notwithstanding, we have not only maintained our
ground, but prevailed against the enemy; our battles have been fought with
repeated success, our land cultivated, our produce exported, our necessaries
imported, our private ships of war have brought much riches into the states,
the councils of the enemy rendered abortive, their power baffled, their troops
often defeated, their whole armies sometimes captured, their bravest officers
put to shame, and the British tyrant left to pine away with malice and
disappointment! Surely The righteous shall rejoice when he sees the vengeance,
he shall wash his feet in the blood of the wicked. Psalm lviii. 10.
Let us praise and give thanks, for the Lord has taught us, that The race is
not to the swift, nor the battle to the strong. Ecl. ix. 11.
That There is no king saved by the multitude of an host; a mighty man is not
delivered by much strength. But The eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him,
upon them that hope in his mercy. Psa. xxxiii. 16.18.
We made our appeal to heaven, when we lifted up arms in our own defense, and
the lord has not made us ashamed of our hope. This argument will appear with
still greater force, when

IV. In the fourth place we take into view our apparent inability for the
mighty conflict. So weak were we, that our enemies did not entertain the least
doubt of reducing us to their terms, by a few troops and ships of war; so weak,
that all Europe were apprehensive for the consequences, and waited the event in
deep suspense. Our internal resources, indeed, were large; a fruitful land to
furnish all kinds of provisions; our men active, intelligent and brave: but our
strength was to be collected, and our powers improved. Cultivating only the
common honest arts of peace, we were generally unskilled in the depths of state
policy and of war; without an army; without arms and ammunition; without money
and clothing for our troops; nor had we a single ship of war, nor one ally. In
this defenseless state, trusting heaven to provide for us, we declared our
resolution to vindicate our liberties by arms, when the royal ear was closed
against our righteous and humble supplications. We had at the same time to
train and equip ourselves for the field -- to fight and cultivate our farms to
procure food and clothing for ourselves and our army -- to throw down ancient
forms of government and erect new ones in their stead. Never did a people do as
much, endure as much, and conquer so many difficulties in the same space of
time. It is hard to say which is most astonishing, the bravery or success of
the enterprise. It is, indeed, next to a miracle that people so weak and
unprepared should have overcome so great a force as stood against us --
confounded the councils, and baffled the power of all Britain -- done so great
things by sea and land, in council, in the field, and upon our farms. Posterity
will be surprised to read it, and we ourselves, upon a serious review of the
whole scene, will scarcely be able to believe what our eyes have seen and our
ears heard. It is the Lord's doing, and mavelous in our eyes. Had not the
Lord been on our side, when men rose up to slay us: then they had swallowed us
up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us. Blessed be the Lord, who
has not given us as a prey to their teeth. Our soul is escaped as a bird out
of the snare of the fowler: the snare is broken, and we are escaped. Our help
is in the name of the Lord, who made heaven and earth. Psalm 124.2, 3, 6, 7, 8.
May the remembrance of our salvation be laid up in our hearts as in the rock,
forever! When the children of Israel vanquished the strong army of the
Amalekites, who attacked them in the wilderness, unprepared, Moses reared a
monumental altar to the Lord, and called it JEHOVAH NISI, THE LORD MY BANNER.
Exodus 17.14, 15.
No less reason have we to raise a perpetual monument of praise to him, who
has lifted up a glorious banner for us in our low estate.

V. The goodness of providence in granting us a few, though they might seem to be
inadequate, preparatives for the war, merit our attention and hearty praise.
Had Britain attacked us before the last war, we must have fallen an easy prey.
But in that war some of our heroes, particularly our brave commander in chief,
caught the military spark, which has been kindled and improved to that degree,
during the course of this war, in training and leading on the troops, that they
are not only become equal to the British forces, but sometimes gain the day
with lesser numbers.

By the stamp act, and other artful devices to invade our liberties, the minds
of our inexperienced statesmen were roused to attend as well to the intrigues
of the British court, as to study the rights of freemen, and vindicate them
against any encroachments. Their rapid and solid improvements in this kind of
knowledge, for which the noblest foundation was laid in a dignity of genius
early cultivated by various useful and well applied studies, soon drew the
attention of all Europe, procured the confidence of its leading powers, and
obtained for them, from no less a judge than lord Pit, the character of "able
statesmen."

On the solid foundation they laid, we have, by the smiles of providence,
proceeded with increasing success till this day. For these favors let our
praises ascend as grateful incense to HIM, who is for a spirit of judgment to
him that sits in judgment, and of strength to them that turn the battle to
the gate. Is. 28.6, 11.


No less noticeable is the appointment of general Washington to the supreme
command of our army; a gentleman who, by common consent, is of all others
allowed to be the fittest for the service. As Elihu said to Job, I know not to
give flattering titles, in so doing my God would soon take me away. Job 32.22.
Yet I know that we ought to give honor to those whom God honors; and that,
in order to praise him for this as well as other instances of his goodness, it
is necessary to attend to the motives of our praise. Without any particular
notice of his various personal excellencies, or the various incidents in
providence uniting to prepare him gradually for so high a trust, it will
justify the observation we have made, barely to mention the growing estimation
of him in the army, for so many years, and in the midst of so many complicated
and trying occurrences -- the reverence for his character our enemies
themselves are obliged to express -- the hearty approbation of his conduct by
all ranks in America, and the testimony of the wisest sages in Europe, who
allow him to be one of the brightest military ornaments of the age. The
improvement of the favor that we and our whole land should make, is humbly to
notice and adore the goodness and wisdom of God, who is at no loss for an
instrument to do it, when he has a great work to perform. He drew Moses from
the ark of bulrushes, to confound Pharaoh's ancient court, and deliver his
brethren from their hard bondage. He called Cyrus, his servant, from the rough
mountains of Persia, to overthrow the strongest empire in the world, and
restore the captivity of his people. And he has raised up his servant
Washington, one of our brethren, who never saw any country but his own, to
humble a powerful and most haughty nation, and save his country from the chains
of slavery. Blessed be his holy and gracious name, who bestows various gifts to
men, according to the various employments he designs them for. He who fitted
Moses for legislation, and Aaron to serve at the altar, inspired Joshua with
military courage and skill to command the armies of his people Israel.

SERMON II.
VI. THE many and remarkable successes of our forces, particularly those of the
last campaign, exceedingly increase our obligations to praise him who teaches
their hands to war, and their fingers to fight. Psalm 144.1.
His excellency general Washington, being happily chosen to the chief command
of our army, takes the field with his little band of undisciplined troops; and
though they were generally much inferior in number to those of the enemy, badly
accoutred at first, and frequently ill supplied with provisions, clothing and
money; yet they baffle the enemy, vanquish them often, sometimes take captive
whole large armaments, and persevere in defending their country amidst many
discouragements: a virtue this, that will shine in the annals of America
throughout all ages. Had we time, and skill, and materials sufficient to follow
them through their several severe and almost incredible marches, their
particular skirmishes and general engagements, the draught would correspond to
the great original. But this will be the business of faithful historians and
skilful panegyrists. Suffice it for us to touch at some of the more interesting
parts of the great scene, to assist in the devotions of the day.

Lexington and Bunker's Hill, Long Island and White Plains, the banks of
Brandywine and streets of German-town, Monmouth with Stoney Point, all proclaim
to our enemies, with a voice of thunder, the watchful care of heaven over
America, and their own folly in expecting to make an easy conquest of her.

But above all other parts of the whole scene, the operations of providence for
us in New Jersey, the latter part of the year 1776 and beginning of 1777,
deserve the most peculiar attention. In this time our illustrious general is a
shining example of true greatness never appearing so conspicuous as in
adversity. Above two thousand of his brave troops fell and were taken at fort
Washington, and the time of the militia and flying camp being expired together
with the short enlistment of several of his regular troops, most of them return
home, and leave the general to retreat through the Jersies with the remains of
his weak and shattered army, before a strong corpse of the pursuing enemy. Yet
he conducteth his few fatigued and naked troops safe, even in sight of the
enemy, crosses the Delaware, and there makes a stand, till the militia are
once more collected.

Our affairs wear a most gloomy aspect at this time, so gloomy, that the hearts
of many begin to tremble for the fate of our little army and of North America!
But after a dark and stormy night the morning star appears leading on the
approaching clear day! Our intrepid* hero, at a juncture the fittest for his
purpose, recrosseth the Delaware, though floating with ice and snow, captivates
and brings off more than nine hundred Hessians. Shortly afterward he keeps
the enemy in play at Trenton, until evening, and whilst they imagined his
troops were scattered through the country, he marches them to Princeton, under
cover of night, and defeateth the wing of their army there, the next morning,
before the other wing could a rive from Trenton to their relief Without loss of
time he marches for and takes possession of the heights of Morris, whilst the
vanquished and disappointed Britons haste, in great consternation, for head
quarters at Brunswic, fired upon and galled by our militia in the way. Here
they are closed in till the following spring. Upon all this part of the scene
are marked the brightest signatures of great generalship, and the operations of
providence in our favor. And here we may fix the date of our relief; a date
gloriously presaging the future successes of our arms. O that men would praise
the Lord for his goodness, and for his wonderful works to the children of men.
Psalm cvii. 14.


The enemy greatly augment their forces by sea and land for the ensuing
campaign; but by some strange kind of policy, they divide their troops to the
north and to the south which obliges us to divide our little army. This
critical moment invites us once more to behold, with wonder and praise, the
power and care of divine providence for our relief. Whilst our enemies make no
doubt of scattering or swallowing up our small band by a division of their vast
armament, and opening a passage for the junction of their armies, many of
themselves are slain, many captivated, and the rest shut up in Philadelphia,
their prison for several months. Saratoga and Bennington are lasting witnesses
of the bravery of our troops, both regulars and militia, into whose hands God
delivered a boastful general with his whole strong army.

Providence opens to us a bright prospect, the following winter, by raising up
for us a powerful and generous ally; upon which the states drop into a
political slumber for many months, until a storm arising in the south awakens
them out of sleep. The capture of Charlestown and defeat of Camden alarm our
fears afresh, and raise the hopes of our enemies. When the prudent and brave
general Green arrived to take the command of the southern army, his regular
troops were few, the army of the enemy strong, and flushed with victory, the
dissaffected to the American cause numerous and violent, and the friends to it
grievously oppressed by many calamities. No place or time, since the
commencement of the war, opened so great a scene of affliction as this, or more
fully manifested the true spirit of valor, of patriotism, and of piety. The
intrepidity and resolution of our troops to encounter dangers and bear their
fatigues, the courage and perseverance of patriots under their distresses, and
the hopes of good people, can scarcely be equalled. A gracious God rewarded
their virtue! When their night is at the darkest, some morning rays beam upon
them with comfort and hope. The capture of a large detachment of the enemy at
King's Mountain, and the complete defeat of another large party at Cowpens,
each much superior in number to our troops who engaged them, open a wide door
of relief to the distressed inhabitants, and pave the way to all the following
successes of our arms in the south. The gallantry of those actions cannot be
fully described, and their salutary effects were as great as the actions
themselves were glorious The stroke was followed up at Guilford, where the loss
of the enemy was very considerable. Not to mention the gallantry and success of
smaller parties during this long campaign, I shall only observe, that the death
and captivity of more than eleven hundred of the British forces at Eutaw
Springs, added the greatest laurels to the worthy general Green, and the corpse
he commanded.

This successful campaign was gloriously crowned by the capture of lord
Cornwallis, with his whole army, consisting of above six thousand regular
forces, and several thousand of his black aids and Refugees, on the memorable
19th of last October. The wisdom with which the expedition to York was planned
by his excellency general Washington, in concert with count de Rochambeau, and
the dispatch with which the plan was executed, as well manifest the generals to
be possessed of the finest military talents, as the special care of providence
for our salvation. It must appear obvious to all who will open their eyes to
see, that all the circumstances concurring to bring to pass the great event,
clearly display the peculiar concern of heaven in it. A series of the most
delightful weather blessed our troops, from the beginning of their march until
the conclusion of the important scene. The fleet and army appear before York in
the same hour. And HE who commands the winds, and the sea, and they obey him,
commands, and they bring both the French fleets into the bay at the same time.
Again he commands, and they fight against lord Cornwallis, throwing his troops
back into their old prison, when they vainly attempted to effect an escape. No
avenue of escape remains for him. The fleet of count de Grass renders it
impossible by sea -- the position of the allied army wholly prevents it by
land. The only alternative left for him is, to fight or surrender. Fight his
way he could not -- surrender he must.

Nor may it pass unnoticed, how the furious general is suffered to drive on to
his own ruin, and the ruin of the king's troops. Separating his army after the
action of Guilford, he leaves part of them a prey to our brave southern troops,
and, by forced marches, penetrates far into the state of Virginia, with the
rest, plundering and destroying private property as he went; until a check
being put to his mad career by the brave marquis la Fayette and general Wayne,
he pusheth for, and closes himself in the spot, the fittest he could choose
for his own trap. And what has this courser obtained by all his violent deeds?
-- captivity, with the character of plunderer, robber, and murderer of mankind.
That righteous judgment long since denounced against men of his character, has
overtaken him; Evil shall hunt the violent man to overthrow him. Psalm 140.11.


O! how great the praises due to God for our deliverance from the hands of
those monsters of iniquity, so estranged from humanity and justice! We were as
men in a sleep when God restored our captivity. The joy was so great, it
appeared a painted dream. Surely friends and foes abroad shall say, The Lord
has done great things for them. America shall say, The Lord has done great
things for us, whereof we are glad. Psalm 126.
Rojoice, O Virginia, and be glad; for the Lord has delivered you from the
Cornwallises, the Tarletons, the Simcoes, and all the ravagers and destroyers
of your country! Rejoice, North and South Carolina, with little Georgia! and
all ye states in the union, rejoice! Let the people praise thee, O God, let all
the people praise thee!

VII. Several incidents interspersed through the scene, which were overruled,
by a wise providence, in our favor, though at first many of them might seem to
stand much against us, equally stain the pride of man, and merit the most
sensible returns of praise. Our own mistakes and the mistakes of the enemy were
the causes of many present afflictions; yet were greatly subservient to our
general interests. The wisdom of God brought good out of evil to us, and turned
our judgments into mercies. The pride and self interest of their generals,
united with the folly of the British councils, operated much in favor of the
American cause. By separating their army they obliged us to separate ours; by
which means our militia are, on many accounts, much more serviceable to us than
they could have been, had they been called to assist against the whole united
force of the enemy. By bribes, and employing their spies, they parted with
their money without obtaining their object, and with some of their best men for
some of the most infamous wretches upon earth. The salvation of our beloved
general and his army from Arnold's hellish plot, and all the coincident
providence relating thereto, deserve to be wrote with a pen of iron and the
point of a diamond. I might mention their folly and our advantage, several
ways, in the capture of 'Statia, and attacking us on the strongest side at
first, and afterward on the weakest, when the states were alarmed and prepared
for war. But passing over those and sundry other incidents, I shall only
observe,

That the plan of terror, upon which they proceeded against us, was a mistake
the most fatal to themselves, and most subservient to our cause. Their
cruelties, insolence and breach of promise were the springs of many present
sufferings to individuals; but nothing could have a greater tendency to
overthow their own design. They rouse the resentment of the states, consolidate
their confederation, and arm them with resolution to defend themselves to the
last extremity. They fix an indelible stain upon the British court and officers
-- They draw forth the pity of other nations toward us, and excite their
abhorrence of those hypocrites, who with the mouth of the lamb talk of mercy,
but tear the prey with the teeth of the lion.

In this they have discovered the true spirit of tyranny, which is cruelty and
blood when artifice fails. In cruelty their conduct is uniform, whenever they
blindly suppose it makes for their purpose. Lord Clive received the thanks of
parliament for shooting down thousands of the unhappy (...) Indians, whom he
had placed before the mouths of cannon for that very end, that they might be an
example of terror to others. One of their own celebrated writers upbraids them
for giving countenance to such an act of barbarity, telling them, it has driven
away more from their interest in the east, than the whole inhabitants of North
America. For this and many other instances of their cruelty and injustice, the
Lord may now be taking vengeance of them by the destruction of their trade in
India, and lopping off America from their empire.
And in this they have openly exposed their ignorance as well of the word and
providence of God, as of the causes of the rise and fall of nations, and of the
operations of human nature itself. Had these infidels attended duly to those
means of instruction, as the rulers of a nation ought to do they would have
known, that there is a cup of red wine in the hand of God for nations that
persist in luxury, insolence, pride, tyranny and brutal lusts; especially for
those who persist in acts of cruelty against their brethren, or any in their
power: The ruins of ancient states and nations, who fell and rose no more, are
lasting monuments of divine wrath for those very crimes, particularly Tire and
old Babylon, Isaiah the 13 and 14 chapters. And in the 1st and 2d chapters of
Amos you may read an irreversible doom pronounced against Damascus, Gaza, Moab,
Ammon and Edom, for such national evils; more especially for their cruelty
toward those in their power. Edom is marked out above all the rest, because He
pursued his brother Jacob with the sword, did cast off all pity, and kept his
anger forever, for which God threatens to cast him off forever from being a
nation. Amos i. 11. compared with Obadiah verse 10. The British court might
read those judgments with trembling equal to that which seized Belshazzar,
when he read the hand writing upon the wall.
the very evils for which they themselves are famous. They would have read in
the struggles and successes of several states for their liberty; that insolence
and oppression, instead of conquering, rouse the spirit of a free people. Of
this the united states of Holland and cantons of Switzerland have been eminent
instances, as America is at this day. Why do not men of letters, men at the
head of a nation, read, and learn, and fear?


But tyrants, often dastardly as well as cruel and ignorant, measure others by
themselves, and persist in their vain hopes of conquest, till ruin without
remedy overtake them, and those they oppress rise victorious. Woe to Britain for
the incorrigibleness of her rulers! Joy to America, for the Lord God omnipotent
reigns, as the avenger of wrongs!

The lengthening out the war, as well as the cruelty of the enemy was grievous
on many accounts; yet, on many accounts necessary for us. It was necessary to
suppress the luxuriance of all the states, and give them more thorough and
humbling instructions. It was necessary to make more full discoveries of false
hearted men, and purge our land of many traitors. And it was necessary to
humble our enemies more effectually, and make the British court plunge
themselves into still deeper ruins. Our troops, weak as they were, compared
with the enemy, had frequently a fair prospect of striking them a fatal blow,
and bringing the war to a speedy crisis; but were as frequently prevented by
some unforeseen incidents. God said at each of those occasions, this is not the
time! This has often suggested to me the import of David's pathetic prayer,
Slay them not, lest my people forget, scatter them by thy power; and bring them
down, O Lord our shield. Psalm lix. 11.
We are apt to forget the mercies which cost us little: but we praise the more,
and hold the faster, those which cost us dear. God did not subdue our enemies
sooner lest we should neglect our deliverer, and forget his mercies; but he
scattered them through the states, and gradually brought them down, till the
fittest time came to deliver a general of the first rank with his whole army
into our hands -- A time when the faith and patience of this people were
thoroughly tried -- A time the most humiliating to the British court and their
boastful general -- A time when they were so sure of victory as to have
appointed governors to the southern states, and general Cornwallis waited his
commission to take the place of general Clinton! Whosoever is wise and will observe
those things even they shall understand the loving kindness of ths Lord. Psalm
cvii. 43.
for they shall see The hand of the Lord made known toward his friends, and
his indignation toward his enemies. Isaiah lxvi. 14.


Our own mistakes, as well as those of the enemy, added much to our affliction;
yet were they overruled by a gracious providence for our good* the non
importation agreement, and not raising a sufficient army to serve during the
war, instead of producing the salutary effects expected from them, subjected
our army to many difficulties, and increased the burdens of the people. Yet by
the former a spirit of industry was promoted, and military skill by the latter,
each of which are exceedingly useful for a young nation. These united, are a
strong proof of our simple honesty, and serve to convince the world that
independence was not our aim, till we were forced into the measure.

By far the most hurtful of all our mistakes respected our bills of credit, the
management of which, from first to last, together with the consequences
thereof, afford many instructions, as well political as moral, and lay a ground
for much humiliation. It is certain that it fell as a heavy stroke upon
multitudes of the honest, and many of them the most helpless part of the
community, such as widows, orphans, annuitants, weakly and aged persons, with
others who lived on the interest of their money, etc

It gave the deepest stab to public credit, which ought ever to be preserved
inviolate for the peace and prosperity of a nation. It greatly affected our
public funds and seminaries, to the no small injury of the nation; and would
have dissolved our army, had it not been for their own inimitable virtue. It
was the greatest incitement to gaming and vanity, and opened the widest door to
fraud and injustice, which had a most pernicious influence on the morals of the
people.

For these, with other reasons, I cannot but look upon our conduct, with regard
to the currency, as involving much national guilt, which undoubtedly requires
much national humiliation.

The facts are so notorious, that they cannot be hid, how willing so ever we
might be to draw an external veil over them, if we could, and could do it
consistently with duty. Sorry am I to say any thing which might damp the joys
of this day; but in our guilty world we must often mingle tears with our joys.
This day, my brethren, we are called to rejoice; but let us "rejoice with
trembling;" Psalm 2.11.
for we have to deal with a holy and jealous God, who, though he pardon the
offenses of his people, yet may he, by one means or other, take "vengeance of
their inventions." Psalm 99.8.
I cannot rejoice that the public debt is paid at the expense of so many
innocent sufferers. I rather lament their calamity.

But I do rejoice, and we all ought to rejoice, that however various outward
dispensations may be, the divine promise, that all things shall work together
for good to them that love God, Romans 8.28.
is invariable: therefore he will make up the losses of pious sufferers; or if
he withhold temporal blessings he will give that which is much better,
spiritual mercies in the room of them. We ought to rejoice that friends to our
common cause, even those of them who suffered most by the depredation, instead
of stumbling at the cause on that account, they always rejoiced when they heard
any thing in favor of it. And it is matter of joy that, when the money must
sink, how different soever the opinions and practices of the multitude had been
about it, it receives its funeral, as it were, by common consent.

We ought to rejoice, that the idol to which many paid their devotion, is
thrown down; for, in its operation upon their minds and practices, it afforded
the fullest demonstration of the truth of that inspired sentence, The love of
money is the root of all evil. 1 Timothy 6.10
Like the dropsy, it was a continual growing evil; the more the quantity
increased, the more the thirst for it increased. And had it been possible to
give them, and had they received, according to their wish, a silver dollar for
every paper one, it would have been a wide inlet to the highest degrees of
luxury, pride, vanity, dissipation, and all the abominations that ever
debauched and destroyed any state; consequently it would have entirely banished
liberty from our land, the great object for which we have spent much blood and
treasure.

We have reason to rejoice, that the hopes of our enemies, from the
depreciation of the money, are wholly frustrated. It was a scheme at first
invented and executed by the friends of British government, to sink us* But he
who brings the counsels of the wicked to naught, holds up to them the
destruction of our money as paying our national debt; while Britain, in
addition to all their former immense debt, is immersed in a sum of more than
seventy millions, in order to support the war against us; an object this, too
painful for their vitiated eyes to look at..

Above all, we have reason to rejoice in the display of his absolute power and
glory, who does according to his will in the army of heaven, and among the
inhabitants of the earth: and none can stay his hand, or say unto him, What
do thou? Dan. 3.35.
After he had enabled us, by means of our paper currency, to support the war
against Britain for six years, he called it Nehushtan, as Hezekiah called the
brazen serpent, i.e. NOTHING; nothing but mere brass! Our money was nothing but
depreciated stamped paper, worse than brass. With nothing, or a thing of little
or no value, the Lord confounded the councils, and baffled all the power of
Britain! O sing unto the Lord a new song; for he has done mavelous things:
his right hand and his holy arm has gotten him the victory. Psalm 98.1.


Finally, it deserves a peculiar note, that when the paper currency must sink,
a kind providence has, far beyond our expectations, furnished a lasting medium
in lieu of it. The money of the French troops and English prisoners circulate
through the states. Our merchants, especially since the capture of 'Statia,
have imported considerable sums. Our foreign loans have come safe into port.
And the lap of plenty has poured forth her riches to us. Never did our fields
produce in such abundance as in the present year. O give thanks unto the Lord;
call upon his name; make known his deeds among the people. Psalm 105.1.
His unmerited and needed bounties have greatly increased our obligations. But,
alas! we are more sensible of our temporal wants than of God's mercies, and
more prone to murmur than to praise.

Let us beware, my brethren, lest our ingratitude and impenitence provoke him
to change our prosperous state into misery. He can easily shut up our ports.
Scorching heats and withering frosts, blasting and mildew, or his armies raised
from the earth, may soon darken our fairest prospects. The canker worm, the
catterpillar and the locust, weak as they are, are the terrible ministers of
God's vengeance. Let gratitude and repentance mark our conduct; then shall the
Lord give that which is good, and our land shall yield her increase. Psalm
85.12.
And ye shall eat in plenty and be satisfied, and praise the name of the Lord
your God, that has dealt wonderously with you, and shall never be ashamed.
Joel 2.26.


VIII. The glorious prospects opened to us and to our posterity, by our
successes and the manner in which they have been obtained, lay us under the
sweetest and most powerful obligations to praise the Lord. These are no less
than as full, and pure, and uninterrupted an enjoyment of the blessings of the
gospel and of this life, as any nation upon earth has ever been favored with,
perhaps much more so.

I have never entertained the least doubt of the justness of our cause, or of
our success in pleading it. My hopes of success and of future glorious days to
America were founded upon the following arguments:

1st. Britain appeared to me to have all the marks of a nation to be sunk low,
and America of one to be raised high. They, like all nations that have passed
their zenith, appear to be sinking fast downwards again -- they are old and
incorrigible in national vices of the worst kind; vices of so high aggravation
as indicate the speedy approach of divine judgments. There is every reason to
conclude, from the testimony of their own ablest writers, and many undeniable
facts, that their sovereign, their court, and their nobility, are more
infatuated and debauched than any in Europe, notwithstanding their superior
advantages for knowledge and virtue. But God as is his usual way with young
nations, has treated, and he will treat us, as we do our children. We correct
them* yet nurse and raise them up to maturity. He has taught us by many
favors, and by the rod. Never did a nation make such rapid progress in the
same space of time, in numbers, strength, glory, and valuable improvements of
every kind, as America has done since its first settlement.

2d. The remarkable manner in which America was at first planted by the brave
New England adventurers, who, flying from tyranny civil and ecclesiastic, those
to risque the dangers of the beasts and savages of the wilderness, rather than
continue under their hated chains. In them seemed to be eminently and even
literally fulfilled that prophecy Rev. 12.6, 14. And the woman fled into the
wilderness, where she had a place prepared of God, that they should feed her
there. And to the woman were given two wings of a great eagle, that she might
fly into the wilderness, into her place. And perhaps America may yet be a
refuge to many European saints from the dreadful storm, when God shall cast
down thrones, and deluge Europe with blood, to prepare the way for the promised
glory of the latter days.

3d. The operations of providence united with predictions of the gospel shining
as lightning from the east to the west. From Asia it flew to Europe, from
Europe over to the wilds of America. And several of their able and pious
divines have given it as their opinion, that the gospel was about to take its
departure from them, and settle down in America.

4th. The strongest of all my reasons was the everlasting promise of God the
Father to his coequal Son, Ps. 2.8. Ask of me, and I shall give the Heathen
for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for thy possession.
O America, a land of promise! glory shall have her habitation in you. Happy
shall it be to have a place among your sons and your daughters!


Yet I never expected our deliverance, either so soon or so easily, as many
hoped for. You know I have frequently told you it was my opinion, that Britain
would proceed to the utmost stretch of her power, and that I should not at all
be disappointed to hear of the enemy's possessing themselves of all our chief
towns, and making the principal ports in all the states feel, for a time, the
effects of their barbarity. I saw a great revolution was about to take place; I
therefore expected a great conflict: for no great things were ever done, or
great events brought to pass, without a great struggle for them. It is
uniformly the conduct of divine providence, as well to nations as to
individuals, to lay them low in order to raise them high, God chooses his
people's extremity as his opportunity to grant them relief, to teach them that
his own arm works their salvation, and cut off all ground of boasting from the
creature. A notable instance of this we have at the entrance of Israel into the
promised land. Jericho fell without the stroke of a sword; yet were they chased
and smitten down by the men of the next city they approached. A most
discouraging circumstance to those who had many strong nations to encounter.
When they had purged out the accursed thing from among them, they easily obtain
a complete victory in their next attack; and God gives them the troubled, but
rich valley of Achor, as a sure pledge of all their future victories, and quiet
possession of the promised rest. In allusion to this is that encouraging
promise to his distressed people, when afflicted and scattered among the
nations: I will allure her and bring her into the wilderness, and speak
comfortably unto her. And I will give her her vineyards from thence, and the
valley of Achor for a door of hope. And she shall sing there as in the days of
her youth, as in the days when she came up out of the land Egypt. Hos. 2.14, 15.
i.e. They should be reduced to a distressful and helpless condition, similar
to that in which they were when they came from the house of bondage to Canaan;
but in their desolate and afflicted state, he would appear to their joy, and
begin to effect their relief, as an earnest of their future complete salvation.

Thus did God deal with us: After we had been brought exceeding low, he granted
success to our arms, first in New Jersey, and afterward in the Carolinas, in a
manner so remarkable, as to be a pledge of our succeeding victories, and of the
glorious prospects of years and ages to come! The rankest deist can scarcely
deny the hand of Providence in our successes, and the wide door of hope they
open to America.

Look forward, Americans! and behold your families quietly enjoying the fruits
of their own labors. They shall not build and others inhabit; they shall not
plant, and another eat: Every one shall sit safe under his vine and fig tree!
Behold your towns marts of nations, and your streams floating with merchandise
uninterrupted! Behold the wilderness cultivated, and the banks of your numerous
lakes and rivers adorned with thriving cities and tra^ing towns! Look forward
and behold the haunts of savages and beasts of prey become seats of the
churches and worship of Christ! The wilderness and solitary place shall be glad
for them; and the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose. It shall
blossom abundantly, and rejoice with joy and singing; the glory of Lebanon
shall be given unto it, the excellency of Carmel and Sharon: They shall see the
glory of the Lord, and the excellency of our God -- and the parched ground
shall become a pool, and the thirsty land springs of water -- Arise, shine, for
thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee -- and the
gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy rising.
They shall fly as a cloud, and as doves to their windows. For thy god will make
thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many generations. Is. 35.1, 2, -- 7. And
60, 1, -- 3, -- 8, -- 15.
For the forementioned and similar reasons which I cannot take time to enlarge
upon, I firmly believe America shall be a glorious empire, abounding in all the
blessings of the gospel, and of this life, and that our present struggles shall
prepare the way for that glory. Nor is it at all improbable, that many shall
come from the east to the brightness of her rising, or that the enlightening and
quickening gospel of Christ shall proceed from us, as life from the dead to the
nations that sit in darkness and in the shadow of death. O give thanks unto the
Lord, make known his deeds among the nations; sing unto him, sing psalms unto
him, talk ye of all his mavelous works. Glory in his holy name: Let the heart
of them rejoice that seek the Lord. Psalm 105.1, 2 3.
Sing and give thanks O Trenton and Princeton; for ye are our valley of Achor,
in which God first opened to us a door of hope, and caused us to sing as in the
days of youth! God bless you and cause your springs to send forth their
salutary streams, to refresh his wea^y heritage! Give thanks to the Lord, and
rejoice, O Saratoga with Bennington, King's Mountain with Cowpens and Eutaw
Springs; for in you has he opened to us a wide door of hope! God make your
fields as Sharon, and your deserts blossom as the rose! Sing unto the Lord,
York with Gloucester, and talk ye of all his mavelous works; for you has he
given to all the states as the largest door of hope! May he that ^^tteth
between the cherubims fix his temple in you, and make you a flourishing mart of
nations! Let the heart of every one rejoice that seeks the Lord; for he is
taking his usual steps to prepare the way for the coming of the kingdom of
Christ, whose kingdom is everlasting, and of whose dominion there shall be no
end. And let all our confederate states, as with one heart and one voice, unite
in the transporting song!

IX. From the preceding arguments, I hope, it will easily appear to every one
who is willing to see, how strong and numerous are the obligations upon all the
states to unite in praise to our God. His favors to the whole are great and
mavelous; and our returns of gratitude should be hearty and unanimous. It has
been the practice of good people, in all ages, to assemble together for
humiliation, or praise, as the providence of God might require. It ought to be
one of our notes of praise this day, that God has put it into the hearts of our
worthy Congress to take notice of the propriety of this, and recommend to the
states to obey the voice of providence by humiliation, or thanksgiving, as it
might speak to us in judgment, or mercy. Thus did the pious rulers of the Jews
as well as the prophets; and we ought to follow the footsteps of the flock.
They had sundry public days of thanksgiving for public mercies, and of
humiliation for public judgments. They observed four public fasts in the year,
during their seventy years captivity, as appears from the seventh and eighth
chapters of Zechariah. The spirit of the duty was indeed neglected by the body
of that nation, who, by persisting in their sins, made their hearts as an
adamant stone, as I fear is the case with a great majority amongst us. Yet were
the duties of special use to them, as I hope they have been to us, as they
assisted good people, and done public honor to their God, unto whom their
prayers and praises ascended as precious odours, being perfumed with the
intercession of Jesus Christ. The humiliation and faithful prayers of a select
few, rather than a general reformation, was the first means of the deliverance
of the Jews, as I believe they have been and will be means of ours.
When God opened a path for his people Israel through the sea, and, causing the
waters to return, overwhelmed their enemies; then sang Moses and the children
of Israel this song unto the Lord, I will sing unto the Lord, for he has
triumphed gloriously; the horse and his rider has he thrown into the sea. The
Lord is my strength and song, and he is become my salvation: He is my God, and
I will prepare him an habitation; my fathers God, and I will exalt him. -- Thy
right hand, O Lord, is become glorious in power: thy right hand, O Lord, has
dashed in pieces the enemy. -- Who is like unto thee, O Lord, among the gods?
who is like unto thee, glorious in holiness, fearful in praises, doing wonders?
Exodus xv. 1.2.6.11.
May the spirit of this song be written in our hearts by the Holy Ghost sent
down from heaven. And when the children of Israel obtained a complete victory
over the army of the Philistines, a perpetual memorial of it was erected in
honor to their great deliverer. Then Samuel took a stone, and set it between
Mizpeh and Shen, and called the name of it Ebenezer, saying, Hitherto has the
Lord helped us. 1 Samuel vii. 12, Ebenezer, a stone of help.
May we be enabled this day to set up our Ebenezer, and call upon the name of
the Lord, in confidence that he who has hitherto helped us, will yet help us.

Nature's light, as well as divine testimony, teaches the propriety of public
praises for public mercies, as appears from the practice of all nations, in
all ages. What name then do they deserve, who, through a carelessness about, a
disrelish for, or contempt of the duty, refuse to cast their mite into the
public rejoicings of God's people? Or those who pay no attention to the spirit
of the duty, though they may mix with the public assemblies? They deserve not a
name among christians of any name, be their profession what it may, nor even
among rational creatures. The psalmist describes them by their true character.
O Lord how great are thy works! and thy thoughts are very deep. A brutish man
knows not; fools understand not this. Psalm 92.5, 6,
Brutes and fools are their names, and with these are they fittest to associate.

Our reasons for praise are great and many, and sorry I am, that there should
be any dissonant chords to mar the harmony. But this must be expected, while
sin is sin, and prevails in our guilty world. Those will not unite in the
exalted duties of this day, whose tempers are assimilated to the tyrants
themselves, and secretly wish for the success of their arms. Nor those who pour
out imprecations on Congress, governors, assemblies, and councils, because the
hopes of their gains in seeking the vitals of their country are over. And their
notes are most unsuitable to the sweet exercises of praise, who like the
unbelieving Israelites in the wilderness, continually murmur at the state of
our affairs, and distrust the salvation of God; instead of repenting for their
sins, and impressing their hearts with the glory of the divine government, and
the many undeserved favors of heaven to us. As unsuitable to unite with the
pure choir of singers are they, who only express their joys in Bacchanalian
routs, mingling their notes with the songs of drunkards. Woe unto them -- the
harp and the viol, the tabret and the pipe, and wine are in their feasts; but
they regard not the work of the Lord, neither consider the operation of his
hands. Isaiah 4.11, 12,
And lastly they will not offer the tribute due to their great benefactor, who,
though they may call themselves whigs, and assume any religious name
whatsoever; yet, are so sullen and ungodly in their temper, that they will not
meet for worship with their brethren on days of humiliation and thanksgiving,
and seldom at any other time. (...) should not scruple to assert, that they
usurp the name of whig, as well as that of christian. They are "spots" in the
societies of christians, clouds without rain, and wells without water. I cannot
esteem them a whit better than the vilest mortal deist, whose language is, let
us eat and drink for tomorrow we die. Let their temper and the temper of their
brethren, above described, prevail in our land, then, farewell liberty! farewell
all ye sweets of our painful struggles with Britain! our own chain will bind us
fast.

But although the base tribe now mentioned, and those of similar characters,
will not praise the Lord; yet a goodly number in all the states will, and I
rejoice that they have so glorious a call to the duty. Pious persons will try
to enter into the spirit of praise; for grace has implanted in their hearts the
purest principles of patriotism and of gratitude. The virtuous, who have
engaged in the cause of their country from principle, though they be not pious,
will attempt the duty from the common sentiments of gratitude; which, as well
as common humiliations, are very necessary and useful, as means to remove
outward judgments from a nation, and obtain for them the common favors of
providence.

My brethren, let me beseech your most pious attention to the things you have
heard, and to frame your conduct accordingly. You have long been addressed by
the politicians of the day, as citizens; I now address you upon the same
topics, as Christians and professors of the religion of Jesus Christ. The cause
of America is the cause of Christ; and as such I wish to interest you more
deeply in it, by drawing you to a more full and religious improvement of his
providence towa^^^ us as a nation. In this view repentance and gratitude are
among the chief improvements required of us. These are precious sister graces,
which harmoniously unite with each other; and so inseparable is their
connection, that the more you increase in the one, the more you will increase
in the other also. We have many great national mercies to praise him for, and
many atrocious national sins to be humbled for. Our sinning with an high hand
under abounding judgments, and our ingratitude under abounding mercies, are
very humbling considerations. But although we have many present and mavelous
mercies to praise God for, and have the strongest grounds of hope for a large
addition to them; yet let us not be high minded, but fear. If we shall drop
into a political sleep, or political distractions, and not duly improve the
advantages granted to us; or if we shall persist in our sins, notwithstanding
all our calls to repentance, our calamities may be renewed and prolonged.
Israel spent forty tedious years in the wilderness for their provocations,
before they attained to the promised rest, which was a journey but of a few
days. And many of their carcases fell in the desert for their distrust of God's
salvation, for their murmuring, and their hardening their hearts against the
voice of his providence and grace. Let us beware lest any of us fall after the
same example of unbelief. If we want our tranquillity soon, let us soon break
off from our iniquities by repentance! If we want our God to come for our
complete salvation, and "make no tarrying," let us make haste, and not delay to
keep his commandments. Let our murmurings be speedily turned into
thanksgivings, and our complaints into praises; then shall the Lord come
quickly to bless us with all the smiles of his providence and grace. O that my
people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in my ways! I should soon
have subdued their enemies, and turned my hand against their adversaries. He
should have fed them also with the finest of the wheat, and with the honey out
of the rock should I have satisfied thee. Psalm lxxxi. 13.14.16.
But though many should fall for their sins, they who trust the salvation of
God, have seen the dawnings of it, they shall see it more fully, and their
posterity shall enjoy it in all its fullness. For all these favors let us
harmoniously unite in the praises of our God! And may all the people, every
where, unite in the same blessed notes (...) every nation, and export your
produce to every market. And with your produce the enlarging privileges of the
gospel may be transmitted to many nations that sit in darkness, to proclaim
liberty to those captives, and the opening of the prison doors to those who
have been long bound in chains of ignorance and error. LET THE PEOPLE PRAISE
THEE, O GOD, LET ALL THE PEOPLE PRAISE THEE! Then shall the earth yield her
increase, and God, even our God, shall bless us. God shall bless us, and all
the ends of the earth shall fear him.

THE END.

