A HORRID MASSACRE!


A NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE OF WILLIAM BEADLE, Of Wethersfield, in the State of
Connecticut.

CONTAINING I. The Particulars of the "horrid Massacre" of himself and Family.
II. Extracts from the Rev. Mr. Marsh's Sermon at the Funeral of his Wife and
Children.


HARTFORD: Printed and sold by BAVIL WEBSTER, 1783.

A LETTER from a Gentleman in Wethersfield, to his Friend, containing a
Narrative of the Life of William Beadle (so far as it is known) and the
particulars of the Massacre of himself and Family.
SIR,
IT IS not strange that reports various and contradictory should have circulated
on so interesting and terribl^ a subject as that of a man's consigning to the
grave himself and family in a ^oment of apparent ease and tranquillity. The
agitation of mind which must be the consequence of being near such a scene of
horror, will sufficiently apologize for not answering your request for the
particulars ever this. Our ignorance of the history of this man at first
precluded a possibility of giving you satisfaction on this head. Perhaps no one
in this town had more favorable opportunities of obtaining the particulars of
his history: yet, could never induce him to mention a single s^llable relating
to his age, parentage, or early occupation. To have asked him directly would
have been rude when he evidently meant to be silent on these subjects. My
conjecture was that he was the natural son of some gentleman in England, and
that he had been brought up in or near London, and had been about the Court.
Since his decease have been able to learn from undoubted authority, that he was
born in the county of Essex, in a village not far from London. As to his
business in youth am still left in the dark, but find he has once mentioned to
a gentleman, some little incidents which happened to him while in company with
his father, and that he very early became acquainted with a club in London who
were Deists, where it is probable he received the first rudiments in those
principles. While in England, where he left a mother and sister, he had a fair
character for integrity and honesty. In the year 1755 he went out to the Island
of Bar^adoes, in the family of Charles Pinfold, Esquire Governor of that Island,
where he tarried six years, the^ returned to England, purchased some
merchandise, and from thence came to New York in the year 1762, and immediately
removed to Stratford in this State, from thence to Darby, and then to
Fairfield, where he married and dwelt some years. -- By this time he had
acquired about twelve hundred pounds property, with which he removed to this
town, about ten years since, where he resided until his death. His business was
that of retailing, he formerly credited his goods, but since his residence in
this town he has refused to give any credit, intending to keep his property
within his own reach, believing it always secure while his eye was upon it.
While here he added considerable to his stock, none of which he ever vested in
real estate; the Continental currency taught him that wealth could take to
itself wings and fly away: Notwithstanding all his vigilance.

When the war commenced he had on hand a very handsome assortment of goods for
a country store, which he sold for the currency of the country, without any
advance in the price; the money he laid by, waiting and expecting the time
would soon arrive when he might therewith replace his goods, resolving not to
part with it until it should be in as good demand as when received by him. His
expectations from this quarter daily lessening, finally lost all hope, and was
thrown into a state little better than despair, as appears from his writings;
he adopted a plan of the most rigid family economy, but still kept up the
outward appearance of his former affluence, and ever to the last entertained
his friend with his usual decent hospitality, although nothing appeared in his
outward deportment, which evinced the uncommon pride of his heart; his
writtings show clearly that he was determined not to bear the mortification of
being thought by his friends poor and dependent. On this subject he expresses
himself in the following extraordinary manner: "If a man, who has once lived
well, meant well and done well, falls by unavoidable accident into poverty, and
then submits to be laughed at, despised and trampled on, by a set of mean
wretches as far below him as the moon is below the sun; I say, if such a man
submits, he must become meaner than meanness itself, and I sincerely wish he
might have ten years added to his natural life to punish him for his folly."

He fixed upon the night succeeding the 18th of November for the execution of
his nefarious purpose, and procured a supper of oysters, of which the family
eat very plentifully; that evening he writes as follows: "I have prepared a
noble supper of o^sters, that my flock and I may eat and drink together, thank
God and die." After supper he sent the ma^d with a studied errand to a friend's
house at some distance, directing her to stay until she obtained an answer to
an insignificant letter he wrote his friend, intending she should not return
that evening -- she did however return, perhaps her return disconcerted him and
prevented him for that time. The next day he carried his pistols to a smith for
repair; it may be, the ill condition of his pistols might be an additional
reason for the delay.

On the evening of the 10th of December some persons were with him at his
house, to whom he appeared as cheerful and se^ene as usual; he attended to the
little affairs of his family as if nothing uncommon was in contemplation. The
company left him about nine o'clock in the evening, when he was urgent as usual
for their stay; whether he slept that night is uncertain, but it is believed he
went to bed. The children and maid slept in one chamber; in the gray of the
morning of the 11th of December he went to their bed chamber, awaked the maid
and ordered her to arise gently without disturbing the children; when she came
down stairs he gave her a line to the family physician, who lived at the
distance of a quarter of a mi^e, ordered her to carry it immediately, at the
same time declaring that Mrs. Beadle had been ill all night, and directing her
to stay until the physician should come with her; this he repeated sundry times
with a degree of ardor. There is much reason to believe he had murdered Mrs.
Beadle before he awaked the maid. Upon the maid's leaving the house he
immediately proceeded to execute his purpose on the children and himself. It
appears he had for some time before, carried to his be (...) side every night
an ax and a carving knife; he smote his wife and each of the children with the
ax on the side of the head as they lay sleeping in their beds; the woman had
two wounds in the head, the scull of each of them was fractured; he then with
the carving knife cut their throats from ear to ear; the w^man and little boy
were drawn partly over the side of their beds, as if to prevent the bedding
from being besmeared with blood* the three daughters were taken from the bed
and laid upon the floor side by side, like three lambs, before their throats
were cu^; they were covered with a blanket, and the woman's face with an
handkerchief. He then proceeded to the lower floor of the house, leaving marks
of his footsteps in blood on the stairs, carrying with him the ax and knife*
the latter he laid upon the table in the room where he was found, reeking with
the blood of his family. Perhaps he had thoughts he might use it against
himself if his pistols should fail; it appears he then seated himself in a
Windsor chair, with his arms supported by the arms of the chair; he fixed the
muzles of the pistols into his two ears and fired them at the same instant: The
balls went through the head in transverse directions. Although the neighbors
were very near and some of them awake, none hea^d the report of the pistols.
The capital facts of the massacre you have seen in the public papers; a minu^e
detail was too horrible to be ^iven at first, until the mind (especially of the
relatives of the unhappy woman) had been prepared by a summary narrative, and
even now it is enough to give feelings to apathy itself, to relate the horrid
tale.

The line to the physician obscurely announced the intentions of the man; the
house was soon opened, but alas too late! The bodies were pale and motionless,
swimming in their blood, their faces white as mountain snow, yet life seemed to
tremble at their lips; description can do no more than faintly ape and ^^^fle
with the real figure.

Such a tragical scene filled every mind with the deepest distress; nature
recoiled and was on the rack with dis^orting passions; the most poignant sorrow
and tender pity for the lady and her innocent babes, who were the hapless
victims of the brutal, studied cruelty of a husband and father, in whose
embraces they expected to find security, melted every heart. -- Shocking
effects of pride and false notions about religion.

To paint the first transports this affecting scene produced, when the house
was opened, is beyond my reach -- Multitudes of all ages and sexes were drawn
together by the sad tale -- The very inmost souls of the beholders were wounded
at the sight, and torn by contending passions: Silent grief, with marks of
^s^^^^shment, were succeeded by furious indignation against the author of the
affecting spectacle, which vented itsel^ (...) i^co^erent exclamations. -- Some
old sol^iers accidentally passing through the town that morning, on their way
from camp to visit their friends, led by cu^i^sity turned in, to view the sad
remains; on sight of the woman and her tender offspring, notwithstanding all
their firmness, the tender sympathetic tear stealing gently down their s^rrowed
cheeks, betrayed the anguish of their hearts; on being showed the body of the
sacrificer they paused a moment, then muttering forth an oath or two of
execration, with their eyes fixed on the ground in silent sorrow, they slowly
went their way. So awful and terrible a disaster wrought wonderfully on the
minds of the neighborhood; nature itself seemed ruffled, and refused the
kindly aid of balmy sleep for a time.

Near the close of the day on the 12th of December, the bodies being still
unburied, the people, who had collected in great numbers, grew almost frantic
wi^h rage, and in a manner demanded the body of the murderer; the law being
silent on the subject, it was difficult to determine where decency required the
body should be placed, many proposed it should be in an ignominious manner
where four roads met, without any coffin or insignia of respect, and perforated
by a stake. Upon which a question arose, where that place could be found which
might be unexceptionable to the neighborhood -- but no one would consent it
should be near his house or land. After some consultation it was thought best
to place it on the bank of the river between high and low water mark; the body
was handed out of the window and bound with cords on a sled, with the clothes
on as it was found, and the bloody knife tied on his breast, without coffin or
box, and the horse he usualy rode was made fast to the fled -- the horse,
unaccustomed to the draught, proceeded with great unsteadiness, sometimes
running full speed, then stopping, followed by a multitude, until arriving at
the water's edge, the body was tumbled into a hole dug for the purpose, like
the carcass of a beast. Not many days after there appeared an uneasiness in
sundr^ persons at placing the body so near a ferry much frequented; so^e
threatenings were given out that the body should be (...) and a second time
exposed to view. It was thought pru^^^^ (...) should be (...), and s^cretly
deposited in some obscur^ spot, it was accordingly removed with the utmost
sec^^cy; notwithstandi^g which some children accidentally discovered the place,
and the early freshes partly washed up the body, and it has had a second remove
to a place where it is hoped mankind will have no further vexation with it.

On the 13th of December the bodies of the murdered were interred in a manner
much unlike that of the unnatural murderer. -- The remains of the children were
borne by a suitable numb^r of equal age, attended with a sad procession of
youths of the town, all bathed in tears; side by side the hapless woman's
corpse was carried in solemn procession to the parish church yard, followed by
a great concourse, who with affectiona^e concern and every token of respect
were anxious to express their heart felt sorrows in performing the last
mournful duties.

The person of Mr. Beadle was small, his features striking and full of
expression, with the as^ect of fierceness and determination; his mind was
contemplative, when once he had formed an opinion, was remarkably tenacious; as
a merchant or trader, he was esteemed a man of strict honor and integrity, and
would not descend to any low or mean artifice to advance his fortune. He was
turned of 52 years of age when he died.

Mrs. Bea^le was born at Plymouh, in Massachusetts, of reputable parents -- a
comely person, of good address, well bred, unusually serene, sincere,
unaffected and sensible; died in the middle of life, aged 32 years.

The children (the eldest of which was a son, aged 12 years the other three,
daughters, the youngest aged 6 years) were such as cheared the hearts of their
parents, who w^^^ uncommonly fond of displaying their virtues and e^^^^lencies,
and seemed to anticipate a continuance of growing parental satisfaction; alas!
like early tender ^uds nipped by untimely frosts, they did but begin to live!

It is more than probable, this man had for months past desired that some or
all of his children might be taken out of the world by accident; he removed all
means of security from a well near his house, which he was careful heretofore
to keep covered. His little boy he often sent to swim in the river, and has
been heard to chide the child for not venturing further into deep wa^er than
his fears would suffer him. H^ at times declared it would give him no pain or
uneasiness to follow his children to the grave -- his acquaintance knew these
expressions could not arise from want of affection or tenderness for his
children, but rather ima^ined him speaking rashly in jest.

He ever spoke lightly of death as a bugbear the world causelessly feared. It
appears from his writings, he at first had doubts whether it was just and
reasonable for him to deprive his wife of life, and offers against it, only
this reason, that he had no hand in bringing her into existence and
consequently had no power over her life. -- She set out about the first of
November on a journey to Fairfield, which he thought was by direction of Heaven
to clear him of his doubts and remove her out of the way, at the time the
business was to be done; and his intention was to have executed his design on
himself and children in her absence. She proceeded no further than New Haven,
and by reason of some disappointment, returned ten days ea^lier than expected;
he appeared chag^in'd at he^ early return, and soon began to invent some
justifying reasons for depriving her of life also. He finally concludes it
would be unmerciful to leave her behind to languish out a ^ise in misery and
wretchedness, which must be the consequence of the surprising death of the rest
of the family, and that since they had shared the frowns and smiles of fortune
together, it would be cruelty to her, to be divided from them in death.

It Is very na^ural for you to ask, whether it was possible a man could be
transformed from an affectionate husband and an indu^gent paren^ to a s^cret
murderer, without some previ^us alteration, which must have been noticed by the
family or acquaintance? Yet this was the case in this instance, there was no
visible alteration in his conduct. It appears by his writing that he thought he
had a right to deprive himself of life, and intended to exercise that right if
ever he should think himself unfortunate, the exten^i^n of this right to his
children, was very easy. It Is probable, the principle had grown up gradually to
the last st^ge. Since his death I have seen a letter he wrote to a friend as
early as 1777, in which he has an expression like this -- "I believe I and my
family shall not live to see the end of the war." -- It was then understood to
mean nothing more than his expectation, the war would continue a long time, his
late conduct has explained it very differently. -- Whether Mrs. Beadle had any
fears of his evil intentions or not, is uncertain, that she had ^ears some
great cal^mity would bef^l the family, is evident, both from what she said, and
what he has le^t in writing. -- He writes on the 18th of November, that on the
morning of the 17th she told him, "She dreamed he had wrote many papers, and
was earnestly concerned ^o^ her, and that those papers were spotted with blood;
and that she also saw a m^n wound himself past recovery and blood guggle (as
she expressed i^) from different parts of his body." -- In another letter, of a
l^ter date, he writes as follows, viz. "I mentioned before that my wife had a
dream concerning this affair, (...) since had two more, one of them, That she
was suddenly seized and liable to great punishment, that it created great
confusion, but she afterward got free and was happy; from her excellence of
heart, I have no doubt but what this will be the case with her. -- On the
thanksgiving night she dreamed, that her three daughters all lay dead, and that
they even froze in that situation, and even yet I am little affected." The
Editor is sensible that it may be disgustful to some readers to observe these
dreams repeated after inserting them in the sermon* but this letter was written
before it was known the sermon would be published, and the observations upon
the subject being very different, and since the some would not be complet^
without a repetition of them he hopes the reader will take no exception there
at.


The afternoon before this terrible execution, Mrs. Beadle walked a broad to
visit an acquaintance, and it was observed by the lady, she was uncommonly
pensive; she asked the reason, Mrs. Beadle with much concern told her, "She had
for months been troubled with frightful and uncommon dreams, and that very
morning she dreamed violence had been offered her family and her children
destroyed; she said those dreams wrought on her mind in a very great degree, to
divert her thoughts from them she had walked abroad that afternoon; and that
she verily believed Providence had judgments in store for their family, which
he was about to inflict on them by some sweeping sickness, or in some other
awful manner." -- Mr. Beadle, who, as appears by his writings, was alone privy
to his malevolent intentions, put a very different construction upon her
dreams. He doubtless considered them as premonitions from Heaven, and
convincing proof to him that his purpose was right, of which he says he had
sundry intimations he really thought from God himself, which he does not
describe.

From whence those dreams originated it is impossible to determine, whether the
weapons he carried to his bed side gave her uneasiness and excited a jealousy
in her mind of his intentions, or whether any of his conduct which fell under
her observations might be alarming to her which might trouble her sleep, no one
can tell. She has lately mentioned sundry dreams of a similar nature, which she
had near six months since. Some great and good characters have thought such
intimations were at times given from on high, to convince mankind of the
reality of the invisible world -- to hazard such a conjecture in these modern
days would perhap^ be thought by the learned world a great mark of fanaticism
-- every man must think for himself, no one can pronounce with satisfactory
certainty with respect to the origin and cause of such thoughts in sleep, which
so nearly correspond with the true state of facts. Her last dream penned by him
was nearly literally verified. Although the weather was serene and pleasant on
the 10th, and near full moon: Neither the sun or moon were visible from the
time this horrid deed was done, until the body of this man was laid beneath the
clods, which redoubled the horror: When suddenly the wind blew from the
northwest, dispelled the vapors and discovered a cloudless sky. The air grew
cold, and the faces of the other five being opened to view in their coffins, in
the front of the meeting house, the concourse was so great that much time was
spent to give opportunity for all to take a view; the cold still increasing,
the bodies in all probability were stifned with frost.

Mr. Beadle lest sundry letters directed to his acquaintance, and one labored
treatise in justification of his conduct; they contain many inconsistencies. He
professes himself a Deist, but reprobates Atheism. While in life and prosperity
he claimed to be a Christian, and offered two of his children in baptism. Much
has been said in favor of publishing his writings by those who have not seen
them; those who have perused them have doubted the propriet^ of such a measure;
not because his reasonings against revelation were in any degree unanswerable,
but lest they might have some effect on weak and melancholy minds. He attempts
to attack all rulers in Church and State, treats the Christian religion with a
great degree of bitterness and bigotry; and yet absurdly concludes by saying,
"if it is true he shall be saved by it." -- He is ^ery unsettled, wavering and
inconsistent in his own beloved system of Deism. He flatters his pride by
believing it was the height of h^roism to dare to die by his own hands, and
that the Deity would not willingly punish one, who was impatient to visit his
God and learn his will from his own mouth, face to face in some future world,
or worlds (which he thinks may be many) and seems to think there is as great
probability of succeeding advantageously, in removing from one world to another
as from one country, or calling to another; and seeing all men must be lugged
off at last (as he expresses it) he was determined to make the experiment
voluntarily which all must do through necessity. As he was much out of temper
with the world, he was unwilling any of his family should stay behind to
encounter its troubles, and since it is a father's duty to provide for his
flock, he chose to consign them over to better hands.

It Is doubtful whether any history of modern times can afford an instance of
similar barbarity, even in the extreme distress of war. The ancients encouraged
by numbers and example, did in hours of despair destroy themselves and
families, to avoid the shame of becoming captives to be led in triumph, and the
cruelty commonly exercised in those barbarous ages.

By this time your curiosity itself will be pleased to find me subscribing
myself,

Your very humble Servant.
Wethersfield, February, 1783.
Extracts from the Rev. Mr. Marsh's Sermon, preached at the Funeral of the Wife
and Children of William Beadle.
THE very shocking and execrable deeds perpetrated last Wednesday morning by a
man in this society have led me to make the following observations.

That a person, favored with Christian light and liberty, who appeared to be
an affectionate husband, and a tender, fond parent, should, with deliberation
and in cool blood, massacre an amiable wife, and four lovely and promising
children, and then take away his own life, is an event so extraordinary,
surprising, and unheard of, that we can scarcely believe it a reality, though
the corpses of the unhappy woman and chi^dren, with the most affecting marks of
violence upon them, are here present before our eyes.

Had he left no written account of his intentions and views respecting the
destruction of himself and family we should have been ready to consider it as
the effect of a sudden and most vehement frenzy. But by his writings he appears
to have had it in contemplation for three years.

The time he first fixed upon for carrying into execution his horrid and
detestable purpose was the 18th of Nov. 1782. Not long before this he writes
thus: "I mean to close the eyes of six persons through perfect humanity, and the
most endearing fondness and friendship; for mortal father never felt more of
these tender ties than myself. -- How I shall really perform the task I have
undertaken I know not 'till the moment arrives; but I believe I shall perform
it as deliberately, and as steadily as I would go to supper, or to bed."

In one of the last letters he wrote, there is the following passage: "Any man
that undertakes any great affair, and at the same time thinks, ought to be very
deliberate indeed; and think and reflect again and again. On the morning of the
sixth of December I rose before the sun, felt calm, and left my wife between
sleep and wake, went into the room where my infants lay, found them all sound
asleep; the means of death were with me, but I had not before determined
whether to strike or not, but yet though it it a good opportunity. I stood over
them and asked my God whether it was right or not, now to strike; but no answer
came, nor I believe ever does to man while on earth. I then examined myself,
there was neither fear, trembling nor horror about me. I then went into a
chamber next to that, to look at myself in the grass; but I could discover no
alteration in my countenance or feelings: this is true as God reigns, but for
further trial I yet postponed it." And when the fatal morning was come it does
not appear by any one circumstance, but that he set himself about and went
through the ab^minable work of mu^dering his wife, four children and himself,
with as much steadiness, composure and fi^mness as he supposed he should.

What a m^nster of a man was this! What were his principles that could lead him
into such detestable and more than savage conduct? Surely it concerns us to
know that we may guard against and avoid them as most pernicious to individuals
and societies. Those he has left a written account of.

Speaking of the Christian religion he says, "It is a most benevolent system,
and would produce grand effects, if it was really believed and universally
practiced. I firmly believed it for many years; but my adherence to its
precepts when every one else forsook them, has been my bane on earth: But never
^ind that, if it is really true I shall be saved by it yet. And now I must
generously own that I have as many doubts about the truth of that, as I have
about the truth of any other scheme of religion, that ever appeared in the
world. -- When I consider men as Christians, I look on them as free agents; I
have examined both old and now Testaments, and must think THAT is their true
meaning and intent. But when I consider man as a Deist, or one that does not
believe revelation, I think him a perfect machine, and that he can do nothing,
but as he is operated upon by some superior power -- I have renounced all the
popular religions in the world, and mean to die a proper Deist. I really think
there never was any thing done wrong in the world, but believe that all is
right; -- that we are all impelled to say and act, every thing that we do say
and act. -- That a tyrant king, or two or three ^i^ce republicans deluging
three quarters of the world in blood -- that my killing my family -- that a
man's destroying a nest of wasps, or a fly, is as much directed by the hand of
heaven as the making this whole world was -- And if this is the case the (...)
is no such thing as sin.

Thus he frankly owns that he had apostatized from the Christian religion and
embraced the principle of deism and fatalism, -- that he believed men to be
mere machines, and God the author of all their actions in such a sense as to
exclude the possibility of sin from the world. The idea of future punishment he
also rejects, as inconsistent with the goodness of God, though he says, "I know
by experience there is no want of hells in this state of things." And seems to
be full in the opinion that he and his shall be happy in the future world
whether he be rig^^ or not in rejecting the Christian revelation.

These principles appear to have had a main influence in reconciling him to
actions, which have a self-evident criminality in them, which every man's mind,
at first view, cannot but abhor and condemn.

Pride, imp^tience, and cowardice first led him to think of destroying himself
and family, and operated powerfully in bringing him to determine upon it. He
had a high opinion of his intellectual abilities; and was uneasy with the
meanness of his personal appearance, and slenderness of his fortune. He writes,
"My person is small and mean to look on, and my circumstances were always
rather narrow; which were great disadvantages in this world: But I have great
reason to think that my soul is above the common mould. -- There are but few
men capable of deism: they are when sound like a diamond among millions of
pebbles."

He murmured and complained of Providence in the following language; "I was
determined not to haste^ the matter" (of destroying himself and family) "but
kept hoping that yet Providence would turn up something to prevent it, if the
intent were wrong: but instead of that every circumstance, from the greatest to
the smallest tri^^e, during the whole of that term" (i. e. three years) "and
long before only tended to convince me that the u^most malevolence of fortune
was, and is, against me, on earth. I have borne "the stings and arrows of
outragous fortune" long enough; and "by opposing I can only end them.

Being too haughty to submit to the humbling dispensations of Providence, and
not having fortitude and courage enough to encounter and sustain the
inconveniences arising from straitened circumstances, he entertained the
cowardly thought of flying from them and taking sanctuary in the unknown world:
But the guilt and danger of such conduct, upon supposition of the truth of the
sac^ed scriptures, were too apparent to suffer him to resolve upon it, before
he had brought himself to disbelieve and reject them. And to render it still
less hazardous in his view he gave into the fa^alistic scheme, judging God to
be so far the author of all the actions of men, as to allow them no other
agency than that of mere machines; and upon this Hypothesis concluded that
there is no sin. In which he is doubtless more consistent than those who admit
the same hypothesis, and yet hold that men are accountable for their conduct.

But even such a view of the actions of men, added to his professed disbelief
of the Re^e^ation o^ ^^e bible and future punishment, was not sufficient ^u^ly
to s^^isfy him with respect to his safety in perpetrating ^eeds so unnatural
and at^o^ious; and therefore he called ^n the aid of sanaticism and
superstition.

In one of his letters he says. "You may believe the hand of heaven is in this
matter. I used to be a great enemy to superstition: But, howeve^ it is, I have
lately had sundry intimations, I (...) think, from God to convince me that I am
(...); but the^e I shall not des^^ibe. -- I mention^^d before, th^^ ^y wife ^ad
a dream concerning this affair," (which in another paper, d^ted November 18. he
relates in these words: "Yesterday morning she told me her dream -- tha^ she
thought I had wrote many papers, and was earnestly concerned about her -- that
these papers we^e spotted with blood -- that she also saw a man wound himself
past reco^ery; and blood guggle (as she expressed it) from differ^ent parts of
his body. Poor woman! She little thought that the greater part of that dream
would be realized within three days -- But I am unappalled and think the hand
of heaven is really with us.") "She has since had two more -- one of them, That
she was suddenly seized, and liable to great punishment -- that it created
great confusion; but she afterward got free and was happy. From her excellence
of heart I have no doubt but this will be the case with her. On the
thanksgiving night she dreamed that her three daughters all lay dead, and they
even froze in that situation; and even yet I am little affected. O my God,
wonderful indeed are thy works; in the highest wisdom have thou contrived them
all! All must be right, or I am hardened indeed. -- Some of these will be
called the suggestions of the devil: but men may rely on it, that I have ever
trusted in a much higher power; and it is he alone that now directs me and
supports me."

In another letter, speaking of the intended massacre of himself and family, he
says, "In fine clear days, when I am most cheerful, and in a morning when I
first wake, free from any disturbance, I seem to be convinced in a steady, calm
and reasonable way, that it is appointed for me to do it -- that it is my duty
and must be done. That it is God himself that prompts and directs me, in all my
reflections and circumspection, I really believe. But if it should at last
prove Mr. Devil, or any other evil spirit, all that I can say about it is, that
I was born a very unlucky fellow."

Dreadful delusion! Strange inconsistencies! Horrid blasphemy! How surprising
is it, that a man, who rejects the infallible evidences in favor of the
divinity of the Christian religion, a religion which he allows to be most
benevolent, and with whom it seems to be a maxim, that God never makes an
extraordinary revelation of himself to man while upon earth, should pretend,
and be confident, that He has given him sundry intimations that he is right is
forming, and taking measures to carry into execution, designs condemned by the
light of nature as absolutely wrong, and which no man "whose conscience is not
seared as with a hot iron," can think of without abhorrence! How surprising,
that one, who ranked himself among the few sublime geniuses, who only, as he
supposed, are cap^ble of deism, that is, of withstanding the force of the
mighty evidence in support of the divine authority of the Bible, should produce
his wife's dreams and his own feelings at her narration of them as a convincing
argument that the hand of heaven was with him! Such dreams, related in the
manner we may suppose they were by her, had a natural tendency to move the
tender passions, and give a check to his pernicious designs. This he seemed to
be aware of, and considered his being unaffected and unappalled as owing either
to supernatural divine help or support, or to his own hardness; the latter he
would not admit: How astonishing that he could imagine it to be the former!

But why do I say astonishing! Can any thing be so in one, who, in an
enlightened age, so far sets himself against God as to reject a revelation
attended with all the evidence, both internal and external, of it is divine
original, that the nature of the thing will admit?

Can any thing be surprising in one, who in contradiction to the light of
reason, and his own consciousness of human liberty and free agency, considers
mankind as perfect machines, and God as the efficient cause of all the actions
of wicked men?

Can we suppose any opinion too absurd to be received by such an one -- any
inconsistency too glaring for him to be guilty of?

Can we suppose it strange, that such an one should be given over by God to
"strong delusion, that he should believe a lie* that he might be damned, who
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness?"

The horrid deeds perpetrated by this man under the influence of such
principles, are a more effectual confutation of those principles, than any it
is in the power of language to produce.

The terrible judgment of heaven in permitting one, who prided himself in the
character of a deist and fatalist, to be carried by his error to so dreadful a
length as with deliberation and dispassion to murder himself and his whole
family, I am ready to think, will, wherever it is known, strike terror into the
minds of all who glory in such a character, if any thing will produce such an
effect, short of the coming of the Judge of the world in flaming fire, to take
vengeance on his enemies.


