SERMON, ON THE PRESENT SITUATION OF THE AFFAIRS OF AMERICA AND GREAT BRITAIN.
WRITTEN BY A BLACK, And printed at the Request of several Persons of
distinguished CHARACTERS.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED BY T. BRADFORD AND P. HALL. M,DCC,LXXXII.

TO THE AMERICANS IN GENERAL, BUT TO THE CITIZENS OF SOUTH CAROLINA IN
PARTICULAR: This small Tract is DEDICATED, With the greatest Respect, by Their
most obedient, And very humble Servant, A Black Whig.

The AUTHOR'S PREFACE.
THE reason why the author's name is concealed, will, I hope, do no injustice
to this short piece. He has taken the liberty of a citizen, though unacquainted
with learned phrases and grammatical questions, to offer this to every son of
freedom; and as it was not intended for the public eye, hopes the critic will
forgive all errors. He only adds, that, if any sentences contained therein,
should kindle the smallest emotion of joy in an American breast, he will think
his labor amply rewarded.

Philadelphia, Sept. 1781.
SERMON, etc.
I. KINGS xii. 16. (...) when all Israel saw that the king hearkened not unto
them, the people answered and said, What portion have we in David? neither have
we inheritance in the son of Jesse: to your tents, O Israel: --


NEXT to life is liberty, and when oppression and tyranny are violent they
cause the parties oppressed to make some resistance, let them be ever so
feeble. The government and authority of kings are almost as old as the
creation, and if we look back to antiquity, we will find the good old patriarch
Abraham engaged in a war with five kings, which he defeated, retook his brother
and all his spoil, and at his return from the slaughter, had the approbation
and benediction of Melchizedeck the priest of the most high God, who
congratulated him on his victory, and regaled him with bread and wine. The
force that Abraham had was but small, yet with that force he overcame all his
enemies. -- So may America and her allies overcome all their enemies. But
before we proceed, let us take notice why those words were spoken by the
children of Israel to Rehoboam their rightful sovereign, and then apply the
case to America and Great Britain, with some remarks.

Disobedience is the general cause of all earthly calamities, and sometimes
meets with immediate vengeance from the hand of the Lord and from the hand of
man. Solomon's disobedience was the cause of the ten tribes revolting, as you
will find it recorded in the preceding chapter; which points out the revolution
of the ten tribes, as it came to pass in the first year of the reign of
Solomon's successor. -- Thus you see the children visited with the ^ins of the
fathers. -- Rehoboam being the hereditary prince repairs to Shechem to be
placed on his father's throne, and accordingly all the heads of Israel assemble
to the coronation: But the children of Israel were apprised of Rehoboam's
designs, and they sent and fetched Jeroboam the usurper, for he had fled
through fear from the land, during the reign of king Solomon; for had he
remained there he m^st undoubtedly have lost his life. Whilst they were thus
assembled they with one voice petitioned the young prince to redress their
grievances; remove their arbitrary taxe^ which his father obliged them to pay
during his reign: But i^ the interim the wise Israelites secretly elect
Jeroboam to be their sovereign; but his promotion to the throne of Israel came
from the mouth of the Lord, whose decrees none can countermand. -- This scheme
of the children of Israel is similar to the conduct of that nation who caused
Charles Stuart to be crowned in the time of their rebellion, which happened in
the year 1745. --

But America has no such views, she wants no titles nor king^, she is
struggling for nothing but liberty, peace and independenc^ and the quiet
possession of that country which their ancestors hel^ed to win from the hands
of barbarous savages. -- But l^^^ return to Rehoboam and the heads of Israel.
The distresse^ ^^raelites demand an answer; their prince bids them depart, a^^
would answer them in three days; during their absence he (...) his father's
counselors together to advise with them what answer should return his urgent
subjects. The counsel of the wise is hea^^^ to the soul. These hoary sages
advise ^im to speak mildly to (...) subjects, redress their grievances, and
remove his father's arbitra^^ laws which he had enacted, and then would they be
willing su^jects, and would serve him as their rightful sovereign. -- But word^
^eing young, vain, proud and arrogant, refused the old men^ counsel, and
preferred such counselors as himself, which was the ^^in of his kingdom, as
you will find in the ensuing discours^. Bad counselors are a hurt to kings,
and when the wicked bear r^^ the righteous must suffer: Kings ought to be
governed by the la^^ as well as subjects, for they are but men, and they ought
(...) have their thrones established in righteousness.

Rehoboam peremptorily re^^^es to remove those enormous bu^then^ that his
subjects compl^^ned of, and what was the issue? T^^ t^^ tribes re^^^^ed and
made Jeroboam their king; but there ne^^ no wonder, the irreversable decree
came from the mouth of the Lord of hosts, who is the king of kings and the Lord
of Lords. ^ings sometimes rush on their own destruction by tyranny and
violence, and the ruin of a kingdom is always near when the sove^eign and
ministers are both wicked. I wish the once illustrious sovereign of Britain
could say as the pious David did, -- That he and his kingdom were guiltless
before the Lord from the blood of ^bner the son of N^r, who was slain by the
blood thirsty Joab. -- ^. Samuel iii. 28.

But who will answer for the blood that has been spilt in America when the Lord
makes enquiry for it, I know not. -- But I am afraid I have deviated from the
point in view. --

So when all Israel saw that the king would not hear nor redress their
grievances, they all with unanimous voices said, What portion have we in David,
or what inheritance in the s^n of Jesse, to your tents, O Israel! and thou
David see to thine own house. -- Thus the grand separation takes place between
the unfortunate son of king Solomon, and the whole kingdom of Israel. The
people are now resolute, since the laws cannot be repealed nor the burdens
removed, they would be no longer subjects. -- Thus it was with the Americans
and Britain -- When the laws of the land are subverted the subjects are
discontented and ready for a revolt.

King Rehoboam is now confined to the small government of the tribe of Judah
only. How mortifying, yet how just, was his pu^^^hment! In this terrible
dilemma he sent Adoram who was his tribute officer to conciliate and pacify a
revolted and an enraged people; but how vain and useless was this messenger.
The enraged Israelites took this as a new insult and they all stoned him with
stones that he died! What will not men do that have been ^^wlessly insulted and
aggrieved? The execution of this principal officer alarmed the son of Solomon,
that he hurried and made all possible speed to get him up to his chariot that
he might flee to ^erusalem. Thus you see how fear accompanies guilt even in
^^ings, and when they do amiss they ought to be punished as well as the meanest
subject; and when they reign well it is the duty of every subject to
acknowledge them as their sovereign. After this retreat of Rehoboam's the
children of Israel crown Jeroboam and ^ets him on the throne of David. Now as
the kingdom of Israel was established in the hands of Jeroboam -- what portion
had they in David, and what inheritance in the son of Jesse? every man to his
own house and thou Rehoboam to your petty government of Judah. How pride and
ambition gilded with avarice can ^lind the eyes and minds of the best of men.

Rehoboam could not relish the revolution of his subjects, it mortified his
pride to that degree that he was mad with rage. He assembles all the chief of
his warriors together, even an hundred and eighty thousand men, to fight
against the children o^ Israel, to see if it was possible to bring the kingdom
back again t^ himself. But whilst this vast army was preparing to go out to
battle, the word of the Lord came unto him by the mouth of t^^ prophet, saying,
Ye shall not go, nor shall ye fight against yo^ brethren the children of
Israel, for the destruction of your kin^dom is from me, says the Lord. -- What
mortal or what sera^ can reverse the decrees of Omnipotence? Who can tell what
in the womb of futurity? That which was in embryo is no^ ready to be brought
forth, -- I mean the peace and the indepe^dence of America.

H^^^^g imperfectly run over Rehoboam's fall, and the revolutio^ of the
^sraelites, let me t^rn my thoughts to America.

America! a name ^^ich I hope will be remembered while ^ sun and moon endure:
An empire which, in my opinion, in spi^^^ of all oppos^^^^^, will be one of the
greatest in the world! O ^ fat^^^^d Brit^in* if thou had known in this thy
day the thi^^^ that belonged to thy peace, thou would never have pretended ^
^^^^ave America! O unhappy was that morn, when the word w^ given to charge a
bayonet! on a brother American! O unnat^ral, unchristian war!

But why do I mention christianity, it has taken its flight from Bri^^^^, as
well as all other honorable, and truly virtuous pursu^^ and (...). -- When
the parents provoke the children are d^^couraged!

When (...) commenced the Americans were at quie^ When they (...) with new laws
and taxes, they appea^ (...) for (...) but (...) of receiving any, the murd^^
(...) to the vir^^o^^ sons of Boston.

They will (...) for (...), but all in vain, the most sen^ (...) as well as
(...) were spurned from the thro^^^ (...)

(...) I join you, my fellow citizens, and y^^ (...) say, What portion have we
(...) in George the Third; to your diffe^^^^ (...) and thou Britai^ ^^e to your
own territories.

(...) takes place between Great B^it^^^ (...) herself independent. -- Brit^^^
(...) colonies no more than Solomon (...): -- -- Assembled warriors can (...)
their most skillful gener^^ (...) or (...) forces -- Have yo^^ (...) to fight
them, rise and de^^^ (...) of Col^mbia.

O Britain how art thou fallen! fallen from the zenith of glory to the low
abyss of tyranny and despotism, your sovereign is a tyrant, and his generals
and commanders butchers. -- What you could not do by the force of your arms you
have attempted to complete by treachery and bribes.

What portion have we then in so perfidious and despotic a government -- Where
is the former courage, virtue and national honor of Britain -- humanity seems
extinguished in the British breast. A nation once renowned for humanity,
generosity and valor. -- But now bereft of all these natural feelings --
callous, and lost indeed!

Notwithstanding all their boastings, they have been fought with bravery equal
to that of Romans, by the raw and undisciplined Americans. -- There is no need
to recount the battles that have been fought; they know, and America also
knows, that her arms have in many actions shone with resplendent luster; one
of her best generals, with his army, has been taken alive in the face of day,
by those men that they branded as cowards. -- Since we can look veterans in the
face, and Britains too; let us not be dismayed, but be of good courage and the
Lord will be our helper. The conduct of the British generals now in America is
so infamous, that the most uncivilized and ferocious savage would blush at such
barbarities.

Nothing but superiority has given them any victories that they have ever
gained; not their valor -- And these victories have been oftentimes so dearly
bought, that they have been almost equal in their consequences to a total
defeat. -- They have armed domestics to fight against their masters, contrary
to the laws of civilized nations. -- They have hired foreign mercenaries to
accomplish their base designs; but their most vigorous efforts have proved
abortive.

Blessed be God, may America say with one voice, that though they have been
chastened sore they are not given over unto death, and that he has raised up
for us an American Joshua to lead our armies into the field, whose virtuous
person I hope heaven will preserve.

However inveterate Great Britain may be against the independency of America,
it shall be established and built on the ruins of British tyranny; and blessed
be the grand Arbiter of nature, that we are supported by our good ally Louis
the Sixteenth, the supporter of the rights of mankind -- And now my virtuous
fellow citizens, let me entreat you, that, after you have rid yourselves of the
British yoke, that you will also emancipate those who have been all their life
time subject to bondage.

Were I to trace the proceedings of the British army since they have been in
America, it would be more than my situation and time will allow, and would be
also robbing the historian as well as the divine. Let what has been said
suffice with a few remarks. What need have we to have any portion or dependence
upon Great Britain? what good have they done for us? and what evil have they
not done? The churches of God have been burnt and defaced, and nothing but
devastation, rapine and plunder have marked the footsteps of the British
generals in America; to enumerate them would be needless. Let me excite and
admonish you with all the affection of a fellow-citizen, though a descendant of
Africa, that you be no more afraid of them, but rather if possible to follow
the example of good Joshua, when he defeated the kings of Canaan, when he
called his captains and his warriors together, and said, Come near and put your
feet upon the necks of those kings, and be not dismayed, but be strong and of
good courage, for thus shall the Lord do unto all your enemies against whom ye
fight. -- The blood of the innocent that has been shed, as well as the cries of
the ^at^e^ess and widows, shall reach the propitious ears of heaven, and call
for vengeance on their devoted heads -- O retaliation, why shou^dst thou sleep
when the virtuous suffer! America has been a grave-ya^d for Britons and
Americans, the blood that has been spilt will one day speak as loud as the
blood of Abel did, at that impartial bar, where even kings must appear and
tremble.

Perhaps you may think me severe when I ^ay retaliate. Has not one of your
virtuous fellow citizens Col. Isaac Hayne, of South Carolina.
been recently executed by orders of British authority, and executed on a
gibbet, notwithstanding all the petitions that were presented to save his life?

If you do not retaliate, the cries of his fatherless and motherless children
will reach the ears of heaven, and it will be against you, and the ghost of
their deceased parents will stare you in the face in the day of battle and
cause you to flee before your enemies. Let me for once use the language of
Semphronius, when he said, "Rise and revenge your slaughtered citizens or share
their fate." If you are still timid and afraid of them, your allies will
withdraw their armies and navies from among you, and leave you to be a prey
unto your enemies, whose tender mercies are cruelties. You have now no portion
in them, therefore be not afraid of them, but fight for your liberty, your
peace and your independence, your sons and your daughters, your wives and your
houses, and remember the Lord who is great and terrible. Ye Americans, ye
Georgians, ye virtuous Carolinians, ye who have experienced the violation of
British faith, and been the c^^^f objects of ministerial vengeance, unto you I
address myself; ye who have been eyewitnesses of the most solemn engagements
scandalously broken, it behooves you to seek for vengeance, and join your
fellow-citizens, that are now hazarding their lives in the high places in the
field. -- Ye banished exiles, that have been driven from every domestic
happiness to suffer in East Florida, and there to be circumscribed to certain
limits, to suffer the insults of British authority; now you are released, be
vigorous in your exertions, and be instrumental in stopping the wounds of your
bleeding country.

But where am I going! I shall enter into an inextricable labyrinth! Pardon me,
I cannot conclude before I address myself to the virtuous daughters of
Carolina, whose courage, perseverance and fortitude are equal to the daughters
of ancient Rome and Sparta. After being deprived of the companions of their
lives, and insulted by the enemies of America, they still maintained their
ground, and have followed their exiled partners across the mighty deep. -- O ye
virtuous daughters, many daughters have done well, but ye excel them all.

Fear not ye brave sons of Columbia, though some of your brethren the citizens
of America have by treachery deserted you and your cause for avaricious
purposes, they with their accomplices will never be able to hinder the
republican American establishment. I hope the day is not far off, when America
shall cause Britain to know, that virtue has well rewarded her virtuous sons;
when her independency shall be acknowledged by all the powers of Europe,
whether armed or neutral, and even Britain herself must acknowledge the
approaching event. -- What success through heaven has our arms been crowned
with toward the southwa^d! What military achievements has been performed by
our gene^als, and what success has the navy of our ally met with here of late
on the southern coasts!

Blessed be the Lord of hosts, the God of battles, for all the glorious things
done for America --

May all the enemies of America perish or be conquered, but all those that are
anxious for her liberty and independence be as the sun when he goes forth in
his might, and may we be a free people for ever!

Which may God grant, through our Lord Jesus Christ, to whom be glory forever
and ever! AMEN.


