A NARRATIVE OF THE RISE and PROGRESS of the DIFFICULTIES which have issued in
a SEPARATION between the MINISTER and PEOPLE of BENNINGTON, 1783. WITH A
VALEDICTORY ADDRESS.

By DAVID AVERY, V. D. M.

(...) THE EARTH ONLY, BUT ALSO HEAVEN. The GOD of ZION. PRAY FOR (...) FOR WE
TRUST WE HAVE A GOOD CONSCIENCE, (...) ALL (...) WILLING TO LIVE HONESTLY. The
SONS of ZION. BENNINGTON: PRINTED BY HASWELL and RUSSELL.

M,DCC,LXXXIII.

AT a Meeting of those of the Church and Congregation of Bennington, who adhere
to the Rev. Mr. AVERY's Ministry, The Honorable JONAS FAY and MOSES ROBINSON,
Esquires, were appointed a Committee, to acquaint Mr. Avery, that this Meeting
do APPROVE of the STATING of the FACTS, mentioned in his Narrative of the rise
and progress of the Difficulties which have issued in a Separation between him
and this People, read to them this Day, and to request a Copy for the Press.

ISAAC TICHENOR, Clerk.
Bennington, Sept, 25th, 1783.
NARRATIVE.
AS the late scene in Bennington, which has closed with my dismission, is not
only interesting to my friends, who are fellow sufferers with me, but it is
imagined that the knowledge of it may be useful to others, who have at least a
curiosity to know, I would humbly request the candor of the public, while I
exhibit a summary view of it for the satisfaction of inquirers.

This office, which I have accepted at the instance of many whom I much esteem,
I am not insensible is as delicate as it is difficult for me to perform, as the
innocent feelings of each one concerned are to be preserved unhurt, while truth
and charity require that I deal faithfully with all.

To open the scene, then, to the greater advantage, I would beg leave to
acquaint the reader, that the ground on which it has been acted was, no longer
ago than twenty three years, an entirely uncultivated and howling wilderness;
lying about forty miles north-east of Albany. The soil being rich and
luxuriant, the situation high and sightly, in a pure and healthy air, was
nevertheless very inviting to settlers. From small beginnings this town has
arisen to considerable eminence and importance, in regard both of the number of
its inhabitants and wealth; and in regard of military prowess, Bennington is
thought to be second to none on the continent.

The original proprietors were chiefly Congregational Separates, from different
parts of New England, who being weary of the restraints of authority, and in
fear of dwindling to nothing in their scattered situation, were willing to
embody together, that they might act out their principles without restraint,
and exhibit to the world the light of their religion.

This favorable spot was then chosen as the theater of their glory. While they
were few in number and feeble in their circumstances, they were remarkable for
their love of one another. Besides this there have been seasons of especial
awakening and attention here; and in the judgment of charity a happy number
have been renewed and added to the Lord. This circumstance has contributed not
a little to the gaining them respect and even fame abroad, as a religious
people.

As a number of professors, not of the separate order, have become inhabitants
of the town, and have had great respect for the personal and ministerial
endowments of the Rev. Mr. DEWEY, who was of catholic and liberal principles,
they have, at different periods joined the communion here. -- And it is to be
hoped that, by conversing with christians of other distinctions, and by a more
liberal train of thinking, these walls of jealousy, shyness and separation,
which now divide professors, will soon be demolished; and gospel union and
affection be restored in the house of Christ's friends.

My worthy predecessor, who held his office here about fifteen years, was no
sooner gathered to his fathers DEC, 21, 1778.
, than the united attention of this people was turned upon me to become his
successor. Accordingly I made them a visit in January 1780, when I was received
with great warmth of affection. This visit I continued until the last of
February, when the people were pleased to give me a call for settlement, with
only one dissentient in the church, and one in the congregation.

From this great union and good agreement, after they had had a fair
opportunity of knowing my sentiments on religion, I was induced to think that
here was laid a happy foundatson for my living in the affections of the people,
and for my being useful in this part of the vineyard, where laborers are very
much needed. And being willing to make a sacrifice of other views and
prospects, for the sake of doing this people good, I did, on the tenth of
April, accept their invitation to settle here.

It being not my intention to descend to many minute circumstances in this
narration, I should gladly pass the following one in silence, did it not claim
particular notice, as it shows the nature, as well as the beginning of our
confusions. The incident is this: That when, upon giving my answer to the
people's call, I proposed that they would be pleased to appoint a day and a
council for my instalment, -- The Hon. JOHN FASSET, Esquire who had objected
against sending for me in the first place, and who had been uniformly against
me all along, was pleased to object against its being done at present, it being
cold and late in the day. And notwithstanding the appointment might have been
made in less time than was consumed in shuffling it off, it was postponed from
Monday until Friday.

And when the Friday-meeting came on, there appeared the strongest jealousy --
That all was not right -- that I held dangerous sentiments in my heart, which I
was unwilling now to bring out, and that the people were taking a hasty step,
which they might have occasion to tread back at a future period. This will be
truly surprising, when it shall be known, that as yet I had broached no one
sentiment different from what I had clearly discussed, to the entire
satisfaction of the church, previous to their call. The consequence of all was,
that after much had been done to give content and to save the credit of the
church, five brethren were against my instalment, and two or three professed to
be neuters.

The incivility and the indeceney of this usage of a minister of Christ, and
the interruption of the peace and harmony of the town, met with deserved rebuke
from men of feeling here. And while this maneuver failed of gaining the
conductors of it that applause, which it might have gained them if they had not
over-acted their part, they had difficulty in retreating so as wholly to cover
a design, -- and to support their profession as "Israelites indeed, in whom is
no guile."

This maneuver was no sooner over, and the heat of men's spirits abated, than
the people very amicably agreed in making the necessary appointments for the
installation without opposition.

The third day of May was the time of our attending this solemnity. And when
there appeared before the council but three dissenters in the church, and only
one in the congregation, the opposition was so small that I made no scruple to
renew my answer: which as it will give the reader an idea of my views, as well
as of the manner of my induction, I beg leave to present him with it here.

"To the church of Christ in Bennington.
"Dear brethren,
"INASMUCH as it has pleased the great Head of the church to turn your early
attention to me, in your destitute circumstances; and inasmuch as, after a full
and fair trial of my ministerial qualifications and endowments, you have very
unanimously and very cheerfully invited me to take the pastoral watch and care
of you, under the great Shepherd of the sheep, for your spiritual edification
and comfort; and finally, inasmuch as this day of fasting and prayer is, by
mutual consent, appointed for our uniting as pastor and church: I do now, in
the presence of the living God, of the holy angels and of these witnesses, most
cheerfully espouse you as a church of visible believers; and I do hereby
publish and declare my hearty compliance with your invitation and call to
become your pastor.

And inasmuch as I have heretofore been duly ordained an officer in Christ's
kingdom, by "the laying on of the hands of the presbytery," whereby I am
invested with full power and authority to administer sealing ordinances, and to
do all the duties of a minister in God's house; and inasmuch as I can receive
no new, nor even any accession of power by a reordination; I do now, without
some of the usual ceremonies of an instalment, thus publicly acknowledge and
declare myself to be under the most sacred vows to exercise my office, and to
do all the duties of the pastor of this church, according to the tenor of the
charge given to Timothy or Titus, or to any other pastor of new testament
description, so long as God in his providence shall continue me with you. And,
in reliance on divine grace, I do engage to exercise this my office for your
edification and not destruction, that I may hope to present you as a chosen
virgin to Christ, to whom I am to give account, that you and I may rejoice
together at his appearing.

Upon this occasion, I hope that your goodness, my brethren, will suffer me to
mention to you that I have great confidence in your zeal and faithfulness, that
you will concur with me in every prudent measure for the reviving and
supporting of church discipline, to the end that the erroneous may be
corrected, the vicious and the impenitent may be excluded, and that the just
may be vindicated and encouraged; or, to speak in the language of the Apostle
Jude, "Of some have compassion, making a difference; and others save with fear,
pulling them out of the fire; hating even the garments spotted by the flesh."
In this way will you become conspicuous as a city on a hill; and in this way
will the "KING greatly desire your beauty."

Finally, my brethren, as you regard your own advancement, the best interest
and good of others, and the glory of God in the kingdom of redemption, you will
afford me the christian charity of your prayers, that I may be guided by the
spirit of truth; that I may have fortitude and strength for every encounter;
that I may defend the gospel against all opposers; that I may stand in an evil
day; that I may make full proof of my ministry; that I may turn many to
righteousness; and that at last I may meet the approbation of my Judge -- "to
whom be glory in the church by Christ Jesus, throughout all ages, world without
end." Amen.

In the next place I would turn my address to the people of the congregation,
who usually meet for public worship with the church here.

My dear friends,

Your cheerful and unanimous concurrence with the church, in calling me to
labor in this part of the vineyard, has been no small inducement to me to
settle amongst you.

Inasmuch as the holy scriptures, and indeed the very nature of the thing, do
manifestly make a distinction between an evangelist and a pastor; the latter
having relation to church, lead in the discipline of it, and the former having
no such charge, I beg leave to avail myself of this distinct on now.

Upon this principle would I proceed therefore to declare, in the witnessing
view of heaven and of this assembly, that I do very cordially accept your
invitation to me to become your minister. And I do hereby engage to exercise my
office as a preacher of the gospel amongst you, to notice your morals, to seek
your best interest, and to watch for your souls and the souls of your children,
as one who must give account to God.

And give me leave, my people, to assure you, in this public manner, that I
have great pleasure in the thought that you will give your constant attendance
on my ministry; and that you will, in honorable and effectual ways, exert
yourselves, with spirit, to encourage my heart and to strengthen my hands, in
this good work which I have now undertaken for your benefit and salvation.

And, Oh! that my labors may not be in vain, as to any of you, my precious
charge! While I shall be continued your minister, it will, I trust, be the
affectionate prayer of my heart, that you may be given me as the seal of my
ministry, and as the crown of my rejoicing in the day of the Lord Jesus.

Amen and Amen."
When the eyes of the people thus saw their teacher, there was visibly a great
and general joy, as might naturally be expected upon such an occasion. The
noise and clamor, which before had been so great, being now hushed to silence,
and my opposers seeming unwilling to appear in arms, the people felicitated
themselves much in prospect of increasing delight in my ministry.

But as bright and halcyon days seldom continue long without a cloud, so it was
not long before this tranquillity was greatly interrupted, when a rencounter
commenced, in a way little expected by one unacquainted with such operations.

Some time in June, the head of the opposing party presented, to the church, a
small list of grievances, arising from my preaching, which he desired might be
accepted as a sufficient apology for his withdraw from the worship of God where
I guided the assembly.

This gentleman pleaded, that although he could not and dared not say that my
doctrines were unscriptural, yet, as he could not see them to be right, he
judged that he ought not to be compelled to hear that which he deemed not for
edification. Besides, he wished that, if he were in an error about my
doctrines, or did not rightly apprehend my sentiments, the church would bear
with his weakness and afford him help by conference; that he and they might yet
walk together in love.

Although the church had no idea that this apology ought to have been accepted
by them, yet being willing to gratify a brother, in a case that respected faith
and conscience, they readily complied with the motion for a conference.

In managing this interview, the church were very particular in explaining the
grounds and reasons of their belief in those points which were so stumbling to
their brother. But their explanation was so far from yielding him satisfaction,
that it appeared only to give an edge to his feelings. Hence there commenced a
long and tedious dispute. But after a distressing trial of this expedient, Mr.
Fasset was more dissatisfied, and more burdened, about my principles than
before. But this was not all -- by this time, a number of others had collected
courage enough to come out, and declare themselves dissatisfied with the same
points that had been the ground of dispute now in the church.

While this conference made work and made way for one or two more, there was
found no benefit arising from it, except it was to see under whose banners one
and another would appear. And the same may be said of almost every conference
on the subject of grievances. For as the dissenting interest began now to gain
credit and to lift up its head, so, at almost every conference, some new
recruit would be found paraded on the opposite side. And thus the church
appeared to be daily dividing against itself, and to threaten a general
convulsion.

In the mean time, if town fame is true, the leaders in the opposition sounded
the feelings of many from house to house, thereby exciting the sympathy of
weakness in their favor, because of their burdens and great distresses. So
that there was little now to be heard, from any quarter, but the cry of
grievances.

At length, being weary, by hearing the dolorous sound of uneasiness and
discontent, and willing to make their patience and condescension as conspicuous
as their love of order, the church did, notwithstanding confering had hitherto
been quite unavailing, so far yield to the dint of importunity as to consent to
meet them once more in conference. Accordingly, very early in January
following, the church assembled to see if any thing more could be done, in this
way, toward giving content to their troubled brethren. Care being had to the
aggrieved's sense of the articles of their burden; and it being found that, in
case the church should fail in clearing them up to their liking and acceptance,
they would continue still to absent themselves from my ministry, our situation
became truly alarming; and we began now to apprehend danger from the very
measures which we were pursuing with our brethren, who were bound to the same
observance, of rule and order as we were.

The church, upon this, needed very little time to consider that these articles
of grievance, as they were styled, were properly to be deemed articles of
charge and complaint against the pastor, for maladministration. And by this
time, their eyes were opened to see that they were going upon enchanted ground,
while they were suffering charges to be brought thus against a brother, and
especially against an elder, under the fallacious cloak of grievances, when
there had been no private labor with the brother complained of, as a necessary
and an indispensible pre-requisite to a public hearing of a case, of such
nature and degree as to be made the ground of separation amongst brethren.

Accordingly, considering that no one has right to be grieved with his
brother, except for transgression -- that, in case of transgression, it is
antichristian and cruel to prosecute a brother publicly, before private
influence has been exerted betwixt the parties alone -- that a church has no
right to hear a case of transgression debated, except in the appointed way of
discipline: -- Considering also, that the practice of telling grievances, which
are real charges, is an abusive way of prosecuting a brother, contrary to the
dictates both of humanity and revelation -- and that it has a direct tendency
to create fears, suspicions, jealousies, heart burnings, and alienations of
affection, the bane and ruin of all intercouse, communion and happiness in a
church -- and finally being determined to support the credit of religion and
the honor of their own profession: -- the church, at last, very wifely
resolved, that they would allow of this usage no more.

How painful, and how confounding to the views and schemes of our great
advocates for the practice, now laid aside by the church, this resolution was,
is hard to say. The most piteous outcry was now made, that could well have
been made, had the church voted against one of the first privileges of the
kingdom of heaven. And notwithstanding the popular cry of tyranny and
intolerance, the church have done themselves the honor hitherto to support,
with fortitude, their good resolution.

The way being thus prepared, I urged upon my opposers, with great solemnity,
that they should treat me according to Christ's law of discipline, in case I
had transgressed, in my preaching, on the account of which they were so much
offended as to turn their backs upon my ministry -- to the end that they might
appear to regard the divine authority, and that I might know my crime and
repent.

But, being persuaded that they could not make a chargelye against me, and
unwilling to hazard a legal trial, in which, if they should fail, they must
abide the consequences, they excused themselves from this irksome task, by
saying that they did not know, and so did not choose to say, that I had
transgressed, or that my preaching, in the least, erred from the divine word.

When they were reminded of what had been repeated to them times out of mind,
that they could not be justified, in their withdrawing from the worship, and
interrupting the communion by treating the pastor as an offender, for his
preaching, unless they could show that the pastor had erred, and that his
preaching was corrupt; and that, in such case, they could not be excused from
so plain and so binding a duty as that of discipline -- they replied, that
inasmuch as the preaching was of public notoriety and exposed to every one's
remark, the private steps of discipline might lawfully be dispensed with.

But when they were reminded of the principles of the church on this head, that
Christ's law of discipline is not to be restricted to private offenses and
trespasses, but that it respects trespasses, as well public as private, and
may, in no case of trespass, be dispensed with -- and that every one who is
guilty of trespass is entitled to the privilege of being disciplined according
to law -- and that, they ought, therefore, to extend this privilege to the
pastor, would they keep themselves in countenance, even if it were only their
opinion that he had erred in his preaching: -- they had the sagacity to avail
themselves of a method, as extraordinary as their case now required to help
them out of a pinch, which was, to deny that they considered me as a member of
the church, over whom they were to exercise brotherly watch. This was their
reasoning to make it out: That I was not a member unless a pastor of the church
-- that I was not a pastor unless ordained -- that I was not ordained legally
unless by the power of the brotherhood; -- but inasmuch as my ordination was by
the presbytery, by virtue of their own office-power without any investiture
from the brotherhood -- they could not see that I was an officer, nor that I
belonged to their communion. And when they were reminded that as the subject of
my ordination had been largely considered by the church and by themselves too,
not only previous to my instalment but to their giving their call, and that my
denying the right of ordination in the brotherhood, by no means invalidated my
ordination by the presbytery, much less destroyed it, or made it out that it
was no ordination: they answered that they had not so well considered this
matter before, as they had since my introduction.

The principal actor being now struck off from the stage, the scene suddenly
shifted, and assumed a new form, much to the surprise of the spectators, when
the whole train of grievances was now brought in against the church, for their
receiving me and my doctrines. Lay ordination, allowed by Cambridge platform
and practiced by many great and good men, and which is one of the principal
bulwarks of the separate interest -- the danger of surrendering the privileges
of the church into the hands of those who explode the power of the brotherhood
in ordination -- That by receiving a minister who does not fellowship the
doctrine of lay ordination is building the things which they once destroyed,
and thereby making themselves transgressors -- were popular themes to harp
upon, and like a vade-mecum, were always at command when occasion called for
them.

The church having now become the declared object of our brethren's grief and
uneasiness; and as it was proper that they should be allowed an opportunity of
telling us ought that they had against us; the second day of March was
appointed for a full audience, when every article, to be considered, should be
stated in writing. The church met accordingly.

But when it was found that our brethren would not say that they were
aggrieved, on the account of any transgression of the church; and that they
were unwilling to treat those articles as grounds of discipline;
notwithstanding they could not walk with the church as they now were --
considering also that bringing these articles against the church, when they had
no iniquity to lay to their charge, was in reality, though under cover,
obliquely prosecuting the pastor, as he was the mark to which all their arrows
were still pointed; the church judged it not their duty to consume time in
hearing complaints against themselves, any sooner than they would against a
brother, unless they were for some bad conduct, either real or supposed; and
that it would be early enough for them to confer with the aggrieved when they
should declare themselves aggrieved on the account of sin, either real or
supposed.

However, considering that, by the unwarrantable measures now pursued, the
doctrines of Christ were daily growing into disrepute; that the dignity of the
ministerial office was hereby degraded and brought down to the dust of men's
feet; and that the breach of friendship was constantly spreading itself like
fire, and threatening general ruin to the church: -- we proposed, in much
condescension to our brethren, to call in the aid of mutual council, if
peradventure they might do ought to save us, before our case should become
incurable. The conditions were, that each party should choose whom they pleased,
and no one should fault his brother's choice. This motion was very readily
agreed to, and a council appointed. The church appointed ministers of the
standing order, and the aggrieved ministers of the strict congregational order,
as the separates are styled.

Our disputes being now referred to an enlightened and judicious board, in whom
we placed great confidence, we enjoyed, for a moment, a little cessation; and
we fondly felicitated ourselves on the prospect of our receiving much
satisfaction from the gentlemen. But, in the mean time, the sending of our
letters missive was unexpectedly delayed, for some weeks, when there were found
plausible objections against our sending for the council at present. However,
the church were quite happy in finding themselves able so far to surmount those
huge difficulties as to agree, the second time, to send for the men, whom they,
according to accepted proposals, had chosen for counselors.

But when the much wished for time for the session of council had arrived 25 th
of May 1781
, we were made to know, by a very affecting providence, that it was not the
design of Christ that there should yet be an end put to our troubles. For
inasmuch as all the gentlemen appointed by the aggrieved failed, the other
could do little more than to behold our misery and return, leaving us, like
ship wrecked mariners, still buffeted by the waves. A double gloom was now cast
upon the face of our affairs; and indeed we walked in darkness and had no light!

The church, hitherto unwilling to cross the inclinations, the humors and
prejudices of the aggrieved, in any thing which they could with any color
avoid, lest they might seem to be inattentive to their comforts and delights,
so far allowed them to rule as to omit the celebration of the Lords supper
until now. But finding, upon trial, that this conformity to them was as
fruitless as it was unwarrantable, it being turned into wantonness by them, the
church felt themselves approved for their own folly, and on the first of (...)
them communed together, in this ordinance, for the first time since my
instalment.

But, notwithstanding the church professed to have communed with Christ, at his
table, -- to have sat under his shadow with great delight, -- and to have found
his fruit sweet to their taste, -- our aggrieved brethren took great umbrage at
our conduct, stigmatising it with the opprobrious epithets of premature, rash
and unwarrantable, as well publicly as privately from house to house. However,
had we waited longer for a settlement of the grievances, presented only in a
way of complaining of certain things which they did not like, we might have
left our gift at the altar until now, without knowing, in a legal way, that
they had ought against us: For their telling us, not in a way of discipline,
that they could not believe as the church did, respecting my introduction and
doctrines; when at the same time they declared, that they were not grieved with
the church on the account of sins; what was there for us to remember that our
brethren had against us? The truth is, that a church should never neglect a
plain duty that good might come. The way of duty is the way of safety -- and we
are to expect light and comfort only in the way of the keeping of Christ's
commandments. And "they who observe lying vanities, forsake their own mercy."
Jonah ii. 8.


Despairing now of the church's turning from the stedfastness of their purpose
not to take cognizance of grievances, which were not on the account of sing our
brethren judged it time to turn their attention to other measures for redress.
Accordingly, very early in autumn, they moved for a council of separate
churches only, as the church had never professed to be in fellowship with any
but those of this order.

But, considering that the time was now past for a council to prevent a
rupture; that discipline ought to precede the dernier resort to council; that
as there had been made no complaint of error, nor of sin, we had no business
proper for a council, as yet; and that, according to the proposal for having
none but separates, our election could not be free, and so, after all, the
council could not be mutually chosen: the church thought it not their duty to
gratify them in their request.

But this denial having given no conviction to our brethren, either of the
impropriety of their motion, (...) of their duty to be in subjection to the
church, with whom they were bound to walk in charity, (...) all humility and
reverence; they had the (...) of their own heads, to appoint and exparte (...)
of such churches as they had proposed for (...) and appointment.

(...) scheme, however, they were far from (...) according to their wishes. For
their council (...) of knowledge and integrity, and being (...) conviction that
the rules of decency (...) in church affairs, ought not to be (...), to savor
any private or party views, (...) to come at their call.

(...), the Rev. Mr. Palmer, at the (...) his brethren in the exparte
appointment, (...) a visit to see how we did, and to know if (...) members had
any reason or occasion (...) council's coming. And to gratify this gentleman,
who had expressed so much love and concern for us, we spent a day in relating
to him the (...) and progress of our disputes, from my first coming amongst
this people, until then. And after a full hearing, on both sides, M. Palmer
told the aggrieved plainly that he saw no reason why they should send for a
council. This disappointment was as grievous, it may be presumed, as it was
unexpected. However, like every thing else on this subject, it unhappily failed
in affording that conviction, which was fervently prayed it might afford, to
check their fiery ambition; although they were not a little mortified that
their own measures had so unfortunately turned against their darling views.

The season following was remarkable for nothing more than the production of
two additional articles of grievance, though not on account of (...) in the
church. These were made the pretext for calling the church together, some time
in May, when, availing themselves of them, together with all the other
articles, which still disturbed the peace of their conferences as much as ever,
our zealous brethren, with great warmth, renewed their application for a
council. But being unwilling to countenance a motion, which now savoured
strongly of a desire in them, not so much to gain light as to be availed of
influence, by which they might hope to have their own measures sanctified and
they themselves placed above the reach of blame; although we had no uneasy
apprehensions from that quarter; and considering that there still existed the
same objections against our sending now for a council, as there did last fall
when we rejected this motion; and indeed being filled with a sense that our own
dignity, that propriety and decency would not allow us to treat the ordinance
of councils with so great disrespect, as to send for one, when it had been
already judged, that we had nothing prepared to be laid before any board from
abroad: the church was obliged, upon principle, once more to deny them.

Finding themselves foiled and baffled in all their attempts for a council, our
brethren had now but little hope of succeeding in the course which they held;
and, it seems that, they would have been quite in despair, had not the supposed
goodness of their cause been to them as a reviving cordial to keep up their
spirits, while they imagined that God would yet appear for them, and bring
light out of present darkness.

Of this desponding countenance was a request, as absurd as it was
extraordinary, which they made to the church, in the beginning of fall, that we
would dismiss them in regular standing and in christian fellowship, that they
might be a church by themselves. The impropriety, if not the impossibility, of
our granting this request to those, who had virtually if not formally renounced
our fellowship, and whose only reason for this motion was, that the church held
to such a faith and practice as that they could not commune with us, appears
evidently at first blush. For if they could not hold fellowship with us when we
were related to each other as members of one body; how could they do it when we
should be divided into two? Besides, we were persuaded that the laws of God's
house make no provision for a church's dividing on points which prevent, not
only the higher acts of communion at the table, but even their praying and
worshipping together, either upon the sabbath or any other day; except by
regular discipline; but then not in fellowship. To suppose the contrary would
be to make professors covenant breakers according to law. But this is both
absurd and impossible.

But notwithstanding all this, so intent had the church hitherto been on making
their patience, their forbearance and their condescension as great, as was
their brethren's want of these virtues, they would have attended to any
arguments which might have been offered on the subject, had not their own
conduct rendered it inadmissible. For as one of the signers of their request
was under public discipline, in a very heavy charge of heresy and scandal,
their petition carried in it a request that we would acquit him of this charge
when he had done nothing to satisfy it. And when they were reminded of this
indelicacy and impropriety, so far were they from a disposition to expunge his
name, and leave his case to be decided in the church without them, that they
chose rather to stand or fall together, as the die might be cast.

In the mean time, as they allowed the sentiments to be just which their
brother was charged with broaching and maintaining; although they granted that
he had been imprudent in declaring them; they were not a little interested in
the trial depending, and repeatedly urged the bringing of it on. This indeed
was necessary in order to their knowing what step to take next.

The trial of this brother was no sooner issued, in the church, than it was
judged that there must be issued other measures besides those on which they had
hitherto placed dependence. Accordingly they instantly circulated, through the
church, a subscription, requesting a meeting "to see if the church would agree
to call a council of churches, known by the name of strict congregational
churches, to look into the difficulties then subsisting in this church, and to
give their advice agreeable to Cambridge platform and our covenant."

After this paper had obtained the names of one half of the church, it was
brought to me, for my direction. And, passing unnoticed the indignity of this
low ceremony of jealousy, I warned a meeting according to orders; but with less
cheerfulness, than I should have done the same business, had only one or two
made this request.

It being now found, when the church came together, that my friends were
overpowered by numbers, and considering that disputing would be more likely to
stir up wrath, than to convince those who could show a majority, the council
was appointed, according to desire, without indecorum.

Although I saw no necessity, nor any regularity or propriety in this
appointment, as our affairs were circumstanced -- and although no one was under
any obligation to plead, in defense, before the council, as there had been no
legal process to lay any under such obligations: -- Yet being willing to
embrace so favorable an opportunity for propagating light, as well for the
satisfaction of the spectators as of the council: I complied with the desire of
my friends so far as to give a stating of facts, as they had happened, and to
correct such mistakes and misrepresentations as might be made, in handling the
several points set up, by our aggrieved brethren.

That which has been improved as the occasion of so much uneasiness and debate,
and of interrupting the communion here; and been the occasion of so great a
noise through the country; to the no small disadvantage of the gospel, and to
the wounding of religion, may be seen, as it is judiciously drawn up in the
following result of council, which now invites the reader's attention.

"AN ecclesiastical council of strict congregational churches, convened, by
delegation, at Bennington, by request from the congregational church of Christ
in said town, on the 26th of May 1783, to hear and consider several articles of
grievance respecting faith and practice.

PRESENT
ELDERS. DELEGATES. JOHN PALMER, ZACHEUS (...), DANIEL MINER, (...), ELIPHALET
WRIGHT (...)

The council chose the Rev. E. Wright moderator, and J. Spalding for be.

The council being opened with prayer, proceeded to hear the Rev. Mr. Avery
give a narration of the various steps, by which the differences have arisen
which now subsist in the church. Several articles of grievance were then laid
before the council, by a number of the brethren of the church, and the day
being spent, the council adjourned until eight o'clock the next morning.

May 27th, the council met, according to adjournment, opened with prayer, and
proceeded to hear discussed the article of grievance respecting the church's
departing from their covenant and platform, in receiving the Rev. Mr. Avery as
their minister.

The council having carefully attended to this article of complaint or
grievance, are of the opinion that the church have not departed from their
covenant or platform, in receiving the Rev. Mr. Avery as their minister; and
that there is no just cause of grievance on that account.

Secondly, The council proceeded to hear the following articles of grievance or
complaint against the church, for their receiving certain doctrines, delivered
by Mr. Avery, as sound and orthodox, which they the aggrieved members look upon
as erroneous: which doctrines, for substance, are as follows --

1. That whatever an unregenerate man does, as a moral agent, is sin.

2. That Christ's intercession, in the court of heaven, is such as now operates
against all the views, schemes, and evil designs of the wicked, and will at
last terminate in the utter ruin and overthrow of finally impenitent sinners.

3. That a man can do all that God requires of him, if he is but willing: or,
in other words, that moral ability consists in the will.

The council having carefully examined what has been said for and against these
doctrines, are of opinion that they are agreeable to divine revelation.

Thirdly, The council attended to the general run of the doctrines received by
the church, as being mere speculation.

As to this, we are of the opinion that those who make this complaint are
blameable!

Fourthly, The complaint relative to the church's receiving Leonard Robinson to
their communion, after he had been set by for several years, although there had
been no charge against him, was laid before the council.

Careful attention being paid to this article, we are of the opinion that the
church did right in their receiving Mr. Robinson again to their communion.

Fifthly, The Rev. Mr. Avery was accused to the council, as saying -- To make
our appeal to creeds and confessions of faith, as tests of orthodoxy, instead
of making it to the bible, in any cause respecting revelation, is more becoming
papists than protestant christians.

The council having heard Mr. Avery explain himself, as to this matter, are of
the opinion that there was, in this, no just cause of offense.

Sixthly, The discipline of the church, respecting Mr. Simeon Sears, was
submitted to the council for their opinion.

This being considered, we are of the opinion that the church's procedure
against Mr. Sears was just.

We would now address ourselves to the pastor and brethren of this church.

Reverend and Beloved,

It is with the greatest sensibility that we feel for you, in your trials. You
cannot but be sensible that sin is the cause of all the troubles into which you
are plunged. And from a conviction that sin is the cause of these evils, let
every one examine his own heart and say, what have I done?

It seems that the design of the instituted means of grace is much frustrated
amongst you -- gospel ordinances brought into contempt -- the heart of the
righteous made sad -- and the bands of the wicked strengthened -- through your
divisions; which will prove bitterness to you in the latter end.

We would therefore earnestly recommend to you to put away all sinful strife
and contentions; and each one, for himself, walk with God, in the temper of his
heart, and tenor of his life, as the only way that will bring you to walk
together in the kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ.

Furthermore, considering the embarrassments, the disadvantages and
discouragements, that must necessarily attend the Rev. Mr. Avery, in
prosecuting his ministry in this place, and the little prospect that you or Mr.
Avery can have, of his being instrumental of uniting this people -- we would
recommend it to you, as our advice, that, if Mr. Avery shall request the same,
you would dismiss him from his pastoral charge over you; that he may be at
liberty to serve God in his generation, in the work of the ministry, where he
may have a greater prospect of doing good than he has with you -- and you also
may be at liberty to seek for yourselves another pastor, in whom you can be
better agreed.

We would also take this method to declare our esteem for Mr. Avery, as a
minister of Jesus Christ; and, as such, we do freely recommend him to the
acceptance of all God's people.

E. WRIGHT, moderator. J. SPALDING, scribe."


The moderator then, in the presence of the council, delivered the following
admonition, to which they all gave consent. A copy has since been given us for
the press.

"I think it my duty, before I take my leave of you, to address myself, in a
particular manner to the aggrieved brethren, as they are called.

Beloved brethren,

From what I have seen and heard, in the course of the trials which have been
depending before this council, I am very deeply concerned for you and for the
church in this place. I hope you will allow me to express my concern for you,
in dealing plainly and faithfully with you. It may be this will be the last
opportunity that I shall ever have to see you or to speak to you; and I am
unwilling to go away without leaving my testimony with you.

In the first place, then, I have to tell you, that those doctrines exhibited
to the council, which you deny to be doctrines according to godliness, I esteem
to be some of the great truths revealed in the word of God. I have believed
them, and preached them for many years; and I have known them to be owned and
blessed of God for the awakening, and I trust for the conversion of many souls,
especially in the place where I live.

In your opposing these doctrines, it appears to me that, you are opposing some
of the great truths, on which the faith and hope of the people of God depend.
If we give up these doctrines, we do, in effect, give up the whole system of
divine truths.

And notwithstanding you may thing yourselves honest and upright, in opposing
Mr. Avery in these doctrines, I earnestly beseech you to consider whether you
are not really doing the devil's work. Satan is endeavoring, various ways, and
by any means that he can make use of, to root up the gospel to destroy it from
off the face of the earth: and what must the unhappiness of those be that serve
him herein?

Furthermore, consider, I pray you, whether, by your means, the gospel will not
be driven away from Bennington; and this people be deprived of the means and
ordinances of grace, whereby many poor souls may perish eternally, and their
blood be required at your hands. -- I really think, my brethren, that you have
reason to fear that this may be the case. -- I therefore seriously entreat you
not to think light of it.

In the next place, your neglecting your duty as members of this church, your
not attending the ordinances, the order and rule of God's house, fills me with
painful apprehensions for you. I have known several churches, that were as
flourishing for a season as any, perhaps, in the land, that by letting in such
disputes and contentions, and indulging a spirit of division and separation,
have gone on to bite and devour one another, till they have been consumed one
of another, and not the least appearance of a visible church left.

While I have these things in view, and considering the circumstances that this
church is in, at present, I have the greatest reason to fear that this may be
your case here in Bennington; and that you will become like Shiloh of old, when
the ark was taken from them. God is with his people while they hearken to his
voice and obey his word: but if they walk contrary to him, he will walk
contrary to them, and repent of the good wherewith he said he would benefit
them. Lev. xxvi. 23, 24. Jer. xviii. 10.


Be entreated therefore, my brethren, to stop and consider your ways, lest, if
you go on as you have done, you may repent when it will be too late!

Thus, brethren, I must take my leave of you, praying that God, of his
sovereign grace and mercy, would direct and preserve you in the way that you
should go."

When, upon this occasion, the moderator put to vote the doings of council, my
friends accepted of every article; but the aggrieved brethren accepted of none
but the first.

Now finding that, notwithstanding my opposers were thus confounded by their
own measures, they still maintained, in full strength, their aversion to my
doctrines and discipline; and that their ear could not be gained by all the
eloquence and persuasion of the worthy council of their own choice, the
appointment of which they had obtained with so much address, I could not long
hesitate what part to act.

Accordingly, being persuaded of the truth of the wiseman's maxim, as well in
regard of the people as of myself, that "Better is a dry morsel, and quietness
therewith, than a house full of sacrifices with strife, Prove. xvii 1.
I resigned my office here the 17th of June; but not without the liveliest
sense of grief for the very unhappy necessity which compelled me to do it.

To the church of Christ in Bennington.
Brethren,
Inasmuch as I am related to you as pastor, by voluntary consent: inasmuch as I
am bound by every tie of duty, of gratitude and of oath to my divine Master to
support the dignity of my office, and to preserve my usefulness in his kingdom:
Inasmuch as my engagements are such as do not forbid a discharge from my
pastoral care of you, when it is deemed, by a proper board, that my usefulness
is obstructed beyond the rational prospect of its being recovered amongst you:
inasmuch as the late ecclesiastical council, from a survey of our affairs,
have, of their own accord, judged that there are such embarrassments,
disadvantages and discouragements attending the prosecuting my ministry here,
that neither you nor I can have much prospect of my uniting this divided
people: inasmuch at the council, from these considerations, have advised that I
might be dismissed from my present connexions, in case I shall request it:
inasmuch as one half of this church are divided from me, without any prospect
of my recovering them; and there is found here a very surprising inattention to
my settlement and salaries, by many of those who have covenanted to pay them;
whereby, as effectually as by any other means, my studies and my usefulness are
not a little interrupted: and inasmuch as the divine glory and my highest duty
call upon me to request that I may be at liberty to serve God, in the gospel,
where I may have a greater prospect of doing good than I have with you: I do
now, in the fear of God, resign my pastoral charge of you into the hands of the
Chief Shepherd, who, for a little (...) than three years past, has seen fit to
entrust me (...) it. And I do hereby request, that you will henceforward
consider the relation between us as dissolved and void.

Allow me, my brethren, upon this occasion, to assure you, that as your good
(...) special has always lain very near my heart while I have had the charge of
this church: so now, at resigning it, I am moved with the tenderest compassion
for you and for your children. The hardships which I have endured for your
sakes, and the trials which I have suffered, by reason of your divisions, your
disputes, your contentions, your emulations, your strifes and your disorders,
in the course of there three years past, truly exceed description -- One day
will reveal how ready I have been to spend and to be spent for you; and that in
me you have had a friend.

Allow me, hence, to indulge in the pleasure of the hope, that those of you who
respect my ministry will still remember the great doctrines of grace, which I
have constantly taught you; and that you will act upon that plan of christ an
discipline which I have ever urged and steadfastly maintained, at the no small
expense of character and case. And let us pray one for another, and prepare to
meet in that better world where brethren dwell together in unity.

"And now, brethren, I commend you to God, and to the word of his grace, which
is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance among all them which
are sanctified." Acts xx. (...)



To the people of the congregation who concurred with the church, in calling me
to settle here.
Gentlemen and friends,
IT has been in my heart to live and to die with you. This I should still be
free to do, were there now a prospect of the continuance of my usefulness, as
there was when I first came amongst you. But the bright and promising
prospects, which we contemplated with so much pleasure at first, being now
obscured and cut off, I am compelled by the severest necessity to relinquish my
connexions here, that I may be able to follow the Lamb wherever else he may
lead me.

As you have been constant spectators and even actors in the affecting scene in
which I have shared such a variety of misfortunes, you are not ignorant of the
embarrassments and discouragements which attend my ministry here. And I cannot
but do you the justice to suppose that you are of the same opinion with the
late council, that the end of my ministry is so much frustrated, that it is
beyond my power to do you that good, which you need to have done you by a
minister of Christ. In this view of things, I am persuaded that you will
justify me, when I resign my ministerial watch over you, and request you to
consider the relation between us as null and void.

Upon this occasion, I beg leave to return my best thanks to you, for all that
attention and respect which you have been pleased to show me, in the course of
my connexions with you. And, from the feelings of my own heart, I am ready to
hope that a remembrance of mutual good offices will be reciprocal and perpetual
between us. Above all, allow me to hope, my dear friends, that you will never
dispute nor reject those interesting doctrines which you have been taught from
my lips, and which have been so much discredited by my misjudging brethren;
that so I may not be "the savor of death unto death to you!" 2. Cor. ii. 16.


That God will be gracious to you; will renew you; will sanctify you; will
gather and unite you; will build you up, and make you respectable; will give
you yet to see good days; and will "make you glad according to the days wherein
he has afflicted you, and the years wherein you have seen evil;" Psalm. xc. 15.
is the hearty prayer of your

FRIEND.
17th of June, 1783.

Upon my making this motion, the church, tenderly affected with that necessity
which occasioned it, dismissed me, the same day, by vote. But the congregation
defered their answer until the 24th of June, when they were pleased to present
me with the following address: which, as it is expressive of much respect and
good liking, entitles them to my particular acknowledgments.

"The congregation in Bennington to the Rev. David Avery.
Rev. Sir,
PERMIT us to assure you that the sad occasion of this address, in answer to
the resignation of your ministerial watch over us, affects us in the most
tender manner.

We have anxiously felt for you, in your embarrassments and perplexities; and
it has been with great grief and concern, that we have been witnesses of those
dissentions, in the church, which necessitate you to be at liberty from us.

But when we consider these unhappy divisions -- that inattention to the very
solemn reproof and admonition of the late council which is observable in the
opposing party; and that the measures used for uniting them in the bonds of
christian love are without effect -- we are persuaded, Sir, that the great
duties of your office justify your departure from us. And while we lament the
causes which have led to this separation, we beg leave to assure you of our
sincere affection, and approbation of your ministerial care over us.

Notwithstanding, should it seem good in the eyes of the Lord to soften the
hearts of those who have risen up against you without a cause, so that your
usefulness and comfort might be preserved and promoted amongst us, nothing can
give us a greater satisfaction, than the continuance of your ministry in this
place.

It give us pain when we reflect upon the wretched circumstances into which we
shall be involved, by our being deprived of a regular ministry, and the danger
there is, that our children and others amongst us will be led away to hearken
to men for teachers, destitute of those virtues which form the christ an and
the real ministers of God; whereby they will be rendered unamiable in life, and
exposed to misery in the world to come. In consequence of these our
apprehensions, we do earnestly entreat you to continue the exercise of your
ministry with us, in case the measures of the church shall be such as comport
with your duty.

Nevertheless, if you shall judge it not your duty to continue with us, it is
our earnest desire that the divine blessing may attend you and your labors,
wherever you may be called; that the Lord of hosts will hold you as a polished
shaft in his quiver; and still promote your usefulness in his church.

Upon this occasion, we beg leave to return you our sincere thanks for the
painful and laborious execution of your office with us, for more than three
years past. At the same time we assure you that whatever arrearages remain
unpaid for your services, so far as it concerns us, we will make such
settlement as we conceive will be to your satisfaction. September 29, 1783. It
is with pleasure that the author acknowledges this settlement to have been made
to his entire satisfaction, this day.


That the goodwill of HIM who dwelt in the BUSH may be with you, preserve and
promote your interest and usefulness; and at last cause you to shine as the
firmament, for ever and ever; is the affectionate wish and prayer of your
friends.

ISAAC TICHENOR,
By order of the congregation."

Thus has closed a scene which has made as disagreeable, as it has an unusual
display, on the christian theater. While the actors on one part have been
intent on a favorite point, those on the other part have contended earnestly
for the faith once delivered to the saints. Who has acted a part worthy of
imitation, is left to the reader's judgment -- and whose eye has been single,
in conducting this scene, is humbly refered to the judgment of the great day.

I have now only to make a remark or two, and then I shall put an end to this
writing.

1. I cannot but be of the opinion, that a principal occasion of our confusions
has been a neglect of church discipline.

Had discipline been seasonably and duly observed, it would, without doubt,
have blasted, in the bud, those evils which have brought forth so much corrupt
fruit. This would have prevented our brethren's taking up a cause of uneasiness
with my preaching, unless they had against it reasons sufficient to justify a
public declaration. And, in such case, they would not have made any public
declaration before they had used private influence to recover me from error. In
this way, communion would not have been interrupted, and the peace and union of
the church would have remained. -- And I beg leave to add, that had the church
turned their forbearance into discipline, they would either have gained their
brethren, or else have excluded them from their communion according to law; and
so have preserved the dignity and order of God's house. -- But, alas, the day
in which we live is a day when it is imagined that church discipline savours
rather of a hard and unchristian disposition, than of that love and
faithfulness which constitute the brother of Christ. Hence, honest men, who
know their duty, are too much inclined to neglect this ordinance through fear
of offense. But this is their weakness, and it calls for mourning, as well as
it does that it should be shrewdly given out, in various ways, that the great
law of brotherly love is dangerous to the union and peace of churches.

When churches put up with evils, which require discipline, thinking thereby to
get along, some how, as it is often expressed, would do well to consider that
there is no getting along, in Christ's kingdom, but by keeping his
commandments; and that when these are neglected, churches ly still, or rather
go back, and are making work for repentance. Should the instance before us
convince the reader of the truth of this remark, it will be found that he has
read our affecting story not in vain.

2. To revive and support the established order of God's house, is an object of
the first importance to command the attention and the zeal of christians.

Every one ought to "mark well, and behold with his own eyes, and hear with his
ears all that God says unto him concerning all the ordinances of the house of
the Lord, and all the laws thereof, and mark well the entering in of the house,
with every going forth of the sanctuary." Ezekiel. xliv. ^^.
And the word of God, in all cases, is to be obeyed, as the only rule of
conduct in his house. This being regarded will raise up the church from her low
state, and make her shine in all the beauties of holiness. Adopting any other
system, and acting upon any other maxims, however plausible, and however
celebrated they may be, will utterly fail in reducing men to the order of the
house. To the law and to the testimony, therefore; "if they speak not according
to this word, it is because there is no light in them." Isa. ^iii ^^.
Let every matter of faith and practice be decided by this standard, and the
church cannot fail in the uniformity and goodness of her profession. And
whenever this shall be done, all iniquity will stop its mouth, and the church
will keep herself pure, as a chaste virgin, for Christ. And then it will be
found to be a divine PRIVILEGE to be a member of the church, when every member
will be treated according to law, without fear from brethren, when they have no
sin to lay to his charge, -- for "in that day there shall be no more the
Canaanite in the house of the Lord of hosts." (...)
The church being composed of such as shall be saved, she will keep the unity
of the Spirit, in the bond of peace, and seek those things whereby one may
edify another. When the Lord shall thus "beautify the place of (...) sanctuary,
and shall make the place of his (...) glorious, then the sons of them that
(...) the church shall come bending unto her, and all (...) that despise her
shall bow themselves down at the soles of her feet; and they shall call her The
city of the Lord, The Zion of the Holy One of Israel." Isa. ^x. 13, 14.
Who then can withhold his hand from a work so interesting and so important as
the raising up the church in her order and glory! In this great design many
hands are employed -- the wisdom of the learned, and the eloquence of the
orator. And in this work is displayed the unparrallelled love and zeal of the
Lord himself. This is his own declaration. "For Zion's sake will I not hold my
peace, and for Jerusalem's sake I will not rest, until the righteousness
thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation thereof as a lamp that
burns." Isa lxii. 1.


Having this glorious object in view, how can christians sit with folded hands
and take their rest, when "the hedges" of Zion "are broken down, so that all
they which pass by the way do pluck her?" Psalm. lxxx. 12.
Without discipline a church soon becomes like "the field of the slothful, and
the vineyard of the man void of understanding, -- all grown over with thorns,
and nettles covering the face of it, and the stone wall thereof broken down."
Prove xxiv. 30, 31.
And indeed it is hard for us to see that physic is more necessary for the
body, or regulations for an army, than discipline for a church. For without the
former, disorder will prey upon the constitution, exhaust nature and terminate
in death. And without the latter, all the distinction which we give to the idea
of an army is confounded and even lost in confusion, mutiny, desertion,
obstinacy, uproar, and a wild ungovernable mob; utterly unfit for service,
affording no defense to any nation, state or kingdom. In this view, I must say
that discipline is even essential to the well being of a christian church.

And as a church is especially different from wordly society only by her
discipline, she must sustain character amongst men accordingly as she supports
or neglects this ordinance. And thus shall there be found a difference "between
him that serves God, and him that serves him not" Mal. iii. 18.
And when professors of religion shall gain the noble distiction of serving God
in this way, they may with confidence look up and say unto him -- "Thou shall
arise and have mercy upon Zion; for the time to favor her, yea, the set time
is come. For thy servants take pleasure in her stones, and favor the dust
thereof." Psalm. cii. 13, 14.


ADDRESS To those who have steadfastly adhered to my ministry in Bennington.
My dear friends,
AS you have a joint interest with me in the sceene now described, I beg leave
to address you, in particular, on the subject, at my parting with you.

My heart being filled with the tenderest sympathy, I do sincerely condole with
you, in your present affliction. By matters being brought to this crisis. I am
sensible that your views and expectations are cut off equally as my own. And
notwithstanding people are wont to feel little concern in affairs foreign to
them, yet I am persuaded that the history of your troubles, as it is a history
of human nature, will not fail to excite in persons of sensibility the
liveliest pity and compassion for you; especially if they themselves have
experienced the like misfortune. But that which is most needful for you is to
make a wise improvement of the dispensation which so much affects you. I hope
that you will, therefore, allow me to testify my love to you, in that frankness
which becomes the friend and the christian, by giving you such advice as your
circumstances make me think will be not improper for you.

1. Adore that holy hand which has effected those events by which we are
obliged to part.

This is the believer's challenge; "Shall there be evil in a city, and the Lord
has not done it?" And not only revelation, but even nature itself teaches the
same doctrine. "Ask now the beasts, and they shall teach thee; and the fowls of
the air, and they shall tell thee: or speak to the earth, and it shall teach
thee; and the fishes of the sea shall declare unto thee: who knows not in all
these, that the hand of the Lord has wrought this." Job xii. 7 -- 9.


While you consider that you have to do with God in these concerns, you will be
happily guarded against fretting at second causes. Second causes are in his
hand, as instruments of discipline and correction; and great good may come to
you by them. "The Lord's voice cries unto the city, and the man of wisdom
shall see his name; hear ye the rod, and who has appointed it." Micah vi. 9.
Hence say with Eli, in his affliction, "It is the LORD: let him do what
seems him good.." 1 Samuel iii. 18.


2. Consider the reason you have to be humbled under this rebuke.

It has been easy to foresee that a rupture must have been the consequence of
the spirited measures which have uniformly operated against my continuance
here, unless checked by discipline, and opposed as well by a manly neglect as
by reasoning. But while your charity, and reluctance to put forth such
exertion, have been conspicuous, the opposition has constantly gained ground,
and supported itself with courage. And now we may well say with Jeremiah in his
lamentations; "Certainly this is the day that we looked for; we have found, we
have seen it." Lam. ii. 16.
And if this chastening brings to your remembrance any inattention to your
duty, in the course of your troubles, allow me to hope that you will admit the
conviction, and be humbled under the rod.

3 Be patient under God's hand.

"Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord; that
the Lord is very pitiful and of tender mercy." James v. 11.
The day may come when you will see good come out of this evil, and the glory
of God greatly promoted by it. And if you walk in darkness and have no light
about the issue and event of this providence, yet remember that there is
sufficient reason for you to trust in the name of the Lord, and to stay upon
God. Isa. 1. 10
"Then be ye followers of them who through faith and patience inherit the
promises." Heb. vi. 12.
They have with one voice said, "We glory in tribulation, knowing that
tribulation works patience." Romans v. 3.
"If when you do well and suffer for it, ye take it patiently, this is
acceptable with God." 1 Pet. ii. 20.


Consider that the time has not yet come, when satan shall be bound, and he
make havoc of the church no more. But as the time fixed upon by the prophets
when his influence shall be destroyed, draws nigh, "he has come down unto the
inhabitants of the earth and of the sea, having great wrath, because he knows
that he has but a short time." Rev. xii. 12.
The rapid increase of discord amongst brethren -- the sly measures used to
shun the rules of God's house* the spirit of division and contention, of
emulation and strife -- the corrupt principle embraced and supported against
the plain sense of the scriptures the perverseness, the willfulness and the
unreclaimableness of men's tempers -- the growth of vice, the abounding of
lust, the spread and prevalence of infidelity, of heresy and hardness of heart
-- the airs of insult assumed over conscientious men, the friends of the
ancient faith and manners -- the unbridled covetousness which is now arrayed in
all its terrors against the gospel, which so signally mark the men of this
generation -- all loudly proclaim that little rest may be enjoyed, at present,
except you become conformed to this world, and court their friendship. But you
had better suffer all the terrors that antichrist (...) than do that And as
things are now taking place, it becomes you to gird on the harness and prepare
for war. Arm yourselves, therefore, with patience, that you may endure to the
end. "Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him, fret not" yourselves
"because of him who prospers in his way, because of the man who brings
wicked devices to pass." Psalm. lxxxvii. 7.


4. Be aware of a separateing spirit.

From the many awful displays of this spirit, made before your eyes, in the
course of a few years past, as well before as since I came amongst you, there
is more reason why you should fear it, than there is that you should fear "the
pestilence that walks in darkness, or the destruction that wastes at
noonday." Psalm. xci. 6.
This spirit always feels independent of its neighbors; and is intent only
upon its own interest and humor. It never esteems another better than itself;
and it seldom blushes to make its own goodness a standard for its brother.
Hence it is not uncommon for this spirit to affect great compassion for the
blindness and the small experiences of its fellow-professors. In various ways
it calls upon beholders to admire its shining excellencies; and in as many ways
it is wont to show displeasure if they withhold their applause. It "loves the
uppermost seats in the synagogues, and greetings in the market," Luke ii. 43.
as though these of right belonged to it. It assumes, with airs, the dictator's
chair; and is not unwilling to give laws to inferiors. And if you dispute this
prerogative, it scruples not to adopt that all-convincing reasoning, "I am
holier than thou." Isa. lxv. 5.
And the least disobedience to this evil spirit is, at any time, a sufficient
reason for its withdrawing from you, as though you were unworthy of its
communion. And then the discipline of shyness, jealousy, murmuring,
unsociableness, surliness, sourness, unkindness, unmercifulness, and
complaining, is the ordinance of your reformation. As this spirit never gathers
with Christ, it always scatters abroad, contrary to the whole strain of the
scriptures. And what is surprising is, that it delights in being alone, when it
can exclude all others as not necessary to its happiness.

When I consider that the spirit of the gospel is a uniting spirit (...) that
it is the desire of Christ that all his people "may be one, that they may be
made perfect in one;" and that this union made manifest in life is designed as
the great mean of conviction to the world that his mission was from heaven*
when I consider also the great stress which is laid upon the doctrine of union,
in the scriptures, as, "Be of one mind." "Be perfectly joined together in the
same mind and in the same judgment." "Let us stand fast in one spirit." "Behold
how good and how pleasant it is for brethren to dwell together in unity." "Now
I beseech you, brethren, mark them which cause divisions and offenses, contrary
to the doctrine which ye have learned; and avoid them." I say, when I consider
these things, and how great a stress is laid upon this doctrine, which all
believers receive in the love of it -- I hesitate not to pronounce upon a
separating spirit, that it is antichristian spirit, and ought to be avoided as
the bane of churches.

You cannot, therefore, my friends, have too great an abhorrence of this
spirit, in whomsoever it may, at any time, appear. You ought to guard against
it with diligence, and crush the first risings of it amongst you. If it be let
alone very long, it will become headstrong, and utterly unmanageable, like the
wild Gadarene, whom no man could tame.

Introduced with this unholy and dangerous spirit is a train of evils of the
foulest character. Its natural and constant attendants are, "debates, envyings,
wraths, strifes, backbitings, whisperings, swellings, tumults." And whenever
you shall see this troop of furies arise, stand in awe and dread the
consequences. For if every kingdom divided against itself is brought to
desolation: and if no city or house divided against itself shall stand: know
you for certain, that when a spirit of division shall have dominion over you,
then destruction will be even at your door. "If ye bite and and devour one
another, says the apostle, take heed that ye be not consumed one of another."

5. Seek after gospel order and walk in it.

The blessings of order are so numerous, so great, and so precious, that it is
truly astonishing that it does not more command the attention of believers. Its
lines are drawn with so much clearness and precision; and its distinguishing
marks are so plain and easy to be seen; that it seems to require invention to
avoid it. To every humble and honest disciple, the way of duty is obvious
enough: so that "the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein."
Hence young children, and persons of very scanty capacities may easily be
convicted of perverseness, and wilful blindness when they refuse to walk in it.
This is the covenant.

"Thine eyes shall see thy teachers: and thine ears shall hear a word behind
thee, saying, This is the way, walk ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand,
and when ye turn to the left." "The meek will he guide in judgment: and the
meek will he teach his way. All the paths of the Lord are mercy and truth unto
such as keep his covenant and his testimonies." And as "God is not the author
of confusion, but of peace, as in all churches of saints:" so his peculiar
people are distinguished from others by their love and practice of peace and
order.

Indeed this is an article of such estimation in the scriptures, that "in this
the children of God are manifest, and the children of the devil: whosoever does
not righteousness is not of God, neither he that loves not his brother." Of
your duty on this head, this is the sum: "Thou shall not hate thy brother in
thine heart; thou shall in any wise rebuke thy neighbor, and not suffer sin
upon him." "If thy brother shall trespass against thee, go and tell him his
fault between thee and him alone: if he hear thee, thou have gained thy
brother. But if he will not hear thee, then take with thee one or two more,
that in the mouth of two or three witnesses every word may be established. And
if he shall neglect to hear them, tell it unto the church: but if he neglect to
hear the church let him be unto thee as an heathen man and a publican."
"Withdraw yourselves from every brother that walks disorderly. If any man
obey not our word by this epistle, note that man, and have no company with him,
that he may be ashamed" "Mark them which cause divisions, contrary to the
doctrine which ye have learned, and avoid them." "I have written to you not to
keep company, if any man that is called a brother be a fornicator, or covetous,
or an idolator, or a railer, or a drunkard, or an extortioner -- with such an
one, no not to eat. If any reader shall imagine that we are prohibited eating
with an excommunicant, at the Lord's table only -- let him consider -- that we
are to have NO company with him -- surely then, not the HIGHEST and MOST
HONORABLE kind of company. Otherwise we shall make our apostle read thus
absurdly -- with such an one NO, not even to eat the Lord's supper, as that is
the GREATEST act of communion that christians ever perform on earth. --
Besides, this restriction respects our treatment of a man, called a brother,
when he is cast out of the church. With others, even the fornicators of this
world, we may eat: but if any man that is called a brother be a fornicator --
with such an one, no not to eat. But while he was in the church, every brother
might eat with him.
"

6. Display, upon all occasions, true greatness of mind.

This is necessary in order to your shining in that religion which will make
you the light of the world. And it is to be wished, that you may appear to the
best advantage, that others beholding "your good works may glorify your Father
who is in heaven."

Narrowness and contraction are not more unaimiable or even contemptible in the
eyes of men, than they are unfavourable to a religious character. Hence, under
the reign of righteoussness, when there will be light sufficient to exhibit and
to distinguish characters with clearness, --

"The vile person shall be no more called liberal, nor the churl said to be
bountiful. For the vile person will speak villainy, and his heart will work
iniquity, to practice hypocrisy, and to utter error against the Lord, to make
empty the soul of the hungry, and he will cause the drink of the thirsty to
fail. The instruments of the churl are evil: he devises wicked devices, to
destroy the poor with lying words, even when the needy speaks right." And yet
this same vile person, this churl, the enormity of whose villainy and
covetousness exceeds even the liveliest description, would fain be thought to
be liberal, bountiful, manly, honorable. He seems not to see any reason in his
"depart in peace, by ye warmed and filled" -- not being accepted in lieu of
"those things which are needful to the body." And should any have the
confidence, from the churl's 'making empty the soul of the hungry, and his
causing the drink of the thirsty to fail,' to scruple the goodness or the
nobleness of his heart, it will be much if he is not deemed uncharitable and
severe. Hence hypocritical and lying professions of a good disposition, of good
intentions, of full resolutions, -- to do something clever, something honorable
and noble, are always to supply the gaping vacancy of something clever,
honorable and noble. And after all his study and care to save appearances,
while he rebels against righteousness, and against his duty; his speaking
villainy, his heart's working iniquity, his practicing hypocrisy, his uttering
error against the Lord, his making empty the soul of the hungry, his causing
the drink of the thirsty to fail, his evil instruments, his wicked devices, his
destroying the poor with lying words, will all appear without a covering and
without excuse, and procure him the heavy curses due to his little soul. He
shall no longer then be ranked amongst good and honorable men -- he shall be
called, and treated as, a vile churl.

"But the liberal devises liberal things." -- This man can look on great and
generous designs with noble pleasure and a heartfelt satisfaction; and in
this, as well as in every other respect, he is superior to a man of a narrow
mind, in that he can behold the solicitor of a charity, without turning pale.
It is not his character to treat the good of others with cold indifference; for
he knows by experience that "it is more blessed to give than to receive." And
as he enjoys the pleasure of diffusing happiness amongst men, so he is
"satisfied from himself." With him it is not sufficient barely to be just -- he
delights in being bountiful. And since he has this promptitude, it is no
marvel that he prefers the public to any private interest. His "charity seeks
not her own." The amassing of wealth, and laying up riches, he knows not
whether for a wise man or a fool, is not an object of so much importance in his
estimation, as his being "eyes to the blind, and feet to the lame; a father to
the poor, and a searcher out of the cause that he knows not, his breaking the
jaws of the wicked, and plucking the spoil out of his teeth." The cry of the
poor, of the fatherless, and of him who has none to keep him, more readily
reaches his feelings, than the moving eloquence of the ablest orator; and the
widow's heart singing for joy affords him a nobler entertainment, than even a
band of the best performers. And so odd is he in his notion, that he really
prefers "the blessing of him who was ready to perish," to all the praises of
cringing sycophants, and the loud huzzas of lazy dependents, or even the
degrading encomium -- He is a very rich man.

To recommend this excellence of temper yet more to your acceptance, I beg
leave only to add, that it will help you to pass by affronts and to pardon
abuses. You may have much need of this, in the midst of such a provoking
generation as this, who think it becoming men of spirit readily to resent, at
least with the sword of the tongue, every usage of their neighbors, that is so
unfortunate as not to agree with their nice sentiments of dignity and honor. It
is the glory of a great mind to pass unnoticed such abuse; "not rendering evil
for evil, or railing for railing: but contrary wise blessing; knowing that he
is thereunto called, that he should inherit a blessing.'

Should this divine greatness, therefore, swell and enoble all your breasts,
and prompt and regulate all your views, give me leave to assure you, my
friends, that it will make you the ornament of religion, the pillars of
society, and the beast and glory of good men. This will acquire you a name that
is better than precious ointment; and the fruits of it will be "an odor of a
sweet smell, a sacrifice acceptable, well pleasing to God."

"And by liberal things shall he stand." 'For he that in these things serves
Christ is acceptable to God, and approved of men." Although these liberal
things are not the meritorious ground of our standing in the divine favor, yet
they shall be produced as the necessary vouchers of our righteousness, when we
shall be judged according to our works. "Then shall the King say unto them on
his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for
you from the foundation of the world: for I was an hungered, and ye gave me
meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in:
naked, and ye clothed me: I was sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and
ye came unto me. Inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the least of these my
brethren, ye have done it unto me.

Be not afraid, then, my friends, to be truly liberal, and truly great. So far
are you from losing your money by lending it unto the Lord, that you lose even
all that you do not lend to him. In this disposing of your interest you lay up
for yourselves treasures in heaven, which you shall enjoy hereafter. "He that
has pity upon the poor lends unto the Lord; and that which he has given
will he pay him again." "There is that scatters, and yet increateth; and
there is that withholdeth more than is meet, but it tends to poverty. The
liberal soul shall be made fat; and he that waters shall be watered also
himself."

7. Reprove and avoid a levelling disposition.

If you receive my advice under the last head, surely you will under this. Your
religious character, and your highest interest depend upon it. As a levelling
disposition is not only dangerous to society, but is expressly forbidden in
God's word, I beseech you not to speak lightly of it: for in this matter you
have a mighty concern with your maker. The divine law, on this subject is --
"In lowliness of mind let each esteem other better than themselves." "Be kindly
affectioned one to another with brotherly love; in honor prefering one
another." "Render to all their dues: fear to whom fear; honor to whom honor"
"Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye even
so to them."

This law you need to have well written in your hearts, that you may display it
in all your deportment toward others. Christians in nothing appear more like
the great Pattern of humility, of meekness and of philanthropy, than they do in
a strict conformity to this rule And I am free to say, that it is owing to
nothing but pride and arrogance that any are not in subjection to it.

As a levelling spirit ever envies the superiority of its neighbors; so it
does not scruple to adopt any measures to clip the wings of those who fly, or
to depress those who attempt to rise. This demon of envy can never endure its
equal, much less its rival, in either interest or fame. And indeed, such is the
nature of this disposition, that it cannot rest without degrading other
characters below the level, that it may enjoy the pleasure of thinking itself
esteemed above them. Its language is -- I am not inferior to any one -- men
were made to serve me! Hence it confounds the distinctions which nature has
made, and which time immemorial has sanctified, between members of society, on
the account either of their age or rank. Men of this stamp "despise government,
presumptuous are they, self willed, they are not afraid to speak evil of
DIGNITIES."

And this evil disposition is as destructive to society, as it is ungracious
and degrading. For as it disrobes public characters of that dignity and honor
which God has confered upon them for the good of others; so it renders useless
their administrations, whether it be in church or state, exactly in proportion
as they are brought down from that eminence in which their offices place them
above others. Would you then, my friends, desire to have the civil magistrate
"a terror to evil doers, and a praise to such as do well," hold him up in the
light of DIGNITY. And would you wish to have the ministers of the gospel "save
them who hear them," hold them up in the light of DIGNITY. And since this
daring, levelling spirit of the times has pervaded all our land, and shakes
even the pillars of church and state, from both extremities of the continent,
and more than legions of veterans is threatening ruin to our liberties and to
our religion -- let me conjure you to awake, and to be upon your guard against
this fiend, this offspring of pride, this enemy of all righteouness, this pest
and plague of society. Now is the time for you to rouse, when the effects of a
levelling spirit have become so alarming. Lift up then a standard against this
enemy, and make the tyrant flee -- make the tyrant die! Crush, with spirit, the
first risings of his power, before he gains strength amongst you -- You can
more easily conquer him in the cradle, than in the field -- "I speak as to wise
men; judge ye what I say."

Finally, as family-religion -- family-government -- the education of children
-- and the promoting of learning in this young and rising state -- are subjects
of high importance to you, I would gladly discant upon each of them, were it
not that it will swell this address to too great a size. Nevertheless, allow me
to indulge in the pleasure of the hope that my painful instructions on these
topics will be kept in lasting remembrance, and will be carried forth in
practice, by you.

And now, I must take my leave of you -- it may be that with some it will be
for ever. I hope you will allow me to remind you, that the opportunities which
we have had together, in the course of my ministry here, will sensibly affect
us hereafter. The great doctrines of grace which I have invariably preached to
you are of the first excellence and importance. And accordingly as these
doctrines have been receieved or rejected, so will the happiness or the misery
of the hearers be. Be advised then to take heed to what you have heard and
learned, and hold fast. Be careful to make these doctrines shine in all your
conversation, that you may shine hereafter in the kingdom of your Father.

"Finally, brethren, farewell. Be perfect, be of good comfort, be of one mind,
live in peace; and the God of love and peace shall be with you. If there be
therefore any consolation in Christ if any comfort of love, if any fellowship
of the spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be
like-minded, having the same love, being of one accord, of one mind." My
address concludes with the blessing of Israel:

"The Lord bless thee, and keep thee: the Lord make his face to shine upon
thee, and be gracious unto thee: the Lord lift up his countenance upon thee,
and give thee peace."

I am, My dear friends, With great respect, Your unfeigned Friend and servant
in the kingdom and patience of Christ, D. AVERY.
Bennington, 1st of October, 1783.

