AN ATTEMPT TO SHOW AND MAINTAIN, THE WISDOM, JUSTICE, EQUITY and FITNESS of
GOD'S annexing ETERNAL REWARDS and PUNISHMENTS to his RIGHTEOUS LAWS, FOR The
exciting and enforcing MAN's obedience thereunto, and all necessary, for the
best good of Mankind. CALCULATED ALSO, To show the ERROR, FALSNESS and DANGER
of that WICKED DOCTRINE of UNIVERSAL SALVATION. ARGUED IN TWO DISCOURSES
DELIVERED in LYME, NORTH-PARISH, LORD'S DAY, JANUARY 26, 1783.

BY GEORGE BECKWITH, A. M. PASTOR OF THE THIRD CHURCH IN LYME.

NORWICH: PRINTED BY JOHN TRUMBULL, M, DCC, LXXXIII.

AN ATTEMPT TO SHOW AND MAINTAIN THE Wisdom, Justice, Equity and Fitness, of
God's annexing eternal Rewards and Punishments, etc.
MATTHEW, XXV. 46. And these shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the
righteous into life eternal.


IN this chapter our Savior discourses of his second coming to judge the
world, when all must appear before him, to hear and receive their final
sentence. Now from the 31st to the 46th verse, he tells us more plainly and
particularly, how and with what wisdom and equity, the judgment will proceed,
and after sentence is awarded according to the just desert, or demerit of all
good and bad; execution will be taken out and levelled on all accordingly, as
in our text -- "And these (the wicked) shall go away into everlasting
punishment: but the righteous into life eternal." These words are so plain and
express at first view, that they need but little explanation. The scope and
design of them is, to represent to us the different states of good and bad men
in the other world, and that their end, or state there, will be as different as
their ways and doings have been here in this world, which certainly are matters
of the highest concernment, to be well considered by us in this our only
probation season, for one or the other of these states which are, or will be
unalterable forever. In a word, we are plainly here taught those two soul
concerning propositions, viz.

Proposition first. THAT good men, or all the Godly, shall be eternally happy
in the other world.

Prop. 2d. THAT wicked men, or all the ungodly, shall be eternally punished for
their sins in the other world.

MANKIND seem to be willing enough to acknowledge the truth of this first
proposition, hoping to share in the blessings of it; but many for want of this
gospel hope, have a great aversion to this second proposition, and are
unwilling it should be true, or be received for truth, that the punishment of
the wicked should be eternal, and have their objections and cavils against the
truth of it: but it ought to be observed, that if the glorification of the
saints in heaven is eternal, so is the punishment of them that perish; for
these are in exact opposition and same measure of time. But more of this
hereafter.

As the great difficulty lies with respect to the second (...), which is denied
by some ('it is hoped not (...) among us) I shall therefore begin with that
first, and endeavor to prove that the doctrine of the eternal punishment of
the wicked in the other world, is a true, just, and reasonable doctrine,
plainly and fully taught us in God's sacred oracles. Here therefore we shall
show these two things.

I. THAT it is a doctrine clearly, fully and plainly taught us by Christ
himself, in the sacred scriptures.

II. THAT it is a just and reasonable doctrine, worthy the blessed author of
it, and greatly beneficial to mankind in many respects, etc.

Prop. 1st. WE say, that this doctrine of eternal rewards and punishments, is a
doctrine clearly, fully and plainly taught us by Christ himself in the sacred
scriptures; and for the illustration of this, let us look back to the
foundation: when God created our first parents innocent and holy, to warn them
to continue in their obedience and fealty to God, death was threatened as the
immediate consequence of sin, "in the day thou eatest thereof, thou shall
surely die," or dying thou shall die a continual everlasting death. They
disobeying incured the penalty on themselves and posterity; and hence God
determined what the effect of sin should ever be -- The soul that sins, it
shall die -- The wicked shall be turned into hell with all the nations that
forget God. In the new Testament we are more fully told what hell is, viz. a
lake burning with fire and brimstone -- and the smoke of their torment
assendeth forever and ever; and as these torments are intolerable, so they are
eternal and never ceasing, into which our Savior assures us, that the wicked
shall be cast in the other world. So in our text, "and these (viz. the wicked)
shall go away into everlasting punishment," and in Mat. xxviii. 41. "Depart
from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his
angels," chap. xviii. 8. "where the worm dies not and the fire is not
quenched" -- Rev. xx. 10. "and shall be tormented forever and ever" -- and in
Mark, chap. 9. it is three times over, severally and very pathetically asserted
by our Savior, that "their worm dies not and fire is not quenched." And what
says the Apostle, speaking of those that know not God, nor obey the gospel of
his Son? Why "they shall be punished with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord, and for the glory of his power." 2 Thessalonians. i. 9. Now how
full, how clear, how perfectly agreeing with these scriptures for affirming
this doctrine, of the eternal rewards of the Godly, and eternal punishment of
the wicked in the other world; nor can there be one text produced in all the
book of God, that gives any real intimation, that the punishment of the wicked
who continue obstinate in sin, to the end of this life; that the punishment of
such in the other world, shall ever have an end, or mittigation. The Athiest
says there is no God; but can never prove it. The Deist denies the scriptures
of the old and new Testament, to be a divine revelation from God; but can no
more prove it than the Athiest can what he affirms. And just so it is with them
that deny the eternity of hell torments, they cannot prove what they would fain
persuade themselves and others to believe; but it is a negative proposition
incapable of proof.

Prop. 2d. WE say and affirm, that this is a just and reasonable doctrine,
worthy the blessed author of it, and greatly beneficial to the good and best
interest of mankind in many respects, etc. These assertions, we shall endeavor
to prove and make evident -- and then consider such obejections, or cavils, as
are, or may be made against this true, plain and scripture doctrine which we
assert.

HERE then let the following arguments be seriously and impartially considered
-- as 1st. That the belief of this doctrine is really beneficial and necessary,
and for the good of mankind; as it is a necessary proper check and restraint on
the unruly lusts, corruptions, and exorbitant passions of mankind in this
corrupt fallen state. It Is wonderful to observe, what possession the world, the
lusts of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life, has got of
men's heart, i. e. the strong appetite corrupt nature has, for indulging
fleshly pleasures, the lust of the eye after gain and riches, rich possessions,
etc. and the pride of life, i. e. the strong insatiable thirst after honor,
pomp, grandeur, and a vainglorious life. What will not men do? What risks wont
they run? Yea, many times not stick at the most cruel and shameful barbarities
to gratify those insatiable cravings of carnal, corrupt nature, that must be
obeyed against the plain dictates of reason, be the consequence what it will;
as Jere. ii. 25. "Thou saidest there is no hope: no, for I have loved
strangers, and after them will I go." And is it so? Don't mankind then stand in
need of some powerful restraint, to check these so disorderly lusts and
passions, without which all manner of rapine, injustice and confusion must take
place, and men be like wolves and tigers to devour one another? Nor can any
means be assigned so proper, and power to answer the end in this case, as the
doctrine of future, eternal rewards and punishments. Temporary punishments, or
evils, are too weak for answering these great ends, of restraining and curbing
the exorbitant lusts and passions of carnal and corrupt nature, and that
because they are temporary and soon at an end, and the sinner may think and
pursuade himself, that he shall surely outlive these temporary punishments, for
infinite ages in bliss and glory. But the apprehension of being eternally
miserable in the other world, strikes a dread on human nature, and becomes a
powerful restraint from sin. For who can bear the thought of dwelling with
devouring fire, and everlasting burnings, without horror? Hence how fit, how
wise, how necessary and proper was it, for the good of mankind in the
legislature, to guard and enforce obedience to his just laws, by annexing
eternal rewards to the obedience of merit and demerit, since no other means
could be powerful enough to attain the end. Nor can any thing be imagined more
intolerably painful than suffering the violence of fire adjutated with
brimstone, fitly expressed to warn men from sin; a metaphor frequently used by
our Savior, in his preaching when on earth to this end, and Apostles followed
this same example in their preaching to the same end, for the warning and good
of mankind. 2 Cor, v. 11. "Knowing the terrors of the Lord, we persuade men."
In a word, such a restraint of all evil, and promoter of all peace, and
promoter of all good both in church and state, is this doctrine of eternal
rewards and punishments, (that if we had not so full an evidence of the truth
of it as we have) yet were it to be desired, that all men should believe it,
for the vast good, peace and benefit, both of individuals and communities.

II. THE belief of this doctrine will more especially appear to be for the good
and benefit of mankind, if we consider the safety and support it yields in
times of trouble and danger. What have we to support and comfort us, under all
the hard things and evil sufferings that befall us in this state of life; (for
which in many cases we have no remedy here) but that of our Savior, that if we
suffer with him, that we may be glorified together? This is the only or
principle support that good men have under all the unjust sufferings, evils,
and hard treatment, that befall them in this life. That there is a judgment
approaching on the other side death, when all these wrong things shall be
righted, and every man receive a full and just reward according to what his
conduct has been in this life of trial: hence that of 1 Cor. xv. 19. "If in
this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men most miserable." But
here is the sure remedy and cure of this evil, that God will fully consider all
the pains any of us have taken in his service, or suffered for his cause, and
all the difficulties which we have struggled with, out of love to God; virtue
and religion, and such good works, shall be eternally rewarded of grace, not of
debt. Hence, "Blessed are the dead that die in the Lord, they rest from their
labor, and their works do follow them."

III. THE wisdom and goodness, as well as justice of God, are to be seen and
acknowledged in appointing these rewards and punishments, and making them
eternal for the warning and detering men from sin, the exciting and encouraging
men to obedience, virtue and holiness. The primary design of annexing eternal
punishment to sin, wilfully and perversely continued in through this state of
life, is not to punish, but rather to save from punishment, by warning them of
the danger, and detering men from those sinful practices, and such a wicked
life as surely brings on inevitable misery and destruction at last. Hence the
wisdom and goodness of the legisture appear, in annexing such degree of
punishment to sin, as may overbalance the strong dispositions and
temptations, men have to commit and continue in the practice of sin. The law is
good, and can never hurt us, if we don't hurt ourselves by disobeying of it. It
lays no restraints upon us, but what is for our own good and benefit; nor does
God threaten men, that they may sin and be punished; no, but that they may
escape the punishment; therefore, the higher the threatening runs, so much the
more mercy and goodness there is in it, because it is so much the more likely
to restrain them from incurring the penalty that is threatened, and if it fails
of this good effect, the fault is wholly our own.

IV. WAS it not fit, reasonable and necessary to enforce man's obedience to the
laws of his Maker? That God should annex such rewards and punishments as were
fit and proper to answer that end, and their being made eternal was necessary
to answer that end, even by the repeated concessions of the greatest and most
learned of the Deistical writers themselves, (and this corrupt doctrine we are
opposing, is much the same with their's) giving such high incomiums to
Christianity, her constitution, rights, orders, sacrament, laws, etc. obliged
thereto, by the light of truth, their own reason and conscience, though enemies
to divine revelation. So Lord Herbit pronounces of the divine laws, ordinances,
etc. of divine revelation, as enforced by eternal rewards and punishments, that
it is the best religion: that all its doctrines, precepts, sacraments, aim at
the establishment of those five important articles, in which he makes all
religion to consist. (...), p. 9, 10.
Doct. Tind^^, that accute reasoner, owns, that Christianity itself stripped
(as he is pleased to express himself) of all additions that policy mistake, and
the circumstances of time have made to it, is a most holy religion.
Christianity as old as the world, p. 382. edit. 8vo. Lord Bolingbroke, vol.
first of his essays, p. 305, 328. ib. 281, 282. ib. p. 305, 328. ib. 314, 310.
Dr. Morgan.

Mr. Chub acknowledges the same. Posthumous-works, vol. 2. p. 370.


The moral philosopher frequently expresses himself to the same purpose. And
Mr. Chub acknowledges that Christianity, if it could be separated from every
thing that is blended with it, yields a much clearer light, and is a more safe
guide to mankind, than any other traditionary religion, as being better adapted
to improve and perfect human nature. Lord Bolingbroke, their champion,
represent Christianity as a most amiable and useful institution, and that its
natural tendency is to promote the peace and happiness of mankind; that the
system of religion it teaches, is a complete system to all the purposes of
religion, natural and revealed. And in another place represents, that the
system of religion which Christ (...), and his Evangelists (...), is a complete
system to all the purposes of religion, natural and revealed. And again adds,
that supposing Christianity to have been an human invention, it had been the
most amiable, and the most useful invention, that ever was imposed on mankind
for their good, and often to the same purpose elsewhere. Why then do they not
adhere to this excellent divine constitution? Why the reasons they give us, are
thus truly confessed by themselves, viz. because they cannot bear the
restraints that (that gospel, or true religion) lays upon their corrupt lusts
and passions. The real end they aim at, is expressed by one of themselves, to
save a soul from the dismal apprehensions of eternal damnation, to release a
person from laboring under that uneasiness of mind which often he is under,
when pleasure and Christianity come in competition. And Lord Bolingbroke
mentions it as an advantage of the way of thinking, he recommends, that the
burning lake will then disappear. And one man said that he found this gospel
preaching made a hell in a man's conscience. In a word, it is easy to see whence
the minds of determined sinners come to be filled with such unreasonable
prejudices against divine revelation.

V. WE add as a further argument; it is utterly impossible in the nature of the
thing, that a man living and dying in his sins should be happy, or enjoy heaven
which he cannot be capable of; because a sinful nature, and consciousness of
guilt, will ever make a man miserable in himself, be he where he will, in this
world or the next: as it was with Adam and Eve in Paradise, on their fall;
though they were created perfectly innocent, holy and happy, yet immediately on
their sinning, they lost all their peace and happiness, and fell under amazing
fear and terror, and vainly strove to hide themselves from God; as not able to
bear the sight of God their Maker. Sin and unpardoned guilt will ever produce
the like effect: it is the gnawing worm in the breast that never dies; it makes
sinners tremble at the thoughts of appearing before God: hence the wicked man
travels in pain all his days, is always subject to fear and inward uneasiness.
In a word, he that is a slave to sin cannot but be a slave to fear; hence is
like the troubled sea that cannot rest, consequently can have no true peace in
this world, or in the next. Job, xxxiv. 29. "When he gives quietness, who then
can give trouble? And when he hides his face, who then can behold him?"
Whether it be done against a nation, or against a man only.

VI. AS without holiness, and the removal of guilt from the conscience by
pardon, the sinner cannot see God, nor enjoy peace, or happiness, were he in
heaven; so no such necessary sanctifying change can be obtained on the other
side death, or in the other world; and consequently no such sinner dying in his
sins, can ever go to heaven to all eternity; for as the tree falls so it lies;
as death leaves us, so judgment will find us, in the same state of guilt and
sin, and pass sentence on us accordingly. For none of our actions, whether good
or bad, will ever be imputed to us, but such only as are done in the body, or
while soul and body are united, making the same identical person: so the
Apostle assures us. 2 Cor. v. 10. "That every one may receive the things done
in the body, according to what he has done, whether it be good or bad. But
when death has dissolved the union, laid the body in the grave, and the soul
past into hades, or the receptacle of souls, be that where it may, all personal
identity is then at an end; therefore incapable of receiving or doing any
personal actions to be judged for, The soul indeed in this separate state, is
doubtless much more knowing and susceptible of pleasure or pain* happiness or
misery, than before in this life. etc. but this belongs to the soul alone, the
body having no sense of or concern with the soul in this separate state; nor
can any thing the soul does, enjoys or suffers, have any effect on the body
which it once inhabited, so as either to make any satisfaction for, or increase
the debt contracted whilst in their union together here, on the final trial at
the last day; nor yet can the happiness of the soul be complete while in this
separate state, without the body, for the resurrection of which, it waited with
longing desire. Rom* viii. 23. "Waiting for the adoption, viz, the redemption
of the body."
and when at the great resurrection day, the body is raised and soul again
united to its own body, so becoming again the same identical person, and is
immediately summoned away to the last final judgment, which judgment
immediately beginning and proceeding, leaves no time for any new trial to be
made, or change to be wrought Now then where is there any time or place left
for fool's purgatory of a thousand years, (as its pretended origin taught) or
be it for a longer, or unknown time, that wicked men and Devils must be
tormented in for sin, to bring them to repentance for sin, to purify and
prepare them for heaven? But how false and absurd the notion, and what a
miserable foundation for comfort were it true. And how much better is the
arguing of the Deists against divine revelation, in which they are far from
being consistent, or agreeing among themselves* and many times really self
contradictory, and much the same with the teachers of the doctrine I am
opposing, which is an evidence that the truth they are writing against, is
unreasonable. See Doct. Leland's view of the Deistical writers, vol. 2. edit.
3. p. 167, 1^8, 169. e^ sequen.
nor any means to be used for obtaining it; hence in that world no place for
faith in Christ* repentance to life, virtue or holiness; but he that is unjust,
most be unjust still, and he that is filthy, must be filthy still; and suffer
eternal punishment for the same. And this is not only the voice of reason, but
fully confirmed by God's sacred oracles: also, Mat. v. 25, 26. Eccl. ix. 10
"For there is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave
whether thou go." Psalm. lxxxix. 10. "Will thou show wonders to the dead?
Shall the dead arise and praise thee?" Psalm. cxv. 17. "The dead praise not the
Lord, neither any that go down into silence."

VII. MANKIND in this state, are probationers and on trial for an endless
eternity of happiness, or misery, and God has assured them that their wages
shall be according to their works whether good, or evil.

HE that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap corruption; but he that
sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting, Gal. vi. 8. "He
that sows to the flesh, viz. they that live corrupt carnal lives shall reap
corruption, misery and eternal death; but they that sow to the spirit living
holy, virtuous, spiritual lives, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting."
God has plainly told us what the two different states are, which men are on
trial and laboring for in this life, and which all our actions here have
reference to, and that our wages hereafter, shall be according to our works so
in our text -- and John iv, 36. "and he that reapeth receives wages, and
gathers fruit unto life eternal." Romans vi. 22. "For the wages of sin is
death, but the gift of God is eternal life." And thus God treats mankind as
reasonable creatures, free, mortal agents, to choose for themselves, whom they
will serve, yet advising them to choose life, by chuicing the way that leads to
it, s^ Deuteronomy. xxx. 19. "I have set before thee this day, life and death,
blessing and cursing, therefore choose life." Now God having given man all this
light by his sacred oracles, and promised him what his wages shall be according
to the choice he makes of good or evil, etc. Now, is not justice bound as much
to reward eternal punishment to the finally unbelieving obstinate impenitent
sinner, as to reward the rightous believing penitent sinner with life eternal,
as God, would mentain a holy, righteous and just government? What reason then
can the suffering sinner have to complain, when he has but his own choice, for,
in chuseing the means and way, he chose the end and receives but the just
wages, he had been laboring for through his whole life of trial, according to
that of the Apostle 2 Thessa. i. 6, 7, 8, 9. "Seeing it is a righteous thing
with God to recompense tribulation to them who trouble you; and to you who are
troubled rest with us, when the Lord Jesus shall be revealed from heaven with
his mighty angels, in flaming fire taking vengeance on them, who know not God
and who obey not the gospel of the Lord Jesus Christ: Who shall be punished
with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord and from the glory
of his Power, and may we not add Justice to?

VIII. Suffer me just to add, that the life eternal promised the righteous, may
as well be affirmed to have an end, as the everlasting punishment of the
wicked; because they are both delivered in the same expressions and
commensurate of the same measure of time. Nay there seems to be a further
agreement, or analogy in scripture expressions concerning these two great
events, as that those wicked who are cast into the Lake of fire and brimstone,
shall be tormented day and night forever and ever? Which expressions of day and
night are the same with those which declare that of the happiness of heaven,
where they rest not day and night, saying, holy, holy, holy, where they are
before the throne of God and serve him day and night, in his temple. -- To add
only one argument more.

IX. We say our Savior on a special occasion has established this doctrine
beyond all reasonable doubt, or dispute, Matt. xii. 32. "Whosoever shall speak
a word against the Son of Man, it shall be forgiven him; but whoever speaks
against the Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven him neither in this world,
neither in the world to come" -- How full and express are these words, and
precisely agreeing with the original, word for word, assureing us that there
are some sinners who never shall, never will be pardoned, consequently must
suffer eternally for their sins. Which surely is enough to overthrow that
corrupt, wicked doctrine of universal salvation, of late taught among us; for
if it be certain, that there be some that never shall be pardoned, why may not
this be the case of all willful, incorrigible, impenitent sinners dying in
their sins, how or where will you make the difference? God's holy word makes
none in this case, nor leaves room for our making of it, all are sheep or goats
and treated accordingly in the last great Judgment Day, Matt. xxv. 33. "And
shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left* et
sec^quencia.

Objection. BUT how will you reconcile it with the justice and goodness of God
to punish the sinner eternally, in the other world, for a short life of sin in
this?

Answ. HERE one would have thought that what has been already said and proved
of the fitness, reasonableness, and necessity even for the good of mankind and
maintaining a righteous government, that it was necessary that the divine law
should be so inculcated and enforced by such eternal rewards, promise to merit
and demerit and all so much to the benefit of mankind, relative, to this world
and the next, might have been sufficient to have (...) this objection, at least
till the objector had attempted an answer to what we have above affirmed and
plead.

BUT our objector seems to entertain low and unworthy thoughts of the immence
being and infinite perfections of God, as though he were such an one as himself,
and could do nothing, that is equitable and consistant with justice, but what
frail man can see through and determine the justice, and fitness of, which is
in effect to arreign God at man's bar, and implicitly to deny him to be God,
for how is he infinite in wisdom and incomprehensible in all his perfections,
if he can do nothing just and fit to be done, beyond what man is able to give a
sufficient reason for the equity and fitness of. Psalm. lxxvii. 19. "Thy way is
in the sea and thy path in the great water, and thy footsteps are not known"
But you insist on it, that you cannot see, how a short life of sin in this
world should demerit endless punishment in the next, here therefore, consider
with seriousness and candor the two following things, viz.

I. THAT the demerit of sin consists, not in the saddenness of the act or
shortness of the life of sin, but in the malignity of it, its exceeding
sinfullness in its nature, its incorrigible determined rebellion against God
and his holy laws. The principle part of its malignity being an insurrection
against the majesty and authority of the great Lord of the universe, to whom we
owe all possible subjection and obedience, an opposing our wills, lusts and
passions to the will, law and authority of the supreme God -- How great must be
the malignity of such willful traitorous rebellion against a being of such
immense perfections and holiness, how provoking the ingratitude, etc. and how
meritorous of the greatest punishment, according to that well known maxim, that
every rebellious, or abusive act arises in its demerit in proportion to the
digninity of the person, against whom it is committed, surely then no short
degree of punishment can be adequate here.

SIN may appear small in its first act and yet be very awful and malignant in
its extensive consequences. The manner of Adams offense seemed small, yet the
disobedience was emmensely great; it being the transgression of that command
which was given to be the instance and proof of man's subjection to God, in the
breath of which command the majesty and honor of the whole law were violated;
and how great and awful the effects of this sin to this day. -- So murder is a
short, and sudden act, but awful and lasting the guilt and effect of it,
reaching down to the great judgment day, yea, to eternity unless repentance
and pardon be obtained in this life. -- Again, that most horrible murder and
suicide, lately committed at Wetherfield, the most wicked father, slaying his
four children, and their mother, his wife and then himself, all which was
suddenly perpetrated, likely in less then half an hour; but how great and
lasting the guilt, and the effect reaching down not only to the great judgment
day; but doubtless to eternity.

II. CONSIDER the Angels that sinned, who vastly excelled us in nature,
strength and knowledge while holy: how did God deal with them, for one sin, the
first sin though indeed vastly great and heinous, considering the perfect
nature God had given them, the blessed state they were in enjoying as much
happiness, as their nature was capable of, yet to rebel, to rebel in heaven,
renounce their sealty to God, despise his authority, contemn his goodness, etc.
How greatly must this increase their guilt, and how justly did God, for this
one sin, this one so great act of rebellion, thunder them down out of heaven
into hell, and shut them up under chains of darkness, to be reserved, to the
judgment of the great day, and then to be more closely shut up and confined in
hell forever, having their eternal torments increased, by all the mischief they
are doing, and sin they are tempting and leading mankind into, in this world
which they now well know, and have trembling apprehensions of now; yet, such is
their malice, that they cannot forbear going on in their wickedness though to the
increase of their eternal torments, Jam. ii. 19. "Thou believes there is one
God, thou do well, the devils also believe and tremble." And how much does
incorrigible sinners imitate them, in there perverse sinful practices, and why
not therefore be partakers with them, in the same eternal punishment, to the
manifestation of God's infinite hatred of sin, the righteousness and justice of
his eternal government, that angels and men may forever fear and glorify God.

Prop. XI. THAT good men or all the godly shall be eternally happy in the other
world. -- As this proposition is not objected to, or denied and is most clearly
taught in God's sacred (...) little more need be said upon it, for its full
proof; save only pointing out few texts for that end, as Dan xii. 3. "they that
be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn man
to righteousness, as the stars forever and ever." -- Mal. iii. 17. "And they
shall be mine when I make up my jewels." -- Luke xii. 32. "Fear not, little
flock; for it is your father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom." John
xiv. 19. "because I live ye shall live also." i. e. as sure as I live, as long
as I live. -- chap. x. 20, 27. "And I give unto them eternal life and they
shall never perish." How great, how precious are these promises made to all the
goodly and more sure in their fulfillment, than the ^^^nding of the heaven's and
the earth, and how safe, how happy the state of every soul, that can by faith
take hold of them, and by holy obedience maintain his interest in them; to
conclude in a word, let all that have this hope in them, attend to that
excellent advice of St. John in his first Epistle chap. iii. 3. "Every one that
has this hope in him, purifieth himself as he is pure."

FINALLY to close all with a word of emprovment, on what was offered and as we
trust proved under the first proposition, showing the fatal mistake and danger
those are in, who deny the scripture doctrine of future rewards and
punishments, or that wicked men an all the ungodly shall be eternaly punished
for their sins in the other world. But why have men such an aversion to gospel
reverlation, since it abridges us of no pleasures within the bounds of purity
and innocence: nor does it oblige us to extinguish our natural appetites and
passions, but to govern and moderate them: it deprives us of nothing, but what,
would be to our own hurt; as well as, hurt of society, even in this state and
much more in the world to come. But what if it be found at last that such
unbelievers have rejected a true divine revelation, will it not involve them in
the greatest guilt and danger, when in that great day they shall be judged by
this very gospel Romans ii. 16. But in a word is not the bear probability of the
wrath to come so dreadful a thing, that a wise man would not run the hazard for
a few transient, vicious gratifications. The principal man among the Deist,
Lord Bolingbrook says (though perhaps sneeringly) that which is a sober and
momenous truth and what the reason of man cannot but approve, that where there
is a hell on the other side it is but natural prudence to take readily to the
safest side.

FINIS.

