Mr. Adams's SERMON, PREACHED AT LEXINGTON, NINETEENTH OF APRIL, 1783.

The evil designs of men made subservient by God to the public good;
particularly illustrated in the rise, progress and conclusion of the American
war. A SERMON PREACHED AT LEXINGTON, ON THE NINETEENTH OF April, 1783; Being
the Anniversary of the Commencement of the War between Britain and America,
which broke out in that Town on the 19th of April, 1775.

By ZABDIEL ADAMS, A. M. Pastor of the Church in Lunenburgh.

"The Cause was from the Lord."

1. KINGS, xii.15. BOSTON: Printed by BENJAMIN EDES and SONS, in Cornhill,
M,DCC,LXXXIII.

A SERMON, etc.
GENESIS 50th Chap. 20th Ver. "But as for you, ye thought evil against me, but
GOD meant it unto good, to bring to pass, as it is this day, to save much
people alive."


THE story with which the text is connected, is one of the most affecting tales
to be found on sacred record. Taken in all its circumstances, it is beyond a
parallel. It contains such a number of surprising incidents, and all, at last,
so overruled by the providence of God, for the good of the eastern world, that
it is not only one of the most entertaining, but also the most instructive
pieces of history. It gives an illustrious character to Jehovah, as a being of
such sublime perfections, that the most unpromising events are, by him, made
subservient to his own glory, and the good of his people. It teaches the
malignancy of the passions of envy and hatred on the one hand, and the strength
of natural affection on the other; and when these are set in contrast, as in
the case of Joseph and his brethren; when the events are so unexpected, so
interesting, and at last terminate so well, the story becomes too impassioned
to be read with stoical insensibility. A man of sentiment and of piety can
never read it with an unaffected ^eart, or with eyes unsuffused with tears. --
From it w^ farther learn that guilt is fearful and suspicious. -- Thus, the
brethren of Joseph, are under fearful apprehensions (since their father was
dead, who was the center of union,) left Joseph, now in power, should take
deserved vengeance upon them who had designed, and really, for a time, brought
him into most unhappy circumstances. From these suspicions they sent messengers
to him, informing that it was the dying injunction of their common parent, that
they should confess their fault, and ask forgiveness; hoping from the benignity
of his disposition, that he would in consequence thereof, restore them to his
favor. -- They were not mistaken. The injured brother, always generous, humane
and god-like, most heartily forgave them, assigning this particular reason for
his conduct, "you thought evil against me, but God meant it for good," etc.

The occurrence to which my text alludes, has a near affinity, in its origin
and final issue, to the tragical event, which eight years ago took place in
this town, destined, by divine providence, to be the stage on which a most
memorable scene was acted. The instances are not, indeed, in all respects,
parallel; and who could expect to find, even in the bible, that copious book,
an instance exactly similar to that which then happened in this place; which
ushered in the American war, and gave rise to this anniversary, which has been
so worthily conducted and laudably con^^nued to this day. As hostilities first
began in the town of Lexington, it was thought proper by the worthy and
patriotic minister of that place, with the entire approbation and concurrence
of his respected hearers, to institute a solemn annual commemoration of that
important event; on which the militia has been underarms, military exercises
performed, and a sermon preached to crowded auditories. The whole has been
conducted with great decorum, and to universal acceptance. The Rev. Mr. Clark
preached the first sermon, in which is contained a particular narrative of the
whole transaction; Mr. Cook, of Cambridge, the next; then Mr. Cushing, of
Waltham; Mr. Woodward, of Weston; Mr. Morrill, of Wilmington; Mr. ^ummings, of
Billeri^a; and Mr. Payson, of Chel^^a.


Were we to trace the similitude, it would be no difficult matter to point out
a striking one in several particulars, though not in all. It must be confessed
there are some discrepant circumstances. Thus, a single family was concerned in
the banishment of Joseph; whereas, a whole nation meditated the subjugation or
ruin of the American States.

In the case of Joseph no murder was committed, though originally intended; but
murder has been perpetrated here, with every circumstance of cruel barbarity.
-- In these two instances they differ, but agree in many others.

Joseph's brethren through fear of his future exaltation and aggrandisement,
first intended to murder, and afterward sold him into Egypt. Envy was the
moving cause. And what greatly different excited the British king and his
parliament to meditate and stir up against us, a severe civil war of near eight
years continuance? They were jealous we should one day revolt, become
independent states, and rise to liberties superior to their own.

The elder brethren of the family meditated his ruin; and who but our elder
brethren attempted to despoil us of our liberties, and reduce us to a state of
vassalage? Again, Jacob's sons advanced Joseph to honor and distinction, by the
very means they made use of, to humble, depress or destroy him. So in the
present case, the measures made use of by Britain to enslave the inhabitants of
this country, have accelerated their independency, sovereignty and honor.
Farther, as the great Jehovah overruled the malice and envy of Joseph's
brethren for the good of the whole family and Jewish nation; so the
unprecedented massacre of this day, and the subsequent ravages of the British
troops, through the country, though "meant by them for evil, yet the great
Jehovah has overruled for good," not only to this and the United States of
America, but also to some other kingdoms of the world! And may I not add, that
since the causes were so similar, and the effects also, we in this country
ought to resolve as Joseph did, not so to remember the injury done and
designed, as to ill treat or forbear acts of kindness to the people of Britain;
from whom our ancestors descended, to whom we are consequently related, and
with whom we symbolize in religion, language and laws.

Before we proceed to point out the happy effects of the war just concluded, to
this and other parts of the world, it may be proper to make some strictures on
the d^^trine that is held forth by the text.

This and some similar passages of scripture have been much quoted of late by a
certain new and upstart ^^ct to prove that God is the efficient cause of sin.
-- In support of this novel doctrine, they quote not only my tex^, but such
passages as the following -- " I form the light and create darkness, I make
peace and create evil; I the Lord do all these things". And again; " Is there
evil in the city, and the Lord has not done it?" These passages, methinks, are
greatly wrested. For they refer not to moral but to natural and penal evil, as
has been the confession of the wise and learned in former ages, a very few only
excepted. They are now pressed into the service of a particular sect, who would
make the wondering world be^eve, that they are the authors of new discoveries,
and have unraveled a difficulty which has nonplused the brightest geniuses in
former and latter times! But, pri^e apart, who could suppose that the
abovementioned passages countenance any such sentiment? a sentiment repugnant
to the moral character of the Deity, which subverts the order of nature, and
makes an holy GOD very like to his grand antagonist, the Devil! To suppose that
GOD cannot effect his designs without bringing sin upon the stage, or
influen^ing moral agents to the perpetration of it, is to imagine that all
powerful and perfect Being to be weak and impotent, and altogether such an one
as ourselves!

It is true, the great Jehovah has certain plans of providence which he carries
on, and never wants means to effect. But is it not contrary to the true meaning
of Scripture, and the common sense of mankind, to assert that he is the
efficient cause of sin, and that he influences men to commit it, in order to
effect his designs? There is no need of this; for if good must be brought about
by the wickedness of men, there is forever a sufficient number of moral, free
agents, who, prompted by the devil, and their own hearts lusts, are ready to do
that, which under the superintending providence of God, is overruled and
finally terminates, either to the general good of the system, or to a
particular part of it.

The brethren of Joseph, filled with envy and ambition, could not brook his
dreams, nor bear his party-colored coat; and therefore conceived a design to
murder, or some way get rid of him: But the great GOD, known unto whom are all
his works, from the beginning of the world; whose counsel shall stand, and who
will do all his pleasure, made these same passions subservient to his
particular purpose. They intended to gratify their malice, but He to indulge
his boundless philanthropy and benevolence. Now I would ask. Is there not a
mighty difference between GOD's permitting these brethren the gratification of
their hearts desire, and governing it to the public good, and his being the
efficient cause of their behavior? The latter opinion makes men machines; the
former is consistent with that freedom which is essential to rational beings --
to moral agents.

I have observed, that GOD has general plans of providence, which he is ever
carrying into execution, and which he some times accomplishes through the lusts
and passions of men. -- I will mention a few instances out of very many. -- It
was the will of heaven that a seven years drought should come upon the eastern
world, and that the posterity of Abraham, then in Canaan* should be preserved
from the fatal influence of it. This could not be better effected, in the
common course of things, than by having a prudent man of their own number sent
before them into Egypt, that garden of the world, who, having a foresight of
the impending scarcity and through a variety of adverse fortune, being raised
to distinction and power, should cause the erection of granaries, by stores
seasonably accumulated in which, the posterity of Jacob, as well as others,
should be preserved from the sad consequences of a severe and long continued
scarcity. This scheme was executed by the malice and envy of Jacob's sons, who
sold their brother with no other view than to be rid of his pretended, haughty
and imperious temper. Now, through whose efficiency was this barbarous
banishment brought about? God's? or Satan's? Let scripture and common sense
decide.

Indeed, some persons pretend that God influences to the opus operatum, to the
outward action, but not to the sinfulness of it. This appears to me, a lame
account of the matter. It will not quadrate with the case referred to in the
text. How can we, in that instance, separate the action from the obliquity of
it? To kill, or to banish persons, under some circumstances, is a virtuous
action, a laudable deed, when they have forfeited their lives or merited exile.
But how can the same be done to innocent persons without guilt? And if there
was guilt, to whom is it to be imputed? To God, or to Jacob's sons? Let God be
holy, but every man a sinner.

In after ages, the Jews were to be redeemed from Egypt by an out stretched
arm. The great Jehovah, in that idolatrous country, and emporium of the world,
chose to display his wonderful w^^ks, and his evident superiority to the false
gods of the Heathen. Nothing gave a greater scope for this, than the obstinacy
of Pharaoh, the reigning prince, who refused to let the children of Israel go
out of his dominions, till the most astonishing judgments were sent, and
miracles wrought in the land of Ham! But we are not from hence to conclude that
God by his efficiency produced this pravity of disposition, in the Egygtian
king. All that was necessary, was to raise to the throne, and cause to stand
there a certain man, whose avarice, ambition and tyranny prompted him to detain
the posterity of Israel in his kingdom, till Jehovah demonstrated himself to be
the true God of the universe. There is one objection to this account of the
matter: the scripture asserts, in direct and positive terms, that God hardened
Pharoah's heart. It also says in other places* that he hardened his own heart;
nothing more, therefore, can re^sonably be intended thereby, than that God
permitted him to follow the evil dispositions of his heart, left him exposed to
the temptations of the world and the devil, took from him his holy spirit, and
brought him into such trials, as meeting with a perverse temper, rendered it
more so; not that he used any positive influence in the production of this
event.

Farther, it was the will of heaven, a scheme in providence, that the people of
Israel should be planted down in the land of Canaan. To this end the ancient
inhabitants must be exterminated. They were left therefore, to fill up the
measure of their iniquity, that so the Jews might be justified, in the
destruction of them. To suppose God made them wicked by his own efficiency, is
to imagine that he was reduced to the hard necessity of justifying one sin by
the production of another, than which nothing can be more injurious or absurd.

Again; The Jews after being sometime planted in Canaan become extremely vile;
so that, agreeable to the (...) nature of the divine government, it was
necessary they should be punished by captivity. There were those who were ready
to carry this design into execution. Senacharib undertook the service: but it
was far from his intention, to fulfill the designs or execute the plans of
heaven; all that he meant was to gratify his lust of domination and conquest.
Accordingly we find the Almighty thus declaring, I will punish the fruit of the
stout heart of the king of Assyria. He means not so, neither does his heart
think so; but it is in his heart to destroy, and to cut off nations not a few.

Once more: It was the scheme or plan of providence, to redeem the fallen world
by the advent and sacrifice of Jesus Christ. In order to accomplish this
benevolent plan, the Savior of the world must be put to a cruel and
ignominious death. Judas and the people of the Jews stood ready to accomplish
the deed, which, though nefarious in itself, was productive of the happiest
consequences to the world. The perpetrators were actuated by the worst of
principles. Satan* through the door of avarice, entered into Judas, and St.
Peter declares, that his murderers in general were moved by an evil spirit, and
practiced with wicked hands. -- Him being delivered by the determinate counsel
and foreknowledge of God, ye have taken and by wicked hands have crucified and
slain." -- From these examples it plainly appears, that though there be general
schemes of providence which will be executed; yet we are by no means obliged to
recur to the blasphemous assertions of some late dogmatists, who tell us, that
as the plan was from heaven, the evil principles by which it was accomplished
were from God.

These instances being previously mentioned, and commented on, we shall apply
the whole to the memorable revolution that has lately taken place in this
country.

It was the will of heaven, and agreeable to his general plan, that the
principal part of America should become separate and independent of Britain.

This separation must be brought about, like most other events, by the agency
of men. America ^^st revolt; and some incidents must take place, to induce or
excite them thus to do. The avarice and tyranny of Britain soon led them to
this. Instigated by those restless desires, they imposed heavy burdens
grievous to be borne; revoked our charters, shut up our ports; changed the mode
of criminal prosecution; quartered a body of armed men upon us, who insulted
the inhabitants; and finally, to complete the system of oppression, excited the
dogs of war, the sons of violence, to butcher innocent and unoffending men. The
first attack was made upon the militia of this town, who, only because they
appeared in arms, and thereby demonstrated that they would not be tame
spectators of every outrage, insult and abus^, were, in a most inhuman manner,
cut down, and eight of them had their souls instantly dislodged from their
bodies. As soon as the fame of this barbarous deed had reached the distant
colonies, all America rose as one man to arms, to avenge the wrong done to
their fellow-countrymen! The British troops, indeed, marked their progress
through this and the neighboring towns on that memorable day, which we now
solemnize, with such characters, of unheard of barbarity, that all to whose
ears it came, were ready to say, that no such deed had been done in America
since its first settlement to that time. I am sensible, that acts of greater
barbarity in themselves considered, have sometimes been committed against the
Americans by the aboriginals of the country. But still, when all circumstances
are duly considered, the affair at Lexingt^n may be pronounced cruel beyond a
parallel. This will appear, if we for a moment reflect upon the cause and the
author^ of this detestable deed. The indian^ acted no otherways than might
reasonably be expected. ^ntut^red and destitute of civilization, they always
made war with every circumstance of fer^city; it was their nature and agreeable
to their modes and habits of life. Besides, they were p^culiarly incensed
against the English inhabitants, because they ousted them from their old
possessions, and interrupted their fishing, ^u^^ing, etc. -- But nothing of
this sort can be ple^d in extennation of the crimes of the Britons, in ^iring
on the Militia of Lexington. They value themselves on their polite^^ss and
humanity, and certainly had no provocation thus to behave* except it be a
provocation for others to hold arm^ in their fight. The Americans were never
indebted to Britain for the soil they now possess; they purchased it with their
own money, and cultivated it with their own hand^. It was extremely cruel,
after they had driven our forefathers from Europe into the wilds of America, to
pursue their sons, and slaughter them in heap^, for no other crime than
ten^ciously adh^ring to their liberties and inheritance, which were transmitted
to them from their ancestors. Upon a review of these several p^rticulars, we
may be justified in saying, "no such deed had been done in this country since
it was inhabited by emigrants from Britain, to that time." Heaven, it seems,
resented it, together with their other barbarous conduct toward this people;
for when the appeal was made to him, and the dispu^^ wa^ to b^ ^^cided by the
sword; he has given the cause to AMERICAN


And having their souls filled with an extrem^ abhorrence of it, were ready to
cry out in the language of Jacob, when he reflected on the cruelty of Simeon
and Levi; " O my soul, come not thou into their secret, unto their assembly,
mine honor, be thou not united; for in their anger they s^ew a man, and in
their self will dug down a wall. Cursed be their anger for it was fierce,
and their wrath for it was cruel." From this wanton and unprovoked massacre,
the American war took its rise, and barbarous rage effected what no other
consideration could have done; it combined a large nation in arms, though of
somewhat different customs, laws, religion and manners; and what is still more
wonderful, combined them against a powerful and warlike kingdom, nearly related
by blood*

The war thus commenced, went forward with tedious progression, and with
various fortune, till* under the conduct of a kind providence, it has at length
ended in independency and peace! Now, though the general plan was evidently of
God, to emancipate America from the bondage of Britain, who deprived their
forefathers of liberty of conscience, under the intollerant spirit of a
persecuting Land, and in this way caused them to seek an assylum in this then
howling wilderness; and who with the same spirit pursued ^s their sons over the
ocean, and had they not been obstructed, would never have desisted from their
attempts, till they had made us hewers of wood and drawers of water, to haughty
and imperious taskmasters: yet the evil spirit which induced them to these
measures, can not be imputed to God* but to Satan and to their own corrupt
hearts -- " As God cannot be tempted of evil, so neither does he tempt any man;
but every man is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lusts, and enticed:
surely the wrath of man shall praise him, and the remainder of wrath he will
restrain" It is his prerogative to educe good from evil; to reduce the greatest
excentrici^ies to order, to frustrate the deepest laid schemes, to turn the
wisest counsels into foolishness, and to make wicked men, quite beside their
own intentions, the execu^^oners of his pleasure! " O the depth of the riches
both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how unsearchable are his judgments,
and his ways past finding (...)!" This ^^^lamation of the Apostle is remarkably
verified in the rise, progress and conclusion of the late war. The king of
Britain meant one thing, but the KING of HEAVEN another. The former intended to
b^ing us to his feet, and extort a revenue from us, to maintain a band of idle
pensioners, the tools of government; but the latter meant to bring about as at
this day, to make a great and numerous people (corrupt indeed, for which we
have been severely chastised) the depositaries of that liberty which is the
incontestible birthright and peculium of man; of that liberty which has
forsaken the greater part of the world, flown over the Atlantic and now
domesticates itself with us.

I shall in the last place observe, that as God mean^ these evil things for
good; and great good has already resulted therefrom, and there is much greater
in reversion; the consideration thereof should, as in the case of Joseph,
reconcile us to our brethren of Britain, divest our breasts of all emotions of
resentment, or revenge, and induce us, upon their return to a pacific temper,
to maintain a friendly intercourse with them. This part of the Sermon may
probably be excepted against, as not being fully understood. To prevent
mistakes, therefore, let it be observed, that the pre^^her had no intention to
recommend the reception of the Refugees, or to persuade the people of the
Massachusetts so far to overl^ok the vile conduct of those persons, who went
out from u^, (...) up against u^, and did all in their power to ruin and ^ve
us, (...) to receive them into their ^os^^^ -- This was (...) ^^om hi^ design.
He (...) not conceive t^^^ the preli^^^arie^ (...) peace oblige them so to do.
From ^rusing those article* he is persuaded (...) is finally (...) to the
option of the different Stat^^ This (...) therefore depend on the sentiments of
the people at large, and the (...) of the several Legi^^ature^. It is to be
hoped the^ will be ^^vinely directed. It the^ p^each^r may be permitted to
express his own sentiments on a matter so differently thought of, be should
certainly say, that many of the Absentees have conducted so ill, so effensively
to the people of the United States, that it is, by no means reasonable, that
they should ever be permitted to return to their former poss^ssions, even
though they should be willing to pay the bona fide price which was paid by the
present possessors. This, however, must be the subject of free discussion in
our several Legisl^tures. To them I trust, the people at large will be willing
to refer it, and acquiesce in their determination.

As to the people of Britain, the proper inhabitants before the war, there can
be no kind of difficulty. They certainly ough^ to be forgiven, and rest^red to
our charity, as they have virtu^lly acknowledged their fa^les in conceding to
reasonable terms of peace. How far an intimate conne^ion with them in trade and
commerce, will be advantageous to this country, is left to time and wiser head^
to determine. Such is the nature of mankind in general* that they soon overlook
the greatest* ^^ri^^, when th^se who perpetrated them cease their offenses; and
there is no doubt thi^ will be the case i^ fu^ure times between Britain and
America. But sopp^sing it should, this one thing may with truth be affirmed,
that the copious consumption of their luxu^ies ca^ never be profitable to
America. Though with a^l the world we may ^de, yet let i^^^stry prevail, and
our exports (...) our imports, ^ise we shall ever be poor and miserable.


At least, we ought to forgive them, bear them no hatred, and pray to God that
none of the evil they have done us, may finally be laid to their charge. This I
know is a hard duty, but it is such as we are bound to comply with. As a
preacher of the gospel I am obliged to recommend it to whomsoever I have the
honor publicly to speak. If we feel the smart of the blows inflicted, the duty
of forgiveness is still more difficult. Now this is our case. The sufferings of
America by the hands of Britain are still felt, and they have been cruelly
severe. A little recollection will soon convince us all of this. You my
brethren of this town, want no monitor to stir up your minds, nor lively
description to affect your hearts at the do^eful tragedy which was here
perpetrated. Though eight years have since rolled away, yet your souls have a
lively remembrance of your affliction and misery, of the wormwood and gail that
were contained in that bitter cup, of which yo^ were compelled to drink large
draughts! -- Those missive ba^ls which felled eight or ten of your number to
the ground, and which were discharged without provocation, ushered in a scene
of havoc and destruction through that dreadful day which, when brought full to
view, still harrows those bosoms that are softened with compassion, and causes
the crystal, briny tears to flow! Well may you all shed a tear over the
mouldering urns of your murdered friends on this anniversary, especially when
you call to mind the tragical circumstances attending their exit, the cause in
which they fell, and the glorious events that have resulted from their deaths!
-- On this occasion, you may be allowed to shed both the tears of sorrow and of
joy; of sorrow, when you consider how dreadful it was to have your relations
and friends sent instantaneously, and perhaps unexpectedly, to the righteous
bar of God! How lamentable! how affecting the sight! to see husbands, sons and
fathers lying in their gore, pale and breathless, s^^ched away, without
opportunity of going through the parting ceremony, or so much as bidding the
long farewell; at once deprived of their company, their support and solace; and
abandoned to all the wretchedness of wo^! I^ this had happened in the common
course of providence, and after the usual premonitions, it would have been a
mighty mitigation. But to have the atrocious deed unexpectedly perpetrated, and
that not by a common enemy, but by those who were relations and pretended
friends, with whom heretofore we have had sweet communication and now had no
sufficient cause to hurt, much less to kill, how aggravating the circumstance,
how pungent the grief! For these reasons you are excited, on this occasion, to
shed tears of grief; and also, that your friends had not lived to share with
you the important blessings of independency and peace, to which they so greatly
contributed. -- But then, on other accounts, you are called to shed the tears
of joy: In particular, that your friends and townsmen died in so good a cause,
that they fell the first victims, and were made a sacrifice for the good of
their country. Every generous and disinterested soul, forgetting the ties of
blood, is prompted thus to do. Even the mothers of heroic youths, among the
Romans* though of the tender sex, have been known to rejoice that their sons
were slain in battle, and died in the cause and for the honor of their country!
Quam dulce et decorum est, pro patria mori, was a principle with them. It is
also a maxim of reason and no less so of the gospel, that it is better that one
man, nay that many men should die, than that the whole nation should perish.
Since then, the murder here committed by the British troops, has been followed
with happy consequences, has preserved this country from slavery or
destruction, the consideration thereof should cause townsmen, and even
relations to dry up their tears of sorrow, and excite them to weep tears of joy.

But when I have mentioned the death of your friends, I have told but a part of
the bitter tale. Not content with killing your townsmen, they were prompted by
Satan, to burn your houses and destroy your property, Those who in the morning
of that fated day, arose and blessed themselves that they were possessed of
com^^^^ble (...), the fruit of former toil* were* (...) deprived of their
accommodations, had not, like our divine Redeemer, where to lay their heads,
saw their dwellings consumed to ashes, and the smoke ascending to darken and
insult the face of day! And this which happened to you in the first instance,
has been the bitter portion of many others on the continent. Need I tell you of
the towns, fair and populous, that have been consumed by fi^e in the wantonness
of British rage? What numbers of our brave men, the young, the healthy and
robust, the boast of their country, the pride of their parents, and the flower
of the army, have miserably perished in jails and prison-ships, through neglect
and studied cruelty, for want of wholesome provision and fresh air? Should I
paint in proper colors the dreadful scenes of carnage, the horrid tortures
which, with more than diabolical malice, were inflicted on our countrymen, and
women and children, in some of our new-settled plantations, it would renew your
grief, excite the tenderest emotions, and wring your breasts with the keenest
anguish! How many women have been ravished and maids debauched in the course of
this unhappy war? What enormous taxes have been l^id upon us, and how
oppressive the load we have borne in defense of our liberties and lives. That
there is no exaggeration in the above representation is well known to all who
have registered the events of the war in their memories. Five or six large
towns have been burned by the enemy, with an immense quantity of valuable
effects. Among these were Charlestown, Nor^olk, Falmouth, Danbury* Esopus and
its environs, etc. besides a number of private buildings in many other towns.

The sufferings of our people captivated and imprisoned by the enemy, have been
severe beyond example. Witness, particularly, those who were carried into New
York, and especially those that were captivated at Fort Washington, of whom
eight or ten died every day. The dreadful sufferings of the people on the
Susqu^hannah, are still fresh in our memories, and the recollection causes the
blood still to run cold in our veins! Of the^^^ and rapes New Jersey and the
Caroli^a^ had large and sorrowful experience; though none of these things
disheartened them! And of taxes, which have been incredibly heavy on all, none
have paid a larger proportion than the inhabitants of Massachusetts. When the
heavy debt contracted by the war will be paid, the wisest po^^^^^^n cannot tell.




But notwithstanding all this, it is certainly our duty to forgive, if not to
forget. To forget, indeed, I know is not our duty. Sooner may our right hands
forget their cunning, than forget thee and thy unparallelled sufferings, O my
country! Indeed, whilst the vestiges of learning* and the force of the English
language remain, it is impossible they should be forgotten. For such writings
have been composed, and such monuments erected, as will perpetua^e the
distresses of this country, and the mighty exertions they have made for their
liberties, to the last period of time. The annals of America will stand
distinguished among all the nations of literature, till " the angel, with one
foot on the sea, and another on the earth, shall lift up his hand to Heaven,
and swear by him that lives forever and ever, that time shall be no longer!
Even our tender offspring, in future times, will stand around the knees of
their parents, and with faultering accents ask, what meant the military
exercises, and the yearly meetings, on the nineteenth of April, at Lexington?
Their fathers, under the operation of various passions, will inform them, that
then began, in that place, those hostilities, which, in progress of events,
brought on the present happy settlement; the great privileges they now enjoy.
The children, satisfied with the pleasing narration, will bless the memory of
their virtuous ancestors, and sacredly hand down the important tale, from
generation to generation, till children shall be no more!

But though it be impossible to forget the late transactions on the stage of
America, -- yet certainly the laws of Christianity oblige us to forgive. The
duty of forgiveness Heaven does not extend so far as to oblige us to make the
offenders our confidents and friends -- to trust them for the future, or
receive them into our intimate communion: it only requires, that we bear them
no ill will -- take no steps for revenge -- and recommend them to the mercy of
God. We must bless them that curse us, and pray for them that despitefully use
and entreat us, if we would be the children of our Father in Heaven, who causes
his sun to rise on the evil, and on the good, and sends rain on the just, and
on the unjust. If we are his children, and possessed with a humane and
benevolent heart, we shall bitterly lament those wars and fightings, which the
lusts of men create. Great allowances are to be made for the weaknesses and
follies of mankind. As we are human, and know our own frailties, we ought to be
indulgent to the follies and vices of others. -- Homo sum, et nihil humanum a
me alienum puto, -- was the modest saying of an ancient sage. On this
principle, we ought ever to ^ct. -- Reason requires it, and scripture demands
it* Joseph, educated in the Jewish religion, teaches us, that in consideration
of the great good that resulted from his brethren's envy, he should overlook
and forgive the most aggravated personal offense. -- But a greater than Joseph
is here. St. Stephen, when just expiring under the cruel attacks of his
enemies, breathed out this benevolent prayer, Lord, lay not this sin to their
charge! And a greater than Stephen, even the Lord Jesus* just before he was put
to a cruel death by his persecutors, preferred this petition to God, which
contained the only excuse that could possibly be made for them; -- Father,
forgive them, for they know not what they do! Let us go and do likewise. Shall
we, who profess ourselves Christians, and are assured, that unless we forgive
men their trespasses, our heavenly father will not forgive our's; which are
greatly aggravated and daily committed, refuse to forgive* or retain our
resentment against the people of Britain? God forbid! May we honor the manes of
our departed friends who died in the war, and most cordially at the same time
forgive the perpetrators of those evil deeds, in consideration of the great
good that has arisen therefrom, not only to this but to some other parts of the
world.

Now, would it not be deemed impertinent or superfluous, I could easily point
out the great advantage that has accrued to some other countries as well as to
this from the late American war. Before the contest with this western world,
the spirit and the idea of liberty, was almost lost from Europe, as it had been
long before from Asia and Africa. This dispute aroused it in Ireland, who
before were fettered in chains of severe bondage. Poverty and oppression
reigned in that island. Their trade was most invidiously restricted; pensioners
were saddled upon them; their taxes were heavy, and their rents from landlords
who lived in England, enormous; by means of all which, the common ranks of
people became excessively poor, and from the greatest industry could scarcely
procure a mouthful of meat for themselves and family more than once a week. But
seeing the spirit raging in America, they caught the heavenly fire, and with
(...) in their hands made a bold demand of their rights, and never desisted*
till England granted their request, unfettered their trade, and now permit them
to live upon terms of reciprocity with themselves! A glorious effect of the
American war! Farther, the king of France has given free toleration to his
Protestant subjects, and allows them to build their churches, undisturbed in
any part of his kingdom! The king of Spain has put an end to the Inquisition;
and from the ratified articles of peace between these two latter kingdoms and
Britain, it should seem, that it is made upon more liberal principles than
commonly has been between Protestant and Popish kingdoms. But what is the most
considerable, the confederated States of America have in consequence of our
struggles, become free, sovereign and independent Independency and freedom are
the wish of all men. Freedom, indeed, may be abused to purposes of
licentiousness, and what other blessing may not be abused? But, if it be not
our own fault, we may now be the happiest people upon the face of the globe!
Instead of being controuled by others, at three thousand miles distance, we now
have it in our power to rule and govern ourselves, to impose our own taxes,
choose all our officers, regulate our internal police, and rise under the
influence of our virtues, to eminent distinction and renown!

We have at present a happy constitution of government, framed by wise men and
accepted by a majority of the people at large. If we adhere to the spirit of
it, and labor to give energy to the laws, and dignity to the governing
authority, by electing wise men and true, and then submitting cheerfully to
their commands, we shall doubtless taste the sweets of that liberty for which
we have bled at every vein.

It is not only natural for nations to wish to be independent, as the minor
pants for twenty-one; but it must be highly eligible and advantageous to be
separated from Britain. Whilst connected with them our peace and virtue would
ever have been in danger. Their examples would have had a pernicious influence
on our morals. Their extensive comme^ce has given them wealth, and wealth by a
natural causality has produced luxury; and luxury, effeminacy. These vices are
extremely contagious; and if we had been connected with and dependent on them,
should have been very prone to have aped them in their vices as well as in
their virtues; and such vices as those abovementioned, would have been highly
detrimental to an infant country. May God long preserve us from them.

Besides, being in connection with them, we must frequently have been embroiled
in their broils; which we know in time past have been frequent and numerous;
and probably will be so for the future.

Monarchies are often in war, with a view to extend the domains of a single
man, whilst Commonwealths are na^urally pacific; because the benefit resulting
from conquest, being divided among the ruling body, which is numerous and often
shifted, or among the community at large, is not a sufficient stimu^us to war.
-- Hence Holland, Switzerland, and other republican states are never, except
through necessity, engaged in national disputes; though the latter republic, it
is well known, furnishes a plenty of the best soldiers, who are often the
mercinary troops of crowned heads.

Having therefore assumed republican governments, and being now separated from
Britain, and not obliged to follow her inc^ination or her fortune, there is the
highest probability, that we shall enjoy a lasting, if not a perpetual peace;
and that this would be a precious boon, a glorious advantage, we must needs be
convinced from the late long continued horrors of war; for if war be a judgment
(which by sad experience we all know to be fact) doub^less peace is a blessing.
If we are in peace we shall be at leisure for the noblest purposes; for the
service of God; for being delivered out of the hands of our enemies, we may
serve him without fear, in righteousness and holiness all the days of our
lives; -- for the cultivation of the arts and sciences, which never flourish in
a time of war; -- for the extension of commerce and a lucrative navigation"; --
for the improvement of agriculture; and the diffusion of the blessings of good
government, and liberty to all around us.

When rapt into future times, we contemplate the great things which will be
acted on the stage of America; how she will bless her numerous sons; how
produce legislators, politicians, orators and poets, equal to the most renowned
of antiq^ity, and how she will rise to opulence, fame and glory; unless it be
her own fault, we must feel ourselves not only willing to forgive the people of
Britain, who by the infatuation of their councils, have been the undesigned
instruments of so much good; but can also bless God, most heartily, that he has
been so ki^d to us, whilst in pleasing gratitude we can adopt the words of the
prophet, and with but a little alteration, say, " Happy art thou, O America!
who is like unto thee, O people saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and
who is the sword of thine excellency!"

I cannot, with decency, conclude without addressing myself to the gentlemen
now in arms: --

RESPECTABLE SIRS,

WHILST we revere your character, as soldiers, we cannot but lament those lusts
and passions of men which make your profession necessary, and entitle you to
deserved esteem.

In the present state of the world, no body of men is more important than that
which is acquainted with the dexterous use of the instruments of death, and has
studied the arts of killing! A well regulated militia is the glory and defense
of every country. They are a greater security than standing armies, who, though
necessary in time of war, are ever dangerous in peace. The liberties of Athens,
of Rome, of Sweden, and of many other places, have been destroyed by them. Our
rulers, knowing their pernicious influence in other parts of the world, have
resolved they shall not be maintained here in times of peace. Soon, therefore,
may we expect to hear that our army is disbanded, and then our dependence will
be altogether on the militia. And indeed on whom can we rely for safety better
than on them? Memorable have been their exploits in former times. It was by the
militia that England anciently penetrated to the gates of Paris, took their
fleurs de lis, and almost conquered that great and potent kingdom. And what
noble feats have they not performed during the progress of the war but lately
finished? Principally by their exertions Burgoyne and his powerful army were
captiva^ed, and lost their power to hurt. When I thus commend our militias, I
certainly mean no reflection on our standing army. Great is their merit and
much have they done, under Washington one of the wisest and best of generals
toward bringing forward the present happy era. Their toils and labors, their
patience and perseverance, under peculiar discouragements, are unexampled in
history! To such an height of discipline and skill, of bravery and prowess,
have they arrived, that we should not fear to have them meet in the open field,
an equal number of the best veteran troops in the world. A large British army
was cooped up by them, and with the assistance of the French, Cornwallis, with
his numerous host, fell an easy prey to their maneuvers and undaunted courage.
Now that they are about to leave the camp, with their brows encircled with the
laurels of victory, may they cheerfully return to the peaceful walks of life,
and by the several States who employed them, have equal justice done, and a
reasonable compensation for all their former sufferings.
Considering, therefore, gentlemen, the importance of your character and the
expectations of the people, you will be persuaded to persevere in measures for
the acquirement of greater military capacity to do good. Peace will justify no
relaxation in this regard. As the country, for ought we know, may soon be
attacked, and need your assistance, so we trust you will labor to be qualified
and disposed to give it. To your conduct, under GOD, we are much indebted for
the present independent station we hold among the nations of the earth; for
here the corner stone thereof was laid. As you early stepped forth, lent your aid
to your country, and made a sacrifice in her cause, at a time when she needed
the assistance of all her sons; so we trust, should there be any future call,
you will be prompt in obedience to it. How glorious to be hailed, like
Camillus, the saviors of your country!

The deaths of those who from your body were slain, as on this day, by British
cruelty, have been suitably noticed and resented; and that you have not yet
forgotten them is evident from your appearing in hostile array in the house of
God.

You have acted a laudable part in observing this anniversary to the present
day. It has answered a most valuable political purpose, as well as demonstrated
a decent respect to the memory of those who first bled in their country's
cause. What may be the line of propriety for the future, I shall not take upon
me to say, and for this reason, because I do not particularly know. This,
however, I may be permitted to observe in general, that the ends of this
institution being chiefly secured, the call for its continuance cannot be
great. To you it belongs to determine, and to you it is left. But if you
continue the solemnization of the anniversary, yet you will not perpetuate your
resentment against the inhabitants of Britain. It is unbecoming the character,
both of ch^istians and soldiers so to do. As the good soldier is brave in war,
he is no less humane and gentle in peace. " Better is he that rules his spirit
than he that takes a city." Whilst, therefore, you bless the ashes of your
departed friends* you will eradicate from your breasts the spirit of revenge,
and all forbidden resentment to the living; and exert yourselves so to pass
through life, that when death shall lay its cold hand upon you, and call you
hence, you may be ripened for, and through grace in the divine Redeemer, be
admited to that glorious world, where wars and fightings never enter, where
harmony and love perpetually reign!

And now turning myself to this numerous assembly, I would, in the fullness of
my heart, congratulate you on the return of peace with its olive branch, after
the toils and perplexi^ies, the strates and horrors of mo^e than a seven years
war! Hail my happy countrymen, at length emancipated from the slave^y that was
designed for you! The shackles are knocked off; the chain that was to have
bound u^ in perpetual bondage, was marr^d in the forge, the snare is broken and
we have escaped! And not only escaped, but are placed on the stable rock of
independence, and are brought to an honorable and advantageous peace. The
Parliament of Britain seem to be discontented, and murmur at the peace, as
being made, in their view* on terms ingl^rious to the nation. But be this as it
will surely we, of this country, have the utmost reason to acquiesce in it, and
with a mixture of joy and astonishment, take notice of the hand of Providence
in accelerating this important event, and establishing it on terms so honorable
to America. Our most sanguine wishes are gratified, and expectations out done!
Who could have thought, when the object in dispute, was of such magnitude, that
Britain would so soon desist from her claims, consent to the dismemberment of
the empire, and make so large a proportion of it, independent! That we possess
a share in the fishery, both in the gulf of St. Laurence and on the Ba^ks of
Newfoundland; -- that a moiety of all the great Lakes to the Westward, falls
within our limits, which gives us the advantage of a lucrative inland
navigation, and an interest in the furr trade; -- that our boundaries are so
extensive -- and that the British troop^ are to evacuate every part of
confederated America, which they possessed during the war, New York. Long
Island and Peno^scot, is under GOD* to be ascribed to the valor and heroism of
our army, to the wisdom and unwearied exertions of our ambassadors. This event
plainly demonstrates, that we can shine in the cabinet, as well as in the
field; that we are wise in council, as well as mighty in war. This country
will, I doubt not, retain a lasting and grateful remembrance of those worthies*
both in civil and military departments, through whose vigorous and persevering
efforts, we enjoy so glorio^s a peace, and so pleasing a prospect of future
good*


That we may perceive in the most lively manner, the blessedness of our present
situation, and keenly relish the joy of the day, we need only recollect the
horrors of that dreadful day, when the war first broke out in this place, and
contrast them with the present smiling aspect of divine providence. That was a
day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of clouds and thick darkness, as the
morning spread upon the mountains; when the people were much pained, and all
faces gathered blackness. Many of you heard the sound of the trumpet, and the
alarm of war; and saw the doleful spectacle of garments rolled in blood! you
saw your friends pale in death, and heard their dying groans! Distressed at
what had already happened, you were no less anxious for the future. Sadness sat
brooding on every face, and sorrow penetrated deep into every heart. But now
the scene is mightily reversed -- the incumbent gloom is dispelled, and the
brightest prospects open to view. That never to be forgotten morn, was ushered
in by the discharge of musketry, loaded with the instruments of death! But this
opened with the feu de joye, which diffused agreeable sensations through the
soul. On that day, the British standard erected, presented a sickening prospect
to the free born sons of Massachusetts: but on this, the thirteen stripes of
the American flag, waving and wantoning in the wind, exhilirate the heart, and
cause the pulse of freedom to beat high. On that doleful day, the floor of this
sacred house was crimsoned with the blood of our murdered friends, and spread
over with their mangled corpses; but on this, it is trod by the feet of devout
worshippers, who come hither in crowds to express their gratitude to that God
who has beheld us with a propitious eye, appeared for our help, and turned this
anniversary from sorrow to joy, and from mourning into a good day! That day saw
some of the best characters of the province proscribed, doomed to destruction,
and hunted like partridges on the mountains; but this auspicious one beholds
them advanced to the first seats of the government, and enjoying the confidence
and reward of an obliged people. When the British troops came from Boston, it
is believed that one part of their business was to seize, if possible, his
Excellency John Hancock, Esquire our present Governor, and the honorable Samuel
Adams, who, by their opposition to British tyranny, had rendered themselves
obnoxious; and were known then to be in Lexington. They happily escaped out of
their hands. For having, by private posts, dispatched from Boston, received
intelligence of the movement of a detachment of the troops, with the probable
object of their view, those gentlemen arose from their beds in the dead of
night, decamped, and thus escaped. They were reserved to a better end, even to
govern and bless that people with their counsels, to whose deliverance from
slavery they so greatly contributed. Truly laudable was the conduct of his
Excellency in making his appearance in the house of GOD on this day. His
presence increased the general joy, as it gave us an opportunity of sharing it
with one, who had largely partook in the distresses of his country, lamented in
all their sorrows, and administered to multitudes the balm of consolation. There
was also a great propriety in his coming up to the house of GOD with others, to
testify his thankfulness to Jehovah, on this occasion, as this was the town
where his pious ancestors lived; as he was upon the spot when hostilities were
first commenced; as he was designed to have been one of the first victims to
their rage; as they came partly in pursuit of him, and he experienced the
divine favor in his signal preservation on that day. The example was such as
ought ever to be set by those in power, under similar circumstances. May his
Excellency long live to taste the sweets of that liberty, for the obtainme^t of
which he has made a great sacrifice; and this Commonwealth never want a
Governor to animate them to the worship of God by his own example.
Thus the stones which the British builders refused, and designed to break to
pieces, have, in our political edifice, become the head stones of the corner!
This is the Lord's doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes! This is the
operation of that God who appeared for the Jews, when destined to slaughter,
promoted Mordecai to the highest post of the kingdom, and inflicted on an
haughty Haman, the punishment due to his crimes -- Thus by the kind providence
of that God who disposes the fate of nations, and causes kingdoms to rise and
fall at his pleasure, we are b^ought to the summit of our earthly wishes, and
have lived to see what many others disired, but were not permitted to behold,
by reason of death. Since our lives are lengthened out to this glorious epoch;
since we have seen the blood here shed, cleansed by that God, who abominates
murder and all acts of cruelty; let pious gratitude rise from the altar of our
hearts to the King of kings, and the most substantial obed^ence to his laws
adorn our external conduct. Let us all, now laying aside every other
contention, strive only to do most for that Being who has saved us from
slavery, redeemed our lives from destruction, and crowned us with loving
kindness and tender mercies. As the war is brought to a conclusion, let us
attend to the arts of peace, for which we have so blessed an opportunity.

Since we can now sit under our own vines and fig trees, having none to disturb
us, or make us afraid, let us diligently cultivate the soil which has been
watered by the blood of our countrymen; and beg of God that he would cause the
earth to yield her increase, and the trees their fruit; that he would give us
friutfu^ seasons, and plentiful crops: for then soon will our scarcity be
followed with redundancy, and America supply the deficiencies of others. May
navigation, trade and commerce flourish; and by an attention to every source of
wealth, may we have such streams flow in upon us, as shall enable us to
discharge all our dues, and give us distinction among the nations of the earth.
Above all things, may we seek after true repentance, and peace with God, which,
alone, will stand us in stead, when the revolutions of kingdoms and empires
shall cease; "when the sun shall grow dim with age, and nature sink in years."
Nothing, on this side of eternity, can give us lasting content, if we have not
peace within; -- little shall we be bettered by peace with a foreign enemy. In
the revolution of a few years, we must follow our departed friends, and be
unconscious to terrestial scenes. Let us, therefore, seek peace with God
through Jesus Christ, the great peacemaker; who has made both Jew and Gentile
one, and made peace by the blood of his cross; -- that so when we are called
away from the enjoyments of American citizens, we may be made free of the city
of the New-Jerusalem, and become the denisons of the Zion that is above.

AMEN.
APPENDIX. LEXINGTON, 22 d April, 1783.
NEITHER the public nor the world, at this time, need to be informed, that the
late great and affecting contest, between Britain and America, opened in
Lexington, by the unprovoked massacre of a number of its inhabitants,
perpetrated by a body of British troops, on the nineteenth of April, 1775.

This distressing day has been unto us for a memorial. As such it has been
statedly observed in this place, as an important anniversary, through the
course of the late war, by a respectable appearance of the militia in arms, and
a solemn assembly of the whole congregation in the house of GOD, to drop a tear
upon the graves and mourn over the ashes of our slaughtered friends,
religiously to notice and acknowledge the hand of GOD, -- humbly to express our
confidence in him, as the righteous and powerful avenger of injured innocence,
and devoutly to implore his presence and aid in the cause of our country, of
posterity, and mankind.

It has pleased him, who is governor amongst the nations, to behold the state
of an oppressed land, to hear the prayers of an afflicted people, to give them
to see their desires upon their enemies, and to rejoice in his salvation, by
bringing the war to an happy issue, and granting them the pleasing prospect of
the blessings of a peace, in which all their rights and claims, as free,
sovereign states, and an independent nation, are established upon a permanent
foundation.

Our sorrow being thus turned into joy, and our mourning into songs of praise
-- decently and religiously to express the fullness of our hearts, upon this
great and joyful occasion, the interesting anniversary on Saturday last, was
observed and celebrated in the following manner, viz.

The dawn of the day was ushered in by the ringing of the bell. -- The officers
of the town militia, with a large number of the inhabitants, being collected
together -- at five o'clock (the time when the Britons made their approach,
and, without notice or provocation, inhumanly fired upon the people of this
town) eight cannon, from the artillery, commanded by Captain Oliver Brown, were
discharged, in memory of eight of our brethren, who fell the first victims to
the oppressor's cruelty, and martyrs in the cause of liberty, America, and
mankind.

At the rising of the sun, a large flag of the United States appeared displayed
over the house of Captain Brown, near the meeting house and place of parade,
where our brethren were slain, and thirteen cannon were discharged in
commemoration of that spirit of liberty, patriotism and bravery, which, upon
that affecting event, fired the American's breast, and catching from soul to
soul, diffused itself through this wide extended continent, and inspired the
inhabitants of thirteen of the (then) colonies of America, as one man, to ris^
and revenge their brethren's blood; and, in a solemn appeal to heaven, at the
point of the sword, to assert, support and defend their own, and their
country's rights.

Between twelve and one, on the arrival of the Governor, (who was present and a
witness of the tragical scene, which gave rise to this anniversary, and who
greatly added to the joy of the day by honoring the solemnity with his
presence) a number of cannon were discharged, as a token of respect from the
inhabitants of the town and a salute to his EXCELLENCY.

At two o'clock, a large number of the inhabitants (several of whom in years
past had borne commissions from this or the United States) turning out as
volunteers, in honor to the day, assembled in arms; and being embodied under
the conduct of the present officers of the militia, performed several military
maneuvres to good acceptance.

Precisely at three o'clock, the company, commanded by Capt. Munroe, appeared
at the house of the Rev. Mr. Clark, and from thence escorted his Excellency the
Governor, and a large number of gentlemen in the ministry, and other gentlemen
of character, to the meeting house, to attend divine service.

As the company, with the procession, were marching to the house of GOD,
thirteen cannon were discharged, in memory of the wisdom, firmness and
patriotism of the thirteen colonies, in declaring themselves free, sovereign
and independent states, and consolidating their union and strength into one
body for glory and defense, as a nation, by articles of a confederation,
founded in principles of wisdom and equity, virtue and liberty, supported by
the experience of ages, and approving itself to the common sense of mankind.

In the house of divine worship, prayers and thanksgivings were devoutly
addressed to that God who has been with his people in distress, who has
carried them through, and who, alone, is to be exalted in their salvation; and an
excellent and well adapted sermon, preached by the Rev. Mr. Adams, of
Lunenburgh* to a very crowded and attentive audience, from Genesis 50.20 But as
for you, ye thought evil against me, but God meant it for good, etc. The
exercise was closed with a psalm and an anthem, pertinent to the joyful
occasion.

After divine service, the procession was escorted back to the Rev. Mr.
Clark's* by the company in arms, and three vollies fired, as a salute to his
Excellency and the other gentlemen of the procession.

The military company then returned to the place of parade, when thirteen
cannon were discharged, to celebrate the glory of victory and the joy of peace,
to the Thirteen United States of America, now delivered from the calamities of
war, restored to the blessings of peace, and established in their freedom,
independence and sovereignty, as States and a Nation.

The rejoicings of the day were closed with a parting salute of three vollies,
by the company in arms; and the discharge of a cannon, and the striking of the
flag at the setting of the sun.


