TWO EPISTLES TO THE YOUTH OF NORWICH MONTHLY MEETING, IN GREAT BRITAIN.

Meeting for Sufferings in Philadelphia, Third Month, 1783.
ALTHOUGH the following pertinent and interesting Advices are addressed only to
the Youth of the Meeting of which the well concerned Authors were Members, yet
appearing to be properly adapted to general Service, we are induced from the
like religious Motives, with much Affection, earnestly to recommend them to the
serious Perusal and close Attention of the Youth within the Compass of our
Yearly Meeting for Pennsylvania and New Jersey, etc.

AN AFFECTIONATE ADDRESS TO THE YOUTH OF NORWICH MONTHLY MEETING.

Thy People shall be my People, and thy God my God. Ruth i. 16. And thou
Solomon, my Son, know thou the God of thy Father. 1 Chronicles. xxviii. 9. I have no
greater Joy than to hear that my Children walk in the Truth. 3 John, Verse 4.
THE THIRD EDITION.

PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED AND SOLD BY JOSEPH CRUKSHANK, IN MARKET-STREET, BETWEEN
SECOND AND THIRD-STREETS. 1783.

AN AFFECTIONATE ADDRESS, etc.
My dear young Friends, fellow Members of the same Meeting,
IT is not that suitable advice has not been administered to every state and
condition, that induces me to make this address; but as the connection between
us may occasion this to be read, while advices more worthy may escape notice, I
trust it will sufficiently justify me in thus attempting to impart some things,
wherein I apprehend your present and future welfare is much concerned.

I would, however, first premise, that all will allow the most important
concern to us, in this life, is to endeavor after such a state of mind, that
we may be enabled so to live and conduct ourselves in this world, as that all
our actions may tend to render us fit companions for men here, and for purified
and blessed spirits hereafter: our existence will else be of no value, no other
pursuit being worthy our attention. The solemn period, that will reduce every
state, condition, and thing, to one level, is certain to us all; prosperity and
adversity, riches and poverty, health and sickness, however differently
estimated now, will then, in fact, admit of no choice or difference, or afford
any comfort, otherwise than as such proper uses have been made of them as may
have promoted this great end: for if we were possessed in the highest degree of
this world's good, or what is most sought after, viz. health, power, affluence,
and pleasure, and had not a better hope, we should be most miserable; that
which we feared to lose, and knew we must lose, would take away the true
enjoyment of every blessing assorded by Divine Providence. On the contrary, did
we but experience our minds redeemed from transitory things, and sixed on the
better hope, we should, as was testified of the meek, enjoy even the earth in a
right and true manner; receiving with thankful hearts the mercies of the
Almighty, using this world as not abusing it, and not be afraid, whenever it
should please him to call us hence, freely to resign up all. Having said this,
I shall now proceed, and hope to be enabled to convince you, that the
profession of your education, becoming that of your judgment and practice,
will, through divine assistance, bring you into this happy situation, which
both your greatest interest and most incumbent duty demand you earnestly to
seek after. I need hardly ask you the question, "Your fathers, where are they,
and the prophets, do they live for ever?" Zech. i. 5. You will readily answer,
They are gone. What then? are the words they taught, and the statutes they were
commanded by the Almighty, buried with them? I hope not. By whom then should
the knowledge of them be preserved? Surely by such as are left behind. And I
pray that we, who are the natural branches, may not (through our disregard
thereto) lose our birthright for a mere mess of pottage; (a poor temporary
gratification) but, like the sons of Jonadab, keep all their precepts: that the
Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, may not want a man of their posterity to
stand before him for ever.

You need not be told, that they were very singular and different from others
in their dress and address; and, however light some may now esteem these
things, they suffered greatly for the same, both in body and goods, and their
sufferings have opened to us a door of great liberty, but we do not, I fear,
sufficiently prize it: if we did, there would be no running back again into
bondage. If the Hebrew who might have been free and would not, deserved to have
his ear bored through with an awl, and be fixed in slavery for ever, such
backsliders certainly do. There is such a dignity in the truth, and such a
nobility in appearing like friends agreeable to our known principles, that it
keeps even transgressors in awe, and libertines at a distance. A deviation
opens a door to every hurtful thing, and introduces an acquaintance that
oftentimes leads to ruin in this world, and, which is much worse, (though far
be it from me to limit the mercies of the Almighty) unfits us, I fear, for
happiness in the world to come. My beloved young friends, do not plead for this
or that, as seeing no harm in it: abstractedly considered, it may be
indifferent, but, as it is connected, of the utmost importance. A cocked-up
hat, fashionable clothes, or using the plural number instead of the singular,
may be called by you indifferent things; you may say that speech is to convey
ideas, and what religion can there be in having a hat a little lower or higher?
And in the same manner plead for every other liberty; but indeed these are very
far from being indifferent things to us. These singularities, as you may call
them, are like the locks of Sampson's hair, wherein if we suffer ourselves by
any Delilah to be deceived, and depart from the plainness and simplicity of our
profession, we shall lose our strength, and become weak as other men: who,
seeing us in their state, will soon entice us into those things I have hinted
at. I do not, however, by this mean to be understood, that we are to lay such a
stress on an external appearance, as in any-wise to neglect what is internal.
Make the inside clean, and the outside will be clean also. Our predecessors in
the truth, we know, from well-grounded objections, laid aside greatly the
exteriors men had added to religion, and recommended to us an inward purity of
heart and soul. If therefore, we become dead to the power of truth, having
neither form nor power, we are so far from exceeding other professions, that,
in my opinion, we fall greatly short. I pray it may not be so with us; but, as
our fathers before us walked in the truth, that we may likewise so walk; and
have to say to them that succeed us, follow us as we have followed them, who
followed the Lord Jesus in truth and righteousness. May you also be examples to
the youth in other meetings; that they, beholding your circumspection, and the
fear of God impressed on your minds, may be encouraged to tread in the same
path. Never be ashamed of being religious. I have thought nothing ever advanced
the character of David more, than that zealous joyful selfabasement which
appeared in his dancing before the ark: and though, by the spirit of the world,
such may be despised, as acting too mean a part for the dignity of human pride,
yet by the upright-hearted they will be had in honor, and their souls shall be
satisfied as with marrow and fatness, and know a growing in that which is truly
good; when leanness and barrenness shall attend the scoffers, who at length
shall be made to confess, Wisd. v. 4, 5. "We fools accounted their life
madness, and their end to be without honor. How are they numbered amongst the
children of God, and their lot is amongst the saints? What has pride profited
us, or what good has riches and vaunting brought us? All these things are
passed away like as a shadow, and as a post that hastes by, and we are now
consumed in our own wickedness. But the righteous live for evermore, even they
whom we had sometimes in derision, and a proverb of reproach: their reward is
with the Lord, and the care of the Most High is over them." Thus by acting in
character, agreeable to your profession, you will gain all things; and out of
it, lose all. For what advantage can the whole world afford, or any thing
therein, when the time comes, which is most sure, that we shall have but one
desire, even to die the death of the righteous, and our latter end to be like
unto theirs, so emphatically set forth in the foregoing passages.

I would now set before you some outward advantages you enjoy superior to many
of your brethren; and press that proper use to be made of them which may
further this great purpose of life -- To finish well. Our meeting has been
favored with a living, acceptable ministry: many watering seasons we have had,
here a little and there a little. These blessings are not to be lightly
esteemed; nor are we so to depend on them, as to neglect in any wise our
attention to that great Minister, to whom both those that edify and those that
are edified are servants. If we do, we shall suffer great loss; and as, on a
certain occasion, the Almighty said to Moses, "They are thy people, not mine,"
may it not be applicable to us? A lamentable exchange or difference, to become
the children of men, from being children taught by the Most High, and in his
truth established. The end of all true ministry is to direct to this; and the
softening showers of the gospel are to water the heritage, that the good ground
being opened thereby, the true seed may take root and grow up, bringing forth
an increase proportionate to the talent received: in some thirty, some sixty,
and some an hundredfold. The frequent opportunities afforded us to meet
together, are also great advantages; I do entreat you, by no means neglect
them. It is great encouragement to see a meeting well and timely filled. I
remember to have heard a friend once say in testimony, "That such as were
indifferent about coming to meetings, were most indifferent when there." This
is a truth to which I believe our experience will readily assent. Let us
therefore in an especial manner guard against this indifference; and though we
may have attended many meetings, and seem to be nevertheless in a distressed
state, and hardly to know what good is, yet if we miss but one, that one might
have been to us as the appearance of Jesus was to the disciples when they were
very low in their minds. He then stood in the midst of them, and said, "Peace
be unto you;" he showed them his hands and his, side, and they were glad; he
also breathed on them, and they received the Holy Ghost. Observe, from this
memorable meeting one disciple was absent, and the report from others could not
make him believe; and though our Lord, in condescension, afforded him another
opportunity, when he could only cry out, "My Lord, and my God!" yet are we not
to presume upon that, but cry earnestly to be endued with ability to perform
the present duty in the present time.

Be exceeding choice of your company; for true it is, that evil communications
corrupt good manners. Be as careful what books you read; and avoid those in the
least tending to libertinism and deism, as you would an infectious distemper.
Man, by all his earthly wisdom, cannot find out God; finite cannot comprehend
infinite. In his unregenerate state, man may puzzle and perplex himself with
matters too high for him. Meddle not therewith, but ever bear in remembrance,
"The man that walks uprightly, walks securely;" and that to such as "walk
not after the flesh, but after the spirit, there is no condemnation." This is
enough for us to believe and practice; let us leave the rest to the all wise
Disposer of all things, and say with David, "He that planted the ear, shall he
not hear? He that formed the eye, shall he not see? And he that teaches men
knowledge, shall he not know?"

After requesting your frequent perusal of the holy scriptures, I would in a
particular manner recommend to your reading the several volumes, entitled,
Piety Promoted. What can more excite to piety, than to view men in their
expiring moments joyfully leaving this world, from a consciousness of a life
spent in the fear of God? a time in which no dazzling object can deceive, or
any worldly enjoyment flatter. William Penn's Rise and Progress, wrote by way
of preface to George Fox's journal, Dr. Rutty's Liberty of the Flesh and Spirit
distinguished, and John Fry's Serious and Affectionate Address, I would also
wish you all often to read, and seriously to consider. The many journals left
by worthy deceased friends will afford both delight and profit; the experiences
of great and good men being by the wise always had in esteem. I am not
insensible, whilst I thus recommend the examples of others, that great hurt
has been occasioned by the falling away of some men, from whom better things
might have been expected, and that by their fall many have been wounded. I
confess this is a lamentable circumstance; but should thousands fall on the
right, and ten thousands on the left hand, truth is truth; and may the failures
of others tend to make us more circumspect and careful of ourselves, and
quicken our endeavors, to the utmost of the ability afforded us, to be
steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord: ever bearing in
remembrance, that the best of men are no longer safe than whilst on their
guard; that the higher the attainment, the greater the fall; and that if the
light that was once in us becomes darkness, that darkness is great indeed! And
as, in the outward, when a man becomes blind, after having once seen, the loss
of sight is more severely felt by him than by a person born blind; so when
those who have once spiritually seen afterward fall into blindness, it is no
marvel that the state of such should be worse than that of those who have not
been so enlightened. I have seen so much hurt sustained by some who have begun
right, by not keeping to the simplicity and innocence they once knew and began
in, that I cannot but greatly desire our preservation and perseverance: and
that with Joshua we may resolve, That, let others do what they will, we will to
the utmost of our power follow on to know and serve the Lord.

It is a short time we have to be here, even the youngest: it will soon pass
over, and flee as a shadow, or as a post that hastes by. How many strong
persons do we see unexpectedly called away? Have we not had in our own meeting
very recent instances? By the records of our burials, I find in one month
buried four young men, aged 28, 20, 18, and 17 years, and two in the 37th year.
Were we constantly to consider our latter end, it might tend greatly to make us
wise, and suppress every inordinate desire. As I have dwelt pretty largely on
this subject in the beginning of this address, I shall not add much; my end in
resuming it being rather to set before us the uncertainty when, than the
certainty of our dissolution: being sensible of our aptness to put such
considerations afar off, especially in the young, the healthy, and the strong.
But although the aged must die, the young may, and we see they do. How greatly,
how essentially then does it behove us to walk circumspectly, not as fools, but
like wise men, redeeming our time. It was nobly resolved by one of old, who
said, "All the days of my appointed time I will wait, until my change come."
May you all be like minded: it will tend, I believe, to make your life
comfortable, and your latter end peace.

As to your demeanor in your outward affairs, nothing can so perfectly direct
you therein, as keeping to the truth; nor can any thing else enable you to bear
disappointments, which will unavoidably happen. Some points, however, it may
not be amiss to mention. Treat all, with whom you have to do, with meekness and
calmness: a soft answer turns away anger, and a wrong is sooner redressed and
acknowledged through a mild conduct than repreach. Imitate not those in an
higher sphere of life. Endeavor to live rather below than above your
situations. I have often seen exceeding hurt to individuals in this particular,
who might have been very comfortable, had they confined their way of life to
their situation in it; but, by looking and aiming at an higher, have, to
support it, gone into hazardous undertakings, brought very great inconveniency
on themselves; and then have been ready to complain, and think their lot hard.
Another thing I would observe to those in small circumstances, who may be in
trades and business, that they do not trust their affairs in the hands of such
as are likewise but of small circumstances. Men of greater may run hazards not
justifiable in them: if they have less business on account of their caution, it
is to be preferred, rather than to risque the little they have, where there may
be a danger.

And such of you as may earn your bread with the sweat of your brow, repine not
at it. Remember, that godliness with contentment is great gain. Providence, in
the all-wise disposal of things, has more equally bestowed his gifts than men
perceive. The poor are exempt from many watchings, toils, and fatigues, which
the rich experience; their food is pleasant, and their rest sweet. The
possession of the truth will make all conditions happy; and without it all is
confusion. The poor in this world, possessing these greater riches, will not
repine for want of the lesser: their bread will be sure, and their water never
fail, and they shall not even want outward bread. It will be a blessing to have
to administer to such; and although at times their difficulties may appear
great, such will remember what the apostle says, "That the time is short, that
they that weep be as though they wept not; and they that rejoice as though they
rejoiced not; and they that buy as though they possessed not:" and further,
what he wrote to Timothy. "We brought nothing into this world, and it is
certain we can carry nothing out; and having food and raiment, let us be
therewith content." Thus is verified what the same apostle wrote to his same
beloved Timothy, "Godliness is profitable unto all things, having the promise
of the life that now is, (through contentment) and of that which is to come"
(by its effects.)

I shall not enlarge; a few short hints may be better remembered than longer
discourses; nor have I any desire to appear in this public manner: for could I
have conveyed these advices as from an anonymous writer, it would have suited
my own inclination better; but I could not see how that might be done, so as to
answer the end proposed. Finally, therefore, let me recommend to you, my dear
young friends, in the words of the apostle, "that ye be kindly-affectioned one
to another in brotherly love, in honor preferring one another, and the God of
love and peace be with you all. Amen.

From your affectionate Well-wishing friend, J.G.
Norwich, the 21st of the 4th Month, 1762. P. S. I shall just subjoin a few
very useful and instructive passages of scripture, applicable to every state
and condition. A continued thoughtfulness and regard thereto may greatly tend
to regulate our lives and actions, the truths therein contained carrying their
own evidence to all, without distinctions of names; and might have been much
more enlarged, but I confine them to three heads, viz. true religion; the great
advantage of a meek spirit; and, as the ultimate of all, death and our latter
end.



TRUE RELIGION.
HE has showed thee, O man, what is good, and what does the Lord require of
thee, but to do justly, to love mercy, and to walk humbly with thy God.

Pure religion and undefiled before God and the Father is this, to visit the
fatherless and widows in their affliction, and to keep himself unspotted from
the world.

Whatsoever things are true, whatsoever things are honest, whatsoever things
are just, whatsoever things are pure, whatsoever things are lovely, whatsoever
things are of good report, if there be any virtue, and if there be any praise,
think on these things.

The fruit of the spirit is love, joy, peace, long-suffering, gentleness,
goodness, faith, meekness, temperance: against such there is no law.

Add to your faith virtue, and to virtue knowledge, and to knowledge
temperance, and to temperance patience, and to patience godliness, and to
godliness brotherly kindness, and to brotherly kindness charity.

For if these things be in you, and abound, they make you that ye shall neither
be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ.

But he that lacks these things is blind, and cannot see afar off, and has
forgotten that he was purged from his old sins.

-- Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence to make your calling and
election sure; for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall.

For so an entrance shall be ministered to you abundantly into the everlasting
kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.

-- Have always a conscience void of Offense toward God and toward men.

ON MEEKNESS.
BLESSED are the meek, for they shall inherit the earth.

Yet a little while, and the wicked shall not be; yea, thou shall diligently
consider his place, and it shall not be found: but the meek shall inherit the
earth, and shall delight themselves in the abundance of peace.

The ornament of a meek and quiet spirit is in the sight of God of great price.

The meek will he guide in judgment, and the meek will he teach his way.

The Lord takes pleasure in his people; he will beautify the meek with
salvation.

The meek also shall increase their joy in the Lord, and the poor among men
shall rejoice in the Holy One of Israel.

A soft answer turns away wrath, but grievous words stir up anger.

Learn of me, for I am meek and lowly in heart, and ye shall find rest unto
your souls.

DEATH and our LATTER-END.
IT is appointed unto men once to die, and after death the judgment.

So teach us to number our days, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom.

Lord, make me to know mine end, (...) the measure of my days, what it is, that
I may know how frail I am.

Behold, thou have made my days as an hand-breadth, and mine age is as nothing
before thee; verily every man at his best estate is altogether vanity.

Surely every man walks in a vain show, surely they are disquieted in vain:
he heapeth up riches, and knows not who shall gather them. And now, Lord,
what wait I for? My hope is in thee.

All flesh is as grass, and all the glory of man as the flower of the grass:
the grass withers, and the flower thereof fades, but the word of the Lord
endures for ever.

-- The time is short; it remains, that both they that have wives, be as
though they had none; and they that weep, as though they wept not; and they
that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as though they
possessed not; and they that use this world, as not abusing it; for the fashion
of this world passes away.

I made me great works, I builded me house, I planted me vineyards, etc. I
withheld not myself from any joy, etc.

Then I looked on all the works that my hands had wrought, and on the labor
that I had labored to do, and behold, all was vanity and vexation of spirit,
and there was no profit under the sun! But,

Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth; yea, says the
spirit, that they may rest from their labors; and their works do follow them.

Oh that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider
their latter-end!

Although affliction comes not forth of the dust, neither does trouble spring
out of the ground; yet man is born unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward.

Man that is born of a woman is of few days, and full of trouble; he comes
forth like a flower, and is cut down; he flees also as a shadow, and
continues not.

Mark the perfect man, and behold the upright, for the end of that man is peace.

The wicked is driven away in his wickedness, but the righteous has hope in
his death.

The hope of the righteous shall be gladness, but the expectation of the wicked
shall perish.

Let me die the death of the righteous, and let my last end be like his.

All the days of my appointed time will I wait, until my change come.

TO THE YOUTH OF NORWICH MEETING.
DEAR YOUNG FRIENDS,
LET me request your attention to the following lines. The subject nearly
concerns you. -- Despise not the counsel of One who has often looked upon you
with tender regard, and been secretly engaged on your account, that the many
gracious visitations of Divine love and mercy to you might be affectionately
received, and duly prized by you. If you sincerely embrace them in humble
resignation, and faithful obedience, the power of Truth will preserve you, and
the fresh springs of life increase, and establish you in the saving knowledge
of God; but if you choose the ways of the world, and walk after the sight of
your eyes, and the imaginations of your hearts, rejecting the gentle drawings
and inward reproofs of his Holy Spirit, you not only forsake your own mercies
for lying vanities, but also put a high indignity and affront upon the
Sovereign Majesty, the great Judge of the quick and dead, who is every where a
present Observer of our conduct, and too jealous of his honor to suffer,
without displeasure, the froward will of the creature to have the preference in
any, to his just and holy will; and who will not force those into felicity who
refuse his gracious offers.

Unless you take up your daily cross to selfish indulgencies and carnal
gratifications, you cannot be the disciples of Christ, nor inherit those
enjoyments which are of a divine and permanent nature. If ye live after the
flesh, ye shall die; but if "ye through the Spirit do mortify the "deeds of the
body, ye shall live. For "as many as are led by the Spirit of God, they are the
sons, or children, of God. Romans viii. To follow the Lamb, whithersoever he
leads, is the only way to true and lasting happiness, notwithstanding the
deceitful flatteries of a degenerate world, and the delusive persuasions of
corrupt nature to the contrary.

The subtle enemy of your peace begins with fair shows and plausible
temptations, in things which, to inexperienced minds, appear of small concern.
He knows, should he at once attempt you with manifest iniquities and obvious
impieties, it would shock your tenderness, and defeat his destructive
intentions. He therefore seeks first to ensnare you, by secretly operating upon
the complacency of your natural tempers, and your aversion to give disgust, by
putting forward and heightening your natural desires, rather to please than
profit yourselves and others, in your deportment and converse; and also to
betray you into an ill-grounded shame of godly conversation, and pious walking,
and a breach of the due adherence to those distinguishing peculiarities which
the Truth has led its faithful followers into, and placed as an exterior hedge
of preservation about them. These the blind world calls affected singularities,
and clownish absurdities, and styles the disregard and disuse of them an
innocent freedom, and prudent demeanor. Thus the insiduous adversary leads
first into partial compliances, and proceeds by making every succeeding step
toward a captivating conformity, appear trivial, and of no consequence. By
this means he deludes the weak and unwary gradually to assimilate with the
world, in language, in dress, in behavior, in the superfluity and folly of its
modes and fashions, in its corrupt associations, and poisonous diversions, the
natural tendency of all which is to entangle, darken, and debase the mind, and
by alienating it from the light and life of Christ, to render it so unguarded
as to make way for the introduction of unsuitable connections, unhappy
marriages, and, in brief, every kind of corruption and misery.

Be entreated therefore to beware, in time, of every approach toward a false
liberty in the smallest matters, lest they prove introductions to greater.
Guard strictly against every thing that would lead you to slight the tender
touches and convictions of Divine Grace. Withdraw from alluring objects. To
tamper at all with temptations, is to lose ground. It is vain to imagine you
can go what length you please, and no further; that you may securely temporize
to a certain degree, or to just such a pleasing point of compliance as you are
now tempted to, in behavior, dress, and language, in order to appear genteel,
candid, well bred, intelligent, polite, and to escape the disagreeable
sensations of false shame, and the reflections of being stupid, mulish, and
Quaker-like. This leads into liberty, but it is the liberty of the flesh, which
is in reality the bondage of corruption.

Content not yourselves with a birth in the Society; but seek to secure a
birthright in the Truth; without which the first will not avail you in the
sight of God. Let the Spirit of Truth govern your inclinations; for whatever
inclination you give your affection to, or passionately espouse, will prove
your master. Indulge not an eager curiosity; it led Dinah to dishonor, and
became the ruin of a city. Be cautious of your company; for that will affect
both your manners and character, and eventually your future state. Humor not
the carnal mind in dressing your mortal, changeable, uncertain bodies, beyond
what truth warrants, and decency requires; for more is not decoration, but
disguise, which in the ultimate runs into deformity, and administers offense to
him who resists the proud, but increases grace to the humble. Flatter not
the vanity of those who look for a plural address to themselves, whilst they
treat their Maker in the singular number; as if Infinite Omnipotence was less,
or less worthy, than the poor creature, whose very breath and being is not one
moment at his own disposal.

I would beseech you, who are conscious that you have already been turned aside
or stumbled at the cross, proceed no further, but fly to the great Redeemer,
who so wonderfully condescended from the heights of immortal Glory, took a
painful humanity upon him, and bled for us, that he might bring us to celestial
enjoyments, and for that end trod the most thorny paths, and left us the
fairest example of humility, meekness, resignation, purity, and the most
perfect plainness in every respect. Slight not the pattern he set, but follow
it, for his blessed sake, and the security of your own happiness; shun all the
gilded baits, the fair seeming caresses of a delusive world, in small matters
as well as great, for they are all one in nature, though different in degree.
Beware of the little foxes; they crop the tender buddings of the vine of life.
Studiously avoid all friendships, flatteries, formal visits, idle pastimes, and
parties of pleasure, which in any measure lead out of the fear of God, divert
you from daily attention upon him, and indispose you for humble walking with
him.

Who, in their proper senses, would lose an eternal mansion in the heavenly
Jerusalem and paradise of God, for the paltry pleasures and silly satisfactions
which must shortly end in everlasting bitterness? Shall the decking of these
perishable bodies, the vanity of this uncertain life, the gratification of
sense, the lure of idle associates, or the apprehension of derision from
persons ignorant of the virtue and power of truth, or unfaithful to it, have
greater impression with you than the love of Him that made you, the favor of
Him that sustains you, and a state of immutable blessedness with him in the
realms of eternal light and glory? Make not so miserable a choice and
preference, but practically adopt this apostolic advice, Be not conformed to
this world; but be ye transformed by "the renewing of your minds, that ye "may
prove what is that good and acceptable, and perfect will God. Romans xii.

To behold blooming youth renouncing those temptations and appearances of
present advantage, which captivate the generality of their cotemporaries, for
the sake of that glorious truth which leads, under the cross, to the crown
immortal, cannot fail of being acceptable to God and good men. "I rejoiced
greatly," says the good apostle, "that I found of thy children walking in
Truth." "I have no greater joy than to hear that my children walk in Truth."

J. P.

FINIS.

