AN ADDRESS TO THE FREEMEN OF THE STATE of SOUTH CAROLINA.

Containing Political Observations on the following Subjects, viz.

I. On the Citizens making a temporary Submission to the British Arms, after
the reduction of Charlestown in 1780. II. On Governor Rutledge's Proclamation
of the 27th of September, 1781. III. On the Mode of conducting the Election,
for the Assembly at Jacksonborough. IV. On the EXCLUSION ACT, which cuts off
the Citizens from the Rights of Election. V. On the Confiscation Act. VI. On
the Amercement Act. VII. The Conclusion, with Remarks to prove the Necessity of
an Amnesty, or Act of Oblivion.
BY CASSIUS.

Supposed to be written by AEDANUS BURKE, Esquire, one of the Chief Justices of
the State of South Carolina.

Who with the generous rustics Sat,
On Uri's rock, in close Divan,
And winged that arrow sure as Fate,
Which ascertained, THE SACRED RIGHTS OF MAN.
PHILADELPHIA: PRINTED and SOLD by ROBERT BELL, in Third-Street. Price one
third of a Dollar. -- MDCCLXXXIII.

A reverence for our great Creator, principles of humanity, and the dictates of
common sense, must convince all those who reflect upon the subject, that
Government was instituted to promote the welfare of Mankind, and ought to be
administered for the attainment of that End.

DECLARATION by the AMERICAN CONGRESS, at Philadelphia, July 6th, 1775. "The
last right, we shall mention, regards the freedom of the press. The importance
of this consists, besides the advancement of truth, science, morality, and arts
in general, in its diffusion of liberal sentiments on the administration of
government, its ready communication of thoughts between subjects, and its
consequential promotion of union among them, whereby oppressive officers are
shamed or intimidated into more honorable and just modes of conducting affairs."

ADDRESS of the AMERICAN CONGRESS, at Philadelphia, September 5th, 1774. TO THE
FREEMEN OF THE STATE of SOUTH CAROLINA.
INTRODUCTION.
Friends and Fellow Citizens,
THE proceedings of the late Assembly held at Jacksonborough have already
excited the attention not only of this, but of other States; and some of the
laws then enacted are of so serious a nature, that the memory of them will
last, and their consequences operate, when the authors of the measures shall be
no more. By one of those laws, upwards of two hundred men who had been citizens
of this State before the reduction of Charlestown, have been stripped of all
their property: innocent wives and children involved in the calamity of
husbands and fathers, their widows are deprived of the right of dower, their
children disinherited, and themselves banished for ever from this country. And
this without process, trial, examination, or hearing; and without allowing them
the sacred right of proving their innocence on a future day. Under other acts
of that assembly, a number of the inhabitants are subjected to heavy fines,
some to near one third, others to one eight, and some to a tenth part of their
estate, real and personal, without better proof of crime than report and
suggestions. Another act excludes from the freedom of voting or being elected
to a seat in the legislature, almost a majority of our citizens. The crimes of
all consist in the part which they were said to have taken after the reduction
of South Carolina by the British army.

One would imagine there is no free country upon earth, in which laws bringing
such ruin on so many families, and so big with political mischief, would not
have been publicly discussed before this day. But whether it be owing, that
the measures have succeeded in breaking the spirit of the people, by filling
every man with a sense of his own danger; or that the fear of the Governor's
extraordinary power, awes men into silence; or that they are indifferent about
public affairs; not a man has yet undertaken to enquire into the justice or
injustice of it, or ask his neighbor how far the Legislature could effect the
ruin and disgrace of so many of his fellow citizens, consistently with the
laws, constitution, and happiness of his country.

From every point of view in which I consider those proceedings, I am convinced
it is essential to the future peace and liberty of our country, that a true
judgment be formed on the matter. The people at large in whom the sovereignty
of the State should be vested, ought to be informed whether public measures be
right or wrong; and it therefore becomes the duty of every citizen to present
the subject in as open and public a light as opportunity or knowledge may
enable him. Under this persuasion I venture to offer a few remarks to the
consideration of the public; and I only wish my talents were equal to the
importance of the subject. I trust the candid, plain manner in which I shall
discourse on it will answer for me, that I have no other design by it but what
has been the object of my pursuit through seven years public service; that is,
the liberty and peace of my courtry.

I must first observe, that G -- r R -- 's proclamation of the 27th of
September 1781, was the fountain from whence sprung some of those bitter laws,
and the forfeitures and disabilities abovementioned. That proclamation went
entirely on the supposition, that the citizens of the State who had taken
protection on the fall of the country under British usurpation, had thereby not
only forfeited their lives, fortunes, and the privileges of citizenship, but
had also incurred the penalty of treason against the State. This was the
doctrine allowed on all hands; not only laid down by the proclamation, but
advanced in both houses, and I never heard it contradicted by the judges or
lawyers who ought to have known better. The proclamation indeed was supposed to
have restored all those who complied with the terms of it, to their lost
liberties, by joining the army within a limited time.

I shall proceed to make some remarks on the supposed crime and delinquency of
the people in taking protection.

I. On the Citizens making a temporary Submission to the British Arms, after
the reduction of Charlestown in 1780.
THIS State, soon after the reduction of Charlestown, may be strictly said to
have been conquered. Not only the capital, but every post throughout the
country was in the hands of the enemy. The Governor who represented the
Sovereignty of the State, had provided for his safety by flight, and all the
Continental troops in South Carolina were either killed, taken, or routed.

The enemy, thus masters of the country, resolved to reduce by military force
the inhabitants to obedience. And Sir Henry Clinton accordingly in the month of
June 1781, issues a proclamation, Commanding all persons whatever inhabitants
of this province, (those who were in Charlestown and Fort Moultrie at the time
of their capitulations and surrender, or were then in actual confinement
excepted) who shall after the 20th of June next, neglect to return to his
allegiance and to his Majesty's government, will be considered as enemies and
rebels to the same, and treated accordingly.

Thus a military despotism was established throughout the settlements, and to
complete this miserable scene of woes, the army under General Gates, and a
division under General Sumpter, to whom we looked up as our deliverers, were
entirely defeated. The country thus abandoned to a cruel, unprincipled foe, the
people had no idea but that our independence was lost irrecoverably. And indeed
the advantages gained by the enemy were so rapid and decisive, it was for some
time apprehended through the other States, and even by many members of Congress,
that Carolina and Georgia must in the end revert to the domination of Great
Britain.

In this situation necessity, whose dominion triumphs over all human laws
pointed out to our inhabitants, that as there was neither government, laws, nor
army to protect them, they were at liberty to protect themselves, as well as
they could. This is the law of Nature and of Nations: And all Statesmen, the
best lawyers, and most eminent writers, agree, that when an invader over-runs a
country, defeats the standing forces, and subverts its government, the
inhabitants of such a country are justifiable to take the conqueror's
protection and obey his laws; and whether the government be a monarchy or
republic, it makes no difference, as the reason of the thing is the same.

In Germany and other parts of Europe, it is not uncommon for one and the same
city to be taken and retaken and have different masters in one campaign. And
the inhabitants of such a city, magistrates and all, who are not soldiers by
profession, uniformly take an oath of allegiance to the stronger side, which
oath is binding only so long as the conqueror's power lasts. And I believe we
have the exclusive honor of being the first who proceeded to punish their
inhabitants on account of such submission. I shall bring forward the authority
of the best writers on the laws of nations and nature to prove that taking
protection from a conqueror is no crime.

Things may be brought to such an issue, says Puffendorf, lib. 7 c. 8. as shall
make it not only allowable, but good and necessary to obey the ruler in
possession, by whatsoever means possession was gained. As if the lawful
Sovereign be reduced to such straits, that one can no longer exercise his regal
office toward his people. For though the commands of the usurper, being
destitute of legal power are not in themselves obligatory, yet it becomes a
wise man to consult the welfare of himself and of his affairs, make provision
against the future, and with wariness and caution reflect on his present
condition, that he may not thrust his life and fortune into danger; as he would
do, should he by vain obstinacy and opposition draw the usurper's rage upon his
own head, without procuring the least advantage to his country. And further on
he concludes, That when the prince cannot afford his subjects due protection,
nor they on the other hand able to resist the usurper without imminent ruin,
they are released from all obligations to him, until providence shall open a
way to his restoration. Again, This method must be allowed to be lawful not
only for particular subjects, but also for entire cities and provinces, when
they find no other way left for their safety and preservation. Lib. 8. c. 11.
In support of this right he quotes the case of the Petilini from Livy. This
nation being in alliance with the Romans, and pressed by their enemies, sent
for assistance. But the Romans being distressed themselves, answered, They
confessed themselves no longer in a condition to defend their distant friends,
and therefore desired the petitioners to return home, consult for themselves,
and make the best terms they could.

This is the law laid down by Grotius as well as Puffendorf: and Vattel, a late
writer of the first distinction, delivers the like doctrine in the following
words:

If a State is overcome by force, necessity, that irresistible law, frees it
from its first engagement, and gives it a right to treat with the conqueror, in
order to obtain the best conditions possible. If it must submit to him, or
perish, who can entertain a doubt but that it may, and even ought to choose the
first expedient, submission? The modern usage is agreeable to this decision: A
city submits to an enemy when it cannot expect safety from a vigorous
resistance: it takes an oath of fidelity to him, and the Sovereign of such city
has no body to accuse but fortune.

Vattel gives as examples the cases of the country of Zug, and the city of
Zurich abandoned by their Confederates in the 14th century, who entered into a
treaty with their enemies from necessity.

This part of my subject I shall conclude with a quotation from Mr. Heboes, a
writer whose authority is the more to be depended on, as be lived in England in
the time of the grand rebellion, when England then was, as Carolina was lately,
distracted by a fierce war, and were persecuting each other, as the parliament
forces, or those of the king got the better.

Because I find, says Hobbes, by our English books lately printed, that the
civil wars have not sufficiently taught men in which point of time it is that a
subject becomes obliged to the conqueror, nor how it comes about that men are
obliged to obey his laws. Therefore, for satisfaction of men therein, I say,
That for him who has no obligation to his former sovereign, but that of an
ordinary subject, (that is not a soldier by profession) it is then when the
means of life are within the guards and garrisons of the enemy: for it is then
he has no longer protection from his sovereign, but is protected by the
adverse party for his contribution. Seeing therefore such a contribution is
every where esteemed lawful, as a thing inevitable, (notwithstanding it be an
assistance to the enemy) a total submission cannot be esteemed unlawful.
Besides, if we consider that he who submits assists the enemy but with part of
his estate, whereas, they that refuse to submit, assist him with the whole.

Again, when in a war (foreign or domestic) the enemy get a final victory, so
as the forces of the Commonwealth keeping the field no longer, there is no
farther protection of the citizens in their loyalty: Then is the Common wealth
dissolved, and every man at liberty to protect himself by such courses as his
own direction shall suggest to him. For the Sovereign is the public soul,
giving life and motion to the Commonwealth; which expiring, the members are no
more governed by it than the carcass of a man by his departed spirit. For though
the right of a sovereign cannot be extinguished, yet the obligation of the
members may; for he that wants protection may seek it any where.

Again, the obligation of subjects to the State is understood to last so long,
and no longer than the power lasts by which it is able to protect them. For the
right which men have by nature to protect themselves, when none else can
protect them, can by no covenant be relinquished. The sovereignty is the soul
of the commonwealth, which once departed from the body, the members do no more
receive their motion from it. The end of obedience is protection, which
wheresoever a man seeks, either in his own, or his enemy's sword, nature
applies his obedience to it. Hobbes's Leviathan, cap. 21.27.29. and the Review.

Nothing can be clearer than this doctrine; and however shocking it will seem
to those who have kept a perpetual boasting of their own virtue and clamor
against such as the British did not think fit to send to St. Augustine; yet
this is what is good law in South Carolina as well as all the world over: All
those writers whose authority we rely on in law-matters laying it down for law,
that subjects are excused and justified, and not liable to be impleaded or
called to account for taking protection from a conqueror or usurper.

I hope I have said enough to satisfy the reader, that our inhabitants did
nothing more than their duty in taking protection: and if they thought they
could secure better treatment, or alleviate their calamity by congratulations,
they had an undoubted right to do it. It did not show much political wisdom, I
allow; but let that matter be as it will, they did not commit any crime against
the laws or government, for neither law nor government existed. The Sovereign
power was in a state of temporary death, the soul was fled and departed, and
nothing remained but the carcass; which could no more be injured or violated by
any of our former citizens taking protection, or signing a congratulation, than
they could be said to commit murder by trampling on the body of a man who had
been dead and buried many months.

With respect to presenting congratulations, it were easy to prove from what
happened in other countries that they are by no means a true test or proof of
the public sentiments, or of those who present them. Such addresses are
obtained in all countries by a few designing men, and the rest by threats,
terror, or a sort of impulse, follow the example. For a long time before
Cromwell died he was detested by the English nation, and scarcely an honest man
in it who did not wish to have him dispatched.

Yet after his death, and the nomination of his son Richard to the
protectorship, which was looked on as a tyranny. The city of London and almost
all the countries and cities in England sent him addresses of condolance for
the loss of his father, and congratulations on his succession to the
protectorship. So little, says Burnet, do these appearances signify. This
levity, this infirmity of the multitude, no statesman before our time thought
in earnest of punishing. Our laws cannot do it. Lord Cornwallis himself, though
not a man of abilities, yet has sense enough to know that if he and Clinton
were in Charlestown going to be hanged, the people would rejoice and sign
congratulations as they did on a different occasion.

I well know prudent men, or rather such as think themselves so, will say, that
this doctrine of Protection ought not to be drawn into discussion, but should
sleep in silence for the present. But is not the contrary doctrine believed to
be law? Have not be few proclaimed to the world, and still continue to proclaim
it, that the protectionmen forfeited their lives and fortunes? Has not the
government been seized, and its constitution subverted, by the few in
consequence of that doctrine? Has it not set one part of the community against
the other, brought ruin on many, and dishonor on us all? I should hold myself
guilty of the most posillammous submission, were I under this conviction and to
be silent on it.

For men in power to persuade the people, that they committed crimes and acted
dishonourably, when there is neither crime nor dishonor in the case, is a most
mischievous policy. It has the same pernicious effects on the multitude, that
private scandal and defamation, has on an innocent individual. It breaks that
spirit, and generous pride, which is the best guardian of public liberty and
private honor. It overwhelms the public as well as the private mind, with
conscious inferiority; degrades men in their own opinion, and tenders them fit
tools for the ambitious designs, and arbitrary dispositions of haughty aspiring
superiors.

Whether I am right, let those judge who have carefully observed the deportment
and behavior of such of our unhappy citizens as are held under censure, for
taking protection, by those in authority. The citizens who came from
Charlestown in the scorching hearts of August last, by a proclamation, afforded
a melancholy proof, how soon oppression degrades mankind, and impresses timid,
cringing habits, even on the minds of freemen.

Having proved the taking protection was no crime in the people, I shall go on
to show, that on the restoration of the republic and laws from British
thraldom, the protection-men who had been our citizens before, were as fully
entitled to all the rights and freedom of citizenship, as those who were
detained prisoners of war, or took refuge to the northward.

Every country of which we have any account from history, has had its day of
woe and affliction, by foreign invasion, or civil discord, as we have had. But
in every one of them as soon as the troubles were over, and the country
regained; the government returned to its ancient form, and the subjects were
reinstated in the participation of their rights and privileges. And this is not
only agreeable to justice, but the freedom and liberty of the country would be
destroyed if it were otherwise. If in a republic a few could set up pretensions
to superior political merit, over the whole aggregate body of the people, and
deprive the latter of their rights and privileges, this would be nothing more
nor less than overthrowing the constitution, seizing on the liberties of the
people, and setting up an arbitrary government of the few The laws of nations
as well as the rights of nature therefore dictate, that when a country
oppressed by a foreign power regains its liberty, the citizens should be
restored to all the rights and liberties they before enjoyed.

A whole nation, says Puffendorf, cap. 6, when it has, either by its own
strength, or the assistance of friends or allies, shaken off an enemy's yoke,
recovers its liberty and ancient state. And if a part of the people be
recovered by the people, from which they were for some time divided or torn, or
by the assistance of allies, they again incorporate with the old body, and
return to the place and rights they had before.

This authority goes to the point; but in order to make it plainer, I shall put
a case: I shall suppose a nation governed by a limited monarch, invaded by a
powerful enemy, and after trying the fortune of war, entirely vanquished. The
Prince escapes into another State, and the subjects are obliged to receive such
terms as the conqueror chooses to grant. In case this country be again recovered
by the assistance of friends or allies, would it not be strange indeed, that
the prince on returning, should call the conquest over his people, and their
necessity to submit, by the name of treason against the government? Should he
carry this notion so far as to exclude the subjects from the benefit of the
ancient laws, and deny to all the rights of citizenship, except to his friends
or adherents, and such whose captivity prevented them from following the
example of the rest, or whose residence on the frontier afforded an easy
removal into another country; would not this procedure be considered as seizing
the government and setting up his own will to reign instead of laws? If there
was a spark of freedom left in such a country, they would ask what his design
and presence for proclaiming to the world that his subjects had committed
treason, and forfeited, without trial or conviction, the rights and protection
of the ancient laws? To cut this matter short, was not this exactly the course
taken by the late G -- R --, who acted only as minister of State for our
Republic? Did he not issue his proclamation to make the people and the nations
around believe, that by a temporary submission to a conqueror who had the power
of life and death in his hands, they had incurred crime and dishonor? Has not
himself and a few others who were not in the country while the war raged, nor
lent the least aid to drive out the enemy, bereaved the citizens of their
rights and privileges, and by the terror of dictatorial power reduced the whole
State to a condition of vassalage, without any other redemption than dragooning
into six months military service, by way of punishment and expiation?

II. On Governor Rutledge's Proclamation of the 27th of September, 1781.
A Measure so singular as this is must be produced by some uncommon motive. It
is, however, one of those things, which the more a man will think of, the more
will he detest it. For it is calculated for no other end but to sow the
poisonous seeds of faction and party, to disgrace the middling and lower class
of our citizens, and throw the whole weight and powers of government out of the
people into a few families. G -- r R -- 's proclamation, and the plans which he
carried last assembly, would, unless unrivetted by a future one, fasten at one
blow in this country, a fierce and jealous aristocracy, which has been gaining
ground for seven years past. Miserable is that republic whose citizens want
discernment to penetrate through such designs, or are afraid to expose them!

For some time before the battle of the Eutaw Springs, almost all our citizens
without the lines of Charlestown, and with few exceptions, all within, worried
by the tyranny of the British army, held them and their cause in the utmost
detestation. The victory obtained in that action proved a death-warrant to the
tory interest in this State; and the capture of the British army under Lord
Cornwallis following on the heels of the event, roused the few tories there
were as from a dream; and they saw clearly they had hitherto only deluded
themselves in thinking this country would be conquered. And those who from
zeal, levity, or necessity, adhered to the enemy after the fall of Charlestown,
employed all the means in their power to pave the way to a reconciliation. This
was not difficult for those who had not personal enemies among us; for General
Green wanted supplies, the town abounded with merchandise, of which our old
citizens found means to send out large quantities. The very adventurers who
followed the British army to South Carolina became our friends, and testified
their zeal for us on many occasions.

This I believe was the true state of parties the latter end of the year 1781.
Happy would it have been for this country if the servants of the public could
have disentangled their minds from the resentments and party-rage which prevail
in civil wars! A proclamation then framed upon principles of wisdom and
humanity, would have had a happy tendency to bury in oblivion what was past; to
extinguish from the minds of men, a sense of late injuries; to unite the
affections of all; and restore the country to order and tranquillity.

The proclamation of September 27th, as I observed before, went on the
Governor's idea that the great body of the people who had taken protection had
thereby forfeited their lives, liberty, and property. He takes upon him to
offer pardon to every one of them who should join our standard in 30 days, and
serve 6 months in the militia, as common soldiers; excepting from this benefit,
those who were banished the State in the beginning of the troubles; the
congratulators, and such as held commissions civil or military on the 27th of
September, or were then with the enemy. I shall say nothing of the good or bad
policy of excluding such a number of citizens as this exception comprehended,
admitting he had the power he pretended to* However on the 17th of November he
issued a second proclamation, extending the benefits held out by the former
under the like terms.

As the capture of Cornwallis and his army was known to the Governor when this
proclamation came out; as the British troops had absolutely lost their courage
with their loss at Eutaw, and the Pennsylvania Line was on the march from
York-Town to our assistance: When this, and the state the country was in at
that juncture, is considered; I leave the reader to judge, whether the
proclamation was not calculated rather for creating mischief than for raising a
force. For it laid all who neglected or refused, not only under a stigma and
reproach, but under such disabilities as degraded them below the rank of
freemen.

Obliging the whole country that had taken protection to turn out and serve six
months in the militia, was the greatest oppression imaginable; and the
contriver of it well knew, as those do, who now drive down the measure, that it
was commanding what was absolutely impossible. Men are generally so embarrassed
with inconveniences of one sort or another, that there is no society on earth,
the aggregate body whereof could all quit their families and homes for six
months. In our case, not to mention how much agriculture would suffer by such
emigration, the heads of those families who resided within the enemy's range,
were peculiarly circumstanced. They were no doubt called on by the feelings of
fathers, husbands, or protectors to stay and afford the feeble protection they
could to their families, or avert the distress or ruin that would ensue; if
they joined our army, which at that time had not the power of protecting them.

Ordering them out, therefore, without regard to local situation, sickness, or
other distress, was an extravagant act of power. Whether they resided within or
out of the enemy's garrison or guards; whether a man's wife or little ones, or
the property the British had left him unplundered, were in or out of the
enemy's reach: All this was nothing; they must abandon the whole to the rage of
an unprincipled, revengeful enemy; and sally forth, like Don Quixote, setting
British guards and parties at defiance, in quest of adventures on the report of
a proclamation; and what perhaps was more mortifying; they must humble
themselves and supplicate for mercy as criminals, at the feet of a man who a
little before was a fellow citizen, no more than on a fooling with themselves.

I conjure any sensible honest man to tell me, if this was acting the part of a
magistrate, framing regulations for the ease and convenience of a people, over
whose happiness he was appointed to preside? In the high station he was, ought
he not to have looked on the people at large as children of the republic; whose
only crime was a misfortune that admitted of no alternative? Instead of adding
to the list of their calamities, from British oppression, ought he not to have
comforted them, and rather to palliate, or cover over any stain of dishonor,
if any there was, than lay them under the condemnation of treachery to their
country? this proclamation was like putting the citizens in a Bear-skin, and
then worrying them; or according to a more just comparison made by General
Gadsden on the Confiscation Bill; he said it was like an Auto de fe, a sort of
proceeding used in Portugal against Heretics, where they are dressed in frocks
painted over with figures of fiends and devils, to excite a horror in the
multitude against them.

III. On the Mode of conducting the Election for the Assembly at Jacksonborough.
I Shall proceed to examine the mode of conducting the elections in the latter
end of 1781, for the Assembly at Jacksonborough; as I think it of consequence
that the public should be acquainted with the nature of it. The Governor
resolved to convene the Assembly in January; and whether the measure of calling
them at all, at that time, will turn out a blessing or a curse to us, time will
discover. The writs of election were accompanied with printed instructions to
the returning officers, not to admit any person to vote, but such as obeyed his
extraordinary proclamation. The returning officers had also further orders from
the Governor to choose particular men whom he named, and according to such
nomination they were chosen.

Our Constitution or Charter or Liberties ascertains the qualification of
voters, and secures this valuable privilege by the following clause:

Every free white man who has attained to the age of 21 years, and has been a
resident and an inhabitant in this State for the space of one whole year, and
has freehold of fifty acres of land, or a town lot, and been seized of it six
months previous to the election, or paid a tax, or was taxable six months
previous to the election in a sum equal to the tax on fifty acres of land,
shall be deemed qualified to vote for, and be eligible, etc.

Thus the Constitution gives to every such citizen a participation in the
Sovereignty of the State, which right and share neither Governor nor both
Houses can take away without establishing a tyrannical government on the ruins
of our Liberties. And at any rate the Assembly could not alter the Constitution
nor any part of it without ninety days notice by the -- section. For the
Governer therefore to assume authority to deprive some citizens of this right
and give it to others, is a flagrant instance of tyranny, and is scarcely to be
equalled in any country that pretended to freedom. The privilege of voting for
those who are to make laws for us, is a right so inherent in every citizen of
our State, that the Governor or Legislature, who pretends under any condition
or limitation to deprive him of it, and then return it as a matter of favor,
actually plays the tyrant by so doing: It is at once vesting the government in
a few independent of the whole: An overt act to change the nature and form of
our Constitution: Not an injury to one or a few individuals, but I aver it to
be what in every Republican Government is called crimen laesae libertatis, high
treason against the sovereignty and liberties of the people.

It is essential to the being of a parliament, says Blackstone, that elections
should be absolutely free. Therefore all undue influence on the electors is
illegal and strongly prohibited; Mr. Lock ranks it among those breaches of
trust in the executive magistrate, which according to his notion amount to a
dissolution of the government if he employs the force, the treasure and offices
of society to corrupt the Representatives, or openly to pre-engage the
electors, and prescribe what manner of persons shall be chosen. For thus to
regulate candidates and electors and new model the ways of election; what is
it, says he, but to cut up the government by the roots, and poison the very
fountain of public security. Blackst. vol. 1. p. 178.

The right of electing those who act as public trustees in the legislature is
by our constitution so vested in the citizen, so personal to him, that he
cannot surrender or resign it, any more than the substance of his body can part
with its shadow; nor can it be forfeited until he be convicted of some
notorious crime, on a fair trial by his peers. It is indefeasible and
hereditary, and the Governor with all the authority which an act of Assembly
could give him, was only an agent or trustee, who could no more abolish this
right of the principal or people who appointed him, than a man who is only
attorney or manager of an estate, can destroy or alienate the right of his
employer. The manager exercising an act of ownership, such as selling or
converting it to his own emolument, makes void his commission. The power of the
trust returns to the owner, and the other is responsible for his breach of it.
So the Governor seizing on the freedom of election, which alone constitutes the
freedom of the people, was destroying all legal authority in himself. Such an
act of power was a felo de se; a murderer of itself. It was no longer the act
of the law, but of the usurper; and packing an Assembly in which he confirmed
all his doings, was making the matter ten times worse; it was employing the
forms of parliament, of law and constitution to rivet his usurpation.

As to the Governor's extraordinary powers in the recess of the Assembly, to do
and execute whatever he thought necessary for the safety of the State. On due
consideration of this clause, I believe no lawyer will be so hardy as to deny,
that this power only authorized him to support, not to overturn the charter of
our liberties and fundamental laws of the State, and by this precedent expose
us in future to all the mischiefs of arbitrary power.

Encroachments on public liberty commence in all republics with plausible
pretenses of promoting some public good, or remedying some evil. In any
government where there is the least spark of freedom, open and barefaced
tyranny can never insinuate itself. It is obliged therefore like the original
tempter in Paradise, to assume a shape which may conceal its subtilty, and the
story of every nation affords examples of this truth. In the instance before
me, the pretense was "a necessity for excluding from votes the disaffected or
protection-men, to prevent a tory influence in the Legislature." I look upon
this to be a shallow pretense: It also amounts to a calumny on the great body
of the people, who hated the British government as much, and loved Republican
equality much better than some people I could name I have been told that
certain gentlemen frequently make it their business in company, to propagate a
notion, that the people of this State are not capable to govern themselves, and
that the constitution should be changed into an aristocracy, or the government
of certain potent families. Does not this let the Cat out of the bag, and
account for some late proceedings?
. The political sentiments of the public were such, and the hatred to the
British so universal, that had a free, impartial election prevailed, there
would have been, not only no danger, but the settlement of the government, and
peace of the country, would in all probability have been consulted much better
than it was. I believe as much as I exist, that it was a great and public
misfortune, that the Governor returned to the country, or that Major Hyrne,
whom I regard by the by, as a man of great merit, exchanged the Charlestown
militia. Had they remained where they were, a convention of the people would
have been held as soon as things were ripe for it: Elections would have been
made agreeable to the constitution; something like temperance and justice might
have prevailed; and the State at this time might have been in freedom and
serenity; instead of the arbitrary measures, the spirit of faction, and
discontent, ruin and misery of families, which like a dismal gloomy mist hangs
over the land at present.

At any rate we could not have been worsted, for anarchy or no Government is
far preferable to an arbitrary one. How different the policy adopted in
New Jersey, and other parts of America, where the enemy for a while domineered,
and the people uniformly took a temporary protection! Not one of them affords
an example of a public servant fixing on the tyranny exercised by the enemy
over his countrymen, as a mask or pretense for accusing them of disaffection,
and taking the government out of their hands. Not one of them trampled, as we
have done, on the charter of their liberties or constitution, under color of
guarding against tory influence.

This influence the State of Jersey apprehended a few months ago; but what did
they do? Not to open a theater for the citizens to worry and persecute each
other, under distinctions of the virtuous few, and protection-men; they only
passed an act substituting the mode of giving in their votes at the elections,
openly and publicly, instead of balloting as formerly.

How the legislature could make this proclamation of the Governor the
groundwork of all their proceedings, cannot be accounted for, but by
considering that such was his influence, and the management of his party, that
it became dangerous to make any opposition. The great majority of the Assembly
were men who had taken protection; but who from local situation were enabled to
join the army, or find a substitute.

What a strong impression of horror of the Governor's arbitrary power must
those members have upon them, when they gave their votes for degrading their
fellow-citizens from the rights of freemen, only for doing what they did
themselves, making a temporary submission to a conqueror! Some gratified the
workings of revenge, and others some other paltry passion. But they were all
mere tools to carry on the business of usurpation on the freedom of their
country, and raise a few families to a height of power as would one day crush
them and their posterity.

IV. On the Exclusion Act, which cuts of the Citizens from the Rights of
Election.
The following words of the preamble of the Exclusion Act are worth quoting:

AND WHEREAS it is inconsistent with justice and policy that any of the persons
who are excluded by the Governor's proclamation from pardon should be admitted
to vote for, or be eligible as members of the Legislature; be it enacted, that
no person by the said proclamation excepted, shall be entitled to vote for, or
be eligible as members of either branch of the Legislature.

This Act of Assembly supposes with the Governor, that all who did not come in
whithin the time specified by the proclamation, and serve six months, had
forfeited their liberty, and that such as obeyed, were restored to lost
freedom. But the gentlemen of both Houses forgot, that the citizens of
South Carolina had to thank the Governor for nothing: Their rights and
liberties were founded on something else besides parchment, or paper, or a
proclamation; they were built on the laws of nature, and the fundamental laws
of the State, and they were supported by the valor, and cemented by the blood
of those brave men who fought, bled, and died in the cause of freedom, not for
the usurpation of a few, but for the liberties and happiness of all. And yet
this wretched country at this very hour, when peace and happiness should
prevail, is split into a faction of two classes of men; the one sort, a set of
mongrel freemen, begot between G -- R -- and a proclamation, or his party in
the Assembly; or holding the privilege of voting because they could advance
fifty or sixty guineas to procure a substitute. The rest are aliens in the
government, divested of every privilege we have been contending for these seven
years past, and to be ruled and taxed without their consent. Even the
unfortunate citizens of Charlestown, who though they were not six months-men
under G -- R -- 's proclamation, yet were actually six years-men like common
soldiers, before the reduction of the town. Their zeal for the cause, and
courage in supporting it, was often proved on dangerous and honorable trials:
They were all taken in defending it; and the great bulk of them bore hunger,
insults and persecution before they would submit even to a conqueror; yet are
their services not only forgotten, but they have been abused and worried as if
they were convicts, and are now little better than vassals in their own city,
except a few of the richer sort, who could buy the freedom of voting; which it
seems before this last general election was let to sale as it were with an
OYEZ. Gold, it appears, with all their pretended fears of tory influence can
work a miracle, by making a man a whig, and buy a right of voting or being
elected. Is not this like the coming of the day of judgment to our freedom?
when the right of election, to keep which chaste and unspotted, we went to war
with Great Britain, is now, like a public strumpet, to be embraced only by him
who can pull out his guineas, and advance a mercenary reward?

I have now done with the proclamation and election business; and here I must
declare, that I can lay my hand on my heart, and say, that I entertain no
personal dislike or prejudice to J -- R --. It is not the man I censure but the
measure. Probably any other citizen with the power of doing what he pleased,
would have acted no better; for supreme authority is so intoxicating to human
nature, that even the good are misled by it. The aggrandisement of his family,
and perpetuating power in it; or being at the head of an aristocracy, is of far
greater consequence to an able, ambitious man, than public freedom.
South Carolina is not the only place in the world where a first-rate citizen,
of a guardian of his countrymens liberty, turned an invader, and subverted it,
under pretense of preserving it.

V. On the Confiscation Act.
I SHALL now enter on the Confiscation Act; make a few remarks on the
Amercement Law; and conclude with endeavoring to prove that an Act of Amnesty
and Oblivion is the only means for restoring order, tranquillity and happiness
to our common country.

The principal difficulty I meet with on a subject where so much may be said,
is to confine myself within the narrow compass I proposed.

It is impossible not to feel distress when we reflect on the miseries which
each party in a civil war, inflicts on the other as they become uppermost. The
cruel oppressions of the British, particularly the personal insults and outrage
we suffered from their officers, after the fall of the country, is enough to
make a man shudder.

Their treatment was so extravagantly outrageous, that no description will ever
give a just idea of it; and to myself who was a witness and a sufferer, it
appears like a dream, and almost incredible to me. Their cruelty to the
garrison; their violation of the capitulation; their sequestration and plunder;
their banishing the tender sex, our wives, and children, to a distant country,
merely to gratify malice, as a days journey would have set them down amidst
their friends in their own country: During all this scene of violence and
revenge, we ourselves never ceased to make the most tragical complaints, and
calling heaven and earth to witness and avenge the injustice of our enemies;
and yet no sooner did Providence turn things in our favor, and restore to us
our country, than instead of thinking how to settle the peace and happiness of
it, we took the quite contrary way, and looked about for means of doing
vengeance in our turn, by way of retaliation. No sooner did we cease to fear
and suffer, than our next endeavor was to make others fear and feel misery, as
if it was necessary either to be suffering ruin or doing mischief. In thinking
on these bitter calamities which men are so ingenious in contriving for each
other, he must be more or less than man who cannot feel compassion and sorrow
for the unhappy lot of human nature, and cry out with Shakespeare, Merciful
sweet Heaven!
Who rather with thy sharp and sulphurous bolt.
Splitst the unwedgeable and knarled oak,
Than the soft myrtle. O! but man, proud man,
Dressed in a little brief authority,
Most ignorant of what he is most assured,
(His glassy essence) like an angry ape
Plays such fantastic tricks before high Heaven,
As make the angels weep.


Our act of assembly which banishes so many citizens, after reducing their
families Beccaria makes the following remarks on confiscation: The law which
ordains confiscations, sets a price on the head of the subject; with the guilty
punishes the innocent; and by reducing them to indigence and despair, tempts
them to become criminal. Can there be a more melancholy spectacle, than a whole
family, overwhelmed with infamy and misery, from the crime of their chief? a
crime, which if it had been possible, they were restrained from preventing, by
that submission which the laws themselves have ordained.
to beggary, without hearing, is perhaps the most furious proscription of which
we have any account in all history. Sylla, the Dictator, by virtue of his
extraordinary powers, to be revenged on the party in opposition, and enrich his
own adherents, banished more citizens, though he took not perhaps half the
property we did. He disdained however to do it under pretense or color of law
and constitution; he did it as Lord Cornwallis sequestered our estates, and
banished our families, by dint of military force, at the head of an army
devoted to him.

In the civil discord and factions of the small republics of Greece, the party
which was uppermost sometimes banished the leading men on the other side. But
this proceeding was always done in a mobbish way, or by force of arms. But our
Assembly very peaceably, under the mask of justice, and under the forms of
parliament, condemned the citizens in violation of the spirit and substance of
both. No crime alleged; no one article of charge given in against any of them;
nor does any such accusation appear on the journals of either house at this
moment. Before they heard of it with any certainty, the law was passed and
their doom fixed. At the time the Assembly was taking his property from the
citizen, which the State should secure for the maintenance of his children; at
the instant he was condemned to utter ruin and infamy, and put to a political
death; the unhappy man was in Charlestown, with his wife and family; perhaps
struggling under the pressure of necessity in getting them common necessaries,
or suffering under British tyranny; and his little property going for a trifle,
under the despotic orders of a military tribunal. This was the case with many
of them.

And thus, a report or idle slory, an old grudge, revenge, or malice, supplied
the place of legal accusation, of evidence, of Judge and Jury.

The injustice of this measure is so enormous, that the endeavoring to prove
it, is like proving that the Sun now shines at noonday. Hearing the accused,
and giving him a chance to defend himself, is the first and most sacred rule of
justice. All sorts of laws, civil and military, laws of parliament,
courts-martial, and others, hear proof and defense; and any tribunal that
refuses to hear proof, refuses to do justice; and must thereby suffer a ruin of
character, and bear an eternal stigma and reproach on the face of its
proceedings.

According to Magna Charta, which is in force in this State, No man shall be
disinherited, nor put out of his franchises, or freehold, unless he be duly
brought to answer, and before-judged by due course of law, if any thing be done
to the contrary, it shall be redressed and holden for none.

By the -- clause of our constitution, or charter of liberties, No freeman
ought to be taken or imprisoned, or disseized of his freehold, liberties or
privileges, or outlawed, or exiled, or in any manner destroyed, or deprived of
his liberty or property, but by the judgment of his peers, or the law of the
land.

It is needless to observe that the liberty of the people through the other
States, are secured against arbitrary power in the same manner, by their
respective constitutions. All of them have passed laws of banishment and
confiscation against some of their dangerous citizens; but every one of them
appointed a long day, and public notice was given in the prints, to render
themselves for trial.

Nor did they make any distinction, whether the parties were within the enemy's
lines at New York, or elsewhere. The legislature of Pennsylvania, passed a
Second Act, for giving a further time to certain of the exiles, who were said
to be in England, and supposed to have been out of the reach of the former
proclamation; and accordingly this second law was notified in the prints. I am
credibly informed that the State of Maryland extended to their exiles, three
years to come in and show their innocence. In short we are the only State in
the Union, who ran blindfold into this irregular business, without hearing
their defense or giving them a future day to make it; except the State of
Georgia who improved on our example; but it seems are now repenting of it.

The drivers of the confiscation and other acts, may attempt to justfy the late
proceedings from the Parliamentary history of the House of Lords in England:
The nation whence we descended; whose code of laws we in general made use of,
and whose constitution of government we have copied as nearly as our
circumstances will admit. If in the whole history of that people, the measure
of attainting without a hearing, cannot be supported; then must it fall to the
ground: for as to the justice, reason, or policy of it, the mind of man must
revolt at it.

I do aver it to be a law of Parliament, That on all bills of attainder the
accused do appear and put in his answer; and the history of England affords not
a single instance of an attainder, that was grounded upon general charges,
without examination and hearing, but has been universally branded with marks
of detestation, by the lawyers and historians of that nation, and is at this
day, considered rather as a national reproach, than a precedent for imitation.
It is true their parliament have been too often led by the furious heats of
civil war, or the influence of arbitrary rulers, into acts of attainder without
a hearing. But they have not only been execrated, but almost uniformly reversed
by act of Parliament, for the injustice of them; as I shall show presently. In
moderate reigns, and when arbitrary power did not prevail, bills of attainder
in Parliament were conducted according to maxims of justice, or secundum
allegata and probata: That is, the accused was responsible only for such crimes
as were alleged and proved against him; if he was in any port of the king's
dominions, and forth coming, he had notice to appear, or was legally arrested;
if he absconded, then they proclaimed a day for his appearance, which if he
observed not, they proceeded to attaint him.

On the bill of attainder against the Earl of Clarendon, [Lords Debates, Vol.
I. etc] he was so generally obnoxious to all parties, that he did not think it
safe to abide by the event, but he fled his country to Holland. On this the
house sent a message to the king to issue a proclamation for his appearance,
and afterward the charges of impeachment against him were enquired into, and
referred to the opinion of the Judges whether they were criminal or not. This
is the law, this the mode of proceeding in the British Parliament, except where
law and justice were trampled on by tyranny and oppression.

I should have observed, that bills of attainder were never intended by the
English constitution, but as the ultimate resource upon extraordinary
occasions: The design of them was excellent; not to destroy mechanics and
people of obscure condition, such as our act of attainder is full of; but bills
of attainder was originally instituted to call to a severe reckoning, Governors
and Ministers of State, who, of public servants, turned public enemies; and
were by the influence which their very abuse of power gave them, grown too big
and weighty for Judge and Jury to deal with.

According to Judge Blackstone, this, and no other, was the true intent of
bills of attainder. For though in general, says he, the union of the
Legislature and judicial powers ought to be most carefully avoided, yet it may
happen that a subject entrusted with the administration of public affairs, may
infringe the rights of the people, and be guilty of such crimes as the ordinary
magistrate, either does not or cannot punish.

Blackstone's Commentaries V. IV. P. 258.

I shall leave the reader to apply the quotation as he chooses, and go on to
produce a few cases on attainders.

In the beginning of the reign of Edward III Roger, Earl Mortimer, Lord Coke
says they indicted him, and not being able to proceed that way, "Resolved to
ruin him by Attainder."
was condemned and executed without trial. But this attainder was reversed by
Act of Parliament for this reason, because he was not brought to judgment
according to the course of law.

1st. Ed. 3 The like happened to Edmond, Earl of Arundel; but in the 4th of
this reign, his son petitioned Parliament, setting forth, "that the proceedings
were contrary to Magna Charta, and insiding he should have been tried by due
course of law" And he was restored in part; and an act of reversal passed the
28th of this reign, declaring that the statute by which he was attainted, was
void and null.

4th. Ed. III. Sir Simon de Beresford, Materevers, and others were condemned to
death without trial or examination, for killing Edward II. and his uncle. But
the 19th of the same reign, a writ issued to suspend the judgment against
Materevers, for this reason, "because it had been illegally passed."

In the reign of Charles 1st, the Earl of Stafford was attainted by Act of
Parliament, but he was allowed to pot in his answer, and was heard before the
House of Lords. However, though the charges against him, amounted not to
treason or felony, he was condemned and executed through party malice and
revenge; but in the next reign his attainder was, for the injustice of it,
reversed by Act of Parliament, in which was a clause to this effect, viz. That
the said act of attainder against Earl Stafford be obliterated from the
journals of both houses, that the same be not visible in after ages, nor used
as a precedent against any person whatsoever.

For the act of attainder passed against Sir John Fenwick, William the IIId.
was branded by the British nation, because he was attainted without a witness;
whereas an act passed that very Parliament requiring two witnesses in cases of
treason.

It is impossible, says an author of a treatise on penal laws, to apologize for
the many bloody stains we find indelibly fixed upon English history. One of
Henry VIII's Parliaments, attainted the Countess of Salisbury, the Marchioness
of Exeter, and others, without any trial or citation to appear, or without
better proofs than the suggestions of the wretched sycophant Cromwell, (his
minister.) This instrument of regal tyranny, fell a sacrifice to the same
iniquitous measures himself. He was some time afterward attainted by the same
Parliament, and without trial, examination, or evidence, condemned to death and
executed. Principle of penal laws, c. 5.

My Lord Coke's remark on Cromwell's attainder without trial, is thus: --
Ausert oblivio, si potent, si non utcunque silentium regat. -- Let the
transaction be forever buried in oblivion, if possible; if not, conceal it as
well as we can. These cruel attainders are also censured by Bishop Burnet,
Hist. Reformat. Such bills, says he, cannot be enough condemned; for they were
a breach of the most sacred and unalterable rules of justice.

The cruelty of this Parliament in condemning the subjects without trial or
examination is also branded with infamy, by the historians, Hume, Rapin, and
those who went before them. To strike a blow of vengeance under the mask of
justice, is the most to be execrated of all iniquity; and the historian who
joins to a clear head, a good heart, never fails to deter posterity from such
deeds by painting them in proper colors. Mr Hume in the Countess of
Salisbury's case, observes; Henry resolved to proceed against her in a more
summary and more tyrannical manner; he found that her offenses could not be
proved, or that she could not by law be subjected to such severe punishment as
he desired to inflict on her. And for that purpose he sent Cromwell, who was
obsequious to his will, to demand of the judges whether the Parliament could
attaint a person who was forthcoming without giving him any trial, or citing
him to appear before them. The Judges replied it was a dangerous question, and
that the high court of Parliament ought to give examples to inferior courts, of
proceeding according to justice -- No inferior court could act in an arbitrary
manner, and they thought the Parliament never would. -- Being pressed to give a
more explicit answer, they replied, that if a person were attainted in that
manner, the attainder after could never be brought in question, and must remain
good in law. Henry learned by their decision that such a method of proceeding,
though the contrary to all principles of equity, was yet practicable.

In his account of Cromwell's fate he goes on. Immediately after a bill of
attainder was framed against him, and the House of Peers thought proper,
without trial, examination, or evidence, to condemn him to death. The only
circumstance of his conduct by which he seems to have merited this fate was,
his being the instrument of the king's tyranny in conducting the like
iniquitous bills in the former sessions against the Countess of Salisbury and
others.

The few quotations I have made need no comment. Every case I have given runs
parallel to that under consideration, and goes to prove the irregularity of the
late proceedings. -- They show what a clamor the illegal condemnation of even
one subject makes in a nation that pretends to freedom. And that no Parliament
was ever understood by any sound lawyer, or good historian, to have a lawful
power to destroy the citizens without trial or examination. It is so cruel and
unjust in its nature, that it can never be made lawful by an Act of Parliament
or of Assembly, any more than theft, adultery, or murder can.

But condemning without hearing is not the only objection against our late
proscription; it is what the lawyers call an ex post facto law; which even in
arbitrary governments is reckoned tyranny. An ex post facto law is such a law
as is made to day, to punish the action of yesterday, though yesterday's action
was innocent. A man for instance takes a protection from a conqueror, who is in
possession of the country, or signs a congratulation; this, I say, could not be
punished by any law of our State on a public and fair trial. To bring in a
retrospective act therefore, on purpose to ruin him, is an ex post facto law.
It first makes the crime out of nothing, or which is next to nothing, out of
appearances: and afterward ordains a punishment as revenge or caprice may
dictate. It requires some reflection to see into the mischiefs of such laws.
But all lawyers agree, that to punish for a fact done before there was a law to
forbid it, is not, properly speaking, a punishment, but hostility; not the
penalty of the law, but the outrage of an enemy. For before the law was, there
could be no trangression.

Against laws so destructive all moderate governments have armed themselves:
Most of our Sister States have done it expressly by their Constitutions. In the
Declaration of Rights of the State of Massachusetts Bay, it is enacted, article
24, That laws made to punish for actions done before the existence of such
laws, and which have not been declared crimes by preceding laws, are unjust,
oppressive, and inconsistent with the principles of a free government. Article
25, No subject ought in any case, or at any time to be declared guilty of
treason or felony by the Legislature.

Other States are guarded by similar laws, and the spirit of our own, if
attended to, forbids the use of them. For if there existed a country in which
they were frequent, it must be governed by the fierce passions of malice and
revenge, and not by justice and equity.

There are many weighty reasons why a Republic should be more cautious than any
other form of government, not to transgress their laws and constitutions by
arbitrary measures. A popular assembly, not governed by fundamental laws, but
under the blass of anger, malice, or a thirst for revenge, will commit more
excess than an arbitrary monarch In Athens the citizens went into a faction
about a division of corn. Party-rage was carried so far, that the stronger
side, actually sold 5000 of their fellow-citizens as slaves in the public
market. This is the only case that I recollect in history which exceeds the
late ^^^franchising of our citizens.
; The extravagant tyranny of Alexander, Nero, Herod, Henry VIIIth and others,
are well known.

But a popular assembly acting in the different characters of Legislators and
judges, who proceed to confiscation and banishment; to name names: to put in
personal enemies, In many instances at Jacksonborough, this was carried to
extraordinary lengths. It is well known a certain gentleman who is now in the
present Assembly, would have been banished, and his estate forfeited, had not
some friend secreted the slip of paper on which his name was inserted.
and keep out friends; will give more loose to malice, avarice, or revenge;
commit more injustice and glaring partiality; and differ in outrage from one
tyrant, as one firebrand is inferior to many hundreds lighted together, and
blown up by a fierce gale. Such deviations from justice, moderation and temper,
would fix disgrace on the very name of a republic.

In answer to this it will be said, that the excess of those powers lately
exerted by the legislature, can never be formidable, but to the enemies of the
republic; and that nothing can be too severe for the tories. Who can find fault
with severity of laws against men who were foremost in supporting British
tyranny? Why not give them a hearing, I say? They formerly took an oath of
allegiance to the State; and admitting they were guilty of the greatest crimes,
they were so far entitled to its protection, that they had a clear right to be
heard in their defense.

Unthinking are those who imagine that one arbitrary exertion of power will not
open a door for many others! There is hardly an instance in history of a law
made to be revenged on enemies, but that very law was brought in as a precedent
to destroy friends; and the thing is quite natural. For if the legislature can,
without ceremony, or forms of law, seize the property, or banish the person of
the meanest, or worst member of society; what I pray can hinder their stripping
or banishing men of character and virtue? If so obscure a man as Paday Hinas,
or so obnoxious a one as Bob Williams, can be banished, amerced, or put to
death without trial, hearing, or examination; whence comes security to you, or
even to J -- R -- himself.

He, and other citizens may blind and flatter themselves with hopes that no
mischiefs can accrue from such tyrannical proceedings. But as factions and
revolutions have been the lot of every republic that we ever heard of, our
government will no doubt have its share of them.

Time which changes all things, may bring matters about, so as to turn the
tables against the very men who were foremost in driving down those laws; for
after this precedent I see nothing they have to depend on, but faction, cabals,
or influence in the legislature: And the sheets on which those laws are
written, may wrap in winding-sheets some of their descendants.

I observed before, that history abounds with examples which prove, that
arbitrary laws made to punish obnoxious people, have been generally used
afterward, as precedents to the destruction of the innocent.

In the city of Athens, says Sir Walter Raleigh, Hist. World. the thirty
Tyrants, apprehended those banditti who were most wicked and odious to the
city, and put them to death, though not punishable by law; which proceeding was
approved by all the citizens; who considered their lewd conditions and crimes,
but did not all bethink themselves, how easy a thing it is, to take away the
life of innocents, by calling them disturbers of the peace, or what else they
listed, when condemnation without trial had been once allowed.

In our own time, says that judicious historian, Salust, when the conqueror
Sylla ordered the villain Damasyppus and others of his stamp to be put to
death, who did not commend the deed? They said that a wicked banditti who had
harrassed the State with their villainies, were put to death deservedly. But
these proceedings were the beginning of a mighty calamity; for when any of
Sylla's adherents coveted a barony or plantation, and at last a piece of plate
or a fine coat, he took care the owner should be put down in the (confiscation
list) list of the proscribed; thus they to whom the death of Damasyppus was
matter of joy, were a little afterward dragged themselves to execution. De
bell. Catillini.

I have thus far endeavored to show that the laws and constitution of our
country have been violated, the personal and civil rights of the people
invaded; that the landmark has been removed which points out our inheritance
and right to freedom; and that we run the risque of drawing down a curse on
ourselves and posterity for the cruelty and injustice of the Confiscation Law.

VI. On the Amercement Act.
AS to the Amercement Act, every argument which I have used above, apply with
equal force against it; not to speak of the injustice of stripping our citizens
of their property, without examination or hearing; The Amercement Act is the
most impolitic that could be devised. I insist upon it, that if it stood
unrepealed, it would do more real injury to this country than the invasion and
all the ravages of the British army. The misfortunes of the war will be soon
out-grown by a young country, so fertile and full of resources as ours. But the
divisions and heart-burnings which those amercements will leave behind, would
turn out a bitter misfortune to us, and go as an inheritance to our children.
It will irritate one half of the people against the other, and disgrace both;
by the injustice done on one side, and the reproach endeavored to be fixed on
the other; many worthy citizens, and of as good families as any we have, being
handed down on the journals of both houses as traitors and enemies to their
country. It will also serve to keep alive the memory of the troubles of the
present day, which should be buried in oblivion. Therefore the application of
such laws as that of the amercement, can never be said to be governing a
country. It is rather distracting it, and turning things upside down. Those men
are deprived of their property, without being so much as allowed to hear the
accusation against them, contrary to the fundamental laws of the State. Can any
one imagine that such extraordinary proceedings will produce no bad consequence
in the community? and that all division, discontent and murmur about the matter
will be soon over, as if nothing had happened? This law of itself would be
sufficient to disturb the peace of the country, and alarm every thinking man in
it; and he who thinks otherwise has but little knowledge of human nature.

The reader may judge by the preamble, whether the Committee who framed the
Amercement Law, paid more attention to law and fact than they did civil
language. Whereas many persons inhabitants of, and owing allegiance to this
State (some bearing high and important commissions) have withdrawn themselves
from the defense thereof, accepted protection, etc.

I have proved already that our government was dissolved; it did not exist, and
of course those who are amerced could not withdraw from its defense: At the
Republic could not give the citizen protection, which is the equivalent he
receives for allegiance, he owed none, and yet the preamble insists, "they owed
allegiance." We also see that "accepting protection" is stated as a high crime,
though I have proved above it was not. It goes on: And are either within the
lines of the enemy, or have omitted to enroll themselves and perform the duties
of their country, pointed out and required by the Proclamation of his
Excellency the Governor, of the 27th of September, in utter contempt of the
executive authority, and evil example of society.

My remarks on the circumstances of the inhabitants who were within the enemy's
guards, have, I hope, satisfied the reader that the proclamation was improper
and oppressive; that those citizens could not possibly comply with it; and that
remaining where they were was perfectly justifiable.

And whereas there are others, who forgetting the social ties of kindred and
humanity, and regardless of the duty and allegiance they had most solemnly
sworn to their country, did actually subscribe, and pay by themselves or
agents, considerable sums of money toward mounting and equipping a troop or
troops of cavalry, or other military force for the service of his Britannic
Majesty. It is a maxim of our law that the greater the crime of which any
citizen is accused, the clearer should be the proof to convict him of it: Yet
the preamble states those facts without any sort of proof that can be called
legal, and in utter contempt of all law-knowledge declares the facts to be a
crime, that if true, were not punishable by our laws.

In all countries overrun by an invading and victorious army, nothing more
common than to raise, what is called Contribution, for the support of it; and
in cities and civilized places, to make the matter easy to the people, or from
an affectation of politeness, which soldiers of fortune can sometimes put on,
with the bayonet (...) your breast, the thing is generally done by
subscription; and we (...) the first example of such contribution being charged
as a (...).

Those in Charlestown who subscribed for the British cavalry, were some of them
volunteers for raising a force against us; but I believe this was not the case
with all of them; the citizens was under the yoke of a tyrant, who had a
thousand ways of doing him mischief.

He had favors to ask of British commanders; a restoration of indigo, rice,
cattle, or other property, was a great one that day; and to be purchased only
by mortifying concessions. To such people the subscribing to British cavalry,
was another name for contribution. It was done perhaps under the highest
necessity and compulsion. To make that a crime therefore, by a retrospective
law, which was none before, and condemn them to near a third of their property,
was what I mentioned above, to be punishing by ex post facto law, and is
arbitrary and unconstitutional. The amerced citizens are painted as miscreants
who do not deserve to live; yet not one act charged in the preamble could be
construed to be a breach of any law of South Carolina.

As the amercement law is founded on injustice and bad policy; it is no wonder
that the mode in which it is enforced, adds to the hardship of it. Three
freeholders are chosen by the commissioners, to appraise those estates, without
the control or challenge of the owner: and however enormous the valuation they
set, yet he must abide by it, without appeal or redress. The freeholders may be
raw unexperienced men, or biassed by the prejudices, malice, or revenge,
peculiar to civil troubles, or misled by a thirst for speculation on the
property of their neighbor. It is easy to see therefore, that injustice and
oppression must be the lot of many. It is said by good judges, that some
estates have been appraised at upwards of twice their real value; so that the
proprietor, instead of 12 or 30 per cent. may suffer an entire confiscation of
the whole. Those who have large families to bring up, and are much in debt,
must be completely ruined; and in this manner are our laws and forms of justice
overturned, which have been handed down as our birthright for ages past; and
the fruits of a man's toil and industry, which every good government ought to
secure for the education and advancement of his children, are snatched from him
in a moment.

There is something very curious in the story of the republic which was
attempted in England, in the last century, after the trial and execution of
Charles I. and the expulsion of his family. It is worth the reader's attention:
The true republican spirit never shone with more luster on any spot of the
globe. Such was the enthusiasm of that nation, that it produced, as it were in
an instant, a race of heroes, patriots, and men of letters, who all
distinguished themselves in pulling down kingly government, and setting up a
commonwealth.

The great Milton, Harrington, and other men of genius, employed all the charms
of eloquence to cherish and support it. But their liberties under their
favorite republic they did not maintain a moment. Not because the conjuncture
of affairs was unfavourable; for it was quite otherwise. But the members of the
new legislature, forgetting that they were young beginners in the art of
governing; instead of endeavoring to reconcile all parties to the republic, by
a temperate administration of law and justice; set to work immediately to
gratify personal malice and revenge; and pursue their adversaries, the
Royalists, with confiscation and amercement.

Some had to avenge cruelty or insults, when in the hands of their enemies;
others the burning of their houses, or to retaliate the death of their kindred;
or the plunder of their property; all which mischiefs, the royal party, in the
hour of success, never failed to execute.

By way of retaliation, they were plundered, imprisoned, decimated, says an
annalist, and so worried by amercements or fines, that they were forced to
compound over and over, 'till at last they had nothing left.

Many of them were forced by such tyranny, to fly their country, and suffered
such distress abroad, that the very gentlemen were forced to fell themselves as
slaves to the Dutch, who accordingly transported them to their plantations.

The blessings of heaven could not attend scenes of such oppression. The spirit
of discord went forth among the people; mutual hatred and animosity arose
between neighbors; fear and apprehensions seized others, for themselves or
family connections: Men had no resource or safety, but to enter into parties,
form factions and cabals, to support themselves or friends. And thus
oppression, hatred, malice, and vexation, seemed to have been let loose by
Divine Providence, as a punishment on the nation. Their affairs at last were so
entangled and distracted by the animosity of contending parties, that the
tyrant Cromwell sprung up in the height of it; and the sensible part of the
people were glad to submit to his usurpation, rather than bear any longer the
misery of being governed by men, who set moderation and justice at defiance and
who proved themselves totally incapable of any thing, but to create public and
private ruin.

God Almighty has so ordered the affairs of men in this world, that a
mischievous legislature, any more than a mischievous individual, can never
succeed in oppression and injustice, without drawing down a curse and
misfortune on itself. And should the legislature of South Carolina, and Georgia
persist in the fearful measures lately pursued, I make no ceremony to foretell,
that we and they shall remain a conspicuous example with posterity, to prove,
that the people are incapable of governing themselves. Tyranny will be
furnished from our history with another new example to establish her favorite
principle, that mankind were destined by nature for slavery, and to be hewers
of wood and drawers of water for one or a few.

VII. The Conclusion, with Remarks to prove the Necessity of an Amnesty, or Act
of Oblivion
THE experience of all countries has shown, that where a community splits into
a faction, and has recourse to arms, and one finally gets the better, a law to
bury in oblivion past transactions is absolutely necessary to restore
tranquillity. For if after a civil war, and one party vanquished, persecution
was to go on; if the fury of laws and the fierce rage of passions prevailed,
while the minds of men were yet fired by deadly revenge against their fallen
adversaries; this would be worse than keeping up the war: it would be carrying
on hostility under the shape of justice, which is the most oppressive, and of
all other injustice, excites the greatest detestation, and the most violent
factions and division.

Every part of Europe has had its share of affliction by usurpation, or civil
war, as we have had lately; but every one of them considered an act of oblivion
as the first step on their return to peace and order. This was the case in
Greece and Rome, as well as in England and other places, as I shall show by a
few examples.

The cruelty of the thirty tyrants in Athens exceeded all bounds. Xenophon
tells us, they destroyed more citizens in eight months than were killed in
thirty years war; and what made them more formidable was their being supported
by 3000 citizens. However, they were at last deposed by an armed force, under
Thrasybulus, and their ruin was followed by a general amnesty. By which order
wisely made, and carefully observed, the city returned to its former quietness,
says Raleigh.

I cannot forbear observing, says Rollin, speaking of that event, the wisdom
and moderation of Thrasybulus, so essential after a long continuance of
domestic troubles. This is one of the finest events in ancient history, worthy
the Athenian lenity and benevolence, and has served as a model for successive
ages to good governments.

Never had tyranny been more cruel and bloody than that which the Athenians had
shaken off: Every house was in mourning: Every family bewailed the loss of some
relation. I had been a series of public robbery and rapine; in which license
and impunity had authorized all manner of crimes. The people seemed to have a
right to demand the blood of all accomplices in their villainies; but
Thrasybulus rose above those sentiments: from the superiority of his genius,
and his views of a more distinguishing policy, he foresaw that by giving into
the punishment of the guilty, eternal seeds of discord and enmity would remain
and weaken the republic by domestic divisions.

All historians and political writers condemn the mischievous policy of
pursuing the citizens with prosecutions after civil wars. Machiavel himself,
though for violent measures on other occasions, yet strongly recommends an act of
oblivion after a revolution. And he censures the conduct of the Roman republic
on the expulsion of the ten tyrants, for not passing an amnesty, instead of
carrying on prosecutions against those citizens who supported their tyranny.

In that republic ten of their principal citizens were entrusted with
extraordinary powers; but regardless of laws or constitution, they seized on
the government and freedom of the people; who, with the assistance of the army,
expelled them after three years usurpation Appius was at the head of that
tyranny, and his cruelty and lust are well known. Yet the proceedings against
him are condemned by all historians, for he was refused a hearing and appeal
before the people, agreeable to their constitution.
. Inflamed with success and revenge, the very people who had taken the tyrant's
protection, for all did it; were for putting to death the most violent and
mischievous and their adherents. Machiavel's remarks on this conduct is worth
noting.

It is a very great fault in a State, says he, every day in the citizens minds
to renew the memory of old wrongs done to this and that man, with new
punishments, as it befell at Rome under the Decemvirate. For all the ten, and
sundry other citizens were accused and condemned, so that the nobility were
affrighted, thinking they would never leave off condemning them 'till they had
destroyed the whole. And certainly it had produced some great commotion in the
city, if Marcus Duellius the Tribune, had not passed a decree, that for a whole
year it should not be lawful to accuse any citizen. Where we see how great a
hurt it is in a republic, or prince, to hold their subjects minds in suspicion
and fear with continual prosecutions and punishments; and without doubt a worse
course cannot be taken. For men that begin to doubt of mischief in any case,
provide for themselves in their danger, grow bolder and less respectful how
they venture on novelties. Wherefore it is necessary never to hurt any, or the
hurt that is done to do it at once, and afterward let them enjoy some
assurance that may give them cause to quiet and settle their minds. Machiavels
discourse.

Whether the necessity of a general amnesty ever occured to the reader or not,
the above observations will strike him very forcibly, as they apply so well to
our present situation. However, to make this matter still clearer, I shall draw
a comparison between the conduct of the British nation, on the restoration,
after the grand rebellion, and of our legislature on the re-establishment of
our republic in 1782.

The situation of the two countries was similar in this, that England suffered
a usurpation under Cromwell, and other tyrants, and South Carolina under the
tyranny of Great Britain: And the inhabitants of both countries, with few
exceptions, submitted to the usurpers. But in other circumstances England
differed from us: British tyranny prevailed in this country only about 16
months. Their officers plundered our side boards of place, and our wardrobes of
their contents, to a considerable amount; and stole, or were the death of about
twenty thousand negroes. In battle and cold blood they destroyed perhaps 3000
of our citizens; and they tortured our every manlike feeling, by distressing
our families, and insults to ourselves, whenever we fell into their hands. This
is rating our damage pretty fairly.

But these injuries vanish into nothing, compared with what the English nation
suffered in the grand rebellion. It lasted 19 years I think. The stronger party
dethroned the prince, brought him to a public trial, and put him to death. The
heir to the crown-having been detained under various indignities a prisoner in
Scotland, put himself at the head of an army; and was defeated in battle at
Worcester.

Ten thousand of his adherents were made prisoners, many of whom Cromwell sold
as slaves to the West India planters. Young Charles, after the rout was hunted
like a deer, and by assuming various disguises got to France. When abroad he
was reduced so low that he could not command a pistole. The number of subjects
destroyed on both sides is computed at half a million.

When the troubles were over, and Charles the Second was restored to the
throne, he had his own injuries and the ruin of his friends, to avenge. But did
he avenge those injuries? Did he dismiss his first parliament, as we did the
last assembly, leaving the terrors of laws hanging over the people's heads; and
resolve to send the courts of sessions through the country, to fill it with
condemnations and convicts, to the disgrace and utter distress of families, and
add to the list of widows and orphans? He did nothing of all this. The very
first bill he passed was an act of amnesty, to settle the distractions of the
nation. Had he reasoned like our politicians, he would have fallen upon
confiscation, banishment and amercement; and under pretense of preventing a
future rebellion, he would like us, have passed acts to exclude from votes or
seats in the legislature, such as were deemed enemies to royalty. Instead of
such like measures, which would have only increased the nation's misfortunes,
he passed a general amnesty; out of which forty nine of the late king's judges
were excepted. These had a fair and public trial, and of the whole, ten only
were executed. This was all the blood shed after so furious a civil war.

I shall transcribe one healing clause of this famous I refer any of the
Gentlemen in the Assembly to the first volume of the Lords debates.
act of amnesty, which is worthy to be remembered.

And to the end and purpose that all names and terms of distinction, may be
likewise put in utter oblivion, be it further enacted, that if any person or
persons, within the space of three years next ensuing, shall presume
maliciously to call or allege, or object against any person or persons, any
name or names, or other words of reproach, any way leading to revive the memory
of the late differences; that then every such person offending as aforesaid,
shall pay ten pounds if a gentleman, and forty shillings if of an inferior
degree.

It is a maxim in politics, that if a breach be made in the constitution of a
government, and it be not healed, it will prove as fatal to its freedom, as a
wound that is neglected and suffered to mortify, would to the life of a man. I
proved clearly that ours received a mortal one; and should the present assembly
leave it to inflame, without applying a cure, we cease to be a free people. The
remedy I speak of is lenient, all healing. Repeal at once the late election
act, the amercement law, and the confiscation act, as far as it affects those
who were our citizens. -- And in order that such proceedings may not be drawn
into precedent hereafter, let there be a clause, to obliterate those three acts
from the journals of both houses. Pass an act of amnesty and oblivion, with as
few exceptions as possible; allowing such as may be excluded, a day to come in
and be heard, either before the court of sessions, on a fair and public trial;
or should they be men whose inveteracy, power or influence may be dangerous to
the State, and are not liable to punishment by our laws; let them have a
hearing before the legislature on articles of impeachment. -- Provided we mean
that the word Republic should signify something more than mere sound, pass an
Act for dissolving the present Assembly.

If every citizen cannot enjoy the rights of election and representation,
according to the constitution, I hope ^o body will be so idle as to talk of
Liberty. This, and the (...) of the three acts abovementioned, is the measure,
and the only one that can reconcile us to the friendship of each other; it will
put an end to silly distinctions and faction: leave us at liberty to shake
hands as brethren, whose fate it is to live together; and it will stand as a
more lasting monument of our national wisdom, justice and magnanimity, than
statues of brass or marble.

These are the sentiments of one who pleads not for personal indulgence. In the
varieties of good and bad fortune which America has passed through, he shared in
her joys and sorrows. Though the connection with her brought him little besides
the affection she inspired; though the changes in her health and appearance
were often for the worst, yet it made no change in him; and neither in feeling,
word, or deed, from the fidelity he pledged to her, has he deviated a moment.
If he has any political sin to answer for, it is that he disdains in the hour
of success, to triumph over the distress of any man who once bore the name of a
fellow-citizen. And should the present publication but contribute to restore
harmony to the Republic; or prevent the return of the bitter hours of
heart-ake, which many an innocent man has undergone since last January; then
however silent or obscure my walk in life, I shall enjoy a sweet and secret
pleasure of having done some service to my country.

CASSIUS.
Charlestown, 14th January, 1783.
NEW WORKS of Entertainment, now Selling at BELL's Book-Store in Third-Street,
Philadelphia.
1. Moore's Travels containing a View of Society and Manners in France,
Switzerland, and Germany, 2 Volumes nearly Bound in one -- Price Three Dollars
and a Half. 2. Moore's Travels containing a View of Society and Manners in
Italy, 2 Vols. neatly Bound in one -- Price 3 Dolls. and a Half. 3. The Man of
the World, with the Man of Feeling, and the Sentimental Sailor. -- Price Three
Dollars. 4. Emma Corbett, on the miseries of Civil War, with Lord Lyttelton's
Letters to his Friend. -- Price Three Dollars.

