AN APPEAL TO Matter of Fact and Common Sense. OR A RATIONAL DEMONSTRATION OF
Man's corrupt and lost Estate.

Ye pompous sons of Reason idolized
And villify'd at once; of Reason dead,
Then deify'd, as monarchs were of old;
Wrong not the Christian; think not Reason yours:
It Is Reason our great Master holds so dear;
It Is Reason's injured rights his wrath resents;
It Is Reason's voice obeyed his glories crown;
To give lost Reason life he poured his own;
Believe, and show the Reason of a Man;
Believe, and taste the pleasure of a God;
Through Reason's wounds alone thy faith can die.
Young's Night Thoughts. The Son of Man is come to seek and to save that which
was LOST.

Luke xix. 10. BRISTOL: Printed,

PHILADELPHIA: REPRINTED BY MELCHIOR STEINER, IN RACE-STREET, NEAR
THIRD-STREET. M.DCC.LXXXIII.

To the principal Inhabitants of the Parish of Madeley, in the County of Salop.
GENTLEMEN,
YOU are no less entitled to my private labors, than the inferior class of my
parishioners. As you do not choose to partake with them of my evening
instruction, I take the liberty to present you with some of my morning
meditations. May these well-meant endeavors of my pen, be more acceptable to
you than those of my tongue: And may you carefully read in your closets, what
you have perhaps inattentively heard in the church! I appeal to the Searcher of
hearts, that I had rather impart truth than receive tithes: You kindly bestow
the latter upon me; grant me, I pray, the satisfaction of seeing you favorably
receive the former, from,

GENTLEMEN, Your affectionate Minister and obedient Servant, J. FLETCHER.
Madeley, 1772.
CONTENTS.
An Introduction. FIRST PART.
THE Doctrine of man's corrupt and lost estate is stated at large, in the words
of the Prophets, Apostles, and Jesus Christ; and recapitulated in those of the
Articles, Homilies, and Liturgy of the Church of England.

SECOND PART.
Man is considered as an inhabitant of the natural world, and his fall is
proved by arguments deduced from the misery, in which he is now undeniably
involved; compared with the happiness, of which we cannot help conceiving him
possessed, when he came out of the hands of his gracious Creator.

A view of this misery in the following particulars. -- I. The disorders of the
globe we inhabit, and the dreadful scourges with which it is visited. -- II.
The deplorable and shocking circumstances of our birth. -- III. The painful and
dangerous travail of women. -- IV. The untimely dissolution of still-born, or
newborn children. -- V. Our natural uncleanliness, helplessness, ignorance,
and nakedness. -- VI. The gross darkness in which we naturally are, both with
respect to God and a future state. -- VII. The general rebellion of the brute
creation against us. -- VIII. The various poisons that lurk in the animal,
vegetable, and mineral world, ready to destroy us. -- IX. The heavy curse of
toil and sweat, to which we are liable; instances of which are given in the
hard and dangerous labors of the author's parishioners. -- X. The other
innumerable calamities of life. -- And XI. the pangs of death.

THIRD PART.
Man is considered as a citizen of the moral world, a free agent, accountable
to his Creator for his tempers and conduct; and his fall is farther
demonstrated by arguments drawn from -- XII. His commission of sin. -- XIII.
His omission of duty. -- XIV. The triumphs of sensual appetites over his
intellectual faculties. -- XV. The corruption of the powers that constitute a
good head; the understanding, imagination, memory, and reason. -- XVI. The
depravity of the powers which form a good heart; the will, conscience, and
affections. -- XVII. His manifest alienation from God. -- XVIII. His amazing
disregard even of his nearest relatives. -- XIX. His unaccountable unconcern
about himself. -- XX. His detestable tempers. -- XXI. The general outbreaking
of human corruption in all individuals. -- XXII. The universal overflowing of
it in all nations. Five objections answered. -- XXIII. Some striking proofs of
this depravity in the general propensity of mankind to vain, irrational, or
cruel diversions; and -- XXIV. In the universality of the most ridiculous,
impious, inhuman, and diabolical sins. -- XXV. The aggravating circumstances
attending the display of this corruption. -- XXVI. The many ineffectual
endeavors to stem its torrent. -- XXVII. The obstinate resistance it makes to
divine grace in the unconverted. -- XXVIII. The amazing struggles of good men
with it. -- XXIX. The testimony of the Heathens and Deists concerning it; and
after all -- XXX. The preposterous conceit which the unconverted have of their
own goodness.

FOURTH PART.
Man is considered as an inhabitant of the Christian world, and his fallen
state is further proved by six scriptural arguments, introduced by a short
demonstration of the authenticity of the scriptures, and by a little attack
upon the amazing CREDULITY of Deists. The heads of these arguments are -- XXXI.
The impossibility that fallen, corrupt Adam, should have an upright, innocent
posterity; with answers to some capital objections. -- XXXII. The spirituality
and severity of God's law, which the unrenewed man continually breaks; --
XXXIII. Our strong propensity to unbelief, the most destructive of all sins
according to the gospel. -- XXXIV. The absurdity of the Christian religion with
respect to infants, and strict moralists; -- XXXV. The harshness and cruelty of
Christ's fundamental doctrines; and -- XXXVI. The extravagance of the grand
article of the Christian faith; if mankind are not in a corrupt and lost estate.

FIFTH PART.
The doctrine of man's fall being established by such a variety of arguments;
first, a few natural inferences are added: secondly, various fatal consequences
attending the ignorance of our lost estate; thirdly, the unspeakable advantages
arising from the right knowledge of it.

The whole is concluded with an ADDRESS to the serious Reader, who enquires
what he must do to be saved. -- And with an APPENDIX, concerning the
evangelical harmony, that subsists between living faith, and loving obedience.

INTRODUCTION.
IN religious matters we easily run into extremes. Nothing is more common than
to see people embracing one error, under the plausible pretense of avoiding
another.

Many, through fear of infidelity, during the night of ignorance and storm of
passion, run against the wild rocks of superstition and enthusiasm; and
frequently do it with such force, that they make shipwreck of the faith, and
have little of godliness left, except a few broken pieces of its form.

Numbers, to shun that fatal error, steer quite a contrary course: Supposing
themselves guided by the compass of reason, when they only follow that of
prejudice, with equal violence they dash their speculative brains against the
opposite rocks of deism and profaneness; and fondly congratulate themselves on
escaping the shelves of fanaticism, whilst the leaky bark of their hopes is
ready to sink, and that of their morals is perhaps sunk already. Thus, both
equally overlook sober, rational, heartfelt piety, that lies between those
wide and dangerous extremes.

To point out the happy medium which they have missed, and call them back to
the narrow path, where Reason and Revelation walk hand in hand, is the design
of these sheets. May the Father of lights so shine upon the Reader's mind, that
he may clearly discover truth, and notwithstanding the severity of her aspect,
prefer her to the most soothing error!

If he is one of those, who affect to be the warm votaries of Reason, he is
entreated to be a close-thinker, as well as a free-thinker; and with careful
attention to consider Reason's dictates, before he concludes, that they agree
with his favorite sentiments. He has, no doubt, too much candor, not to grant
so equitable a request; too much justice, to set aside Matter of fact; and too
much good sense, to disregard an Appeal to common sense.

Should he incline to the opposite extreme, and cry down our rational powers;
he is desired to remember, Right Reason, which is that I appeal to, is a ray of
the light that enlightens every man who comes into the world, and a beam of the
eternal Logos, the glorious Sun of Righteousness.

God, far from blaming a proper use of the noble faculty, by which we are
chiefly distinguished from brutes, graciously invites us to the exercise of it:
Come now, says he, and let us reason together. Jesus commends the unjust
steward, for reasoning better upon his wrong, than the children of light, upon
their right principles. Samuel desires the Israelites to stand still, that he
may REASON with them before the Lord. St. Peter charges believers to give an
answer to every one, that asks them a REASON of their hope. And St. Paul, who
reasoned so conclusively himself, intimates, that wicked men are UNREASONABLE;
and declares, that a total dedication of ourselves to God is our REASONABLE
service: And, while he challenges the vain disputers of this world, who would
make jests pass for proofs, invectives for arguments, and sophistry for reason;
he charges Titus to use, not merely sound speech, but, as the original also
means, SOUND REASON, that he who is of the contrary part may be ashamed.

Let us then, following his advice and example, pay a due regard both to reason
and revelation: So shall we, according to his candid direction, break the
shackles of prejudice, prove all things; and, by divine grace, hold fast that
which is good.

AN APPEAL TO MATTER OF FACT, etc.
FIRST PART.
IN every religion there is a principal truth or error, which, like the first
link of a chain, necessarily draws after it all the parts, with which it is
essentially connected. This leading principle, in Christianity distinguished
from Deism, is the Doctrine of our corrupt and lost estate: for if man is not
at variance with his Creator, what need of a Mediator between God and him? If
he is not a depraved, undone creature, what necessity of so wonderful a
Restorer and Savior as the Son of God? If he is not inslaved to sin, why is he
redeemed by Jesus Christ? If he is not polluted, why must he be washed in the
blood of that immaculate Lamb? If his soul is not disordered, what occasion is
there for such a divine Physician? If he is not helpless and miserable, why is
he perpetually invited to secure the assistance and consolations of the Holy
Spirit? And, in a word, if he is not born in sin, why is a new birth so
absolutely necessary, that Christ declares with the most solemn asseverations,
without it no man can see the kingdom of God?

This doctrine then being of such importance, that genuine Christianity stands
or falls with it; it may be proper to state it at large; and as this cannot be
done in stronger or plainer words, than those of the sacred writers, and our
pious reformers; I beg leave to collect them, and present the reader with a
picture of our natural estate, drawn at full length by those ancient and
masterly hands.

I. Moses, who informs us, that God created man in his own image, and after his
likeness, soon casts a shade upon his original dignity, by giving us a sad
account of his fall. He represents him after his disobedience, as a criminal
under sentence of death; a wretch filled with guilt, shame, dread and horror;
and a vagabond, turned out of a lost paradise into a cursed wilderness, where
all bears the stamp of desolation for his sake. Genesis iii. 17. In consequence of
this apostasy he died, and all die in him: for, by one man sin entered into the
world, and death by sin; and so death passed upon all men, for that all have
sinned in him, who was all mankind seminally and federally collected in one
individual. 1 Cor. xi. 22. Romans v. 12.

The sacred historian, having informed us how the first man was corrupted,
observes, that he begat a son in his own image, sinful and mortal like himself;
that his firstborn was a murderer; that Abel himself offered sacrifices to
avert divine wrath, and that the violent temper of Cain soon broke out in all
the human species. The earth, says he, was filled with violence -- all flesh
had corrupted its way -- and God saw the wickedness of man was great in the
earth, so great, that every imagination of the thoughts of his heart was only
evil, continually. ONLY evil, without any mixture of good: And CONTINUALLY,
without any intermission of evil. Genesis vi. 5.

When the deluge was over, the Lord himself gave the same account of his
obstinately rebellious creature. The imagination of man's heart, said he to
Noah, is evil from his youth, Genesis viii. 21. Job's friends paint us with the
same colors: One of them observes, that Man it born like the wild asses' colt:
And another, that he is abominable and filthy, and drinks iniquity like water.
Job xi. 12. and xv. 16.

David does not alter the hideous portrait: The Lord, says he, looked down from
heaven upon the children of men; to see if there were any, that did understand,
and seek God. And the result of the divine inspection is: They are all gone
aside, they are all together become filthy: There is none that does good, no
not one. Ps. xiv. 2. Solomon gives a finishing stroke to his father's draught,
by informing us, that Foolishness is bound in the heart of a child, and not of
a child only, for he adds, The heart of the sons of men is full of evil, and
while they live, madness is in their heart. Prove. xxii. 15. Eccl. ix. 3.

Isaiah corroborates the assertions of the royal Prophets, in the following
mournful confessions: All we, like sheep, have gone astray -- We are all as an
unclean thing, and all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags. Isa. liii. 6.
and* lxiv. 6.

Jeremiah confirms the deplorable truth, where he says: The sin of Judah is
written with a pen of iron, and with the point of a diamond; it is graven upon
the tables of their hearts. -- O Jerusalem wash thy heart from wickedness, that
thou may be saved. -- For the heart is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked: Who can know it? Jer. iv. 14, and xvii. 1.9.

Thus the Prophets delineate mankind in a natural, impenitent state. And do the
Apostles dip their pencil in brighter colors? Let them speak for themselves.
The chief of them informs us, that the natural, unrenewed man receives not the
things of the Spirit of God, and that they are foolishness to him. 1 Cor. ii.
14. And he lays it down as matter of fact, that the carnal mind, the taste and
disposition of every unregenerate person, is not only averse to goodness, but
ENMITY itself against God, the adorable fountain of all excellence. A blacker
line can hardly be drawn, to describe a fallen, diabolical nature. Romans viii. 7.

Various are the names, which the Apostle of the Gentiles gives to our original
corruption; and they are all expressive of its pernicious nature, and dreadful
effects. He calls it emphatically Sin, a sin so full of activity and energy,
that it is the life and spring of all others: -- Indwelling Sin, a sin which is
not like the leaves and fruits of a bad tree, that appear for a time, and then
drop off; but like the sap that dwells and works within, always ready to break
out at every bud: -- The body of Sin, because it is an assemblage of all the
members which constitute the human frame: -- The law of sin, and the Law in our
members, because it has a constraining force, and rules in our mortal bodies,
as a mighty tyrant in the kingdom which he has usurped: -- The old man,
because we have it from the first man, Adam; and because it is as old as the
first stamina of our frame, with which it is most closely interwoven: -- The
flesh, as being propagated by carnal generation, and always opposing the
Spirit, the gracious principle, which we have from Adam the second: -- And
Concupiscence, that mystic Jezebel, who brings forth the infinite variety of
fleshly, worldly, and mental lusts, which war against the soul.

Nor are St. James and St. John less severe than St. Paul, upon the unconverted
man. The one observes, that his wisdom, the best property naturally belonging
to him, descends not from above, but is earthly, sensual, and devilish: And
the other positively declares, that The whole world lies in wickedness. James
iii. 15. 1 John v. 19.

Our Lord, whose spirit inspired the Prophets and Apostles, confirms their
lamentable testimony. To make us seriously consider sin, our mortal disease, he
reminds us, that The whole have no need of a Physician, but they that are sick.
Luke v. 31. He declares, that men love darkness rather than light. That the
world hates him; and that its works are evil. John iii. 19. and xv. 18. and
vii. 7. He directs all to pray for the pardon of sin, as being evil, and owing
ten thousand talents to their heavenly creditor. Mat. vi. 12. vii. 11. xviii.
24. And he assures us, that the things, which defile the man, come from within;
and that out of the heart proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications,
murders, thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an evil eye,
blasphemy, pride, foolishness, and, in a word, ALL MORAL EVIL. Mark vii. 21.
Mat. xv. 19.

Some indeed confine what the scriptures say of the depravity of the human
heart, to the abandoned Heathens and persecuting Jews; as if the professors of
morality, and christianity, were not concerned in the dreadful charge. But if
the apostolic writings affirm, that Christ came not to call the righteous, but
SINNERS; that he died for the UNGODLY; and that he suffered, the just for the
UNJUST; it is plain that, unless he did not suffer and die for moral men and
christians, they are by nature sinners, ungodly, and unjust as the rest of
mankind. Romans v. 6. 1 Pet. 3.18.

If this assertion seems severe, let some of the best men that ever lived,
decide the point, not by the experience of immoral persons, but by their own. I
abhor myself, says Job, and repent in dust and ashes. Job xlii. 6. Behold, I
was shapen in iniquity, says David, and in sin did my mother conceive me. Ps.
li. 5. Woe is me, for I am undone, says Isaiah, because I am a man of unclean
lips. Isa. vi. 5. I know, says St. Paul, that in me, that is, in my flesh,
dwells no good thing. Romans vii. 18. We ourselves, says he, to Titus, were
sometimes foolish, disobedient, deceived, serving diverse lusts and pleasures,
living in malice and envy, hateful and hating one another. Tit. iii. 3. And
speaking of himself, and the Christians at Ephesus, he leaves upon record, this
memorable sentence: We were BY NATURE the children of wrath even as others.
Ephesians. ii. 3. Such humbling thoughts have the best men entertained both of their
natural estate, and themselves!

But as no one is a more proper person to appeal to, in this matter, than this
learned Apostle, who, by continually conversing with Jews, Heathens, and
Christians in his travels, had such an opportunity of knowing mankind; let us
hear him sum up the suffrages of his inspired brethren. What then, says he, are
we better than they? Better than the immoral Pagans, and hypocritical Jews,
described in the two preceding chapters? No, in no wise. And he proves it by
observing: (1) The UNIVERSALITY of human corruption: ALL are under sin, as it
is written, There is NONE righteous, no not ONE: (2) The EXTENT of it in
individuals, as it affects the whole man, especially his mind; There is none
that understands the things of God: His affections, There is none that
seeks after God: And his actions, They are all gone out of the way of duty:
There is none that does good, no not one; For all have their conversation in
the lusts of the flesh, and of the mind. -- (3) The OUT-BREAKINGS of this
corruption through all the parts of the body: Their throat, their lips, their
mouth, their feet, their eyes, and all their members are together become
unprofitable, and instruments of unrighteousness. As for their tongue, says St.
James, it is a world of iniquity, it defiles the whole body, and sets on fire
the course of nature, and is set on fire of hell. And lastly, its MALIGNITY and
VIRULENCE: It is loathsome as an open sepulcher, terrible as one who runs to
shed blood, and mortal as the poison of asps.

From the whole, speaking of all mankind in their unregenerate state, he justly
infers, that destruction and misery are in their ways. And, lest the
self-righteous should flatter themselves, that this alarming declaration does
not regard them, he adds, that the scriptures conclude ALL under sin; that
there is no difference, for ALL have sinned, and come short of the glory of
God; and that the moral law denounces a general curse against its violators,
that EVERY MOUTH may be stopped and ALL THE WORLD may become guilty before God.
Romans iii. 9. to 23. vi. 19. Ephesians. ii. 2.

If man is thus corrupt and guilty, he must be liable to condign punishment.
Therefore, as the Prophets and Apostles agree with our Lord, in their dismal
descriptions of this depravity; so they harmonize with him, in their alarming
accounts of his danger. Till he flies to the Redeemer as a condemned
malefactor, and secures an interest in the salvation provided for the lost,
they represent him as on the brink of ruin.

They inform us, that the wrath of God is revealed from heaven, not only
against some atrocious crimes, but against ALL unrighteousness of men. Romans i.
18. That EVERY transgression and disobedience, shall receive a just recompense
of reward. Heb. ii. 2. That the soul that sins shall die, because the wages
of sin is death, Ezekiel. xviii. 4. Romans vi. 23. They declare, that they are
cursed, who do err from God's commandments: That cursed is the man whose heart
departs from the Lord: That cursed is every one, who continues not in all
things, which are written in the book of the law to do them: That whosoever
shall keep the whole law, and yet offend in one point, is guilty of all: And
that, as many as have sinned without law, shall also perish without law. Ps.
cxix. 21. Jer. xvii. 5. Gal. iii. 10. Ja. ii. 13. Romans ii. ^2.

They entreat us to turn, lest we should be found with the many, in the bread
way to destruction. Ezekiel. xviii. 23. Matt. vii. 13. They affectionately inform
us, that it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the living God: That
our God is a consuming fire to the unregenerate: That indignation and wrath,
tribulation and anguish, hang over every soul of man who does evil: That the
Lord shall be revealed from heaven in flaming fire, to take vengeance on them,
who know him not, and obey not the gospel: That the wicked shall be turned into
hell, and all the people that forget God: That they shall be punished with
eternal destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his
power: And that they all shall be damned, who believe not the truth, but have
pleasure in unrighteousness. Heb. x. 31. and xii. 29. Romans ii. 9. 2 These. i. 8.
and.ii. 12. Ps. ix. 17.

Nor does our Lord, who is both the fountain and pattern of true charity, speak
a different language. He bids us fear him, who is able to destroy both soul and
body in hell. Luke xii. 5. He solemnly charges us to oppose corrupt nature with
the utmost resolution, lest we be cast into hell, where the worm dies not, and
the fire is not quenched. Mark ix. 43. With tenderness he informs us, that
whosoever shall say to his brother, Thou fool! shall be in danger of hell fire;
That not only the wicked, but the unprofitable servant shall be cast into outer
darkness, where will be weeping, wailing, and gnashing of teeth: And that he
himself, far from conniving at sin, will fix the doom of all impenitent
sinners, by this dreadful sentence, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. Matt. v. 22. and xxv. 30.41.

II. I flatter myself that the doctrine, which we are to try by the touch stone
of reason, has been already sufficiently established from scripture.
Nevertheless, that the Reader may have the fullest view of so momentous a
subject, I shall yet present him with a recapitulation of the whole, in the
words of our pious Reformers, taken out of the Articles, Homilies, and Liturgy
of the Church of England.

The 9th Article thus describes our depravity and danger: Original, or
birth-sin is the fault, and corruption of the nature of every man, that
naturally is engendered of the offspring of Adam; whereby man is very far gone
from original righteousness, and is of his own nature inclined to evil, so that
the flesh lusts always contrary to the spirit; and therefore in every person
born into this world, it deserves God's wrath and damnation.

The 35th Article gives sanction to the Homilies, in the following words: The
book of Homilies contains a good and wholesome doctrine, and therefore we judge
them to be read in churches, by ministers, diligently and distinctly, that they
may be understood by the people. Let us then see, how they set forth the good
and wholesome, though lamentable and humbling doctrine of our lost estate.

The title of the 2d is: A Sermon of the misery of mankind, and of his
condemnation to death everlasting by his sin. In the close of it, the contents
of it are summed up in these words: We have heard how evil we are of ourselves;
how of ourselves, and by ourselves, we have no goodness, help, or salvation;
but on the contrary, sin, damnation, and death everlasting.

Our church is uniform in her woeful accounts of man's misery. Hear her in the
1st Homily for Whitsunday: Man, OF HIS OWN NATURE (since the fall) is fleshly
and carnal, corrupt and naught, sinful and disobedient to God, without any
spark of goodness in him, without any virtuous or godly motion, only given to
evil thoughts and wicked deeds.

In the Homily on the nativity, she speaks thus: He (disobedient man) was now
cursed and abhorred. Instead of the image of God, he was now become the image of
the devil, the bond slave of hell. Altogether spotted and defiled, he seemed to
be nothing else but a lump of sin; and therefore, by the just judgment of God,
he was condemned to everlasting death. Thus, in Adam, all men became
universally mortal, having in themselves nothing but Prejudiced persons, who
instead of considering the entire system of truth, run away with a part
detached from the whole, will be offended here, as if our Church "damned every
body". But the candid Reader will easily observe, that, instead of dooming any
one to destruction, she only declares, that the Savior finds all men in a
state of condemnation and misery, where they would eternally remain, were it
not for the compassionate equity of our gracious God, which does not permit him
to sentence to a consciousness of eternal torments, any one of his creatures,
for a sin, of which they never were personally guilty; and of which,
consequently, they can never have any consciousness.
everlasting damnation of body and soul.

The same doctrine is delivered with the same plainness in the 2d part of the
Homily on the passion. Adam died the death, that is, became mortal, lost the
favor of God, and was cast out of paradise, being no longer a citizen of
heaven, but a firebrand of hell, and a bond-slave of the devil. And St. Paul
bears witness, that by Adam's offense death came upon all men to condemnation,
who became plain reprobates, and cast-aways, * being perpetually damned to the
everlasting pains of hellfire.

Agreeable to this, we are taught, in the 2d part of the Homily on repentance,
that part of that virtue consists in an unfeigned acknowledgement of our sins
to God, whom, by them we have so grievously offended, that if he should deal
with us according to his justice, we deserve a thousand hells, if there were so
many.

The same vein of wholesome, though unpleasant doctrine runs through the
Liturgy of our church. She opens her service by exhorting us not to dissemble,
nor cloak, our manifold sins and wickedness. She acknowledges in her
confessions, that we have erred and strayed from God's ways like lost sheep, --
that there is no health in us, -- that we are miserable sinners, miserable
offenders, to whom our sins are grievous, and the burden of them is intolerable.

She begins her baptismal office by reminding us, that all men are conceived
and born in sin. She teaches in her catechism, that we are by nature born in
sin, and the children of wrath. She confesses in the collect before the general
thanksgiving, that we are tied and bound with the chain of our sins, and
entreats God to let the pitifulness of his great mercy loose us: And in her
suffrages she beseeches him to have mercy upon us, to spare us, and make speed
to save us; a language that can suit none but condemned sinners.

Duly sensible of our extreme danger till we have secured an interest in
Christ, at the grave she supplicates the most holy God, not to deliver us into
the bitter pains of eternal death; and in the litany she beseeches our Lord
Jesus Christ, by his agony and bloody sweat, by his cross and passion, to
deliver us from his wrath and everlasting damnation. Thus is our church every
where consistent with herself, and with the oracles of God, in representing us
as corrupt, condemned creatures, in Adam: till we are penitent, absolved
believers in Jesus Christ.

The doctrine to be demonstrated in this treatise being thus fully stated, in
the consentaneous words of the sacred Writers, and our pious Reformers, I shall
close this part by an appeal to the Reader's candor and common sense. If such
are the sentiments of our church, are those churchmen reasonable, who
intimate, that all the maintainers of them, are either her open or secret
enemies? And may they rank with modest, humble Christians, who, instead of the
self-abasing scripture doctrine here laid down, boldly substitute pompous,
pharisaic descriptions of the present dignity and rectitude of human nature?
Without waiting for the obvious answer, I pass to the first class of arguments,
on which the truth of this mortifying doctrine is established.

SECOND PART.
AS no man is bound to believe what is contrary to common sense; if the
above-stated doctrine appears irrational, Scriptures, Articles, Homilies, and
Liturgy, are quoted in vain: When men of parts are pressed with their
authority, they start from it as an imposition on their reason, and make as
honorable a retreat as they possibly can.

Some, to extricate themselves at once, set the Bible aside, as full of
incredible assertions. Others with more modesty plead, that the Scriptures have
been frequently misunderstood, and are so in the present case. They put grammar
criticism, and common sense to the rack, to show that when the inspired writers
say, the human heart is desperately wicked, they mean that it is extremely
good; or at least like blank paper, ready to receive either the characters of
virtue, or of vice. With respect to the testimony of our reformers, they would
have you to understand, that in this enlightened age, we must leave their
harsh, uncharitable sentiments, to the old Puritans, and the present Methodists.

That such objectors may subscribe as a solemn truth, what they have hitherto
rejected as a dangerous error; and that humbled sinners may see the propriety
of an heartfelt repentance, and the absolute need of an almighty Redeemer;
they are here presented with some proofs of our depravity, taken from the
astonishing severity of God's dispensations toward mankind.

AXIOM.
If we consider the supreme Being, as creating a world for the manifestation of
his glory, the display of his perfections, and the communication of his
happiness to an intelligent creature, whom he would attach to himself by the
strongest ties of gratitude and love; we at once perceive, that he never could
form this earth and man in their present, disordered, deplorable condition. It
is not so absurd to suppose the meridian sun productive of darkness, as to
imagine that infinite Goodness ever produced any kind or degree of evil.

Infinite Holiness and Wisdom having assisted infinite Goodness, to draw the
original plan of the world; it could not but be entirely worthy of its glorious
Author, absolutely free from every moral defilement, and natural disorder: Nor
could infinite Power possibly be at a loss, to execute what the other divine
attributes had contrived. Therefore, unless we embrace the senseless opinion of
the Materialists, who deny the being of a God; or admit the ridiculous creed of
the Manichees, who adore two Gods, the one the gracious author of all the good,
and the other the mischievous principle of all the evil in the world; we must
conclude with Moses, that every thing which God made, was at first very good;
or in other words, that order and beauty, harmony and happiness, were stamped
upon every part of the creation, and especially on man, the masterpiece of
creating power in this sublunary world. On this axiom I raise my

I. ARGUMENT.
Does not the natural state of the earth cast a light upon the spiritual
condition of its inhabitants? Amidst a thousand beauties, that indicate what it
was, when God pronounced it very good, and as the original also imports,
extremely beautiful: Amidst the elegant and grand ruins, which form the variety
of our smiling landscapes, and romantic prospects; can an impartial inquirer
help taking notice of a thousand striking proofs, that a multiplied curse rests
upon this globe; and that man, who inhabits it, is now disgraced by the God of
nature and providence?

Here, deceitful morasses, or faithlest quicksands obstruct our way: There,
miry, impassible roads, or inhospitable sandy deserts, endanger our life. In
one place, we are stopped by stupendous chains of rocky mountains, broken into
frightful precipices, or hideous caverns: And in another, we meet with ruinous
valleys, cut deep by torrents and water-falls, whose tremendous roar stuns the
astonished traveller. Many of the hills are stony, rude, and waste; and most of
the plains are covered over with strata of barren sand, stiff clay, or
infertile gravel.

Thorns, Those who oppose the doctrine of the fall, say that "Weeds have their
use." I grant they are serviceable to thousands of poor people, who carn their
bread by pulling the general nuisance out of our fields and gardens: But till
our objectors have proved that thistles are more useful, and therefore grow
more spontaneously, and multiply more abundantly, than corn, we shall discover
the badness of their cause through the slightness of their objection.
thistles, and noxious weeds, grow spontaneously every where, and yield a
troublesome, never-failing crop: While the best soil, carefully plowed by the
laborious husbandman, and sown with precious seed, frequently repays his
expensive toil with light sheaves, or a blasted harvest.

Consider that immense part of the globe which lies between the tropics: it is
parched up by the scorching beams of the vertical sun: There, the tanny
inhabitants fan themselves in vain; they pant, they melt, they faint on the
sultry couch; and, like the birds of night, dare not appear abroad, till
evening shades temper the insufferable blaze of day. View the frozen countries
around the poles: In summer, the sun just glances upon them by his feeble,
horizontal rays: In winter, he totally deserts them, and they lie bound with
rigorous frosts, and buried in continual night. There, the torpid inhabitants
know neither harvest nor vintage, the ocean seems a boundless plain of ice, and
the continent immense hills of snow.

The temperate zones are indeed blessed with milder climates: But even here,
how irregular are the seasons! To go no farther than this favored island, What
means the strange foresight, by which the ice of January is laid in to temper
the ardors of July; and the burning mineral is stored up in June, to mitigate
the frost in December? But notwithstanding these precautions, what continual
complaints are heard, about the intenseness of the heat, the severity of the
cold, or the sudden, pernicious change from the one to the other!

Let us descend to particulars. In winter, how often do drifts of snow bury the
starved sheep, and intomb the frozen traveller! In summer, how frequently do
dreadful storms of hail cut down, or incessant showers of rain wash away the
fruits of the earth! Perhaps, to complete the desolation, water pours down from
all the neighboring hills; and the swelling streams, joining with overflowing
rivers, cause sudden inundations, lay waste the richest pastures, and carry off
the swimming flocks; while the frighted inhabitants This was the case of
several families in the author's parish, November 1770.
of the vale, either retire to the top of their deluged houses, or by the
timely assistance of boats fly from the imminent and increasing danger.

If heaven seems to dissolve into water in one place, in another it is like
brass; it yields neither fruitful rains nor cooling dews: The earth is like
iron under it, and the perishing cattle loll out their parched tongues, where
they once drank the refreshing stream. Suppose a few happy districts escape
these dreadful scourges for a number of years, are they not at last visited
with redoubled severity? And, whilst abused affluence vanishes as a dream
before the intolerable dearth, do not a starving, This happened some years ago
in this neighborhood.
riotous populace leave their wretched cottages, to plunder the houses of their
wealthy neighbors, desperately venturing the gallows for a morsel of bread.

When some, secure from the attacks of water, quietly enjoy the comforts of
plenty, fire perhaps surprises them in an instant: They awake involved in
smoke, and surrounded by crackling flames, through which (if it is not too
late) they fly naked at the hazard of their neck, and think themselves happy
if, while they leave behind them young children, or aged parents, burning in
the blaze of all their goods, they escape themselves with dislocated joints or
broken bones. Their piercing shrieks, and the fall of their house, seem to
portend a general conflagration; loud confusion increases, disastrous ruin
spreads; and perhaps, before they can be stopped, a street, a suburb, a whole
city is reduced to ashes.

Turn your imagination from the smoking ruins, to fix it upon the terrifying
effects of the air, agitated into roaring tempests and boisterous hurricanes.
Before their impetuous blast, the masts of ships and cedars of Lebanon, are
like broken reeds; men of war, and solid buildings like the driven chaff. Here,
they strip the groaning forests, tear the bosom of the earth, and obscure the
sky with clouds of whirling sand: And there, they plow up the liquid foaming
plains, and with sportive fury turn up mountains for ridges, or cut valleys
instead of furrows. As they pass along, the confounded elements dreadfully roar
under the mighty scourge, the rolling sea tosses herself up to heaven, and
solid land is swept with the besom of destruction.

To heighten the horror of the scene, thunder, the majestic voice of an angry
God, and the awful artillery of heaven, bursts in loud claps from the lowering
sky. Distant hills reverberate and increase the alarming sound, and with
rocking edifices declare to man, that vengeance belongs unto God: And, to
enforce the solemn warning, repeated flashes of lightning, with horrible glare
dazzle his eyes, and with forked fires strike consternation into his breast; if
they do not actually strike him dead, in the midst of his shattered habitation.

Nor does heaven alone dart destructive fires; earth, our mother earth, as if
it were not enough frequently to corrupt the atmosphere by pestilential
vapors, borrows the assistance of the devouring element, to terrify and
scourge her guilty children. By sudden, frightful chasms, and the mouth of her
burning mountains, she vomits clouds of smoke, sulphurous flames, and calcined
rocks; she emits streams of melted minerals, covers the adjacent plains with
boiling, fiery lavas; and, as if she wanted to ease herself of the burden of
her inhabitants, suddenly rises against them, and in battles of shaking at once
crushes, destroys, and buries them in heaps of ruins.

These astonishing scenes, like a bloody battle that is seen at a distance, may
indeed entertain us: They may amuse our imagination, when in a peaceful
apartment, we behold them beautifully represented by the pen of a Virgil, or
the pencil of a Raphael. But to be in the midst of them, as thousands are
sooner or later, is inexpressibly dreadful: It is actually to see the
forerunners of divine vengeance, and hear the shakeing of God's destructive
rod: It is to behold at once a lively emblem, and an awful pledge of that fire
and brimstone, storm and tempest, which the righteous Governor of the world
will rain upon the ungodly; when the heavens shall pass away with a great
noise, the elements shall melt with fervent heat, and the earth, with the works
that are therein, shall be burnt up.

Now as reason loudly declares, that the God of order, justice, and goodness,
could never establish and continue this fearful course of things, but to punish
the disorders of the moral world by those of the natural; we must conclude that
man is guilty, from the alarming tokens of divine displeasure, which sooner or
later are so conspicuous in every part of the habitable globe.

II. ARGUMENT.
We have taken a view of the residence of mankind: let us now behold them
entering upon the disordered scene. And here Reason informs us, that some
mystery of iniquity lies hid under ihe loathsome, painful, and frequently
mortal circumstances, which accompany their birth. For it can never be
imagined, that a righteous and good God would suffer innocent and pure
creatures to come into the world, skilled in no language but that of misery,
venting itself in bitter cries, or doleful accents.

It is a matter of fact, that infants generally return their first breath with
a groan, and salute the light with the voice of sorrow: Generally, I say, for
some times they are born half dead, and cannot without the utmost difficulty be
brought to breathe and groan. But all are born at the hazard of their lives:
For, while some cannot press into the land of the living, without being
dangerously bruised; others have their tender bones dislocated. Some are almost
strangled; and it is the horrible fate of others to be forced into the world by
instruments of torture; having their scull bored through or broken to pieces,
or their quivering limbs cut or torn off from the unfortunate trunk. Again,

While some appear on the stage of life embarrassed with superfluous parts,
others unaccountably mutilated, want those which are necessary: And what is
more terrible still, a few, whose hideous misshapen bodies seem calculated to
represent the deformity of a fallen soul, rank among frightful monsters; and to
terminate the horror of the parents, are actually smothered and destroyed.

The spectators, it is true, concerned for the honor of mankind, frequently
draw a veil over these shocking and bloody scenes; but a philosopher will find
them out, and will rationally infer, that the deplorable and dangerous manner
in which mankind are born, proves them to be degenerate and fallen creatures.
Logicians will excuse the author, if he prefers the common, unaffected manner
of proposing his arguments, to the formal method of the schools. But they may
easily try his enthymemes, by giving them the form of syllogisms, thus:

I. Argument: If the rod of God is fearfully shaken over this globe, the
disordered habitation of mankind; it is a sign they are under his displeasure.

But God's rod is fearfully shaken over this globe, etc. Therefore mankind are
under his displeasure.

II. Argument. A pure and innocent creature cannot be born under such and such
deplorable circumstances.

But man is born under such and such deplorable circumstances. Therefore man is
not a pure and innocent creature.




III. ARGUMENT.
If we let our thoughts ascend, from the little sufferers, to the mothers that
bear them, we shall find another dreadful proof of the divine displeasure and
of our natural depravity. Does not a good master, much more a gracious God,
delight in the prosperity and happiness of his faithful servants? If mankind
were naturally in their Creator's favor, would he not order the fruit of the
womb to drop from it, without any more inconveniency, than ripe vegetables fall
from the opening husk, or full-grown fruit from the disburdened tree? But how
widely different is the case!

Fix your attention on pregnant mothers: See their disquietude and fears. Some
go beforehand through an imaginary travel, almost as painful to the mind, as
the real labor is to the body. The dreaded hour comes at last. Good God! What
lingering, what tearing pains; what redoubled throes, what killing agonies
attend it! See the curse -- or rather, see it not. Let the daughter of her who
tasted the forbidden fruit without the man, drink that bitter cup Without him.
Fly from the mournful scene, fly to distant apartments -- But in vain -- The
din of sorrow pursues and overtakes you there.

A child of man is at the point of being born; his tortured mother proclaims
the news in the bitterest accents. They increase with her increasing agony.
Sympathize and pray, while she suffers and groans -- Perhaps while she suffers
and dies: For it is possibly her dying groan that reaches your ear. Perhaps
nature is spent in the hard travel; her son is born, and with Jacob's wife, she
closes her languid eye and expires. Perhaps the instruments of death are upon
her: The keen steel mangles her delicate frame: As Caesar's mother, she
generously suffers her body to be opened, that her unborn child may not be torn
from her in pieces; and the fertile tree is unnaturally cut down, that its
fruit may be safely gathered.

Perhaps neither mother nor child can be saved, and one grave is going to
deprive a distracted mortal of a beloved Rachel, and a long expected Benjamin.
If this is the case, O Earth! Earth! Earth! conceal these slain, cover their
blood, and detain in thy dark bosom, the fearful curse that brought them there.
Vain wish! Too active to be confined in thy deepest vaults, it ranges through
the world: With unrelenting fierceness it pursues trembling mothers, and forces
them to lift up their voice for speedy relief: Though varied according to the
accents of an hundred languages, it is the same voice, that of the bitterest
anguish: And while it is reverberated from hamlet to hamlet, from city to city,
it strikes the unprejudiced inquirer, and makes him confess, that these clouds
of unbribed witnesses, by their loud, consentaneous evidence, impeach SIN, the
tormenter of the woman, and murderer of her offspring.

But suppose the case is not so fatal, and she is at last delivered; her labor
may be over, yet not her pain and danger; a lingering weakness may carry her
slowly to her grave. If she recovers, she may be a mother, and yet unable to
act a mother's part. Her pining child sucks her disordered breast in vain:
Either the springs of his balmy food are dried up, or they overflow with a
putrid, loathsome fluid, and excruciating ulcers cause the soft lips of the
infant to appear terrible as the edge of the sword.

If she happily escapes this common kind of distress, yet she may date the
beginning of some chronical disease, from her dangerous lying-in; and, in
consequence of her hard wrestling for the blessing of a child, may with the
patriarch go halting all her days. How sensible are the marks of divine
indignation, in all these scenes of sorrow! And consequently how visible our
sinfulness and guilt.

Nor can the justness of the inference be denied, under pretense that the
females of other animals, which neither do nor can sin, bring forth their young
with pain, as well as women. For, if we take a view of the whole earth, we
shall not see any females, except the daughters of Eve, who groan under a
periodical disorder, that intails languor and pain, weakness and mortal
diseases, on their most blooming days. Nor do we in general find any, that are
delivered of their offspring with half the sorrow and danger of women. These
two remarkable circumstances loudly call upon us, to look for the cause of the
sorrow, which attends the delivery of female animals, where that sorrow is most
sensibly felt; and to admire the perfect agreement, that subsists between the
observations of natural philosophers, and the assertion of the most ancient
historian. Genesis iii. 16.

IV. ARGUMENT.
If we advert to mankind, even before they burst the womb of their tortured
mothers, they afford us a new proof of their total degeneracy. For reason
dictates, that if they were not conceived in sin, the Father of mercies could
not, consistently with his goodness and justice, command the cold hand of death
to nip them in the unopened, or just opened bud. This nevertheless happens
every hour. Who can number the early miscarriages of the womb? How many
millions of miserable embrios feel the pangs of death before those of birth,
and preposterously turn the fruitful womb into a living grave? And how many
millions more of wretched infants, escape the dangers of their birthday, and
salute the troublesome light, only to take their untimely leave of it, after
languishing a few days on the rack of a convulsive, or torturing disorder? I
ask again, Would a good and righteous God seal the death-warrant of such
multitudes of his unborn, or newly born creatures, if their natural depravity
did not render them proper subjects of dissolution?

It is true, the young of beasts suffer and die, as well as infants; but it is
only because they are involved in our misery. They partake of it as the
attendants of a noble traitor share in his deserved ruin. Sin, that
inconceivable virulent and powerful evil, drew down God's righteous curse upon
all that was created for man's use, as well as upon man himself. Hence only
springs the degeneracy and death, that turn beasts to one promiscuous dust with
mankind. Compare Genesis iii. 17. Romans v. 12. and viii. 22. We may then justly
infer, from the sufferings and death of still-born or newborn children, that
man is totally degenerate, and liable to destruction, even from his mother's
womb.

V. ARGUMENT.
But take your leave of the infant corpse, already buried in the womb, or
deposited in a coffin of a span long; fix your attention on the healthy,
sucking child. See him stupidly staring in his nurse's lap, or aukwardly
passing through childhood to manhood. How visible is his degeneracy in every
stage!

Part of the divine image, in which he was made in Adam, consisted in purity,
power, and knowledge: But now, he is naturally the least cleanly, as well as
the most helpless and ignorant of all animals. Yes, if the reader could forgive
the indelicacy of the assertion, for the sake of its truth, I would venture to
show, that there is no comparison between the cleanliness of the little active
animals, which suck the filthy swine, and of helpless infants, who suck the
purer breasts of their tender mothers. But, casting a veil over the dribbling,
loathsome, little creatures; without fear of being contradicted I aver, that
the young of those brutes, which are stupid to a proverb, know their dams, and
follow them as soon as they are dropped; whilst infants are months without
taking any particular notice of their parents, and without being able, I shall
not say to follow them, but even to bear the weight of their swaddled body, or
stand upon their tottering legs.

With reference to the knowledge necessary for the support of animal life, it
is undeniable that brutes have greatly the advantage of mankind. Fowls and
fishes, immediately and with amazing sagacity, single out their proper
nourishment, among a thousand useless and noxious things: But infants put
indifferently to their mouth all that comes to their hand, whether it be food
or poison, a coral or a knife: And, what is more astonishing still, grown-up
persons scarce ever attain to the knowledge of the quantity, or quality of the
meat and drink, which are most suitable to their constitutions.

All disordered dogs fix at once upon the salutary vegetable, that can (in some
cases) relieve their distress: But many physicians, even after several years
study and practice, hurt and sometimes kill their patients by improper
medicines. Birds of passage by mere instinct, find the north and the south more
readily than mariners by the compass. Untaught spiders weave their webs, and
uninstructed bees make their combs to the greatest perfection: But fallen man
must serve a tedious apprenticeship to learn his own business; and with all the
help of masters, tools, and patterns, seldom proves an ingenious artist.

Again. Other animals are provided with a natural covering, that answers the
double end of usefulness and ornament: But indigent man is obliged to borrow
from plants, beasts, and worms, the materials with which he hides his
nakedness, or defends his feebleness; and a great part of his short life is
spent in providing, or putting on and off garments, the gaudy tokens of his
shame, or ragged badges of his fall.

Are not these plain proofs, that man, who according to his superior rank, and
primitive excellency, should in all things have the pre-eminence, is now a
degraded being, cursed for his apostasy with native uncleanliness,
helplessness, ignorance, and nakedness above all other animals?

VI. ARGUMENT.
Man's natural ignorance, great as it is, might nevertheless be overlooked, if
he had but the right knowledge of his Creator. But alas! The holy and righteous
God judicially withdraws himself from his unholy, apostate creature. Man is not
properly acquainted with him in whom he lives, and moves, and has his being.
This humbling truth may be demonstrated by the following observations.

God is infinitely perfect; all the perfection which is found in the most
exalted creatures, is but the reflection of the transcendent effulgence,
belonging to that glorious Sun of spiritual beauty; it is but the surface of
the unfathomable depths of goodness, and loveliness, which regenerate souls
discover in that boundless ocean of all excellence. If therefore men saw God,
they could far less help being struck with holy awe, overwhelmed with pleasing
wonder, and ravished with delightful admiration; than a man born blind, and
restored to sight in the blaze of a summer's day, could help being transported
at the glory of the new and unexpected scene. Si virtus conspicereter oculis,
mirabiles amores excitaret sui. Cic.
Could we but see virtue in all her beauty, said an Heathen, she would ravish
our hearts: How much greater would our ravishment be, if we were indulged with
a clear, immediate discovery of the divine beauty, the eternal original of all
virtue, the exuberant fountain of all perfection and delight? But alas! how few
thus behold, know, and admire God, may easily be seen by the impious or vain
conduct of mankind.

If a multitude of men ingeniously confess, they know not the king; if they
take his statute, or one of his attendants for him; or if they doubt whether
there be a king; or sport with his name and laws in his presence; we reasonably
conclude, that they neither see nor know the royal person. And is not this the
case of the superstitious, who, like the Athenians, worship an unknown God? Of
idolators, who bow to favorite mortals, or lifeless images, as to the true
God? Of infidels, who doubt the very being of a God? And of open sinners, the
bulk of mankind, who live every where as if there was none?

Our natural ignorance of God, manifests itself still more evidently, by
confessions both of real and nominal Christians. The former, before they knew
God, and were admitted to behold his glory shining in the face of Jesus Christ,
bitterly complained as Isaiah, Verily thou art a God that hidest thyself; or
mournfully asked with David, How long will thou hide thy face from me? It is
plain then, that, by nature, they were as others, without God (practical
atheists) in the world, and have as much reason as St. Paul to declare, that
the world by wisdom knew not God.

As for nominal Christians, though they daily pray that the fellowship of the
Holy Ghost may be with us all, it is evident they are utter strangers to
communion with God by his Holy Spirit. For if we affirm, that he blesses his
children with a spiritual discovery of his presence, and manifests himself to
them as he does not to the world, they say we are mad, or call us enthusiasts.
This behavior shows, beyond all confessions, that they are totally
unacquainted with the light of God's countenance: For, what greater proof can a
blind man give, that he has no knowledge of the sun, than to suspect his
neighbor of lunacy, for affirming that sunshine is a delightful reality?

From this moral demonstration of our natural ignorance of God, I draw the
following conclusion: If the Lord, who is a mild and condescending king to all
his loyal subjects, a father full of endearing and tender love to all his
dutiful children, hides his face from mankind in a natural state; and if what
little they know of him, is only by conjecture, hearsay, or This is the
knowledge of God mentioned Romans i. 21. It is sufficient to leave without excuse
those who do not improve it till they attain to the saving knowledge mentioned
John xvii. 3. 2 John v. 20,
inference; it is a proof, that they are under his displeasure; and
consequently, that they are rebellious, fallen creatures.

For, what but rebellion could thus separate between beings so nearly related,
as an infinitely gracious Creator, and favorite creatures, whose soul is,
according to an Heathen, divinae particula aurae; and according to Moses, the
very breath of God? We may then rationally conclude with the evangelical
prophet, that our iniquities have separated between us and our God, and that
our sins have hid his face from us, eclipsed the sun of righteousness, and
brought such darkness on our souls, that, by nature, we know neither what we
are, nor what we should be; neither whence we come, nor whither we are going;
neither the grand business we have to do, nor the danger that attends our
leaving it undone.

VII. ARGUMENT.
If by nature mankind know not the Lord to be their God, is it surprising that
beasts should not know mankind to be their lords? Nevertheless reason agrees
with scripture in maintaining, that man, by far the noblest work of God here
below, should, according to the reason and fitness of things, bear rule over
all the sublunary creation. But alas! even in this respect, How is the crown
fallen from his head! Inferior animals have as little regard for him, as he has
for his God.

Notwithstanding his artful contrivances, greedy birds and mischievous beasts
eat up, trample down, or destroy part of the fruit of his rural labor. In
warmer climes, armies of locusts, more terrible than hosts of men, frequently
darken the air, or cover the ground, and equally mock at human power and craft.
Wherever they light, all verdure disappears, and the summer's fruitfulness is
turned into wintry desolation.

If locusts do not reach this happy island; caterpillars, and a variety of
other seemingly insignificant, but really formidable insects, make a more
constant, though less general attack upon our trees and gardens. In vain are
they destroyed by millions, they cannot be fully conquered; and the
yearly-returning plague forces the considerate spectator, to acknowledge the
finger of a sin-avenging providence.

Happy would it be for man, if rebellious animals were satisfied with the
produce of his fields and orchards: But alas! They thirst after his blood, and
attack his person. Lions, tigers, rattle-snakes, crocodiles, and sharks,
whenever they have an opportunity, impetuously attack, furiously tear, and
greedily devour him. And what is most astonishing, the basest reptiles are not
afraid to breed in his stomach, to live in his very bowels, and to consume his
inward parts: While swarms of flying, leaping or creeping insects, too vile to
be named, but not to humble a proud apostate, have the insolence to fix upon
his skin; and by piercing or furrowing his flesh, suck his blood, and feast
upon him from his cradle to the grave.

Domestic animals, it is true, do man excellent service: But, is it not because
he either forces, or bribes them to it, by continual labor and expense, with
which he breaks and maintains them? What business have multitudes of men, but
to serve the drudges of mankind? What are smiths, farriers, farmers' servants,
grooms, hostlers, etc. but the slaves of brutes, washing, currying, shoeing,
feeding, and waiting upon them both by day and by night?

And yet, notwithstanding the prerogative granted to Noah's piety, Genesis ix. 2.
and the care taken of domestic animals, do they not rebel as often as they
dare? Here, sheep deemed the quietest of all, run astray, or break into the
field of a litigious neighbor: There, the furious bull pursues and gores, or
the raging dog sets upon and tears the inoffensive traveller. To day you read,
that an impetuous, foaming steed has hurried away, thrown off, and dragged
along his unfortunate master, whose blood sprinkling the dust, and brains
dashed upon the stones, direct the search of his disconsolate friend: And
tomorrow you may hear, that a vicious horse has darted his iron-fenced hoof
into his attendant's breast or forehead, and has lamed or killed him on the
spot.

And would the wise Governor of the world, the kind protector of his obedient
creatures, permit this rebellion, even of the tamest animals, and basest vermin
against man, if man himself was not a daring rebel against him?

VIII. ARGUMENT.
That a contemptible insect should dare to set upon, and be able to devour a
proud monarch, an Herod in the midst of his guards, is terrible: But the
mischief stops not here. Numerous tribes of other base animals are armed with
poisonous tongues or stings, and use them against mankind with peculiar rage.
To say nothing of mad dogs, have not asps, Some will say that viper's flesh is
useful in physic. I grant it; but is the poison of that creature useful? This
must be proved before the argument can be invalidated.
vipers, tarantulas, scorpions, and other venomous serpents and insects, the
destructive skill of extracting the quintessence of the curse, which sin, our
moral poison, has brought upon the earth? When we come within their reach, do
they not bite or sting us with the utmost fury? And by infusing their subtle
venom into our blood, spread they not anguish and destruction through our
agonizing frame? Answer, ye thousands, who died in the wilderness of the bite
of fiery serpents; and ye multitudes, who in almost all countries have shared
their deplorable fate.

Let us descend to the vegetable world. How many deceitful roots, plants, and
fruits deposite their pernicious juice in the stomach of those, who unwarily
feed upon them! Did not Elisha, and the sons of the prophets, narrowly escape
being poisoned all together, by one of them fatally mistaking a pot-herb? And
do not many go quickly, or slowly to their grave by such melancholy accidents?

Minerals and metals are not the last to enter into the general conspiracy
against mankind. Under inoffensive appearances, do not they contain what is
destructive to the animal frame? And have not many fallen a sacrifice to their
ignorance of the mischief lurking in arsenic, and other It is objected, that
excellent remedies are prepared with antimony and mercury: But it is well known
that the persons who use them, only expel one poison with another; as the
decayed constitutions of those who have frequent recourse to such violent
medicines abundantly prove.
mineral productions? Nor are metallic effluvia less hurtful to hundreds; and
the health of mankind is perhaps more injured by copper alone, than it is
preserved by all the mineral waters in the world: It is acknowledged, that
numbers are poisoned by food prepared in utensils made of that dangerous metal;
and how many are insensibly hurt by the same means, is only known to a wise and
righteous providence.

Thus God leaves us in a world, where mischief lurks under a variety of things
apparently useful, without giving us the least intimation of destruction near.
To say that infinite goodness can deal thus with innocent creatures, is
offering violence to our reason, and an affront to divine justice. Conclude
then with me, Reader, that we have lost our original innocence, and forfeited
our Creator's favor.

IX. ARGUMENT.
But if the generality of mankind escape all the various sorts of poison, do
they escape the curse of toil and sweat? And is not a great majority of them
reduced to such sordid want and pressing necessity, as to be obliged to do the
greatest drudgery for a wretched maintenance?

When God made them to have dominion over the works of his hands; when he put
all things in subjection under their feet, and crowned them with glory and
honor; they filled up each happy hour in evidencing their love to him and to
each other: they spent their golden moments in admiring the variety and beauty
of his works, finding out the divine signatures impressed upon them, swaying
their mild scepter over the obedient creation, and enjoying the rich,
incorruptible fruits, which the earth spontaneously produced in the greatest
perfection and abundance. Thus their pleasure was without idleness or pain, and
their employment without toil or weariness.

But no sooner did disobedience open the floodgates of natural evil, than
arduous labor came in full tide upon mankind; and a thousand painful arts were
invented to mitigate the manifold curse, which sin had brought upon them.

Since the fall, our bodies are become vulnerable and shamefully naked; and it
is the business of thousands to make, or sell all sorts of garments for our
defense and ornament. The earth has lost her original fertility; and thousands
more with iron instruments open her bosom, to force her to yield us a
maintenance; or with immense labor secure her precarious, decaying fruits:
Immoderate rains deprive her of her solidity, and earthquakes or deluges
destroy her evenness; numbers therefore are painfully employed in making or
mending roads. Each country affords some only of the necessaries or
conveniences of life; this obliges the mercantile inhabitants to transport,
with immense trouble and danger, the produce of one place to supply the wants
of another. We are exposed to a variety of dangers: Our persons and property
must be secured against the inclemency of the weather, the attacks of evil
beasts, and the assaults of wicked men: Hence the fatigue of millions of
workmen in wood and stone, metals and minerals; and the toils and hazards of
millions more, who live by making, wearing, or using the various instruments of
war and slaughter.

Disorder and injustice give rise to government, politics, and a labyrinth of
laws; and these employ myriads of officers, lawyers, magistrates, and rulers.
We are subject to a thousand pains and maladies; hence myriads more prescribe
and prepare remedies, or attend and nurse the sick. Our universal ignorance
occasions the tedious labor of giving and receiving instruction, in all the
branches of human and divine knowledge. And to complete the whole, the original
tongue of mankind is confounded, and even neighboring nations are barbarians
to each other: From hence arise the painful lucubrations of critics and
linguists, with the infinite trouble of teaching and learning various languages.

The curse introduced by sin, is the occasion of all these toils. They are soon
mentioned, but alas! how long, how grievous do they appear to those that feel
their severity! How many sighs have they forced from the breasts, how much
sweat from the bodies of mankind! Unite the former, a tempest might ensue:
Collect the latter, it would swell into rivers.

To go no farther than this populous parish, with what hardships and dangers do
our indigent neighbors earn their bread! See those who ransack the bowels of
the earth to get the black mineral we burn: How little is their lot preferable
to that of the Spanish felons, who work the golden mines?

They take their leave of the light of the sun, and suspended by a rope, are
let down many fathoms perpendicularly toward the center of the globe: they
traverse the rocks through which they have dug their horizontal ways: The
murderer's cell is a palace, in comparison of the black spot to which they
repair: The vagrant's posture in the stocks, is preferable to that in which
they labor.

Form, if you can, an idea of the misery of men kneeling, stooping, or lying on
one side, to toil all day in a confined place, where a child could hardly
stand: Whilst a younger company, with their hands and feet on the black dusty
ground, and a chain about their body, creep and drag along, like four-footed
beasts, heavy loads of the dirty mineral, through ways almost impassable to the
curious observer.

In these low and dreary vaults, all the elements seem combined against them.
Destructive damps and clouds of noxious dust infect the air they breathe.
Sometimes water incessantly distills on their naked bodies; or bursting upon
them in streams, drowns them, and deluges their work. At other times, pieces of
detached rocks crush them to death, or the earth breaking in upon them, buries
them alive. And frequently sulphurous vapors, kindled in an instant by the
light of their candles, form subterraneous thunder and lightning: What a
dreadful phoenomenon! How impetuous is the blast! How fierce the rolling
flames! How intolerable the noisome smell! How dreadful the continued roar! How
violent and fatal the explosion!

Wonderful providence! Some of the unhappy men have time to prostrate
themselves; the fiery scourge grazes their back, the ground shields their
breasts; they escape. See them wound up out of the blazing dungeon, and say if
these are not brands plucked out of the fire. A pestiferous steam, and clouds
of suffocating smoke pursue them. Half dead themselves, they hold their dead or
dying companions in their trembling arms. Merciful God of Shadrach! Kind
protector of Meshech! Mighty deliverer of Abednego! Patient preserver of
rebellious Jonah! Will not these utter a song -- a song of praise to Thee --
praise ardent as the flames they escape -- lasting as the life thou prolongest?
-- Alas! they refuse! And some -- O tell it not among the Heathens, lest they
for ever abhor the name of Christian -- Some return to the very pits, where
they have been branded with sulphurous fire by the warning hand of providence;
and there, sporting themselves again with the most infernal wishes, call aloud
for a fire that cannot be quenched, and challenge the Almighty to cast them
into hell, that bottomless pit whence there is no return.

Leave these black men at their perilous work, and see yonder bargemen hauling
that loaded vessel against wind and stream. Since the dawn of day, they have
wrestled with the impetuous current; and now, that it almost overpowers them,
how do they exert all their remaining strength, and strain their every nerve!
How are they bathed in sweat and rain! Fastened to their lines as horses to
their traces, wherein do they differ from the laborious brutes? Not in an erect
posture of body, for in the intenseness of their toil they bend forward, their
head is foremost, and their hands upon the ground. If there is any difference,
it consists in this: Horses are indulged with a colar to save their breast; and
these, as if theirs was not worth saving, draw without one: The beasts tug in
patient silence and mutual harmony; but the men with loud contention and
horrible imprecations. O sin, what have thou done! Is it not enough that these
drudges should toil like brutes, must they also curse one another like devils?

If you have gone beyond the hearing of their impious oaths, stop to consider
the sons of Vulcan confined to these forges and furnaces. Is their lot much
preferable? A sultry air, and clouds of smoke and dust, are the element in
which they labor. The confused noise of water falling, steam hissing,
fire-engines working, wheels turning, files creaking, hammers beating, ore
bursting, and bellows roaring, form the dismal concert that strikes the ears;
while a continual eruption of flames, ascending from the mouth of their
artificial volcanos, dazzle their eyes with an horrible glare. Massy bars of
hot iron are the heavy tools they handle, cylinders of the first magnitude the
enormous weights they heave, vessels full of melted metal the dangerous loads
they carry, streams of the same burning fluid the fiery rivers, which they
conduct into the deep cavities of their subterraneous moulds; and millions of
flying sparks, with a thousand drops of liquid, hissing iron, the horrible
showers to which they are exposed. See them cast; you would think them in a
bath, and not in a furnace: They bedew the burning sand with their streaming
sweat: nor are their wet garments dried up, either by the fierce fires that
they attend, or the fiery streams which they manage. Certainly, of all men,
these have reason to remember the just sentence of an offended God: In the
sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread, all the days of thy life.

All indeed do not go through the same toil; but all have their share of it,
either in body or in mind. Behold the studious son of learning; his intense
application has wasted his flesh, exhausted his spirits, and almost dried up
his radical moisture. Consider the man of fortune: Can his thousands a year
exempt him from the curse of Adam? No; he toils perhaps harder in his sports
and debaucheries, than the poor plowman that works his estate.

View that corpulent epicure, who idles away the whole day, between the festal
board and the dozing couch. You may think that he, at least, is free from the
curse which I describe: But you are mistaken: while he is living, as he thinks,
a life of luxurious ease and gentle inactivity, he fills himself with crude
humors, and makes way for the gnawing gout and racking gravel. See even now,
how strongly he perspires, and with what uneasiness he draws his short breath,
and wipes his dewy, shining face! Surely he toils under the load of an
undigested meal. A porter carries a burden upon his brawny shoulders; but this
wretch has conveyed one into his sick stomach. He will not work; let him alone,
and ere long acute pains will bathe him in as acute a sweat, as that of the
furnace-man; and strong medicines will exercise him to such a degree, that he
will envy even the collier's lot.

It is evident, therefore, that mankind are under a curse of It has been
asserted, that the short pleasure of eating and drinking makes amends for the
severest toil. The best way to bring such idle, sensual objectors to reason,
would be to make them earn every meal by two or three hours threshing. Besides,
what great pleasure can those have in eating, who actually starve, or just stay
gnawing hunger, by food coarser than that which their rich neighbors give to
their dogs?
toil and sweat, according to the divine sentence recorded by Moses; and that
they are frequently condemned by providence to as hard labor for life, as
wretched felons rowing in the galleys, or digging in the mines. God's image
disinherited of day,
Here, plunged in mines forgets a sun was made;
There, Beings deathless as their haughty Lord,
Are hammered to the galling oar for life,
And plow the winter's wave, and reap despair.
YOUNG.
But as it is absolutely incredible, that a good God, who by a word can supply
the wants of all his creatures, should have sentenced innocent mankind to these
inconceivable hardships, to procure or enjoy the necessaries of life; it is
evident they are guilty, miserable offenders.

X. ARGUMENT.
Hard labor and sweat, make up but one of the innumerable calamities, incident
to the wretched inhabitants of this world. Turn your eyes which way you please,
and you will see some flying from, others groaning under, the rod of God; and
the greatest number busily making a scourge for the backs of their
fellow creatures, or their own.

To pass over the misery of the brute creation: To say nothing of the subtilty
and rapaciousness, with which (after the example of men Eager ambition's fiery
chase I see;
I see the circling hunt of noisy men,
Burst laws enclosure, leap the mounds of right,
Pursuing and pursued, each other's pray;
As wolves, for repine; as the fox, for wiles;
'Till death, that mighty hunter, earths them all.
YOUNG.
) they lay wait for, and prey upon one another: To cast a veil over the agonies
of millions, that are daily stabbed, strangled, shot, and even flead, boiled,
or swallowed up alive, for the support of man's life, or the indulgence of his
luxury: And not to mention again the almost uninterrupted cries of feeble
infancy: Only take notice of the tedious confinement of childhood, the blasted
schemes of youth, the anxious cares of riper years, and the deep groans of
wrinkled, decrepid, tottering old age: -- Fix your attention upon family
trials: Here, a prodigal father ruins his children, or undutiful children break
the hearts of their fond parents: There, an unkind husband embitters the life
of his wife, or an imprudent wife stains the honor of her husband: A servant
disobeys, a relation misbehaves, a son lies ill, a tenant breaks, a neighbor
provokes, a rival supplants, a friend betrays, or an enemy triumphs: Peace
seldom continues one day.

Listen to the sighs of the afflicted, the moans of the disconsolate, the
complaints of the oppressed, and shrieks of the tortured: Consider the
deformity of the faces of some, and distortion or mutilation of the limbs of
others: To awaken your compassion, Some for hard masters broken under arms,
In battle lop'd away, with half their limbs,
Beg bitter bread through realms their valor saved.
YOUNG.
here a beggar holds out the stump of a thigh or an arm: There, a ragged wretch
hops after you, upon one leg and two crutches; and a little farther you meet
with a poor creature, using his hands instead of feet, and dragging through the
mire the cumbrous weight of a body without lower parts.

Imagine, if possible, the hardships of those who are destitute of one of their
senses: Here, the blind is guided by a dog, or gropes for his way in the blaze
of noon: There, the deaf lies on the brink of danger, inattentive to the
loudest calls: Here, sits the dumb sentenced to eternal silence: There,
dribbles the idiot doomed to perpetual childhood; and yonder the paralytic
shakes without intermission, or lies senseless, the frightful image of a living
corpse.

Leaving these wretched creatures, consider the tears of the disappointed, the
sorrows of the captive, the anxieties of the accused, the fears of the guilty,
and terrors of the condemned. Take a turn through jails, inquisitions, houses
of correction, and places of execution. Proceed to the mournful rooms of the
languishing, and wearisome beds of the sick; and let not the fear of seeing
human woe, in some of its most deplorable appearances, prevent you from
visiting hospitals, infirmaries, and bedlams: A place
Before your eyes appears, sad, noisome, dark,
A lazar-house it seems, wherein are laid
Numbers of all diseased: all maladies
Of ghastly spasm, or racking torture, qualmes
Of heart-sick agony, all fev'rous kinds,
Convulsions, epilepsies, fierce catarrhs,
Intestine stone, and ulcer, cholic-pangs,
Daemoniac phrenzy, moaping melancholy,
And moon-struck madness, pining atrophy,
Marasmus, and wide-wasting pestilence,
Dropsies, and asthmas, and joint-racking rheums.
Dire is the tossing! Deep the groans! Despair
Attends the sick, busiest from couch to couch:
And over them, triumphant Death his dart
Shakes; but delays to strike, though often invoked
With vows, as their chief good, and final hope.
MILTON.

To close the horrible prospect, view the ruins of cities and kingdoms, the
calamities of wrecks and sieges, the horrors of sea fights and fields of
battle; with all the crimes, devastations, and cruelties, that accompany
revenge, contention, and war; and you will be obliged to conclude with Job,
that corrupt man is born to trouble as the sparks fly upward; with David, that
the earth is full of darkness and cruel habitations; and with every impartial
enquirer, that our depravity, and God's justice, concur to make this world a
vale of tears, as well as a field of toil and sweat; a vast prison for rebels
already "tied with the chains of their sins," a boundless scaffold for their
execution, a golgotha, an aceldama, an immense field of torture and blood.

Some will probably say, "This picture of the world is drawn with black lines,
but kinder providence blends light and shade together, and tempers our
calamities with numberless blessings." I answer: It cannot be too thankfully
acknowledged, that, while patience suspends the stroke of justice, God, for
Christ's sake, restores us a thousand forfeited blessings, that his goodness
may lead us to repentance. But alas! What is the consequence, where divine
grace does not prove victorious over corrupt nature? To all our sins, do we not
add the crime of either enjoying the favors of providence with the greatest
ingratitude, or of abusing them with the most provoking insolence.

Our actions are far more expressive of our real sentiments, than our words.
Why this variety of exquisite food, says the voluptuary, whose life loudly
speaks what his lips dare not utter? Why this abundance of delicious wines, but
to tempt my unbridled appetite, and please my luxurious palate? -- Would God
have given softness to silks, brightness to colors, and luster to diamonds,
says the self-applauding smile of a foolish virgin, who worships herself in a
glass? Would he have commanded the white of the lily thus to meet the blush of
the rose, and heighten so elegant a proportion of features, if he had not
designed that the united powers of art, dress, and beauty, should make me share
his divine honors? -- Why are we blessed with dear children and amiable
friends, says the ridiculous behavior of fond parents and raptured lovers, but
that we should suspend our happiness on their ravishing smiles, and place them
as favorite idols in the shrine of our hearts? -- And why has heaven favored
me both with a strong constitution, and an affluent fortune, says the rich
slave of brutish lusts, but that I may drink deeper of earthly joys and sensual
delights?

Thus blessings abused or unimproved, become curses in our hands: God's
indulgence encourages us to offend him: We have the fatal skill of extracting
poison from the sweetest flowers; and madly turn the gifts of providence into
weapons, to attack our Benefactor and destroy ourselves. That there are then
such perverted gifts, does not prove that mankind are innocent, but that God's
patience endures yet daily, and that a Savior ever lives to make
intercession for us.

Should it be farther objected, that "our pleasures counter-balance our
calamities:" I answer: The greatest part of mankind are so oppressed with want
and cares, toil and sickness, that their intervals of ease may rather be termed
"an alleviation of misery," than "an enjoyment of happiness." Our pains are
real and lasting, our joys imaginary and momentary. Could we exercise all our
senses upon the most pleasing objects, the toothache would render all insipid
and burdensome; a fit of the gout alone damps every worldly joy, while all
earthly delights together cannot give us ease under it: So vastly superior is
the bitterness of one bodily pain, to the sweetness of all the pleasures of
sense!

If objectors still urge, that "sufferings are needful for our trial:" I reply,
They are necessary for our punishment and correction, but not for our trial. A
good king can try the loyalty of his subjects, without putting them to the
rack. Let Nero and Bonner try the innocent by all sorts of tortures, but let
not their barbarity be charged upon a God strictly just, and infinitely good.

However, "calamities prove a blessing to seem." -- And so does transportation:
But who ever inferred from thence, that reformed felons were transported for
the trial of their virtue, and not for the punishment of their crimes? I
conclude therefore, that our calamities and miseries demonstrate our
corruption, as strongly as the punishments of the bastinado and pillory,
appointed by an equitable judge, prove the guilt of those, on whom they are
frequently and severely inflicted.

XI. ARGUMENT.
Would to God the multiplied calamities of life were a sufficient punishment
for our desperate wickedness! But alas! they only make way for the pangs of
death. Like traitors, or rather like wolves and vipers, to which the Son of God
compares natural men, we are all devoted to destruction. Yes, as we kill those
mischievous creatures, so God destroys the sinful sons of men.

If the reader is offended, and denies the mortifying assertion, let him visit
with me the mournful spot, where thousands are daily executed, and where
hundreds make this moment their dying speech. I do not mean what some call "the
bed of honor," a field of battle, but a common deathbed.

Observing, as we go along, those black trophies of the king of terrors, those
escutcheons, which preposterous vanity fixes up in honor of the deceased, when
kind charity should hang them out as a warning to the living; let us repair to
those mournful apartments, where weeping attendants support the dying, where
swooning friends embrace the dead, or whence distracted relatives carry out the
pale remains of all their joy.

Guided by their groans and funeral lights, let us proceed to the dreary
charnal-houses and calvaries, which we decently call vaults and churchyards:
and without stopping to look at the monuments of some, whom my objector
remembers as vigorous as himself; and of others, who were perhaps his partners
in nightly revels; let us hasten to see the dust of his mouldered ancestors,
and to read upon yonder coffins, the dear name of a parent, a child, perhaps a
wife, turned off from his bosom into the gulf of eternity.

If this sight does not convince him, I shall open one of the noisome
repositories, and show him the deep hollows of those eyes, that darted tender
sensation into his soul; and odious reptiles fattened upon the once charming,
now ghastly face, he doted upon. -- But, methinks he turns pale at the very
proposal, and, rather than be confronted with such witnesses, acknowledges,
that he is condemned to die, with all his dear relatives, and the whole human
race.

And is this the case? Are we then under sentence of death? How awful is the
consideration! Of all the things that nature dreads, is not death the most
terrible? And is it not (as being the greatest of temporal evils) appointed by
human and divine laws, for the punishment of capital offenders; whether they
are named felons and traitors, or more generally called men and sinners? Let
matter of fact decide.

Whilst earthly judges condemn murderers and traitors to be hanged or beheaded;
does not the Judge of all, sentence sinful mankind, either to pine away with
old age, or be wasted with consumptions, burned with fevers, scalded with hot
humors, eaten up with cancers, putrified by mortifications, suffocated by
asthmas, strangled by quinseys, poisoned by the cup of excess, stabbed with the
knife of luxury, or racked to death by disorders as loathsome, and accidents as
various as their sins?

If you consider the circumstances of their execution, where is the material
difference between the malefactor and the sinner? The jailor and the turnkey
confine the one to his cell: The disorder and the physician confine the other
to his bed. The one lives upon bread and water: The other upon draughts and
boluses. The one can walk with his fetters: The other loaded with blisters can
scarcely turn himself. The one enjoys freedom from pain, and has the perfect
use of his senses: The other complains he is racked all over, and is frequently
delirious. The executioner does his office upon the one in a few minutes: But
the physician and his medicines, make the other linger for days, before he can
die out of his misery. An honest sheriff, and constables armed with staves,
wait upon one; while a greedy undertaker and his party, with like emblems of
authority, accompany the other: And if it is any advantage to have a numerous
attendance, without comparison the felon his the greater train.

When the pangs of death are over, does not the difference made between the
corpses consist more in appearance than reality? The murderer is dissected in
the surgeon's hall gratis, and the rich sinner is embowelled in his own
apartment at great expense. The robber exposed to open air, wastes away in
hoops of iron; and the gentleman confined to a damp vault, moulders away in
sheets of lead: And while the fowls of the air greedily prey upon the one, the
vermin of the earth eagerly devour the other.

And if you consider them as launching into the world of spirits; is not the
advantage, in one respect, on the malefactor's side? He is solemnly assured he
must die; and when the death-warrant comes down, all about him bid him prepare,
and make the best of his short time: But the physician and chaplain, friends
and attendants, generally flatter the honorable sinner to the last: And what
is the consequence? He either sleeps on in carnal security, till death puts an
end to all his delusive dreams; or, if he has some notion that he must repent,
for fear of discomposing his spirits, he still puts it off till to morrow; and
in the midst of his delays God says, Thou Fool, THIS NIGHT thy soul shall be
required of thee. What wonder is it then, if when the converted thief goes from
the ignominious tree to paradise, the impenitent rich man passes from his
purple bed, into an awful eternity, and there lifts up his eyes in unexpected
torments?

If these are truths too obvious to be denied, will thou, Sinner, as the
thoughtless vulgar, blunt their edge, by saying, with amazing unconcern, "Death
is a debt we must all pay to nature?" Alas! This is granting the point; for if
all have contracted so dreadful a debt, all are in a corrupt and lost state.
Nor is this debt to be paid to Nature, but to Justice; otherwise dying would be
as easy as sleeping, or any other natural action: But it is beyond expression
terrible to thee, from whose soul the Redeemer has not extracted sin, the
monster's sting: And if thou do not see it now in the most alarming light, it
is because either thou imaginest it at a great distance; or the double veil of
rash presumption, and brutish stupidity, is yet upon thy hardened heart.

Or will thou, as the poor Heathens, comfort thyself with the cruel thought,
that "thou shall not die alone?" Alas! dying companions may increase, but
cannot take off the horror of desolution. Besides, though we live in a crowd,
we generally die alone: Each must drink that bitter cup, as if he were the only
mortal in the universe.

What must we do then, in such deplorable circumstances? What! But humble
ourselves in the dust, and bow low to the scepter of divine justice; confessing
that since the righteous God has condemned us to certain death, and in general
to a far more lingering and painful death, than murderers and traitors are made
to undergo, we are certainly degenerate creatures and capital offenders, who
stand in absolute need of an Almighty Redeemer.

Permit me now, candid Reader, to make a solemn appeal to thy reason assisted
by the fear of God. From all that has been advanced, does it not appear, that
man is no more the favored, happy, and innocent creature he was, when he came
out of the hands of his infinitely gracious Creator? And is it not evident
that, whether we consider him as born into this disordered world, or dying out
of it, or passing from the womb to the grave, under a variety of calamitous
circumstances, God's providential dealings with him prove, that he is by nature
in a corrupt and lost estate?

A part, how small! of this terraqueous globe
Is tenanted by man, the rest a waste,
Rocks, deserts, frozen seas, and burning sands,
Wild haunt of monsters, poisons, stings and death.
Such is earth's melancholy map; but far
More sad, this earth is a true map of man:
So bounded are its haughty lord's delights
To woe's wide empire, where deep troubles toss,
Loud sorrows howl, envenomed passions bite,
Ravenous calamities our vitals seize,
And threatening fate wide opens to devour. Young.
THIRD PART.
WE have hitherto considered man as a miserable inhabitant of a wretched world.
We have seen him surrounded by multitudes of wants; pursued by legions of
distresses, maladies, and woes; arrested by the king of terrors: cast into the
grave; and shut up there, the loathsome prey of corruption and worms. Let us
now consider him as a moral agent; and by examining his disposition, character,
and conduct, let us see whether he is wisely punished, according to the
sentence of impartial justice; or wantonly tormented, at the caprice of
arbitrary power.

We cannot help acknowledging, it is highly reasonable, first, that all
intelligent creatures should love, reverence, and obey their Creator; because
he is most eminently their Father, their Master, and their King: Secondly, that
they should assist, support, and love each other, as fellow subjects,
fellow servants, and children of the same universal parent: And thirdly, that
they should preserve their souls and bodies in peace and purity; by which means
alone they can be happy in themselves, profitable to man, and acceptable to
God. This is what we generally call natural religion, which is evidently
founded upon eternal reason, the fitness of things, and the essential relation
of persons.

The propriety of these sanctions is so self-evident, that the Gentiles, who
have not the written law, are a law unto themselves, and do (but alas! how
seldom, and from what motives!) the things contained in the law, thus showing
that the work, the sum and substance of the law, though much blotted by the
fall, is still written in their heart. Nor will it be erased thence in hell
itself; for nothing but a sight of the equity of God's law, can clear his
vindictive justice in the guilty breast, give a scorpion's sting to the worm
that gnaws the stubborn offender, and arm his upbraiding conscience with a whip
of biting serpents.

Since the moral law so strongly recommends itself to reason, let us see how
universally it is observed or broken: So shall matter of fact decide, whether
we are pure and upright, or polluted and depraved.

XII. ARGUMENT.
Those who reject the scriptures, universally agree, that all have sinned, and
that in many things we offend all. Hence it appears, that persons of various
constitutions, ranks, and education; in all nations, religions, times, and
places; are born in such a state, and with such a nature, that they infallibly
commit many sins in thought, word, or deed.

But one transgression would be sufficient to render them obnoxious to God's
displeasure, and to bring them under the fearful curse of his broken law: For,
even according to the statutes of this realm, a man, who once robs a traveller
of a small sum of money, forfeits his life; as well as the bloody highwayman,
who for years barbarously murders all those whom he stops, and accumulates
immense wealth by his repeated barbarities.

The (...) obvious: Both incur the penalty of (...) which forbids robbery; for
both effectually break it, though one does it oftener, and with far more
aggravating circumstances than the other. So sure then as one robbery deserves
the gallows, one sin deserves death; for The soul that sins, says God's law,
and not the soul that commits so many sins, of such or such an heinousness,
it shall die. Hence it is, that the first sin of the first man was punished
both with spiritual and bodily death, and with ten thousand other evils. The
justice of this sanction will appear in a satisfactory light, if we consider
the following remarks:

1. In our present natural state, we are such strangers to God's glory, and the
spirituality of his law; and we are so used to drink the deadly poison of
iniquity like water, that we have no idea of the horror, which should seize
upon us, after a breach of the divine law. We are therefore as unfit judges of
the atrociousness of sin, as lawless, hardened assassins, who shed human blood
like water, are of the heinousness of murder.

2. As every wilful sin arises from a disregard of that sovereign authority,
which is equally stamped upon all the commandments; it has in it the principle
and nature of all possible iniquity, that is, the disregard and contempt of the
Almighty.

3. There is no proper merit before God, in the longest and most exact course
of obedience, but infinite demerit in one, even the least act of wilful
disobedience. When we have done all that is commanded us, we are still
unprofitable servants; for the self-sufficient God has no more need of us, than
a mighty monarch, of the vilest insects that creep in the dust beneath (...)
feet: And our best actions, strictly speaking (...) ^^serve absolutely nothing
from our Creator and Preserver, because we owe him all we have, and are, and
can possibly do. But if we transgress in one point, we ruin all our obedience,
and expose ourselves to the just penalty of his broken law. The following
example may illustrate this observation.

If a rich man gives a thousand meals to an indigent neighbor, he acts only as
a man, he does nothing but his duty; and the judge allows him no reward. But if
he gives him only one dose of poison, he acts as a murderer, and must die a
shameful death: So greatly does one act of sin outweigh a thousand acts of
obedience! How exceedingly absurd then, is the common notion, that our good
works counter-balance our bad ones! Add to this, that

4. Guilt necessarily rises in proportion to the baseness of the offender, the
greatness of the favors conferred upon him, and the dignity of the person
offended. An insulting behavior to a servant is a fault, to a magistrate it is
a crime, to a king it is treason. And what is wilful sin, but an injury offered
by an impotent rebel, to the infinitely powerful Lawgiver of the universe, to
the kindest of Benefectors, to the gracious Creator and Preserver of men -- an
insult given to the supreme Majesty of heaven and earth, in whose glorious
presence the dignity of the greatest potentate and archangel, as truly
disappears, as the splendour of the stars in the blaze of the meridian sun? Sin
therefore flying in the face of such a Lawgiver, Benefactor, and Monarch, has
in it a kind of infinite demerit from its infinite Object; and rebellious,
ungrateful, wretched man, who commits it a thousand times with a thousand
aggravations, may, in the nervous language of our church, be said, in some
sense, to deserve a thousand hells, if there were so many.

XIII. ARGUMENT.
Our natural depravity manifests itself by constant omissions of duty, as much
by flagrant commissions of sin, and perhaps much more. Take one instance out of
many, that might be produced. Constant displays of preserving goodness, and
presents undeservedly and uninterruptedly bestowed upon us, deserve a perpetual
tribute of heartfelt gratitude: God demands it in his law; and conscience, his
agent in our souls, declares, it ought in justice to be paid.

But where shall we find a Deist, properly conscious of what he owes the
supreme Being, for his "creation, preservation, and all the blessings of this
life?" And where, a Christian duly sensible of "God's inestimable love in the
redemption of the world by our Lord Jesus Christ?" A due sense of his
ever-multiplied mercies, would fill our souls with never ceasing wonder, and
make our lips overflow with rapturous praise. The poet's language would suit
our grateful sensations, and without exaggeration paint the just ardor of our
transports.

Bound every heart, and every bosom burn.
Praise, flow for ever (if astonishment
Will give thee leave) my praise, for ever flow:
Praise ardent, cordial, constant, etc.
Is not any thing short of this thankful frame of mind, a sin of omission, a
degree of ingratitude, of which all are naturally guilty; and for which, it is
to be feared, the best owe ten thousand talents both to divine goodness and
justice?

Throw only a few bones to a dog, and you win him: He follows you: Your word
becomes his law: Upon the first motion of your hand he flies through land and
water to execute your commands: Obedience is his delight, and your presence his
paradise: He convinces you of it by all the demonstrations of joy, which he is
capable of giving: And if he unhappily loses sight of you, he exerts all his
sagacity to trace your footsteps; nor will he rest, till he finds his
benefactor again.

Shall a brute be so thankful to a man for some offals, while man himself is so
full of ingratitude to God, who created him, preserves his life from
destruction, and hourly crowns him with mercies and loving kindness! How should
shame cover our guilty faces! Surely, if the royal prophet could say, he was as
a beast before God; may we not well confess, that, in point of gratitude, we
are worse than the dullest and most stupid part of the brute creation? For even
The ox, says the Lord, knows his owner, and the ass his master's crib; but
Israel does not know me, my people does not consider my daily favors. And if
the very Heathens affirmed, that Ingratum si dixeris, omnia dicis. Juv.
to call a man ungrateful to an human benefactor, was to say of him all
possible evil in one word; how can we express the baseness and depravity of
mankind, who are universally so ungrateful, to so bounteous a benefactor as God
himself?

XIV. ARGUMENT.
But, though we seem made of cold inattention, when the sight of divine mercies
should kindle our heart into gratitude and praise; we soon get out of this
languid frame of mind: For, in the pursuit of sensual gratifications, we are
all activity and warmth; we seem an ardent compound of life and fire.

What can be the reason of this amazing difference? -- What but rebellious
sense, and wanton appetite, raised at the sight or idea of some forbidden
object! The bait of pleasure appears, corrupt nature summons all her powers,
every nerve of expectation is stretched; every pulse of desire beats high; the
blood is in a general ferment; the spirits are in an universal hurry; and
though the hook of a fatal consequence is often apparent, the alluring bait
must be swallowed. The fear of God, the most inestimable of all treasures, is
already gone; and if the sinful gratification cannot be enjoyed upon any other
term, a good reputation shall go also. Reason indeed makes remonstrances; but
the loud clamours of flesh and blood, soon drown her soft whispers. The carnal
mind steps imperiously upon the throne: Sense, that conquers the greatest
conquerors, bear down all opposition: The yielding man is led captive by a
brutish lust; and while angels blush, there is joy in hell over the actual, and
complete degradation of an heaven born spirit.

Some indeed affirm, that these conflicts suit a state of probation and trial.
But it is evident, that either our temptations are too violent for our
strength, or our strength too weak for our temptations; since, notwithstanding
the additional help of divine grace, there never was a mere mortal, over whom
they never triumphed.

Nor can we exculpate ourselves by pleading, that these triumphs of sense over
reason, are neither long nor frequent. Alas! How many perpetrate an act of
wickedness in a moment, and suffer death itself for a crime which they never
repeated!

See that crystal vessel. Its brightness and brittleness represent the
shining, and delicate nature of true virtue. If I let it fall, and break it,
what avails it to say, "I never broke it before -- I dropped it but once -- I
am excessively sorry for my carelessness -- I will set the pieces together, and
never break it again:" Will these excuses and resolutions prevent the vessel
from being broken -- broken for ever? The reader may easily make the
application.

Even Heathen moralists, by their fabulous account of the companions of
Ulysses, turned into swine, upon drinking once of Circe's enchanted cup, teach
us, that one fall into sensuality, turns a man into a brute; just as one slip
into unchastity or dishonesty, changes a modest woman into a strumpet, or an
honest man into a thief. Again,

Ought not reason to have as absolute a command over appetite, as a skilful
rider has over a well-broken horse? But suppose we saw all horsemen universally
mastered, one time or other, by their beasts; and forced, though but for a few
minutes, to receive the bit, and go or stop at the pleasure of the wanton
brutes: should we not wonder, and justly infer, that man had lost the kind of
superiority, which he still maintains over domestic animals? And what then, but
the commonness of the case, can prevent our being shocked, when we see rational
creatures overcome, and led captive by carnal appetites? Is not this the
wanton, rebellious beast mounting upon his vanquished, dastardly rider?

We may then conclude, that the universal rebellion of our lower faculties
against our superior powers, and the triumphs of sense over reason,
demonstrate, that human nature has suffered as fatal a revolution, as these
kingdoms did, when a degraded king was seen bleeding on the scaffold, and a
base usurper lording it in the seat of majesty.

XV. ARGUMENT.
Happy would it be for us, if our fall manifested itself only by some transient
advantages of sense over reason. But alas! the experience of the best
demonstrates the truth of Isaiah's words, The whole head is sick.

To say nothing of the gross stupidity, and unconquerable ignorance, that keep
the generality of mankind just above the level of brutes; how strong, how clear
is the UNDERSTANDING of men of sense in worldly affairs! How weak, how dark in
spiritual things! How few idiots are there, but can distinguish between the
shadow and the substance, the cup and the liquor, the dress and the person! But
how many learned men, to this day, see no difference between water baptism and
spiritual regeneration, between the means of grace and grace itself, between
the form and the power of godliness! At our devotions, is not our mind
generally like the roving butterfly; and at our favorite diversions, and
lucrative business, like the fastening leach? Can it not fix itself on any
thing, sooner than on the one thing needful; and find out any way, before that
of peace and salvation?

What can be more extravagant than our IMAGINATION? How often have we caught
this wild power, forming and pursuing phantoms, building and pulling down
castles in the air! How frequently has it raised us into proud conceits, and
then sunk us into gloomy apprehensions! And where is the man, that is never led
into such mental scenes of vanity and lewdness, as would have made him the
object of universal contempt, if the veil of a grave and modest countenance had
not happily concealed him from public notice?

And has our MEMORY escaped unimpaired by the fall? Alas! let us only consider,
how easily we forget the favors of our Creator, and recollect the injuries of
our fellow creatures; how little we retain of a good book, or pious discourse,
and how much of a play, or frivolous conversation: and how exactly we remember
an invitation to a party of pleasure, whilst the loudest calls to turn to God,
and prepare for death, are no sooner heard than forgotten. -- Let us, I say,
consider these things, and we shall be forced to confess, that this useful
power loses like a sieve the living water of truth, drinks in like a sponge the
muddy streams of vanity, and is never so retentive, as when it is excited by
revenge, or some other detestable temper.

"A wretch that is condemned to die tomorrow, cannot forget it, says Baxter;
yet poor sinners, who are uncertain to live an hour, and certain speedily to
see the majesty of the Lord, to their inconceivable joy or terror, can forget
these things, for which they have their memory; and which, one would think,
should drown the matters of this world, as the report of a cannon does a
whisper, or as the sun obscures the purest glowworm. O wonderful stupidity of
an unregenerate soul! O astonishing distraction of the ungodly! That ever men
can forget eternal joy, eternal woe, the eternal God, and the place of their
unchangeable abode; when they stand even at the door, and there is but the thin
veil of flesh between them and that amazing sight, that eternal gulf, into
which thousands are daily plunging!"

Nor does our By Reason I mean that power, by which we pass judgment upon, and
draw inferences from, what the Understanding has simply apprehended.
REASON make us amends for the defects of our other faculties. Its beams, it is
true, wonderfully guide some persons through the circle of sciences, and the
mazes of commercial or political affairs. But when it should lead us in the
search of the truth which is after godliness, unless it is assisted from above,
how are its faint rays obstructed by the gross medium of flesh and blood,
broken by that of passion, and sometimes lost in that of prejudice! Wise sons
of reason, learned philosophers, your 288 opinions concerning the chief good,
are a multiplied proof of my sad assertion: All miss the mark: Not one of them
makes the supreme felicity to consist in the knowledge and enjoyment of God,
the amiable and adorable Parent of all good.

True reason, alas! is as rare as true piety. The poor thing, which, in
spiritual matters, the world calls Reason, is only the ape of that notable
faculty. How partial, how unreasonable Our earth's the bedlam of the universe,
Where reason (undiseas'd in heaven) runs mad,
And nurses folly's children as her own,
Fond of the foulest.
YOUNG.
is this false pretender! If it does not altogether overlook the awful
realities of the invisible world, which is too frequently the case, how busy is
it to reason away faith, and raise objections against the most evident truth, A
late publication in vindication of Pelagianism, appears to me no small instance
of this. The Rev. Author takes his estimate of human nature, not from universal
experience, but his indulged imagination; not from St. Paul, the chief of the
apostles, but from Dr. Tailor, to whom he acknowledges his obligations for
several of the best passages in his sermon. Passing over the exposition of his
text, where he oddly supposes that our Lord meant, by the drawings of God, the
natural powers of man; which is as reasonable as to suppose, that when he said,
Without ME you can do nothing, he meant that me should signify ourselves: --
Passing this over, I shall just point out his capital mistake. He tells us,
that All our faculties and powers ARE good and beautiful in their order, [that
they were so before the fall, is fully granted] and tend naturally to the
happiness both of the individual and the system: And he adds, that How weak
soever and imperfect our intellectual faculties may be, yet to speak
reproachfully of them in general, is a species of blasphemy against our
Creator. If to expose the present weakness of our rational faculties, and show
how greatly they are disordered and impaired by the fall, is what this divine
calls speaking reproachfully of them, have not the best men been found guilty
of this pretended blasphemy? How far the apostles and reformers carried it, may
be seen in the first part of this treatise. How he can clear himself of it, as
a subscriber to the 9th, 10th, and 35th articles of our church, I cannot see:
And by what means he will justify his conduct to the world, in receiving
hundreds a year to maintain the doctrine of the church of England, while he
publicly exposes it as a species of blasphemy, is still a greater mystery. Far
from seeing that all the faculties and powers, by which this is done, are good
and beautiful, I cannot help thinking some of them are materially defective;
and that though such a conduct may very much tend to the emolument of the
individual, it has little tendency to the happiness of the system. For my part,
were I to commence advocate for the uprightness of human nature, I would save
appearances, lest Dr. Tailor himself should say, Non defensoribus istis, etc.
-- But dropping this point, I appeal to common sense: Who is most guilty of
blasphemy against our Creator; he who says God made man both holy and happy,
affirming that the present weakness of our rational powers, is entirely owing
to the original apostasy of mankind: Or he, who intimates, that the gracious
Author of our being, formed our intellectual faculties weak and imperfect as
they now are? If it is not the latter, my understanding is strangely defective.
-- In vain does this learned divine tell us, that the candle of the Lord which
was lighted up in man at first, when the inspiration of the Almighty gave him
understanding, was not extinguished by the original apostasy, but has kept
burning ever since, and that divine flame has catched from father to son, and
has been propagated quite down to the present generation: If it is reasonable
to charge with a species of blasphemy those, who reverence their Creator too
much* to father our present state of imperfection upon him, I must confess my
reason fails; I have outlived the divine flame for one, or it never catched
from my father to me. -- A fear left foam well-meaning person should mistake
the taper of Pelagius, or the lamp of Dr. Tailor, for the candle of the Lord,
and follow it in the destructive paths of error, extorts this note from my pen.
See the objections that follow the xxii Argument.
even that, which I now contend for? And when right reason has been worsted by
sense, how ready is the impostor to plead against the faculty which it
personates! How skilful in cloaking bad habits under the genteel name of "human
foibles!" And how ingenious, in defending the most irrational and dangerous
methods of losing time, as "innocent sports, and harmless diversions!"

These observations, which must appear self-evident to all who know the world
or themselves, incontestably prove the degeneracy of all our rational powers,
and consequently the universality of our natural corruption.

XVI. ARGUMENT.
When the whole head is sick, is not the whole heart faint? Can our Will,
Conscience, and Affections, run parallel to the line of duty; when our
Understanding, Imagination, Memory, and Reason, are so much warped from
original rectitude? Impossible! Experience, thou best of judges, I appeal to
thee. Erect thy fair tribunal in the reader's breast, and bear an honest
testimony to the truth of the following assertions.

Our WILL, in general, is full of obstinacy: We must have our own way, right or
wrong. It Is pregnant with inconstancy: We are passionately fond of a thing one
day, and tired of it the next: We form good resolutions in the morning, and
break them before night. It Is impotent: When we see what is right, instead of
doing it with all our might, we frequently remain as inactive, as if we were
bound by invisible chains; and we wonder by what charm the wheels of duty thus
stop against our apparent inclination; till we discover, that the spring of our
will is broken, or naturally works the wrong way. Yes, it is not only unable to
follow the good, that the understanding approves, but full of perverseness to
pursue the evil, that reason disapproves: We are prone to do, contrary to our
design, those things which breed remorse and wound conscience; and sooner or
later, we may all say with the Heathen princess, who was going to murder her
child, If the reader wants to know the English of these words, he may find it
Romans vii. 15.
Video meliora, probo que,
Deteriora sequor.


Nor is CONSCIENCE itself untainted. Alas! how slow is it to reprove in some
cases! In others, how apt not to do it at all! In one person, it is easy under
mountains of guilt; and in another, it is unreasonably scrupulous about mere
trifles: It either strains out a gnat, or swallows a camel: When it is alarmed,
in some it shows itself ready to be made easy by every wrong method; in others*
it obstinately refuses to be pacified by the right. Today, you may with
propriety compare it to a dumb dog, that does not bark at a thief; and
tomorrow, to a snarling cur, that flies indifferently at a friend, a foe, or a
shadow; and then madly turns upon himself, and tears his own flesh.

If Conscience, the best power of the unconverted man, is so corrupt, good God!
where are his AFFECTIONS? Almost perpetually deficient in some, and excessive
in others, when do they attain to, or stop at, the line of moderation? Who can
tell, how often he has been the sport of their irregularity and violence? One
hour we are hurried into rashness by their impetuosity; the next, we are bound
in sloth by their inactivity. Sometimes every blast of foolish hope, or
ill-grounded fear; every gale of base desire, or unreasonable aversion; every
wave of idolatrous love, or sinful hatred; every surge of misplaced admiration,
or groundless horror; every billow of noisy joy, or undue sorrow, tosses,
raises, or sinks our soul; as a ship in a storm, which has neither rudder nor
ballast. At other times, we are totally be-calmed; all our sails are furled,
not one breath of devout or human affection stirs in our stoical, frozen
breast; and we remain stupidly insensible, till the spark of temptation,
dropping upon the combustible matter in our hearts, blows us up again into loud
passion: And then, how dreadful and ridiculous together, is the new explosion!

If experience pronounces, that these reflections are just, the point is gained.
Our whole heart is faint, through the unaccountable disorders of our will, the
lethargy or boisterous fits of our conscience, and the swooning or high fever
of our affections: And we may, without hypocrisy, join in our daily confession,
and say, There is no health in us.

XVII. ARGUMENT.
The danger of these complicated maladies of our souls, evidences itself by the
most fatal of all symptoms, our manifest alienation from God. Yes, shocking as
the confession is, we must make it, if truth has any dominion in our breast:
Unrenewed man loves not his God. The eternal Beauty, for whose contemplation;
the supreme Good, for whose enjoyment he was created, is generally forgotten,
despised, or hated. If the thought of his holy Majesty presents itself, he
looks upon it as an intruder: It lays him under as disagreeable a restraint, as
that, which the presence of a grave, pious master puts upon a wanton, idle
servant: Nor can he quietly pursue his sinful courses, till he has driven away
the troublesome idea; or imagined with the Epicure a careless God, who wants
resolution to call him to an account, and justice to punish him for his
iniquity.

Does any one offer an indignity to his favorite friend, or only speak
contemptibly of the object of his esteem, he feels as if he was the person
insulted, and reddening with indignation, directly espouses his cause: But
every body, the meanest of his attendants not excepted, may with impunity
insult the King of kings in his presence, and take the most profane liberties
with his name and word, his laws and ministers: He hear^ the wild blasphemy,
and regards it not; he sees the horrid outrage, and resents it not; and yet,
amazing infatuation! he pretends to love God.

If he goes to the play, he can fix his roving eyes, and wandering mind, three
hours together upon the same trifling objects, not only without weariness, but
with uncommon delight. If he has an appointment with the person whom he adores
as a deity, his spirits are elevated, expectation and joy flutter in his
dilated breast: He sweetly anticipates the pleasing interview, or impatiently
chides the slowly-flowing minutes: His feelings are inexpressible. But if he
attends the great congregation, which he too often omits upon the most
frivolous pretenses, it is rather out of form and decency, than out of devotion
and love; rather with indifference or reluctance, than with delight and
transport. And when he is present there, how absent are his thoughts! How
wandering his eyes! How trifling, supine, irreverent Men homage pay to men,
Thoughtless beneath whose dreadful eye they bow
In mutual awe profound, of clay to clay,
Of guilt to guilt, and turn their backs on Thee,
Great Sire! whom thrones celestial ceaseless sing*
To prostrate angels an amazing scence!
YOUNG.

his whole behavior! He would be ashamed to speak to the meanest of his
servants, with as little attention as he sometimes prays to the Majesty of
heaven. Were he to stare about when he gives them orders, as he does when he
presents his supplications to the Lord of lords, he would be afraid that they
would think he was half drunk, or had a touch of lunacy.

Suppose he still retains a sense of outward decency, while the church goes
through her solemn offices; yet how heavy are his spirits! How heartless his
confessions: how cold his prayers! the blessing comes at last, and he is
blessed indeed -- not with the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
fellowship of the Holy Ghost, for that he gladly leaves to "poor enthusiasts,"
but with a release from his confinement and tedious work. And now that he has
"done his duty, and served God," he hastes away to the company that suits his
taste.

See him there. Do not his very looks declare, he is in his own element? With
what eagerness of spirit, energy of gesture, and volubility of tongue, does he
talk over his last entertainment, chase, or bargain? Does not the oil of
cheerfulness make all his motions as free and easy, as if weight and friction
had no place at all in his light and airy frame?

Love of God, thou sweetest, strongest of all powers, did thou ever thus
metamorphose his soul, and impart such a sprightly activity to his body? And
you that converse most familiarly with him, Did you ever hear him say, Come,
and I will tell you what the Lord has done for my soul: Taste, and see how good
the Lord is? -- No, never; for out of the abundance of the heart the mouth
speaks: Nor can it be expected that God, who has no place in his joyous
reflections, should have one in his cheerful conversation. On the contrary, it
will be matter of surprise to those who introduce the delightful subject of the
love of God, if he does not wave it off, as dull, melancholy, or enthusiastical.

But as he will give you to understand, "he is no hypocrite, and therefore
confines devotion to his closet," follow him there -- Alas! he scarce ever
bends the knee to Him that sees in secret: Or, if he says his prayers as
regularly as he winds his watch, it is much in the same spirit: For, suppose he
does not hurry them over, or cut them as short as possible; yet the careless,
formal manner in which he offers them up, indicates as plainly as his public
conduct, the aversion lurking in his heart against God: And yet he fancies he
loves Him: With a sneer that indicates self-applause, and a pharisaic conduct
of others, Away with all your feelings and raptures, says he, This is the love
of God, that we keep his commandments." But alas! which of them does he keep?
Certainly not the first -- for the Lord is not the supreme object of his hopes
and fears, his confidence and joy: Nor yet the last -- for discontent and wrong
desires are still indulged in his selfish and worldly heart. How unfortunate
therefore is his appeal to the commandments, by which his secret enmity to the
law, government, and nature of God is brought to the clearest light!

XVIII. ARGUMENT.
But as the heartfelt love of God is supposed to be downright enthusiasm by
some moralists, who, dashing in pieces the first table of the law against the
second, pretend that all our duty to God consists in the love of our neighbor;
let us examine the unconverted man's charity, and see whether he bears more
love to his fellow creatures than to his Creator.

Nothing can be more erroneous than his notions of charity. He confounds it
with the bare giving of alms; not considering that it is possible to do this
kind of good, from the most selfish and uncharitable motives. Therefore, when
the fear of being accounted covetous, the desire of passing for generous, the
vanity of seeing his name in a list of noble subscribers, the shame of being
outdone by his equals, the teazing importunity of an obstinate beggar, the
moving address of a solicitor whom he would blush to deny, or the pharisaic
notion of making amends for his sins, and purchasing heaven by his alms -- when
any, I say, of these sinister motives set him upon assisting industrious
poverty, relieving friendless old age, or supporting infirm and mutilated
indigence, he fancies, that he gives an indubitable proof of his charity.

Sometimes too he affixes to that word, the idea of a fond hope, that every
body is going to heaven: For if you intimate, that the rich voluptuary is not
with Lazarus in Abraham's bosom, and that the foolish virgins are not
promiscuously admitted to glory with the wise, he wonders at. "your
uncharitableness," and thanks God "he never entertained such unchristian
thoughts of his neighbors."

He considers not, that charity is the fair offspring of the love of God, to
which he is yet an utter stranger; and that it consists in an universal,
disinterested benevolence to all mankind, our worst enemies not excepted: A
benevolence, that sweetly evidences itself by bearing with patience the evil
which they do to us, and kindly doing them all the good we possibly can, both
with respect to their soul and body, their property and reputation.

If this is a just definition of charity, the unrenewed man has not even the
outside of it. To prove it, I might appeal to his impatience and ill-humour,
his unkind words and cutting ralleries (for I suppose him too moral ever to
slander or curse any one:) I might mention his supercilious behavior to some,
who are entitled to his affability as men, countrymen, and neighbors: I might
expatiate on his readiness to exculpate, enrich, or aggrandize himself at the
expense of others, whenever he can do it without exposing himself.

But, waving all these particulars, I ask, Whom does he truly love? You answer,
Doubtless the person to whom he makes daily protestations of the warmest
regard." -- But how does he prove this regard? Why, perhaps by the most artful
insinuations, and dangerous attempts to rob her of her virtue. Perhaps he has
already gained his end -- Unhappy Magdalen! How much better would it have been
for thee, to have fallen into the hands of an highwayman? Thou would only
have lost thy money, but now thou art despoiled of the honor of thy sex, and
the peace of thy mind: Thou art robbed at once of virgin innocence, a fair
reputation, and possibly an healthy constitution. If this is a specimen of the
unconverted man's love, what must be his hatred!

But I happily mistake: "He is no libertine, he has a virtuous wife, and
amiable children, and he loves them, say you, with the tenderest affection." I
reply, that these relations, being immortal spirits, confined for a few years,
in a tenement of clay, and continually on the remove for eternity; his laudable
regard for their frail bodies, and proper care of their temporal prosperity,
are not a sufficient proof, that he loves them in a right manner. For even
according to Nos nos corpora sumus: Corpus quidem vas est aut aliquo^ animi
receptaculum.

Cic. Tusc. Quaest lib. 1.
wise Heathens, our soul is our better part, our true self. And what tender
concern does the unrenewed man feel for the soul of his bosom-friend? Does he
regard it more than the body of his groom, or the life of his horse? Does he,
with any degree of importunity, carry it daily in the arms of love and prayer,
to the throne of grace for life and salvation? Does he, by good instructions,
and a virtuous example, excite his children to secure an eternal inheritance?
And is he at least as desirous to see them wise and pious; as well-bred, rich,
handsome, and great? Alas! I fear it is just the reverse. He is probably the
first to poison their tender minds, with some of the dangerous maxims, that
vanity and ambition have invented: And, supposing he has a favorite dog, it is
well if he is not more anxious for the preservation of that one domestic
animal, than for the salvation of all their souls.

If these observations are founded upon matter of fact, as daily experience
demonstrates, I appeal to common sense, and ask, Can the natural man, with all
his fondness, be said to have a true love even for his nearest relatives? And
is not the regard that he manifests for their bodies, more like the common
instinct, by which doves cleave to their mates, and swallows provide for their
young; than like the generous affection, which a rational creature ought to
bear to immortal SPIRITS, awfully hovering in a scale of probation, which is
just going to turn for hell or heaven?

XIX. ARGUMENT.
Nor is it surprising, that the unrenewed man should be devoid of all true love
to his nearest relations: For he is so completely fallen, that he bears no true
love even to himself. Let us overlook those who cut their throats, shoot,
drown, or hang themselves. Let us take no notice of those who sacrifice a
year's health for a night's revel; who inflame their blood into fevers, or
derive putrefaction into their bones, for the momentary gratification of a
shameful appetite; and are so hot in the pursuit of a base pleasure, that they
leap after it even into the jaws of an untimely grave: Let us, I say, pass by
those innumerable, unhappy victims of intemperance and debauchery, who squander
their money upon panders and harlots, and have as little regard for their
health, as for their fortune and reputation; and let us consider the case of
those good-natured, decent persons, who profess to have a real value for both.

Upon the principle laid down in the last argument, may I not ask, What love
have these for their immortal part, their true self? What do they do for their
souls? Or rather, What do they not leave undone? And who can show less concern
for their greatest interest than they?

Alas! in spiritual matters, the wisest of them seem on a level with the most
foolish. They anxiously secure their title to a few possessions in this
transitory world, out of which the stream of time carries them with unabated
impetuosity; while they remain Time flies, death urges, knells call, heaven
invites,
Hell threatens; all exerts; in effort all;
More than creation labors! labors more!
And is there in creation, what, amidst
This tumult universal, winged dispatch,
And ardent energy, supinely yawns!
Man sleeps; and man alone; and man, whose fate,
Fate irreversible, entire, extreme,
Endless, hair-hung, breeze-shaken, over the gulf
A moment trembles; drops! and man, for whom
All else is in alarm; man, the sole cause
Of this surrounding storm! and yet he sleeps,
As the storm rocked to rest. YOUNG.

stupidly thoughtless of their portion in the unchangeable world, into which
they are just going to launch: They take particular notice of every trivial
incident in life, every idle report raised in their neighborhood, and supinely
overlook the great realities of death and judgment, hell and heaven.

You see them perpetually contriving how to preserve, indulge, and adorn their
dying bodies; and daily neglecting the safety, welfare, and ornament of their
immortal souls. So great is their folly, that earthly toys make them slight
heavenly thrones! So wilful their self-deception, that a point of time And is
it in the flight of threescore years
To push eternity from human thought,
And bury souls immortal in the dust?
A soul immortal spending all her fires,
Wasting her strength in strenuous idleness;
Thrown into tumults, raptured, or alarmed,
At ought this scene can threaten, or indulge,
Resembles Ocean into tempest wrought,
To wast a feather, or to drown a fly. YOUNG.

hides from them a boundless eternity! So perverted is their moral taste, that
they nauseate the word of truth, the precious food of souls, and greedily run
upon the tempter's hook, if it is but made of solid gold, or gilt over with the
specious appearance of honor, or only baited with the prospect of a favorite
diversion. And whilst, by uneasy, fretful tempers, they too often impair their
bodily health; by exorbitant affections and pungent cares, they frequently
break their hearts, or pierce themselves through with many sorrows.

Does such a conduct deserve the name of well-ordered self-love, or
preposterous self-hatred? O man, sinful man, how totally art thou depraved, if
thou art not only thy own most dangerous enemy, but often thy most cruel
tormentor!

XX. ARGUMENT.
This depravity is productive of the most detestable brood. When it has
suppressed the love of God, perverted the love of our neighbor, and vitiated
self-love; it soon gives birth to a variety of execrable tempers, and dire
affections, which should have no place but in the breasts of fiends, no
outbreaking but in the chambers of hell.

If you ask their name, I answer -- Pride, that odious vice, which feeds on the
praises it flyly procures, lives by the applause it has meanly courted, and is
equally stabbed by the reproof of a friend, and the sneer of a foe. -- The
spirit of independence, which cannot bear control, is galled by the easiest
yoke, gnaws the slender cords of just authority, as if they were the heavy
chains of tyrannical power; nor ever ceases struggling till they break, and he
can say: "Now I am my own master." -- Ambition and Vanity, which, like Proteus,
take a thousand shapes, and wind a thousand ways, to climb up to the high seat
of power, shine on the tottering stage of honor, wear the golden badge of
fortune, glitter in the gaudy pomp of dress, and draw, by distinguishing
appearances, the admiration of a gaping multitude. -- Sloth, which unnerves the
soul, enfeebles the body, and makes the whole man deaf to the calls of duty,
loath to set about his business, (even when want, fear, or shame, drives him to
it) ready to postpone or omit it upon any pretense, and willing to give up even
the interests of society, virtue and religion, so he may saunter undisturbed,
doze the time away in stupid inactivity, or enjoy himself in that dastardly
indolence, which passes in the world for quietness and goodnature. -- Envy,
that looks with an evil eye at the good things our competitors enjoy, takes a
secret pleasure in their misfortunes, under various pretexts exposes their
faults, slyly tries to add to our reputation what it detracts from theirs, and
stings our heart when they eclipse us by their greater success, or superior
excellencies. -- Covetousness, which is always dissatisfied with its portion,
watches it with tormenting fears, increases it by every fordid mean, and,
turning its own executioner, justly pines for want over the treasure, it madly
saves for a prodigal heir. -- Impatience, which frets at every thing, finds
fault with every person, and madly tears herself under the distressing sense of
a present evil, or the anxious expectation of an absent good. -- Wrath, which
distorts our faces, racks our breasts, alarms our household, threatens, curses,
stamps and storms even upon imaginary or trifling provocations. -- Jealousy,
that through a fatal skill in diabolical optics, sees contempt in all the words
of a favorite friend, discovers infidelity in all his actions, lives upon the
wicked suspicion it begets, and turns the sweets of the mildest passion into
wormwood and gall. -- Idolatrous love, which preys upon the spirits, consumes
the flesh, tears the throbbing heart, and when it is disappointed, frequently
forces its wretched slaves to lay violent hands upon themselves. -- Hatred of
our fellow creatures, which keeps us void of tender benevolence, a chief
ingredient in the bliss of angels; and fills us with some of the most unhappy
sensations belonging to accursed spirits. -- Malice, which takes an unnatural,
hellish pleasure in teazing beasts, and hurting men in their persons,
properties, or reputation. And the offspring of malice, -- Revenge, Man hard of
heart to man! Of horrid things
Most horrid! Midst stupendous, highly strange!
Yet often his courtesies are smoother wrongs;
Pride brandishes the favors he confers,
And contumelious his humanity:
What then his vengeance? Hear it not, ye stars!
And thou, pale moon! turn paler at the sound,
Man is to man the sorest, surest ill. --
Heaven's Sovereign saves all beings but Himself,
That hideous sight, a naked human heart, Young.

who always thirsts after mischief or blood; and shares the only delight of
devils, when he can repay a real or fancied injury sevenfold. -- Hypocrisy, who
borrows the cloak of religion; bids her flexible muscles imitate vital piety;
attends at the sacred altars, to make a show of her fictitious devotion; there
raises her affected zeal, in proportion to the number of the spectators; calls
upon God to get the praise of man; and lifts up adulterous eyes and thievish
hands to heaven, to procure herself the good things of earth. -- And
hypocrisy's sister, narrow-hearted Bigotry, who pushes from her civility and
goodnature, stops her ears against arguments and entreaties; calls huguenets,
infidels, papists, or heretics, all who do not directly subscribe to her absurd
or impious creeds; dogs them with a malignant eye; throws stones or dirt at
them about an empty ceremony, or an indifferent opinion; and, at last, if she
can, sets churches or kingdoms on fire, about a turban, a surplice, or a cowl.
-- Perfideousness, who puts on the looks of true benevolence, speaks the
language of the warmest affection; with solemn protestations invites men to
depend on her sincerity, while she lays a deep plot for their sudden
destruction; and with repeated oaths beseeches heaven to be witness of her
artless innocence, while she moves the center of hell to accomplish her dire
designs. The fatal hour is come; her stratagem has succeeded; and she now
kisses and betrays, drinks health and poison; offers a friendly embrace, and
gives a deadly stab. -- Despair, who scorns to be beholden to mercy, gives the
lie to all the declarations issued from the throne of grace, obstinately turns
his wild eyes from the great expiatory sacrifice; and, at last, impatient to
drink the cup of trembling, wildly looks for some weapon to destroy himself. --
Distraction, begotten by the shocking mixture of two, or more of these infernal
passions raised to the highest degree, of extravagance: Distraction, that
wrings her hands, tears her dishevelled hair, fixes her ghastly eyes, turns her
swimming brains, quenches the last spark of reason; and, like a fierce tiger,
must at last be chained by the hand of caution, and confined with iron bars in
her dreary dwelling.

And, to close the dismal train, Self-murder, who always points wretched
mortals to ponds and rivers, or presents them with cords, razors, pistols,
daggers, and poison, and perpetually urges them to the choice of one of them.
"You are guilty, miserable creatures, whispers he: The sun of prosperity is for
ever set, the deepest night of distress is come upon you: You are in a hell of
woe: The hell prepared for Satan, cannot be worse than that which you feel, but
it may be more tolerable: Take this, and boldly force your passage out of the
cursed state in which you groan." He persuades, and his desperate victims,
tired of the company of their fellow-mortals, fly for refuge to that of devils;
they shut their eyes; and, horrible to say! but how much more horrible to do!
deliberately venture from one hell into another, to seek ease; or, to speak
with more truth, leap with all the miseries of a known hell, into all the
horrors of one which is unknown.

And are your hearts, O ye sons of men, the favorite seats of this infernal
crew? Then shame on the wretch that made the first panegyric on the dignity of
human nature? He proved my point: He began in Pride, and ended in Distraction.

Detestable as these vices and tempers are, where is the natural man, that is
always free from them? Where is even the child ten years old, who never felt
most of these vipers, upon some occasion or other, shooting their venom through
his lips, darting their baleful influence through his eyes, or at least
stirring and hissing in his disturbed breast? If any one never felt them, he
may be pronounced more than mortal: But if he has, his own experience furnishes
him with a sensible demonstration, that he is a fallen spirit, infected with
the poison that rages in the devil himself.

XXI. ARGUMENT.
Bad roots, which vigorously shoot in the spring, will naturally produce their
dangerous fruit in summer. We may therefore go one step further, and ask, Where
is the man thirty years old, whose depravity has not broke out into the
greatest variety of sinful acts? Among the persons of that age, who never were
esteemed worse than their neighbors, shall we find a Forehead that never
betrayed daring insolence? -- A Check, that never indicated concealed guilt by
an involuntary blush, or unnatural paleness? -- A Neck, that never was
stretched out in pride and vain confidence? -- An Eye, that never cast a
disdainful, malignant, or wanton look? -- An Ear, that an evil curiosity never
opened to frothy, loose, or defaming discourse? -- A Tongue, that never was
tainted with unedifying, false, indecent, or uncharitable language? -- A
Palate, that never became the seat of luxurious indulgence? -- A Throat, that
never was the channel of excess? -- A Stomach, that never felt the oppressive
load of abused mercies? -- Hands, that never plucked, or touched the forbidden
fruit of pleasing sin? -- Feet, that never once moved in the broad, downward
road of iniquity? -- And a Bosom, that never heaved under the dreadful workings
of some exorbitant passion? Where, in short, is there a Face ever so
disagreeable, that never was the object of self-worship in a glass? And where a
Body, however deformed, that never was set up as a favorite idol, by the
fallen spirit that inhabits it?

If iniquity thus works by all the powers, and breaks out through all the
parts, of the human body; we may conclude by woeful experience, not only that
the plague of sin is begun, but that it rages with universal fury; and, to use
again the evangelical prophet's words, that from the sole of the foot, even to
the head of the natural man, there is no spiritual soundness in him, but
wounds, and bruises, and putrefying sores.

XXII. ARGUMENT.
What can be said of each individual, may, with the same propriety, be affirmed
of all the different nations of the earth. Let an impartial judge take four
unconverted men, or children, from the four parts of the world: Let him examine
their actions, and trace them back to their spring; and, if he makes some
allowance for the accidental difference of their climate, constitution, taste,
and education; he will soon find their disposition as equally earthly, sensual,
and devilish, as if they had all been cast in the same mould. Yes, as oak-trees
are oaks all the world over, though by particular circumstances some grow
taller and harder, and some more knotted and crooked than others: So all
unregenerate men resemble one another; for all are proud, self-willed,
impenitent, and lovers of pleasure, more than lovers of God.

Do not sloth, gluttony, drunkenness, and uncleanness; cheating, defrauding,
stealing, and oppression; lying, perjury, treachery, and cruelty, stalk openly,
or lurk secretly every where? Are not all these vices predominant among black
and white people, among savage and civilized nations, among Turks and Jews,
^^^thens and Christians? Whether they live on the banks of the Ganges or the
Thames, the Missisippi or the Seine? Whether they starve in the snows of
Lapland, or burn in the sands of Guinea?

O Sin, thou fatal pest, thou soul-destroying plague, would to God thy fixed
abode were only in the Levant! and that, like the external pestilence, thou
were chiefly confined to the Turkish dominions! But alas! the gross immorality
and profaneness, the various crimes and villainies, the desperate impiety and
wild blasphemy, under which every kingdom and city have groaned, and still
continue to do night and day, over the face of the whole earth, are black spots
so similar, and symptoms so equally terrible, that we are obliged to confess,
they must have a common internal principle; which can be no other than a bad
habit of soul; a fallen, corrupted nature. Yes, the universality and equality
of the effects, show to an unprejudiced mind, that the cause is universal, and
equally interwoven with that nature, which is common to all nations, and
remains the same in all countries and ages.

FIVE OBJECTIONS.
I. If the self-righteous moralist answers, that "sin and wickedness are not so
universal as this argument supposes:" I reply, that the more we are acquainted
with ourselves, with the history of the dead, and secret transactions of the
living; the more we are convinced, that, if all are not guilty of outward
enormities, all are deeply tainted with spiritual wickedness.

Even those excellent persons who, like Jeremiah, have been in part sanctified
before they came forth out of the womb, can from sad experience confess with
him, that The heart is deceitful above all things, and say with David, My heart
shows me the wickedness of the ungodly.

Thousands indeed boast of the goodness of their hearts: They flatter
themselves that to be righteous, it is enough to avoid the gross acts of
intemperance and injustice: With the Pharisees they shut their eyes against the
destructive nature of the love of the world, the thirst of praise, the fear of
men, the love of ease, sloth, sensuality, indevotion, self-righteousness,
discontent, impatience, selfishness, carnal security, unbelief, hardness of
heart, and a thousand other spiritual evils. Full of self-ignorance, like
Peter, they imagine there is no combustible matter of wickedness in their
breasts, because they are not actually fired by the spark of a suitable
temptation. And when they hear what their corrupt nature may one day prompt
them to, they cry out with Hazael, Am I a dog, that I should do this thing?
Nevertheless by and by they do it, if not outwardly as he did, at least in
their vain thoughts by day, or wicked, lewd imaginations by night. So true is
the wise man's saying, He that trusts his own heart is a fool.

II. If historians give us frequent accounts of the notorious wickedness of
mankind, (say the advocates for human excellence) it is because private virtue
is not the subject of history; and to judge of the moral rectitude of the world
by the corruption of courts, is as absurd as to estimate the health of a people
from an infirmary.

And is private vice any more the subject of history than private virtue? If it
were, what folios would contain the fulsome and black accounts of all the lies
and scandal, the secret grudges and open quarrels, the filthy talking and
malicious jesting, the unkind or unjust behavior, the gross or refined
intemperance, which deluge both town and country?

Suppose the annals of any one numerous family were published, how many volumes
might be filled with the detail of the undue fondness, or forbidding coldness;
the variance, animosity, and strife, which break out between husbands and
wives, parents and children, brothers and sisters, masters and domestics, upper
and lower servants, etc. What ridiculous, impertinent scenes would be opened to
public view! What fretfulness, dissimulation, envy, jealousy, talebearing,
deceit! What concealed suspicions, aggravated charges, false accusations,
underhand dealings, imaginary provocations, glaring partiality, insolent
behavior, loud passions!

Was even the best moralist to write the memoirs of his own heart, and give the
public a minute account of all his impertinent thoughts and wild imaginations,
how many paragraphs would make him blush! How many pages, by presenting the
astonished reader with a blank or a blot, would demonstrate the truth of St.
Paul's assertion, They are all gone out of the way, there is none that does
good, none but spoils his best works by a mixture of essential evil! Far then
from finding See the note [mark'd ] p. 76.
those vastly superior numbers, who in safe obscurity are virtuously and
innocently employed, we may every where see the truth of the confession, which
our objectors make in the church, "There is no health in us."

I say every where, for is cabal confined to the court, any more than lewdness
to the army, and profaneness to the navy? Does not the same spirit of
self-interest and intrigue which influences the choice of ministers of state,
preside also at the election of members of parliament, mayors of corporate
towns, burgesses of boroughs, and petty officers in a country parish? We may
then, (notwithstanding the unfortunate comparison, on which this objection is
founded) conclude without absurdity, that, as all men, sooner or later, by
pain, sickness, and death, evidence their natural weakness and mortality,
whether they live in infirmaries, palaces, or cottages: So all men, sooner or
later, by their thoughts, words and actions, demonstrate their natural
corruption; whether they crowd the jail yard, the drawing room, or the obscure
green of a country village.

III. The same objectors will probably reply, If corruption is universal, it
cannot be said to be equal; for numbers lead a very harmless, and not a few a
very useful life.

To this I answer, that all have naturally an evil heart of unbelief, forgetful
of, and departing from the living God. In this respect, there is no difference,
all the world is guilty before God. But, thanks be to the Father of mercies,
all do not remain so. Many cherish the seed of supernatural grace, which we
have from the Redeemer; they bow to his scepter, become new creatures, depart
from iniquity, and are zealous of good works. And the same gracious power that
has renewed them, is at work upon thousands more; hourly restraining them from
much evil, and daily exciting them to many useful actions.

With respect to the harmlessness, for which some unrenewed persons are
remarkable, it cannot spring from a better nature than that of their fellow
mortals; for the nature of all men, like that of all wolves, is the same
throughout the whole species. It must then be owing to the restraining grace of
God, or to a happier constitution, a stricter education, a deeper sense of
decency, or a greater regard for their character: perhaps only to the fear of
consequences, and to the want of natural boldness, or of a suitable temptation
and fair opportunity to sin. Nor are there few, who pass for temperate, merely
because the diabolical pride lurking in their heart, scorns to stoop so low, as
to indulge their beastly appetites: While others have the undeserved reputation
of good-natured, because they find more delight in quietly gratifying their
sheepish indolence or brutal desires, than in yielding to the uneasy,
boisterous tempers, which they have in common with devils.

As to the virtues by which some of the unconverted distinguish themselves from
others, they either spring from God's preventing grace, or are only vices in
disguise. The love of praise, the desire of honor, and the thirst of gold,
excite thousands to laudable designs, and useful actions. Wicked men, set on
work by these powerful springs, do lying wonders in the moral world, as the
magycians did in the land of Egypt. They counterfeit divine grace, and for a
time seem even to outdo believers themselves. Hence it is, that we frequently
see the indolent industrious, the coward brave, the covetous charitable, the
pharisee religious, the Magdalen modest, and the dastardly slave of his lusts a
bold asserter of public liberty. But the searcher of hearts is not deceived by
fair appearances: He judges of their actions according to the motives whence
they spring, and the ends for which they are performed: You are, says he to all
these seemingly virtuous sinners, like whited sepulchers, which indeed appear
beautiful outwardly, but within are full of dead mens' bones, and of all
uncleanness.

Were I to describe these saints of the world by a comparison, I would say,
that some of them resemble persons, who artfully conceal their ulcers, under
the most agreeable appearance of cleanliness and health. Many that admire their
faces and looks, little suspect what a putrid, virulent fluid runs out of their
secret sores. Others of them, whose hypocrisy is not of so gross a kind, are
like persons infected with a mortal disease, who, though the mass of their
blood is tainted, and some noble part attacked, still walk about, do business,
and look as fresh-coloured as if they were the picture of health. Ye sons of
Aesculapius, who, without feeling their pulse, and carefully weighing every
symptom, pronounce them very well upon their look alone, do ye not blunder in
physic, just as my objectors do in divinity?

IV. But still they urge, that It is wrong to father our sinfulness upon a
pretended natural depravity, when it may be entirely owing to the force of ill
example, the influence of a bad education, or the strong ferment of youthful
blood.

All these, I reply, like rich soil and rank manure, cause original corruption
to shoot the higher, but do not form its pernicious seeds. That these seeds
lurk within the heart, before they are forced up by the heat of temptation,
appears indubitable, if we consider, 1. That all children, on particular
occasions, manifest some early inclination to those sins, which the feebleness
of their bodily organs, and the want of proper ferments in their blood, do not
permit them to commit: 2. That infants betray envy, ill-humour, impatience,
selfishness, anger, and obstinacy, even before they can take particular notice
of ill examples, and understand bad counsels: And, 3. That though uncleanness,
fornication, and adultery, on account of the shame and danger attending them,
are committed with so much secrecy, that the examples of them are seldom, if
ever, given in public; they are nevertheless some of the crimes which are most
universally or eagerly committed.

Besides, if we were not more inclined to vice than virtue, good examples would
be as common, and have as much force, as bad ones. Therefore, the generality of
bad examples cannot arise but from the general sinfulness of man; and to
account for this general sinfulness by the generality of bad examples, is
begging the question, and not proving the point.

Add to this, that as weeds, since the curse, grow even in fields sown with the
best wheat; so vice, since the fall, grows in the midst of the best examples,
and the most excellent education: Witness the barbarous crimes committed by
pious Jacob's children, and penitent Adam's eldest son.

V. But if Cain sinned, say our objectors, and all mankind sin also, it is no
more than Adam himself once did by his own free choice, though he was created
as exempt from original depravity as an angel. What need is there then to
suppose, that he communicated to his posterity an inbred proneness to sin?

To this I reply, It is not one accident or single event, but a continual
repetition of the same event, that proves a proneness. If a man, who is
perfectly in his senses, by some unforeseen accident falls into a fit of
madness, we may account for his misfortune from that accident; and no certain
judgment can be formed of the bodily habit of his family. But if all his
children, through an hundred generations, are not only subject to the same mad
fits, but also die in consequence of them, in all sorts of climates, and under
all sorts of physicians; common sense will not allow us to doubt, that it is
now a family disorder, incurable by human art. The man is Adam, the family
mankind, and the madness sin. Reader! you are desired to make the application.

XXIII. ARGUMENT.
But all are not employed in sin and wickedness, for many go through a constant
round of innocent diversions; and these, at least, must be innocent and happy.
-- Let us then consider the amusements of mankind: Or rather, without stopping
to look at the wise dance of the Israelites round the golden calf, and the
modest, sober, and humane diversions of the Heathens, in the festivals of their
lewd, drunken, and bloody gods; let us only see, how far our own pleasures
demonstrate the innocence and happiness of mankind.

How excessively foolish are the plays of children! How full of mischief and
cruelty the sports of boys! How vain, foppish, and frothy the joys of young
people! And how much below the dignity of upright, pure creatures, the snares
that persons of different sexes perpetually lay for each other! When they are
together, is not this their favorite amusement, till they are deservedly
caught in the net, which they imprudently spread? But see them asunder.

Here, a circle of idle women, supping a decoction of Indian herbs, talk or
laugh all together, like so many chirping birds or chattering monkies, and,
scandal excepted, every way to as good purpose. -- And there, a club of graver
men blow, by the hour, clouds of stinking smoke out of their mouth, or wash it
down their throat with repeated draughts of intoxicating liquors. The strong
fumes have already reached their heads; and while some stagger home, others
triumphantly keep the field of excess; though one is already stamped with the
heaviness of the ox, another worked up to the fierceness and roar of the lion,
and a third brought down to the filthiness of the vomiting dog.

Leave them at their manly sport, to follow those musical sounds, mixed with a
noise of stamping; and you will find others profusely perspiring, and violently
fatiguing themselves, in skipping up and down a room for a whole night, and
ridiculously turning their backs and faces to each other an hundred different
ways. Would not a man of sense prefer running ten miles upon an useful errand,
to this useless manner of losing his rest, heating his blood, exhausting his
spirits, unfitting himself for the duties of the following day, and laying the
foundation of a putrid fever or a consumption, by breathing the midnight air,
corrupted by clouds of dust, by the unwholesome fumes of candles, and by the
more pernicious steam, that issues from the body of many persons, who use a
strong exercise in a confined place.

In the next room indeed they are more quiet, but are they more rationally
employed? Why do they so earnestly rattle those ivory cubes; and so anxiously
study those packs of loose and spotted leaves? Is happiness graven upon the
one, or stamped upon the other? Answer, ye Gamesters, who curse your stars, as
ye go home with an empty purse and a heart full of rage.

We hope there is no harm in taking an innocent game at cards, reply a
ridiculous party of superannuated ladies; gain is not our aim, we only play to
kill time. You are not then so well employed as the foolish Heathen emperor,
who amused himself in killing troublesome flies and wearisome time together.
The delight of rational creatures, much more of Christians on the brink of the
grave, is to redeem, improve, and solidly enjoy time; but yours, alas! consists
in the bare, irreparable loss of that invaluable treasure. Oh, what account
will you give of the souls you neglect, and the talents you bury!

And shall we kill each day? If trifling kill,
Sure vice must butcher: Oh, what heaps of slain
Call out for vengeance on us! Time destroyed
Is suicide, where more than blood is spilt.
YOUNG. And are public diversions better evidences of our innocence and
happiness? Let reason decide. In cities, some are lavish of the gold, which
should be laid by for the payment of their debts, or the relief of the poor, to
buy an opportunity of acting under a mask an impertinent or immodest part,
without a blush; and others are guilty of the same injustice or prodigality,
that they may be entitled to the honor of waiting upon a company of idle
buffoons, and seeing them act what would make a modest woman blush, or hearing
them speak what persons of true piety, or pure morals, would gladly pay them
never to utter.

Are country amusements more rational and innocent? What shall we say of those
Christian, or rather Heathenish, festivals, called Wakes, annually kept in
honor of the saint to whom the parish church was formerly dedicated? Are they
not celebrated with the idleness, vanity, and debauchery of the Floralia; with
the noise, riots, and frantic mirth of the Bacchanals; rather than with the
decent solemnity, pious cheerfulness, and strict temperance, which characterise
the religion of the holy Jesus?

The assizes are held, the judge passes an awful sentence of transportation or
death upon guilty wretches who stand pale and trembling before his tribunal;
and twenty couple of gay gentlemen and ladies, as if they rejoiced in the
infamy and destruction of their fellow mortals, hire on the occasion a band of
musicians, and dance all night, perhaps in the very apartment where the
distracted victims of justice a few hours before wrung their hands, and rattled
their irons.

The Races are advertised, all the country is in motion, neither business,
rain, nor storm, can prevent thousands from running for miles, and sometimes
through the worst of roads, to feast their eyes upon the danger of their fellow
creatures, and divert themselves with the misery of the most useful animals.
Daring mortals hazard their necks upon swift coursers, which are tortured by
the severest lashes of the whip, and incessant pricks or tearing gashes of the
spur* that they may exert their utmost force, strain every nerve, and make
continued efforts even beyond the powers of nature: Whence (to say nothing of
the fatal accidents, which yet, alas! too frequently happen) they sometimes
pant away their wretched lives in a bath of sweat and blood; and all this, that
they may afford a barbarous pleasure to their idle, wanton, and barbarous
beholders.

In one place the inhuman sport is afforded by an unhappy bird, fixed at some
distance, that the sons of cruelty may long exercise their merciless skill, in
its lingering and painful destruction: Or by two of them trained up, and high
fed for the battle. The hour fixed for the obstinate engagement is come; and,
as if it was not enough that they should pick each other's eyes out, with the
strong bills that nature has given them, human malice, or rather diabolical
cruelty, comes to the assistance of their native fierceness. Silver spurs, or
steel talons, sharper than those of the eagle, are barbarously fastened to
their feet: Thus armed, they are excited to leap at each other, and in an
hundred repeated onsets to tear their feathers and flesh, as if they were
contending vultures; and if at last one blinded, covered with blood and wounds,
and unable to stand any longer the metallic claws of his antagonist, enters
into the agonies of death; the numerous ring of stamping, clapping, shouting,
eagerly betting, or horridly cursing spectators, is as highly delighted, as if
the tortured, dying creature, was the common enemy of mankind.

In another place, a multitude of spectators is delightfully entertained by two
brawny men, who unmercifully knock one another down, as if they were oxen
appointed for the slaughter, and continue the savage play, till one, with his
flesh bruised and his bones shattered, bleeding, and gasping as in the pangs of
death, yields to his antagonist, and thus puts an end to the shocking sport.

But it is perhaps a different spectacle, that recommends itself to the bloody
taste of our baptized Heathens. Fierce dogs are excited by fiercer men, with
fury to fasten upon the nose, or tear out the eyes, of a poor confined animal,
which pierces the sky with his painful and lamentable bellowings, enough to
force compassion from the heart of barbarians, not totally lost to all sense of
humanity; whilst in the mean time the surrounding, savage mob, rends the very
heavens with the most horrid imprecations, and repeated shouts of applauding
joy; sporting themselves with that very misery, which human nature (were it not
deplorably corrupted) would teach them to alleviate. I ever thought, says judge
Hale, in his Contemplations, that there is a certain degree of justice due from
man to the creatures, as from man to man; and that an excessive use of the
creature's labor is an injustice, for which he must account. I have therefore
always esteemed it as a part of my duty, and it has been always my practice to
be merciful to my beasts; and upon the same account I have declined any cruelty
to any of thy creatures, and, as much as I might, prevented it in others as a
tyranny. I have abhorred those sports that consist in the torturing of thy
creatures; and if any noxious creature must be destroyed, or creatures for food
must be taken, it has been my practice to do it in the manner that may be with
the least torture or cruelty to the creature; ever remembering, that though God
has given us a dominion over his creatures, yet it is under a law of justice,
prudence, and moderation; otherwise we should become tyrants, and not lords,
over God's creatures; and therefore those things of this nature which others
have practiced as recreations, I have avoided as sins.


These are thy favorite amusements, O England, thou center of the civilized
world, where reformed Christianity, deep thinking wisdom, and polite learning,
with all its refinements, have fixed their abode! But, in the name of common
sense, how can we clear them from the imputation of absurdity, folly, and
madness? And by what means can they be reconciled, I will not say to the
religion of the meek Jesus, but to the philosophy of a Plato, or calm reason of
any thinking man? How perverted must be the taste, how irrational and cruel the
diversions of barbarians, in other parts of the globe! And how applicable to
all, the wise man's observation, Foolishness is bound up in the heart of a
child, and madness in the breasts of the sons of men.

XXIV. ARGUMENT.
The total corruption of our nature appears, not only in the inclination of
mankind to pursue irrational, and cruel amusements; but in their general
propensity to commit the most unprofitable, ridiculous, inhuman, impious, and
diabolical sins.

1 st. The most unprofitable: For instance, that of sporting in profane oaths
and curses with the tremendous name of the Supreme Being. Because of swearing
the land mourns, said a prophet thousands of years ago; and what land even in
Christendom, yea what parish in this reformed island mourns not, or ought not
to mourn, for the same provoking crime? -- a crime, which is the hellish
offspring of practical atheism, and heathenish insolence -- a crime, that
brings neither profit, honor, nor pleasure, to the profane wretch who commits
it -- a crime, for which he may be put to open shame, forced to appear before a
magistrate, and sent for ten days to the house of correction, unless he pays an
ignominious fine; and what is more awful still -- a crime, which, if persisted
in, will one day cause him to gnaw his impious tongue in the severest torments.
Surely man, who drinks this insipid, and yet destructive iniquity like water,
must have his moral taste strangely vitiated, not to say, diabolically
perverted.

2 dly. The most ridiculous sins. In what country, town, or village, do not
women betray their silly vanity? Is it not the same foolish disposition of
heart, which makes them bore their ears in Europe, and slit their noses in
America, that they may unnaturally graft in their flesh pieces of glass,
shining pebbles, glittering gold, or trinkets of meaner metal? And when female
Hottentots fancy they add to the importance of their filthy person, by some
yards of the bloody intestines of a beast, twisted round their arms or necks,
do they not evidence the very spirit of the ladies in our hemisphere, who too
often measure their dignity by the yards of colored silk bands, with which
they crown themselves, and turn the grave matron into a pitiful may-queen?

3 dly. The most inhuman sins. An hundred thousand mad animals, whose heads are
covered with hats, says Voltaire, advance to kill, or to be killed by, the like
number of their fellow mortals covered with turbans. By this strange procedure
they want, at best, to decide whether a tract of land, to which none of them
all lays any claim, shall belong to a certain man whom they call Sultan, or to
another whom they name Caesar, neither of whom ever saw, or will see, the spot
so furiously contended for: And very few of those creatures who thus mutually
butcher one another, ever beheld the animal for whom they cut each others
throats. From time immemorial this has been the way of mankind almost over all
the earth. What an excess of madness is this! And how deservedly might a
Superior Being crush to atoms this earthly ball, the bloody nest of such
ridiculous murderers!

The same author makes elsewhere the following reflections, on the same
melancholy subject: Famine, pestilence, and war, are the three most famous
ingredients of this lower world. The two first come from God; but the last, in
which all three concur, comes from the imagination of princes or ministers. A
king fancies, that he has a right to a distant province. He raises a multitude
of men, who have nothing to do, and nothing to lose; gives them a red coat and
a laced hat, and makes them wheel to the right, wheel to the left, and march to
glory. Five or six of these belligerent powers sometimes engage together, three
against three, or two against four: But whatever part they take, they all agree
in one point, which is, to do their neighbor all possible mischief. The most
astonishing thing, belonging to their infernal undertaking, is, that every
ringleader of those murderers, gets his colors consecrated, and solemnly
blessed in the name of God, before he marches up to the destruction of his
fellow creatures. If a chief warrior has had the good fortune of getting only
two or three thousand men slaughtered, he does not think it worth his while to
thank God for it: But if ten thousand have been destroyed by fire and sword,
and if (to complete his good fortune) some capital city has been totally
overthrown, a day of public thanksgiving is appointed on the joyful occasion.
Is not that a fine art which carries such desolation through the earth; and,
one year with another destroys forty thousand men, out of an hundred thousand!

4 thly. The most impious sins; for instance, that of idolatry: "Before the
coming of Christ," says a late divine, all the polite and barbarous nations
among the Heathens, plunged into it with equal blindness. And the Jews were so
strongly wedded to it, that God's miraculous interposition, both by dreadful
judgments and astonishing mercies, could not for 800 years restrain them from
committing it in the grossest manner.

Nor need we look at either Heathens or Jews, to see the proneness of mankind
to that detestable crime; Christians alone can prove the charge. To this day,
the greatest part of them pray to dead men and dead women; bow to images of
stone, and crosses of wood; and make, adore, and swallow down, the wafer-god:
And those, who pity them for this ridiculous idolatry, till converting grace
interposes, daily set up their idols in their hearts, and, without going to the
plain of D^ra, sacrifice all to the king's golden image.

And 5 thly. The most diabolical sin: Persecution, that favorite offspring of
Satan transformed into an angel of light. Persecution, that bloody,
hypocritical monster, which carries a bible, a liturgy, and a bundle of canons
in one hand; with fire, faggots, and all the weapons invented by cruelty in the
other; and with sanctified looks distresses, racks, or murders men, either
because they love God, or because they cannot all think alike.

Time would fail to tell of those, who, on religious accounts, have been stoned
and sawn asunder by the Jews, cast to the lions and burnt by the Heathens,
strangled and impaled by the Mahometans, and butchered all manner of ways by
the Christians.

Yes, we must confess it, Christian Rome has glutted herself with the blood of
martyrs, which Heathenish Rome had but comparatively tasted: And when
Protestants fled from her bloody pale, they brought along with them too much of
her bloody spirit. Prove the sad assertion, poor Servetus: When Romish
inquisition had forced thee to fly to Geneva, what reception did thou meet
with in that reformed city? Alas! the Papists had burned thee in effigy, the
Protestants burned thee in reality, and Moloch triumphed to see the two
opposite parties agree in offering him the human sacrifice.

So universally restless is the spirit of persecution, which inspires the
unrenewed part of mankind, that when people of the same religion have no
outward opposer to tear, they bark at, bite, and devour one another. Is it not
the same bitter zeal, that made the Pharisees and Sadducees among the Jews, and
now makes the sects of Ali and Omar among the Mahometans, those of the
Jansenists and Molinists among the Papists, and those of the Calvinists and
Arminians among the Protestants, oppose each other with such acrimony and
virulence?

But let us look around us at home: When persecuting Popery had almost expired
in the fires, in which it burned our first churchmen, how soon did those who
survived them commence persecutors of the Presbyterians? When these, forced to
fly to New England for rest, got there the staff of power in their hand, did
they not in their turn fall upon, and even hang the Quakers? And now that an
act of toleration binds the monster, and the lash of pens consecrated to the
defense of our civil and religious liberties, makes him either afraid or
ashamed of roaring aloud for his prey; does he not show, by his supercilious
looks, malicious sneers, and settled contempt of vital piety, what he would do,
should an opportunity offer? And does he not still, under artful pretenses, go
to the utmost length of his chain, to wound the reputation of those, whom he
cannot devour, and inflict at least See Pietas Oxoniensis.
academic death upon those whose person is happily secured from his rage?

O ye unconverted among mankind, if all these abominations every where break
out upon you; what cages of unclean birds, what nests swarming with cruel
vipers, are your deceitful and desperately wicked hearts!

XXV. ARGUMENT.
How dreadfully fallen is man, if he has not only a propensity to commit the
abovementioned sins, but to transgress the divine commands with a variety of
shocking aggravations! Yes, mankind are prone to sin:

I. Immediately, by a kind of evil instinct: As children, who peevishly strike
the very breast they suck; and betray the rage of their little hearts, by
sobbing and swelling, sometimes till, by forcing their bowels out of their
place, they bring a rupture upon themselves; and frequently till they are black
in the face, and almost suffocated. -- II. Deliberately, as those, who having
life and death clearly set before them, wilfully, obstinately choose the way
that leads to certain destruction. -- III. Repeatedly, witness liars, who,
because their crime costs them but a breath, frequently commit it at every
breath. -- IV. Continually, as rakes, who would make their whole life one
uninterrupted scene of debauchery, if their exhausted strength, or purse, did
not force them to intermit their lewd practices; though not without a promise
to renew them again, at the first convenient opportunity. -- V. Treacherously,
as those Christians, who forget divine mercies, and their own repeated
resolutions, break through the solemn vows and promises made in their
sacraments, and, sinning with an high hand against their profession,
perfidiously fly in the face of their conscience, the church, and their
Savior. -- VI. Daringly, as those who steal under the gallows, openly insult
their parents or their king, laugh at all laws human and divine, and put to
defiance all, that are invested with power to see them executed. -- VII.
Triumphantly, as the vast number of those, who glory in their shame, found
aloud the trumpet of their own wickedness, and boast of their horrid, repeated
debaucheries, as admirable, and praiseworthy deeds. -- VIII. Progressively,
till they have filled up the measure of their iniquities, as individuals;
witness Judas, who from covetousness, proceeded to hypocrisy, theft, treason,
despair and self-murder: Or, as a nation; witness the Jews, who, after
despising and killing their prophets, rejected the Son of God; affirmed he was
mad; stigmatized him with the name of Deceiver; said, he was Beelzebub himself;
offered him all manner of indignities; bought his blood; prayed it might be on
them, and their children; rested not, till they had put the Prince of Life to
the most ignominious death; and, horrible to say! made sport with the groans,
which rent the rocks around them, and threw the earth into convulsions under
their feet. -- IX. Unnaturally: 1. By astonishing barbarities: As the women who
murder their own children; the Greeks and Romans, who exposed them to be the
living prey of wild beasts: the savages, who knock their aged parents on the
head; the Canibals, who roast and eat their prisoners of war; and some
revengeful people, who, to taste all the sweetness of their devilish passion,
have murdered their enemy, and eaten up his liver and heart. 2. By the most
diabolical superstition: As the Israelites, who, when they had learned the
works of the Heathens, sacrificea their sons and their daughters to devils; and
by the horrible practices of witchcraft, endeavored to raise, and deal with,
infernal spirits. And, 3. by the most preposterous gratifications of sense:
Witness the incests The reason, which engaged the publisher of these sheets to
preach to some of the colliers in his neighborhood, was the horrid length they
went in immorality. One of them, whose father was hanged, upon returning
himself from transportation, in cool blood attempted to ravish his own
daughter, in the presence of his own wife, and was just prevented from
completing his crime, by the utmost exertion of the united strength of the
mother and the child. When brutish ignorance, and heathenish wickedness, break
out into such unnatural enormities, who would not break through the hedge of
canonical regularity?
and rapes committed in this land; the infamous fires, which drew fire and
brimstone down from heaven upon accursed cities; and the horrid lusts of the
Canaanites, though, alas! not confined to Canaan; which gave birth to the laws
recorded Lev. xviii. 7, 23. and xx. 16. In the last century an Irish bishop was
clearly convicted of the crime forbidden in those laws, and suffered death for
it.
Laws that are at once the disgrace of mankind, and the proof of my assertion.
-- X. What is most astonishing of all, by Apostasy: As those, who having begun
in the spirit, and tasted the bitterness of repentance, the good word of God,
and the powers of the world to come, make shipwreck of the faith, deny the Lord
that bought them, account the blood of the covenant, wherewith they were
sanctified, an unholy thing; and so scandalously end in the flesh, that they
are justly compared to trees withered, plucked up by the roots, twice dead; and
to raging waves of the sea, foaming out their own shame, to whom is reserved
the blackness of darkness for ever.

Good God! what line can fathom an abyss of corruption, the overflowings of
which are more or less attended with these multiplied and shocking aggravations?

XXVI. ARGUMENT.
If the force of a torrent may be known by the height and number of the banks,
which it overflows; the strength of this corruption will be rightly estimated
from the high and numerous dikes raised to stem it, which it nevertheless
continually breaks through.

Ignorance and debauchery, injustice and impiety, in all their shapes, still
overspread the whole earth; notwithstanding innumerable means used, in all
ages, to suppress and prevent them.

The almost total extirpation of mankind by the deluge, the fiery showers that
consumed Sodom, the ten Egytian plagues, the entire excision of whole nations
who were once famous for their wickedness, the captivities of the Jews, the
destruction of thousands of cities and kingdoms, and millions of more private
judgments, never fully stopped immorality in any one country.

The striking miracles wrought by prophets, the alarming sermons preached by
divines, the infinite number of good books published in almost all languages,
and the founding of myriads of churches, religious houses, schools, colleges,
and universities, have not yet caused impiety to hide its brazen face any
where. The making of all sorts of excellent laws, the appointing of magistrates
and judges to put them in force, the forming of associations for the
reformation of manners, the filling of thousands of prisons, and erecting of
millions of racks and gallows, have not yet suppressed one vice.

And what is most amazing of all, the life, miracles, sufferings, death, and
heavenly doctrine of the Son of God; the labors, writings, and martyrdom of
his disciples; the example and entreaties of millions that have lived and died
in the faith; the inexpressible horrors and frightful warnings of thousands of
wicked men, who have testified in their last moments, that they had worked out
their damnation, and were just going to their own place; the blood of myriads
of martyrs, the strivings of the Holy Spirit, the dreadful curses of the law,
and the glorious promises of the gospel -- All these means together, have not
extirpated immorality and profaneness out of one single town or village in all
the world; no, nor out of one single family for any length of time. And this
will probably continue to be the desperate case of mankind, till the Lord lays
to his powerful hand; seconds these means by the continued strokes of the sword
of his Spirit; pleads by fire and sword with all flesh; and, according to his
promise, causes righteousness to cover the earth, as the waters cover the sea.

Is not this a demonstration founded on matter of fact, that human corruption
is not only deep as the ocean; but impetuous as an overflowing river, which
breaks down all its banks, and leaves marks of devastation in every place? This
will still appear in a clearer light, if we consider the strong opposition,
which our natural depravity makes to divine grace in the unconverted.

XXVII. ARGUMENT.
When the Lord, by the rod of affliction, the sword of the Spirit, and the
power of his grace, attacks the hard heart of a sinner, how obstinately does he
resist the sharp, though gracious operation! To make an honorable and vigorous
defense, he puts on the shining robes of his formality; he stands firm in the
boasted armor of his moral powers; he daubs with untempered mortar the ruinous
wall of his conduct; with self-righteous resolutions, and pharisaic professions
of virtue, he builds, as he thinks, an impregnable tower; he musters and draws
up in battle array his poor works, artfully putting in the front those that
make the finest appearance, and carefully concealing the vices, which he can
neither disguise, nor dress up in the regimentals of virtue.

In the mean time he prepares the carnal weapon of his warfare, and raises the
battery of objections to silence the truth that begins to gall him. He affirms,
the preachers of it a: deceivers and madmen; till, he sees the Jews and
Heathens fixed even upon Christ and St. Paul the very same opprobrious name: He
calls it a 'new doctrine;' till he is obliged to acknowledge it is as old as
the reformers, the apostles, and the prophets: He says, it is fancy, delusion,
enthusiasm; till the blessed effects of it, on true believers, constrain him to
drop the trite and slanderous assertion: He declares, that it drives people out
of their senses, or makes them melancholy; till he is compelled to confess,
that the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, and that none are so
happy and joyful, as those who truly love, and zealously serve God: He urges,
that 'it destroys good works;' till a sight of the readiness of believers, and
of his own backwardness, to perform them, makes him ashamed of the groundless
accusation: He will tell you twenty times over, there is no need of so much
ado; till he discovers the folly of being careless on the brink of eternal
ruin, and observes, that the nearness of temporal danger puts him upon the
utmost exertion of all his powers. Perhaps, to get himself a name among his
profane companions, he lampoons the scripture, or casts out firebrands and
arrows against the despised disciples of Jesus, they are all poor and
illiterate, says he, fools or knaves, cheats and hypocrites, etc. etc. till the
word of God stops his mouth, and he sees himself the greatest hypocrite, with
whom he is acquainted.

When, by such heavy charges, he has long kept off the truth from his heart,
and the servants of God from his company, this kind of ammunition begins to
fail; and he barricades himself with the fear of being undone in his
circumstances, till experience convinces him, that No good thing shall God
withold from them that live a godly life, and that All things shall be added
to them, who seek first the kingdom of God. He then hides himself in the crowd
of the ungodly, and says, 'if he perishes, many will share the same fate;' till
he sees the glaring absurdity of going to hell for the sake of company. He
shelters at last under the protection of the rich, the great, the learned
despisers of Christ and the cross; till the mines of their wickedness springing
on all sides around him, make him fly to the sanctuary of the Lord; and there
he sees the ways, and understands the end of these men.

When all his batteries are silenced, and a breach is made in his conscience,
he looks out for some secret way to leave Sodom, without being taken notice of,
and derided by those who fight under Satan's banner; and the fear of being
taken for one of them that fly from the wrath to come, and openly take the part
of an holy God against a sinful world, pierces him through with many sorrows.

Are the outworks taken, has he been forced to part with his gross
immoralities, he has generally recourse to a variety of stratagems: Sometimes
he publicly dismisses Satan's garrison, fleshly lusts which war against the
godly, and keep under the ungodly soul; but it is only to let them in again
secretly, either one by one, or with forces seven times greater, so that his
last state is worse than the first. At other times he hoists up the white flag
of truth, apparently yields to conviction, favors the ministers of the gospel,
admits the language of Canaan, and warmly contends for evangelical doctrines:
But alas! the place has not surrendered, his heart is not given up to God:
spiritual wickedness, under fair shows of zeal, still keeps possession for the
god of this world; and the shrewd hypocrite artfully imitates the behavior of
a true Israelite, just as Satan transforms himself into an angel of light.

Is he at last deeply convinced, that the only mean of escaping destruction,
and capitulating to advantage, is to deliver up the traitor Sin? Yet what a
long parley does he hold about it! What a multitude of plausible reasons does
he advance, to put it off from day to day! He is yet young -- The Lord is
merciful -- All have their foibles -- We are here in an imperfect state -- It
is a little sin -- It may be consistent with loyalty to God -- It hurts no body
but himself -- Many pious men were once guilty of it -- By and by he will
repent as they did, etc. When louder summons and increasing fears compel him to
renounce the lusts of the flesh, how strongly does he plead for those of the
mind! And after he has given up his bosom-sin with his lips, how treacherously
does he hide it in the inmost recesses of his heart!

Never did a besieged town dispute the ground with such obstinacy, and hold out
by such a variety of stratagems, as corrupt man stands it out against the
repeated attacks of truth and grace. If he yields at all, it is seldom before
he is brought to the greatest extremity. He feeds on the dust of the earth; he
tries to fill his soul with the husks of vanity; and fares hard on sounds,
names, forms, opinions, withered experience, dry notions of faith, and empty
professions of hope, and fawning shows of love, till the mighty famine arises,
and the intolerable want of substantial bread, forces him to surrender at
discretion, and without reserve.

Some stand it out thus, against the God of their salvation, ten or twenty
years; and others never yield, till the terrors of death storm their affrighted
souls, their last sickness batters down their tortured bodies, and the poison
of the arrows of the Almighty drinks up their wasted spirits. What a strong
proof is this, of the inveteracy and obstinacy of our corruption!

XXVIII. ARGUMENT.
But a still stronger may be drawn, from the amazing struggles of God's
children with their depravity; even after they have, through grace, powerfully
subdued, and gloriously triumphed over it. Their Redeemer himself is the
Captain of their salvation: They are embarked with him and bound for heaven:
They look at the compass of God's word: They hold the rudder of sincerity: They
crowd all the sails of their good resolutions, and pious affections, to catch
the gales of divine assistance: They exhort one another daily, to ply the oars
of faith and prayer with watchful industry: Tears of deep repentance and
fervent desire, often bedew their faces in the pious toil: They would rather
die than draw back to perdition; but alas! the stream of corruption is so
impetuous, that it often prevents their making any sensible progress in their
spiritual voyage: And if, in an unguarded hour, they drop the oar, and faint in
the work of faith, the patience of hope, or the labor of love, they are
presently carried down into the dead sea of religious formality, or the
whirlpools of scandalous wickedness. Witness the lukewarmness of the
Laodiceans, the adultery of David, the perjury of Peter, the final apostasy of
Judas, and the shameful flight of all the disciples.

XXIX. ARGUMENT.
When evidences of the most opposite interest, agree in their deposition of a
matter of fact, its truth is greatly corroborated. To the last argument, taken
from some sad experiences of God's people, I shall therefore add one, drawn
from the religious rites of Paganism, the confessions of ancient Heathens, and
the testimony of modern deists.

When the Heathens made their temples stream with the blood of slaughtered
hecatombs, did they not often explicitly deprecate the wrath of heaven and
impending destruction? And was it not a sense of their guilt and danger; and an
hope, that the punishment they deserved, might be transferred to their bleeding
victims, which gave birth to their numerous, expiatory and propitiatory
sacrifices? If this must be granted, it is plain, those sacrifices were so many
proofs, that the considerate Heathens were not utter strangers to their
corruption and danger.

But let them speak their own sentiments. Not to mention their allegorical
sables of Prometheus, who brought a curse upon earth by stealing fire out of
heaven; and of Pandora, whose fatal curiosity let all sorts of woes and
diseases loose upon mankind: Does not Ovid in his Metamorphoses give a striking
account of the fall, and its dreadful consequences? Read his description of the
golden age, and you see Adam in paradise; proceed to the iron age, and you
behold the horrid picture of our consummate wickedness.

If the ancients had no idea of that native propensity to evil which we call
original depravity; what did Plato mean by our Kakia en phusei. Hence that
excellent definition of true religion, Therapeia Psuches, The cure of a
diseased soul.
Natural wickedness? And Pythagoras by Lugra gar sunopados erris blaptousa
lelethen Sumphulos. Aur. Carm.
The fatal companion, the noxious strife that lurks within us, and was born
along with us? Did not Solon take for his motto the well-known saying, which,
though so much neglected now, was formerly written in golden capitals over the
door of Apollo's temple at Delphos, Gnothi seauton.
Know thyself? Are we not informed by Heathen historians, that Socrates, the
prince of the Greek sages, acknowledged he was naturally prone to the grossest
vices? Does not Seneca, the best of the Roman philosophers, observe, Hac
condition nati sumus: Animalia obnoxia non paucioribus animi quam corporis
morbis.
We are born in such a condition, that we are not subject to sewer disorders of
the mind than of the body? Yea, that Omnia in omnibus vitia sunt, sed non omnia
in singulis extant.
All vices are in all men, though they do not break out in every one: And that,
Vitia sua confiteri sanitatis principium est.
To confess them, is the beginning of our cure? And had not Cicero lamented
before Seneca, that Men are brought into life by nature as a stepmother, with
a naked, frail, and infirm body; and a soul prone to diverse lusts?

Even some of the sprightliest poets bear their testimony to the mournful truth
I contend for: Propertius could say, Unicuique dedit vitium natura creato.
Every body has a vice to which he is inclined by nature. Horace declared, that
Nam vitiis nemo sine nascitur, optimus ille est Qui minimis urgetur.
No man is born free from vices, and that he is the best man who is oppressed
with the least -- That Nitimur in vetitum semper cupimus que negata.
Mankind rush into wickedness, and always desire what is forbidden -- That
Cereus in vitium flecti, monitoribus asper.
youth has the softness of wax to receive vicious impressions, and the
hardness of a rock to resist virtuous admonitions -- In a word, That we are mad
enough to attack heaven itself, and that our repeated crimes do not suffer the
God of heaven to lay by his wrathful thunderbolts. Caelum ipsum petimus
stultitia; neque
Per nostrum patimur scelus
Iracunda Jovem ponere fulmina,



And Juvenal, as if he had understood what St. Paul says of the carnal mind,
affirms that Ad mores natura recurrit Damnatos, fixa et mutari nescia.
Nature unchangeably fixed tends, yea runs back to wickedness, as bodies to
their center.

Thus the very depositions of the Heathens, in their lucid intervals, as well
as their sacrifices, prove the depravity and danger of mankind. And so does
likewise the testimony of some of our modern deistical philosophers.

The ingenious author of a book, called Philosophical Enquiries concerning the
Americans, informs us, it is a custom among some Indians, that, as soon as the
wife is delivered of a child, the husband must take to his bed, where he is
waited on by the poor woman, who should have been brought there; and that, to
this day, the same ridiculous custom prevails in some parts of France. From
this, and other instances, says our enquirer, we may collect, that, however men
may differ in other points, there is a most striking conformity among them in
ABSURDITY.

The same philosopher, who is by no means tainted with what some persons are
pleased to call enthusiasm, confirms the doctrine of our natural depravity by
the following anecdote, and the ironical observation with which it is closed.
The Eskimaux (the wildest and most sottish people in all America) call
themselves men, and all other nations barbarians. Human vanity, we see, thrives
equally well in all climates; in Labrador as in Asia. Beneficent nature has
dealt out as much of this comfortable quality to a Greenlander, as to the most
consummate French petit maitre.

The following testimony is so much the more striking, as it comes from one of
the greatest poets, philosophers, and deists, of this present free-thinking
age. Who can, without horror, consider the whole earth as the empire of
destruction! It abounds in wonders; it abounds also in victims; it is a vast
field of carnage and contagion. Every species is, without pity, pursued and
torn to pieces, through the earth, and air, and water. In man there is more
wretchedness, than in all other animals put together: He smarts continually
under two scourges, which other animals never feel; anxiety, and a listlessness
in appearance, which make him weary of himself. He loves life, and yet he knows
that he must die. If he enjoys some transient good, for which he is thankful to
heaven, he suffers various evils, and is at last devoured by worms. This
knowledge is his fatal prerogative: Other animals have it not. He feels it
every moment, rankling and corroding in his breast. Yet he spends the transient
moment of his existence, in diffusing the misery that he suffers; in cutting
the throats of his fellow creatures for pay; in cheating and being cheated; in
robbing and being robbed; in serving that he may command; and in repenting of
all that he does. The bulk of mankind are nothing more than a crowd of
wretches, equally criminal and unfortunate, and the globe contains rather
carcasses than men. I tremble, upon a review of this dreadful picture, to find
that it implies a complaint against providence, and I wish that I had never
been born. [ Voltaire's Gospel of the Day.] Wild error is often the guide, and
glaring contradiction the badge, both of those, who reject revelation, like
Voltaire; and of those, who indirectly set aside one half of it, like the
Pharisees and Antinomians around us. See a striking proof of it. This very
author, in another book, (O! see what antichristian morality comes to!)
represents the horrible sin of Sodom as an excusable mistake of nature, and
assures us, that At the worst of times, there is at most upon earth, one man in
a thousand, that can be called wicked. Now for the proof! Hardly do we see one
of those enormous crimes, that shock human nature, committed in ten years at
Rome, Paris, or London, those cities where the thirst of gain, which is the
parent of all crimes, is carried to the highest pitch -- If men were
essentially wicked, we should find every morning husbands murdered by their
wives, etc. as we do hens killed by foxes. According to this apostle of the
deistical world, it seems, that the most intense thirst of gold is no degree of
wickedness; that a woman, to be very good, needs only not cut her husband's
throat while he is asleep; and that it even little matters whether she omits
the dire murder out of regard to his life, or her own. What moral philosophy is
here! Why, if the sin of Sodom is a peccadillo, a frolicksome mistake; and
nothing is wickedness but a treacherous cutting of an husband's or a parent's
throat; I extend my charity four times beyond thee, O Voltaire, and do
maintain, that there is not one wicked man in five thousand.

I insert this note, to obviate the charge of severe critics, who accuse me of
dealing in 'gross misrepresentations, false quotations, and forgeries,' because
I quote some authors, when they speak as the oracles of God; and do not swell
my book with their inconsistencies, when they contradict the scriptures,
reason, and the truths which they themselves have advanced in some happy
moments; and because I cannot force my reason to maintain with them, both sides
of a glaring contradiction.

O ye deistical moralists, let me meet with more candor, justice, and mercy
from you, than I have done from the warm opposers of the second gospel-axiom.
It is enough that you discard scripture, do not, like them, make it a part of
your orthodoxy, to murder reason, and kick common sense out of doors!




XXX. ARGUMENT.
And yet, O strange infatuation! vain man will be wise, and wicked man pretends
to be righteous! Far from repenting in the dust, he pleads his innocence, and
claims the rewards of imaginary merit! Incredible as the assertion is, a
thousand witnesses are ready to confirm it.

Come forth, ye natural sons of virtue, who with scornful boasts attack the
doctrine of man's depravity: To drown the whispers of reason and experience,
sound each your own trumpet -- Thank God you 'are not as other men' -- Inform
us, you 'have a good heart,' and a clear conscience: Assure us, you do your
duty, your endeavors, your best endeavors to please the author of your lives
-- Vow, you never were guilty of any crime, never did any harm: -- And tell us,
you hope to mount to heaven, on the strong pinions of your good works and pious
resolutions.

When you have thus acted the Pharisee's part before your fellow creatures, go
to your Creator, and assume the character of the Publican. Confess with your
lips, you are miserable sinners, who have done what you ought not to have done,
and left undone what you ought to have done: Protest, there is no health in
you: Complain, that the remembrance of your sins is grievous unto you, and the
burden of them intolerable: But remember, O ye self-righteous Formalists, that
by this glaring inconsistency, you give the strongest proof of your
unrighteousness. You are nevertheless modest, when compared with your brethren
of the Romish church.

These, far from thinking themselves unprofitable servants, fancy they are
literally righteous overmuch. Becoming merit-mongers, they make a stock of
their works of supererogation, set up shop with the righteousness they can
spare to others, and expose to sale indulgences and pardons, out of their
pretended treasury. Nor are there wanting sons of Simon, who, with ready money,
purchase, as they think, not livings in the church below, but, which is far
preferable, seats in the church above, and good places at the heavenly court.

Was ever a robe of righteousness (I had almost said a fool's coat) so coarsely
woven by the slaves of imposture and avarice! and so dearly bought by the sons
of superstition and credulity!

O ye spiritual Ethiopians, who paint yourselves all over with the corroding
white of hypocrisy, and after all are artful enough to lay on red paint, and
imitate the blush of humble modesty -- Ye that borrow virtue's robes to procure
admiration, and put on religion's cloak to hide your shameful deformity -- Ye
that deal in external righteousness, to carry on with better success the most
sordid of all trades, that of Sin; of the worst of sins, Pride; of the worst
pride, which is spiritual -- Ye numerous followers of those, whom the Prophet
of Christians called crafty Serpents, and soft brood of Vipers -- Ye, to whom
he declared that publicans and harlots shall enter into the kingdom of heaven
before you; if I call you in last, to prove the desperate wickedness of the
human heart, it is not because I esteem you the weakest advocates of the truth
I contend for, but because you really are the strongest of my witnesses.

And now, candid Reader, forget not plain matter of fact; recollect the
evidence given by reason; pass sentence upon these last arguments, which I have
offered to thy consideration; and say, whether man's disposition and conduct
toward his Creator, his fellow creatures, and himself, do not abundantly
prove, that he is by nature in a fallen and lost estate.

FOURTH PART.
THE preceding arguments recommend themselves to the common sense of thinking
Heathens, and the conscience of reasonable deists; as being all taken from
those two amazing volumes, which are open to, and legible by, all; the World
and Man. The following are taken from a third volume, the Bible, despised by
the wits of the age, merely because they study and understand it, even less
than the other two. 'The Bible!' says one of them, with a smile, save yourself
the trouble of producing arguments drawn from that old legend, unless you first
demonstrate its authenticity by the noble faculty, to which you appeal in these
pages. For the sake of such objectors, I here premise, by way of digression, a
few rational arguments to evince, as far as my contracted plan will allow, the
divine authority of the scriptures.

1. The sacred penmen, the prophets and apostles, were holy, excellent men,
and would not; artless, illiterate men, and therefore could not, lay the
horrible scheme of deluding mankind. The hope of gain did not influence them,
for they were self-denying men, that left all, to follow a Master, who had not
where to lay his head; and whose grand initiating maxim was, Except a man
forsake all that he has, he cannot be my disciple. They were so disinterested,
that they secured nothing on earth, but hunger and nakedness, stocks and
prisons, racks and tortures; which indeed was all that they could, or did
expect, in consequence of Christ's express declarations. Neither was a desire
of honor the motive of their actions; for their Lord himself was treated with
the utmost contempt, and had more than once assured them, that they should
certainly share the same fate: Besides, they were humble men, not above working
as mechanics for a coarse maintenance, and so little desirous of human regard,
that they exposed to the world the meanness of their birth and occupations,
their great ignorance and scandalous falls.

Add to this, that they were so many, and lived at such distance of time and
place from each other, that had they been impostors, it would have been
impracticable for them to contrive and carry on a forgery, without being
detected. And as they neither would nor could deceive the world; so they
neither could nor would be deceived themselves: For they were days, months, and
years, eye and ear witnesses of the things which they relate; and when they had
not the fullest evidence of important facts, they insisted upon new proofs, and
even upon sensible demonstrations; as for instance, Thomas, in the matter of
our Lord's resurrection, John xx. 25. And to leave us no room to question their
sincerity, most of them joyfully sealed the truth of their doctrines with their
own blood. Did so many and such marks of veracity, ever meet in any other
authors?

2. But even while they lived, they confirmed their testimony by a variety of
miracles, wrought in diverse places, and for a number of years; sometimes before
thousands of their enemies, as the miracles of Christ and his disciples;
sometimes before hundreds of thousands, as those of Moses. These miracles were
so well known and attested, that when both Christ and Moses appealed to their
authenticity, before their bitterest opposers, mentioning the persons upon
whom, as well as the particular times when, and the places where, they had been
performed; the facts were never denied, but passed over in silence, or
maliciously attributed to the prince of the devils. By such a pitiful slander
as this, Porphyry, Hierocles, Celsus, and Julian the apostate, those learned
and inveterate enemies of Christianity, endeavored (as the Pharisees had done
before them) to sap the argument founded upon the miracles of Christ and his
disciples. So sure then as God would never have displayed his arm, in the most
Once indeed the Lord permitted the Magicians of Egypt so to use their art, as
to counterfeit for a time some of Moses' miracles; but it was only to make the
authenticity of others more conspicuous; this being the happy effect of the
contest, when those ministers of Satan withdrew confounded, and forced to
acknowledge, that the finger of God was evidently displayed through the rod of
their antagonist.
astonishing manner for the support of imposture, the sacred pen men had their
commission from the Almighty, and their writings are his lively oracles.

3. Reason itself dictates, that nothing but the plainest matter of fact, could
induce so many thousands of prejudiced and persecuting Jews, to embrace the
humbling, self-denying doctrine of the cross, which they so much despised and
abhorred. Nothing but the clearest evidence, arising from undoubted truth,
could make multitudes of lawless, luxurious Heathens receive, follow, and
transmit to posterity, the doctrine and writings of the apostles; especially at
a time when the vanity of their pretensions to miracles, and the gift of
tongues, could be so easily discovered, had they been impostors -- at a time,
when the profession of Christianity exposed persons of all ranks to the
greatest contempt, and most imminent danger. In this respect the case of the
primitive Christians widely differed from that of Mahomet's followers: For
those who adhered to the warlike, violent impostor, saved their lives and
properties, or attained to honor, by their new, easy, and flesh-pleasing
religion: But those, who devoted themselves to the meek, self-denying,
crucified Jesus, were frequently spoiled of their goods, and cruelly put to
death; or if they escaped with their lives, were looked upon as the very dregs
of mankind.

Add to this, that some of the most profound parts of the scriptures, were
addressed to the inhabitants of polite Greece, and triumphant Rome, among whom
Not many noble, not many wise are called, says the apostle; nevertheless some
of both, even at the rise of Christianity, openly stood up for its truth. Among
the noble we find Joseph, a member of the great Jewish council; Dionysius, one
of the judges at Athens; and Flavius Clemens, a Roman senator: And among the
wise, Quadratus, Aristides, and Athenagoras, Athenian philosophers; Clemens,
Arnobius, Ammonius, Annatolius, etc. men of great learning at Alexandria; and
at Rome Justin martyr and Tertullian, both famous apologists for the religion
of Jesus; the latter of whom, in the second century, told the Roman governors,
that their corporations, councils, and armies, and the emperor's palace, were
full of Christians: Nor is this improbable, since, so early as St. Paul's days,
the saints of Caesar's household saluted those of the Roman provinces. Phil. iv.
22. How credulous are they who can believe that persons of such rank and
learning could be deluded by Jewish fishermen into the worship of a crucified
impostor!
philosophy and literature, with the fine arts and the sciences, were in the
highest perfection; and who, consequently, were less liable to be the dupes of
forgery and imposture. On the contrary, gross ignorance overspread those
countries where Mahomet first broached his absurd opinions, and propagated them
with the sword: A sure sign this, that the sacred writers did not, like that
impostor, avail themselves of the ignorance, weakness, and helplessness of
their followers, to impose falsehood upon them.

4. When the authenticity of the miracles was attested by thousands of living
witnesses, religious rites were instituted, and performed by hundreds of
thousands, agreeable to scripture injunctions, in order to perpetuate that
authenticity. And these solemn ceremonies have ever since been kept up in all
parts of the world; the Passover by the Jews, in remembrance of Moses' miracles
in Egypt; and the Eucharist by Christians, as a memorial of Christ's death, and
the miracles that accompanied it, some of which are recorded by Phlegon the
Trallian, an Heathen historian.

5. The scriptures have not only the external sanction of miracles, but the
internal stamp of the omniscient God, by a variety of prophecies, some of which
have already been most exactly confirmed by the event predicted; witness the
rise and fall of the four grand monarchies, according to Daniel's prophecy,
chap. ii. and vii. and the destruction of the city and temple of Jerusalem,
foretold by Christ, Matt. xxiv. 2. while others are every day fulfilled in the
face of insidels, particularly the persecution of the real disciples of Christ
in our own times, as well as in all ages (See Matt. x. 22, 35. John xv. 20. and
Gal. iv. 29.) and the present miserable state of the Jews, so exactly described
by Moses, above three thousand years ago. See Deuteronomy. xxviii. 65.

6. Sometimes the plainest prophecies, the most public miracles, and the annals
of kingdoms, well known when those books were first received, wonderfully
concur to demonstrate their authenticity. Take one instance out of many. A
prophet out of Judah, above 300 years before the event, thus foretold the
pollution of Jeroboam's altar at Bethel, before Jeroboam himself, who was
attended by his priests, his courtiers, and, no doubt, a vast number of
idolatrous worshippers: O altar, altar, thus says the Lord, Behold a child
shall be born unto the house of David, Josiah by name, who shall burn men's
bones upon thee: and this is the sign: Behold, this very day, the altar shall
be rent, and the ashes that are upon it scattered. King Jeroboam, enflamed with
anger, stretched forth his hand against the man of God, saying to his guards,
Lay hold on him; but his extended hand was dried up so that he could not pull
it in again to him; the rending of the altar, and scattering of the fire,
instantly took place; and the capital prophecy was exactly fulfilled by pious
king Josiah, as you may see by comparing 1 Kings xiii. 1, etc. with 2 Kings
xxiii. 15, etc. -- Can we reasonably suppose, that books, containing accounts
of such public events, would have been received as divine, by a divided people,
if their authenticity had not been confirmed by indubitable matter of fact?
Nay, is it not as absurd to assert it, as it would be to affirm, that the
offices for the 5th of November, and the 30th of January, were forged by crafty
priests; and that the Papists, Puritans, and Royalists of the last century,
agreed to impose upon the world the history of the gunpowder plot, and of king
Charles's decollation, with which those parts of our liturgy are so inseparably
connected?

7. This scattered, despised people, the irreconcilable enemies of the
Christians, keep with amazing care If the histories contained in the old
testament were, in general, for the credit of the Jews, the love of praise
might indeed have engaged some of them to join in a public forgery. But that
book, of which they have always been so tenacious, presents the world chiefly
with an account of their monstrous ingratitude, unparalleled obstinacy,
perpetual rebellions, abominable idolatries; and of the fearful judgments,
which their wickedness brought upon them. Moses, who leads the van of their
sacred authors, sums up his history of the Israelites, and draws up their
character in these disgraceful words, which he spoke to their face: You have
been rebellious against the Lord from the day that I knew you, Deuteronomy. ix. 24.
And even David and Solomon, their greatest kings, are represented in those
books, as guilty of the greatest enormities. O ye deists, I appeal to your
reason, and ask, Would you die for, would you even connive at a notorious
forgery, supposing the design of it were merely to impose upon the world as
divine, a book that should perpetually stigmatize your ancestors, and fix
horrid blots upon the names, for which you have the greatest veneration?
the old testament, full of the prophetic history of Jesus Christ, and by that
means afford the world a striking proof that the new testament is true; and
Christians in their turn show, that the old testament is abundantly confirmed
and explained by the new. The earl of Rochester, the great wit of the last
century, was so struck with this proof, that upon reading the 53d chapter of
Isaiah, with floods of penitential tears he lamented his former infidelity, and
warmly embraced the faith, which he had so publicly ridiculed.

8. To say nothing of the venerable antiquity, and wonderful preservation of
those books, some of which are by far the most ancient in the world: To pass
over the inimitable simplicity, or true sublimity, of their style; they carry
with them such characters of truth, as command the respect of every
unprejudiced reader.

They open to us the mystery of the creation, the nature of God, angels, and
man, the immortality It is remarkable that the wisest Heathens, with all their
philosophy, seldom attained to a full assurance of the immortality of the soul.
Cicero himself says, Nescio quomodo, dum lego assentior; cum posui librum, et
mecum ipse de immortalitate animorum coepi cogitare, assentio omnis illa
elabitur.

Tusc. Quest. lib.
of the soul, the end for which we were made, the origin and connection of moral
and natural evil, the vanity of this world and the glory of the next. There we
see inspired shepherds, tradesmen, and fishermen, surpassing as much the
greatest philosophers, as these did the herd of mankind, both in meekness of
wisdom and sublimity of doctrine -- There we admire the purest morality in the
world, agreeable to the dictates of sound reason, confirmed by the witness
which God has placed for himself in our breast, and exemplified in the lives of
men of like passions with ourselves -- There we discover a vein of
ecclesiastical history and theological truth, consistently running through a
collection of sixty-six different books, written by various authors, in
different languages, during the space of above 1500 years -- There we find, as
in a deep and pure spring, all the genuine drops and streams of spiritual
knowledge, which can possibly be met with in the largest libraries -- There the
workings of the human heart are described, in a manner that demonstrates the
inspiration of the Searcher of hearts -- There we have a particular account of
all our spiritual maladies, with their various symptoms, and the method of a
certain cure; a cure that has been witnessed by millions of martyrs and
departed saints, and is now enjoyed by thousands of good men, who would account
it an honor to seal the truth of the scriptures with their own blood -- There
you meet with the noblest strains of penitential and joyous devotion, adapted
to the dispositions and states of all travelers to Sion -- And there you read
those awful threatenings and chearing promises, which are daily fulfilled in the
consciences of men, to the admiration of believers, and the astonishment of
attentive infidels.

9. The wonderful efficacy of the scriptures is another proof that they are of
God. When they are faithfully opened by his ministers, and powerfully applied
by his Spirit, they wound and heal, they kill and make alive, they alarm the
careless, turn or enrage the wicked, direct the lost, support the tempted,
strengthen the weak, comfort mourners, and nourish pious souls. As the woman of
Samaria said of Jesus, Come, see a man that told me all that ever I did: Is not
this the Christ? a good man can say of the Bible, Come, see a book that told me
all that was in my heart, and acquainted me with the various trials and dangers
I have met with in my spiritual travels; a book where I have found those
truths, which, like a divinely tempered sword, have cut my way through all the
snares and forces of my spiritual adversaries; and by whose directions my soul
has happily entered the paradise of divine and brotherly love, Is not this the
book of God?

10. To conclude: It is exceedingly remarkable, that the more humble and holy
people are, the more they read, admire, and value the scriptures; and on the
contrary, the more self-conceited, worldly-minded, and wicked, the more they
neglect, despise, and asperse them.

As for the objections which are raised against their perspicuity and
consistency, those who are both pious and learned know, that they are generally
founded on prepossession, and the want of understanding in spiritual things; or
on our ignorance of several customs, idioms, and circumstances, which were
perfectly known when those books were written. Frequently also the immaterial
error arises merely from a wrong punctuation, or a mistake of copiers,
printers, or translators; as the daily discoveries of pious critics, and
ingenuous confessions of unprejudiced enquirers, abundantly prove.

To the preceding arguments, I beg leave to add the following queries: Do not
disbelievers, by supposing that the scriptures are a forged book, and
consequently that Christianity is a false religion, run upon the very rocks
which they seem so afraid of? And may they not be charged with indirectly
setting their seal to opinions, far more incredible than those which they
reject?

1. O ye Disputers of this world, if ye believe that Moses and Jesus Christ,
St. Peter and St. Paul, publicly worked sham miracles for years, in various
cities and countries, before thousands of their sharp-sighted opposers, without
being ever detected in any of their tricks; might you not as reasonably
believe, that thousands of shrewd men were once turned into stupid asses?

2. If you believe, that the gospel is the production of human deceit; and yet,
that in the prodigious number of apostates once concerned in carrying on the
amazing villainy, such as Judas, Demas, Simon Magus, Alexander the Coppersmith,
who did St. Paul much evil, etc. not one was ever found, that would prove the
forgery: might you not as reasonably believe, that if Mr. Wilkes, and all his
friends, knew of a gross villainy, carried on by the ministry, in order to turn
the kingdom upside down; neither he, nor any one of them, could ever be
prevailed upon to disclose and prove it to the world? Pliny, a learned and
prudent Roman governor, who was employed by the emperor Trajan in stopping the
progress of Christianity, wrote to him, that the apostles affirmed, the whole
of their crime had been, to meet before day, and sing an hymn to Christ as to
their God. His own words are, Affirmabant hanc fuisse summam vel culpae suae
vel erroris, quod essent soliti stato die ante lucem con^enire, carmenque
Christo quasi Deo dicere.


3. You believe, that the miracles and resurrection of Christ, together with
the gifts of the Holy Ghost, were nothing but enthusiastical or knavish
pretensions: and yet you are forced to grant, that thousands of Jews, strongly
attached to their religion, amazingly averse to that of Jesus, and guilty of
persecuting him unto death, took him openly for their Savior a few weeks after
they had seen him publicly scourged; and in the very city in sight of which he
had just been crucified between two thieves. Now is not this as absurd as to
believe, that if a few fishermen cried up the last person hanged in London for
a notorious forgery; and if they affirmed that he was the Son of God, appealing
to a great number of miracles, supposed to have been wrought by him in the
squares and hospitals of the metropolis, and especially in St. Paul's church
yard; and maintaining that some of them had been acknowledged genuine by the
Some remarkable instances of this, we have in the sacred books, published when
the facts mentioned therein were notorious, and when some of the persons named
were probably yet alive. After the resurrection of Lazarus, the chief priests
and the Pharisees gathered a council, and said, What do we? for this man does
many miracles. If we let him alone, all men will believe on him, John xi. 47.
-- And after Peter and John had publicly cured the cripple, who used to beg at
the gate of the temple; the rulers, and elders, and scribes, and Annas the high
priest, and Caiaphas, and John, and Alexander, and as many as were of the
kindred of the high priest, were gathered together at Jerusalem, saying, What
shall we do to these men? for that indeed a NOTABLE MIRACLE has been done by
them, is manifest to ALL them that dwell in Jerusalem, and we cannot deny it.

Acts iv. 5 -- 16.
great council of the nation; they could by such notorious lies, engage
thousands of citizens and some aldermen, to put all their trust in the villain
hanged at their special request?

4. You believe, that Christianity is a gross imposture; and yet you cannot
deny, that thousands of learned Romans and wise Greeks, who agreed to despise
the Jews above all other men, took for their Savior that very Jesus, of whom
his own countrymen had been ashamed, and whom they had crucified as an
impostor. Is not this as absurd as to believe, that thousands of wise
Englishmen, and sensible Frenchmen, could be induced by the absurd tale of two
or three Hottentots, to worship a certain Hottentot, whom the whole nation of
Hottentots had condemned to be hanged, as being more worthy of an ignominious
death, than the bloody ringleader of a seditious mob?

5. If you believe with one of the popes, that the history of Christ is 'a mere
fable,' and that there never was such an extraordinary person, you believe that
the Heathens, the Jews, and the Mahometans, have agreed with the Christians,
their sworn enemies, to (...) on the most amazing imposture. For Pliny,
Tacitus, Lucian, and Suetonius, Heathen authors, who lived soon after Christ,
make express mention of him; as do also Mahomet, many of the rabbis, and
Julian the emperor, that powerful and crafty apostate, who not only never
denied Christ's existence, but openly acknowledged that Paul, Mark, Matthew,
and Peter, were the authors of the gospels and epistles, which bear their name.
Now is not this as ridiculous as to believe, that the pope, the mufty, and the
inquisitors, have laid their heads with Messrs. Voltaire, Hume, and Rousseau,
to favor a forgery inbversive of popery, mahometanism, and infidelity?

6. If you deny the authenticity of the four gospels, which are the only
ancient histories that we have of our Savior; and yet believe, that there was
such a personage as Jesus Christ, whose fame so spread through the Roman
empire, that in less than 330 years he was not only reckoned superior to the
Roman emperor, but to Jupiter himself; and that nevertheless not one historian,
during all that time, gave the world a particular account of him: [which must
be the case, if the four gospels are a forgery] Might you not as reasonably
suppose, that if a blazing meteor appeared in our day, and eclipsed the stars,
the moon, and the sun itself; no astronomer for several centuries would take
particular notice of so wonderful a phenomenon?

7. If the gospel is a delusion, you believe that St. Paul, who was a man of
sense, learning, and intrepidity, was seduced by -- no body, to preach for near
thirty years, with astonishing zeal and matchless hardships, an imposture,
against the abettors of which, he just before breathed nothing but threatenings
and slaughter. Would it be half so absurd to believe, that Mr. Wilkes has
suddenly commenced the minister's advocate, goes through the kingdom to
recommend the present administration, and accounts it an honor to be mobb'd,
whipped, or stoned in every borough, for his excessive attachment to the king?

8. The instantaneous conversion of thousands, was wrought by means of public
appeals to notorious matter of fact. Hear the language of the apostles to the
Jews. This ye yourselves KNOW, Acts ii. 24. Ye KNOW the thing done through ALL
Judea, Acts x. 37, 38. The King KNOWS these things -- This thing was NOT done
in a corner, Acts xxvi. 26. Now if Christianity is not founded upon indubitable
facts, might you not as well believe, that twelve men broke loose from bedlam,
brought last year thousands of deists over to Christianity, by saying to them,
' Ye know' -- what you are perfect strangers to; that is, ' Ye know' that we
are a pack of bedlamites?

9. If the gospel is forged, you believe that the Corinthians, etc. handed down
to posterity, as a sacred treasure, epistles where St. Paul mentions their
amazing conversion from gross immoralities; congratulates them about the
spiritual or miraculous gifts, in which they abounded, 1 Cor. xii. 1. and gives
them particular directions, how to use the gift of tongues to edification; when
yet they were totally unacquainted with any such things. Might you not with
equal wisdom believe, that if Mr. Wilkes wrote to the house of commons, a
congratulatory epistle about their having received by the laying on of his
hands the power of speaking Turkish, Arabic, and Chinese, they would carefully
transmit his letter to the next generation, as a divine performance; and that
none of Mr. Wilkes's enemies would ever expose the impudence of so absurd a
pretension?

10. If you say that the apostles were fools, you must believe, that foolish
fishermen laid a scheme with so much wisdom, and carried it on with so much
art, as to deceive multitudes of Greeks noted for their acuteness, and numbers
of Romans famous for their prudence. Might you not as well believe that twelve
poor, unarmed idiots, once combined to take the strongest towns in Europe, and
accomplished their strange design by means, that strike the profoundest
politicians with astonishment?

11. If you affirm, that the apostles were cheats and liars, you run into as
great a difficulty; for you must believe that the greatest knaves that ever
existed, contrary to their own principles and advantage, went through the
world, exposing themselves to the greatest hardships and severest tortures unto
death, to recommend both by their example and precepts, the strictest piety
toward God, and the most scrupulous honesty toward man; perpetually
denouncing eternal destruction to cheats and hypocrites, and the torments of a
lake that burns with fire and brimstone, to every one who loves or makes a
lie. Would it be more absurd to believe, that the twelve greatest epicures in
England, have for a course of years, fulfilled a mutual agreement of preaching
night and day, abstinence and fasting through the three kingdoms, merely to
have the pleasure of starving to death for their pains?

12. To conclude: If the gospel (and consequently the scripture) is an
imposture, you suppose, that some poor Galilean fishermen, only by means of an
absurd lie, which they told without wit, and wrote without elegance, foiled the
multitude of the Jewish and Pagan priests, who had prejudice, custom,
possession, learning, oratory, wealth, laws, governors, and emperors on their
side; yea, and truth also, upon your principles, at least when they decried the
gospel as a cheat. Would it be more ridiculous to believe, that David killed
Goliath with a grain of sand, and cut off his head with a spire of grass; or
that our sailors sink men of war with a puff of breath, while our soldiers
batter down ramparts with snow-balls?

O ye sons of worldly wisdom, drop your unjust prejudices; heartily weigh both
sides of the question, and you will soon see, that in rejecting the gospel as
an imposture, you display a far greater degree of credulity, than we do in
cordially receiving it.

After this short defense of the oracles of God, and this little attack upon
the persons who suspect their authenticity, I hope I may [consistently with the
plan of an Appeal to Reason] produce from THE SCRIPTURES, a few more arguments
to prove the original depravity and lost estate of mankind.

XXXI. ARGUMENT.
The spiritual life of the soul consists in its union with God, as the natural
life of the body does in its union with the soul: And as poison and the sword
kill the latter, so unbelief and sin destroy the former.

The first man was endued with this twofold life; God, says the divine
historian, breathed into him the breath of lives, and he became a living body
and a living soul: He had both an animal life in common with beasts, and a
spiritual life in common with angels. St. Paul, who calls this angelical life
the life of God, intimates that it consisted both in that experimental
knowledge of our Creator, wherein, says our Church, 'standeth our eternal
life,' and in righteousness and true holiness, the moral and most glorious
image of the Supreme Being.

To suppose man was created void of this essential knowledge and holy love, is
to suppose he came very wicked out of the hands of the Parent of all good: For
what is a rational creature, that neither knows nor loves his Creator, but a
monster of stupidity and ingratitude, a wretch actually dead to God, and
deserving present destruction?

When the Lord therefore said to man, In the day that thou eatest thereof, that
is, in the day that thou sinnest, thou shall surely die, it was as if he had
said, In that very day, sin shall assuredly separate between thee and the God
of thy life: Thou shall certainly lose the glorious view, which thou have of my
boundless goodness and infinite perfections: Thou shall infallibly quench the
spirit of ardent love, and stop the breath of delightful praise, by which thou
live both to my glory and thy comfort: And thy soul dead in trespasses and
sins, shall remain in the filthy prison of a mortal body, till death breaks it
open, to remove thee to thy own place.

And was not this Adam's case after his fall? Did he not know that he was
naked, stripped of the glorious image of his Creator? Did not guilty shame
immediately prompt him to hide and pro^^ct, as well as he could, his degenerate
and enfeebled body? Devoid of the ardent love he felt for God before, and of
the pure delight he enjoyed in him, was not he left the wretched prey of
tormenting fears? Did he not evidence his hatred of his heavenly Benefactor, by
dreading his voice, and flying from him as hastily as he should have fled from
the infernal serpent?

Was he not deprived of the knowledge by which, at first sight, he discovered
the nature of Eve, and gave to all living creatures names expressive of their
respective properties? -- Was he not, I say, deprived of that intuitive
knowledge and excellent wisdom, when he foolishly hid himself among the trees
from his all-seeing, omnipresent Creator? And is it not evident that he was
lost to all sense of filial fear toward God, and conjugal love toward Eve,
when, instead of self-accusations, penitential confessions, and earnest pleas
for mercy, he showed nothing at his trial but stubbornness, malice, and
insolence?

Such was the state of corruption into which Adam had deplorably fallen, before
he multiplied the human species. Now, according to the invariable laws of
Providence, an upright, holy nature can no more proceed from a fallen, sinful
one, than gentle lambs can be begotten by fierce tigers, or harmless doves by
venomous serpents: Common sense, therefore, and natural philosophy, dictate,
that our first parents could not communicate the angelical life which they had
lost, nor impart to their children a better nature than their own; and that
their depravity is as much ours by nature, as the fierceness of the first lion,
is the natural property of all the lions in the world.

FOUR OBJECTIONS.
I. Should it be said, that this doctrine reflects on the attributes of God,
who, as the wise and gracious Governor of the world, should have foreseen and
prevented the fall of Adam:

I answer, 1. God made man in his image, part of which consists in free agency,
or a power to determine his own actions. And if creating a free agent is not
repugnant to divine wisdom and goodness; the wrong choice or sin of a free
agent, can be no impeachment of those perfections in the Deity. God answers
thus for himself in MILTON, Man will fall,
He and his faithless progeny. Whose fault?
Whose but his own? Ingrate! he had of me
All he could have: I made him just and right,
Sufficient to have stood, though free to fall.
Such I created all the ethereal powers;
Freely they stood who stood, and fell who fell.
Not free, what proof could they have given sincere
Of true allegiance, constant faith or love,
Where only what they needs must do, appeared;
Not what they would? What praise could they receive?
What pleasure I from such obedience paid,
When will and reason (reason also is choice)
Useless and vain, of freedom both despoiled,
Made passive both, had served necessity,
Not me? They therefore, as to right belonged,
So were created, nor can justly accuse
Their Maker, or their making, or their fate:
As if predestination overruled
Their will, disposed by absolute decree,
Or high foreknowledge. They themselves decreed
Their own revolt, not I; if I fore-knew,
Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault,
Which had no less proved certain unforeknown.
YOUNG expresses the same sentiment with his peculiar boldness and energy.

Blame not the bowels of the Deity:
Man shall be blessed as far as man permits.
Not man alone, all rationals, Heaven arms
With an illustrious, but tremendous, power
To counter-act its own most gracious ends;
And this of strict necessity, not choice:
That power denied, men, angels were no more,
But passive engines, void of praise or blame.
Heaven wills our happiness, allows our doom:
Invites us ardently, but not compels;
Heaven but persuades, almighty man decrees:
Man is the maker of immortal fates,
Man falls by man, if finally he falls.



2. Suppose man had not been endued with freedom of choice, he would only have
ranked among admirable machines, and nothing could have been more absurd, than
to place him in a state of probation. And suppose, when he was in that state,
divine power had irresistibly turned the scale of his will to obedience, the
trial would have been prevented, and the counsel of divine wisdom foolishly
defeated.

3. God did all that a wise and good Ruler of rational and free creatures could
do, to prevent sin. He placed in Adam's heart, a vigorous principle of
holiness: He granted him sufficient strength to continue in obedience: He
indulged him with his blessed presence and converse, to encourage him in the
way of duty: He strictly forbad him to sin: He enforced the prohibition by the
fearful threatening of death: He promised to crown his continuance in holiness,
with a glorious immortality; and gave him the tree of life as a pledge of this
inestimable blessing. To have gone farther, would have been entirely
inconsistent with his wisdom; an absolute restraint being as contrary to the
liberty of a moral agent, and the nature of the divine law, as chaining down an
harmless man, that he may not commit murder, is contrary to the freedom of
Englishmen, and the laws of this realm. Nor can we, either with reason or
decency, complain that God did not make us absolutely immutable and perfect
like himself: This is charging him with folly, for not enduing us with infinite
wisdom, and knowledge every way boundless; that is, for not making us gods
instead of men.

4. In case man fell, divine mercy had decreed his recovery by Jesus Christ:
And when the almighty Redeemer shall have brought life out of death, and light
out of darkness, the mysterious drama of creation and redemption, of which we
see but one or two acts, will appear, even to our objectors, every way worthy
of its infinitely wise and gracious Author.

II. In the mean time they will still urge that Adam's posterity (then unborn)
could not justly partake of the consequences of his transgression. But, shall
cavils overthrow matter of fact? Do not we see in every unrenewed person, the
unbelief, pride, sinful curiosity, sensuality, and alienation from God, to
which our first parents were subjected at their fall? Do not women bear
children with sorrow, as well as Eve? Is the ground less cursed for us than for
Adam? And do not we toil, suffer, and die, as he did? If this order of things
were unjust, would the righteous God have permitted its continuance to the
present time? Besides,

Adam contained in himself, as in miniature, all his posterity. The various
nations of men, are nothing but different branches growing from that original
root. They are Adam, or Man, existing at large; as the branches of a spreading
oak, with all the acorns that have grown upon, and dropped from them, during a
long succession of summers, are nothing but the original acorn, unfolding and
multiplying itself with all its essential properties. It is then as ridiculous
to wonder, that the sons of depraved Adam should naturally be depraved, as that
an acorn should naturally produce an oak; and a poisonous root, a malignant
plant. Again,

Adam was the general head, representative, and father of mankind; and we
suffer for his rebellion legally; as the children of those who have sold
themselves for slaves, are born in a state of wretched slavery; and as the
descendents of a noble traitor, lose the title by their ancestor's crime:
Naturally, as the sons of a bankrupt suffer poverty for their father's
extravagance, or as Gehazi's leprosy clave to him and his seed for ever: And
unavoidably, as an unborn child shares the fate of his unhappy mother, when she
inadvertently poisons, or desperately stabs herself.

III. 'But,' say the same objectors, supposing it be granted, that we are
naturally depraved; yet if our depravity is natural, it is necessary; and we
are no more blameable for it, than lions for their fierceness, or Ethiopians
for their black complexion.

1. Our objectors would not, I presume, be understood to insinuate by
'blameable,' that our depravity does not render us detestable in the eyes of an
holy God, or that it is not in itself blameworthy. Do they less dislike the
complexion of the Ethiopians, or less detest the destructive rage of lions,
because it is natural to them? If moral dispositions ceased to be worthy of
praise or dispraise, as soon as they are rooted, morally necessary, and, in
that sense, natural; what absurd consequences would follow! Sinners would
become guiltless by arriving at complete impenitency; and God could not be
praised for his holiness, nor Satan dispraised for his sinfulness; holiness
being as essential to God, by the absolute perfection of his nature, as sin is
morally necessary to the devil, by the unconquerable habit which he has
wilfully contracted, and in which he obstinately remains.

2. Should they mean, that 'we are not answerable or accountable for our
depravity:' I reply, Though I should grant (which I am very far from doing
MILTON introduces Adam speaking thus,
Ah why should all mankind,
For one man's fault, thus guiltless be condemned,
If guiltless? But from me what can proceed,
But all corrupt, both mind and will depraved,
Not to do only, but to will the same
With me? How can they then acquitted stand
In sight of God? Him after all disputes
Forced I absolve.

) that we are no way accountable for our moral infection, yet it cannot be
denied that we are answerable for our obstinate refusal of relief, and for the
wilful neglect of the means found out by divine mercy for our cure. Can we
justly charge God with either our misfortune, or our guilt? Do not parents, by
the law of nature, represent their unborn posterity? If Adam ruined us by a
common transgression; has not Christ, the second Adam, provided for us a common
salvation? Jud. 3. Heb. ii. 3. If by the offense of one, (Adam) judgment came
upon all men to condemnation; by the righteousness of one, (Christ) is not the
free gift come upon all men to justification of life? Romans v. 18. And since God
has declared, that the son shall not bear the iniquity of the father beyond the
short period of this transitory life, if any suffer after death, is it not
entirely for their own unbelief, and peculiar sins? MILTON introduces God
speaking thus to the Messiah,
Man shall not quite be lost, but saved who will,
Yet not of will in him, but grace in me
Freely vouchsafed: once more I will renew
His lapsed powers -- yet once more he shall stand
On even ground against his mortal foe,
By me upheld -- Be thou in Adam's room
The head of all mankind, though Adam's son.
As in him perish all men, so in thee,
As from a second root, shall be restored
As many as are restored, without thee none.
His crimes make guilty all his sons; thy merit
Imputed shall absolve them, who renounce
Their own both righteous, and unrighteous deeds;
And live in thee transplanted; and from thee
Receive new life.

Compare John iii. 18, 19. and Mark xvi. 16. But what follows, completely
vindicates our Creator's goodness.

3. Do sin and misery abound by our fall in Adam? Grace and glory abound much
more by our redemption in Jesus Christ, Romans v. 20. And it must be owing to our
own perverseness, or our own negligence, says the ingenious Hervey, with great
truth* if we do not levy a tax upon our loss, and rise even by our fall.
Creation's great superior, man, is thine;
Thine is Redemption. How should this great truth
Raise man over man, and kindle seraphs here!
Redemption! 'Twas Creation more sublime;
Redemption! 'Twas the labor of the skies;
Far more than labor -- It was death in heaven.
A truth so strange! 'Twere bold to think it true;
If not far bolder still to disbelieve.

This leaves us not the least shadow of reason, to complain of the divine
proceedings respecting us.

We may then conclude, that a moral depravity, which comes upon us by the
wilful choice of a parent, in whom we seminally and federally existed -- a
depravity which cleaves to us by an obstinate neglect of the infinitely
precious means provided to remove it -- a depravity which works now by our own
personal choice, and to which we daily give our assent by the free commission
of sins that are avoidable, leaves us not only accountable, but inexcusable
before God.

IV. However, the advocates for the natural purity of the human race
(endeavoring to clog with difficulties, what they cannot disprove to be matter
of fact) still assert, As we have our souls immediately from God, if we are
born sinful, he must either create sinful souls, which cannot be supposed
without impiety; or send sinless souls into sinful bodies, to be defiled by the
unhappy union, which is as inconsistent with his goodness as his justice. Add
to this, say the objectors, that nothing can be more unphilosophical than to
suppose, that a body, a mere lump of organized matter, is able to communicate
to a pure spirit that moral pollution, of which itself is as incapable, as the
murderer's sword is incapable of cruelty.

This specious objection, which Dr. Watts acknowledges to be the very chief
point of difficulty, in all the controversies about original sin, is wholly
founded upon the vulgar notion, that we have our souls immediately from God by
infusion: It will therefore entirely fall to the ground, if we can prove, that
we receive them, as well as our bodies, by traduction from Adam: And that this
is fact, appears, if I am not mistaken, by the following arguments,

1. We have no ground, from scripture or reason, to think that adulterers can,
when they please, put God upon creating new souls to animate the spurious fruit
of their crime. On the contrary, it is said, that God rested on the seventh day
from ALL his work of creation.

2. Eve herself was not created but in Adam: God breathed no breath of life
into her, as he did into her husband, to make him a living soul. Therefore when
Adam saw her, he said, She shall be called woman, because she [her whole self,
not her body only] was taken out of man. If then the soul of the first woman
sprang from Adam's soul, as her body from his body, what reason have we to
believe, that the souls of her posterity are immediately infused, as Adam's was
when God created him?

3. All agree, that under God we receive life from our parents; and if life,
then certainly our soul, which is the principle of life.

4. Other animals have power to propagate their own species after its kind;
they can generate animated bodies: Why should man be but half a father? When
did God stint him to propagate the mere shell of his person, the body without
the soul? Was it when he blessed him, and said, Be fruitful and multiply? When
he spoke thus, did he not address himself to the soul, as well as to the body?
Can the body alone either understand or execute a command? Is it not, on the
contrary, highly reasonable to conclude, that by virtue of the divine
appointment and blessing, the whole man can be fruitful and multiply; and the
soul, under proper circumstances, can generate a soul, as a thought begets a
thought; and can kindle the flame of life, as one taper lights another; without
weakening its immortal substance, any more than God the Father (if I may be
allowed the comparison) impairs the divine essence by the eternal generation of
his only begotten Son.

5. Does not matter of fact corroborate the preceding argument? A sprightly
race-horse generally begets a mettlesome colt; while an heavy cart-horse begets
a colt, that bears the stamp of its sire's dullness. And is it not so with
mankind in general? The children of the Hottentots and Eskimaux, are commonly
as stupid; while those of the English and French, are usually as sharp, as
their parents. You seldom see a wit springing from two half-witted people, or a
fool descended from very sensible parents. The children of men of genius, are
frequently as remarkable for some branch of hereditary genius, as those of
blockheads, for their native stupidity. Nothing is more common, than to see
very passionate and flighty parents have very passionate and flighty children.
And I have an hundred times discovered, not only the features, look, and
complexion of a father or a mother in a child's face; but seen a congenial
soul, looking out [if I may so speak] at those windows of the body, which we
call the eyes. Hence I conclude, that the advice frequently given to those, who
are about to choose a companion for life, ' Take care of the breed,' is not
absolutely without foundation; although some lay too much stress upon it;
forgetting that a thousand unknown accidents may form exceptions to the general
rule; and not considering, that the peculiarity of the father's breed, may be
happily corrected by that of the mother, [and vice versa] and that as the grace
of God yielded to, may sweeten the worst temper; so sin persisted in, may sour
the best.

6. Again, Moses informs us, that fallen Adam begat a son in his own likeness,
and after his image: But had he generated a body without a soul, he would not
have begotten a son in his own likeness, since he was not a mere mortal body,
but a fallen embodied spirit. Compare Genesis v. 3. with xlvi. 26.

'But upon this scheme,' will objectors say, if Adam was converted when he
begat a son, he begat a converted soul. This does by no means follow; for if he
was born of God after his fall, it was by grace through faith, and not by
nature through generation: He could not therefore communicate his spiritual
regeneration by natural generation, any more than a great scholar can propagate
his learning together with his species.

Should it be again objected, that The soul is not generated, because the
scriptures declare, The Lord is the father of the spirits of all flesh, and The
spirit returns to God who gave it: I answer, it is also written, that Job and
David were fearfully made and fashioned by the hands of God in the womb; that
he formed Jeremiah in the belly; and that we are the offspring of him, who made
of one blood all nations of men. Now if the latter scriptures do not exclude
the interposition of parents, in the formation of their childrens bodies; by
what rule of criticism or divinity can we prove, that the former exclude that
interposition in the production of their souls?

Nor can materialists, who have no ideas of generation, but such as are gross
and carnal like their own system, with any shadow of reason (...), that if the
soul is generated with the body, it will also perish with it: For dissolution
is so far from being a necessary consequence of the spiritual generation of
souls, that it would not so much as have followed the generation of our bodies,
if Adam had not brought sin into the world, and DEATH by sin. -- Again, if
wheat, a material seed, which grows out of the same earthly clod with the chaff
that encloses it, can subsist unimpaired, when that mean cover is destroyed:
how much more can the soul (that spiritual, vital, heavenly power, which is of
a nature so vastly superior to the body in which it is confined) continue to
exist, when flesh and blood are returned to their native dust!

Should some persons reject what I say of the traduction of souls, in order to
illustrate the derivation of original sin: and should they say, that they have
no more idea of the generation, than honest Nicodemus had of the regeneration
of a spirit: I beg leave to observe two things,

First, If such objectors are converted, they will not deny the regeneration of
souls by the Spirit of God, since they experience it, and our Lord speaks of it
as a blessed reality, even while he represents it as a mystery unknown as to
the manner of it, John iii. 8 -- 13. Now if pious souls have been regenerated
from the beginning of the world, without exactly knowing how; is it reasonable
to deny that souls are generated, merely because we cannot exactly account for
the manner in which that wonder takes place?

Secondly, Should my objectors be versed in natural philosophy, they need not
be told, that even the kind of generation, which they allow, is as much a
mystery to man, as the movement of a watch is to a child, that just sees the
case and the glass. If they will not believe me, let them believe him, who gave
his heart to search out by wisdom, concerning all things that are done under
heaven, and who, touching upon our question, says, As thou know not what is
the way of the Spirit, nor how the bones do grow in the womb of her that is
with child: even so, thou know not the works of God, who makes all. Eccl.
xi. 5.

For my part, I do not see, why the same almighty Preserver of men, who [as St.
Paul tells us] made of ONE BLOOD the bodies of all nations of men, might not of
one ACTIVE THOUGHT, and ARDENT DESIRE, have made the souls of all nations of
men also. Have not thought and desire as great affinity to the nature of the
soul, as blood has to that of the body? And consequently are not our ideas of
the traduction of the soul, as clear as those, which we can form of the
generation of the body?

Having dwelt so long upon the manner in which mankind naturally propagate
original corruption, together with their whole species, I hope I may reasonably
resume the conclusion of my argument, and affirm, that, if Adam corrupted the
fountain of human nature in himself, we, the streams, cannot but be naturally
corrupted.

XXXII. ARGUMENT.
God being a Spirit, reason and revelation jointly inform us, that his law is
spiritual, and extends to our thoughts and tempers, as well as to our words and
actions. At all times, and in all places, it forbids every thing that is
sinful, or has the least tendency to sin; it commands all that is excellent,
and enjoins it to be done in the utmost perfection of our dispensation.

Therefore, if we have not always trusted and delighted in God, more than in
all things and persons; if for one instant we have loved, or feared the
creature more than the Creator; we have had another God besides the Lord, Col.
iii. 5. Phil. iii. 19. -- Have we once omitted to adore him in spirit and in
truth inwardly, or at any time worshipped him without becoming veneration
outwardly; we have transgressed as if we had bowed to a graven image, John iv.
24. -- Though perjury and imprecations should never have defiled our lips; yet,
if ever we mentioned God's tremendous name thoughtlessly, or irreverently in
prayer, reading, or conversation, we have taken it in vain, and the Searcher of
hearts will not hold us guiltless, Phil. ii. 10. -- And if it has not been our
constant practice and delight, to enter his courts with praise, and spend the
whole sabbath in his blessed service, we have polluted that sacred day, and the
guilt of profaneness may justly be charged upon us, Isai. lviii. 13.

Did we ever show any disrespect to our superiors, or unkindness to our equals
and inferiors; we have violated the precept that commands us to honor all men,
and be punctual in the discharge of all social and relative duties, 1 Pet. ii.
17. -- Did we ever weaken our constitution by excess, strike our neighbor in
anger, wound his character with an injurious word, or only suffer hatred to
rise in our breast against him; we have committed a species of murder; for,
Whosoever shall say to his brother, Thou fool, shall be in danger of hell fire;
and Whosoever hates his brother, is a murderer, Matt. v. 22. 1 John iii. 15.
-- Are we the friends of the world, an apostle brands us with the name of
Adulterers, because we are false to our heavenly bridegroom, Jam. iv. 4. And if
we have only looked on a woman to lust after her, Christ declares that we have
committed adultery with her already in our heart, Matt. v. 28. -- Have we
overcharged our customers, exacted upon any one in our bargains, insisted on a
full salary for work done by halves, defrauded the king of any part of his
taxes, or taken advantage of the necessity and ignorance of others, to get by
their loss; we swell the numerous tribe of reputable thieves, and genteel
robbers, Matt. xxii. 21. -- Neglecting to keep our word and baptismal vow, or
speaking an untruth, is bearing false witness against our neighbor, ourselves,
or Christ, who styles himself the truth, Rev. xxii. 1^. -- And giving place to
a fretful, discontented thought, or an irregular, envious desire, is a breach
of that spiritual precept, which made St. Paul say, I had not known lust, or a
wrong desire, to be sin, except the law had said, Thou shall not covet, Romans
vii. 7.

Such being the extreme spirituality of the law, who can plead, that he never
was guilty of breaking one, or even all of the ten commandments? And if we have
broken them all, either in their literal or spiritual meaning, and are
threatened for every transgression, with a curse suitable to the Lawgiver's
infinite majesty, who can conceive the greatness of our guilt and danger? Till
we find a sanctuary under the shadow of a Savior's wings, are we not as liable
to the strokes of divine vengeance, as a felon, guilty of breaking all the
statutes of his country, is liable to the penalty of human laws?

If this is not the case, there is no justice in the court of heaven, and the
laws given with so much terror from the Almighty's throne, like the statutes of
children, or the pope's bulls, are only bruta fulmina, words without effect,
and thunders without lightnings.

Some indeed flatter themselves, that the law, since the gospel dispensation,
abates much of its demands of perfect love. But their hope is equally
unsupported by reason and scripture. The law is the eternal rule of right, the
moral picture of the God of holiness and love. It can no more vary, than its
eternal, unchangeable original. The Lord will not alter the thing that is gone
out of his mouth. He must cease to be what he is, before his law can lose its
power to bind either men or angels; and all creatures shall break sooner than
it shall bend; for if it commands us only to love God with all our heart, and
our neighbor as ourselves, what JUST abatement can be made in so equitable a
precept? Therefore man, who breaks the righteous law of God as naturally as he
breathes, is, and must continue, under its fearful curse, till he has secured
the pardon and help offered him in the gospel.

XXXIII. ARGUMENT.
Nor is the gospel itself without its threatenings; for if the Lord, on the one
hand, 'opens the kingdom of heaven to all believers;' he declares, on the
other, that they all shall be damned who believe not the truth, when it is
proposed to them with sufficient evidence; and that he who believes not is
condemned already, BECAUSE he has not believed on the name of the only
begotten Son of God, 2 Thessalonians. ii. 12. John iii. 18. From these awful
declarations, I draw the following argument.

If faith is so essential a virtue, how depraved and wretched is man, who is so
excessively slow of heart, to believe the things that concern his salvation!
Matter of fact daily proves, that we readily admit the evidence of men, while
we peremptorily reject the testimony of God. Commodore Biron's extraordinary
account of the giants in Patagonia is or was every where received: But that of
Jesus Christ, concerning those who walk in the broad way to destruction, is and
has always been too generally disregarded, Matt. vii. 13.

On reading in a news-paper an anonymous letter from Naples, we believe, that
rivers of liquid fire flow from the convulsed bowels of a mountain, and form
burning lakes in the adjacent plains: But if we read in the scripture, that
Tophet, the burning lake, is prepared of old for the impenitent, we beg leave
to withold our assent; and unless divine grace prevents, we must fall in, and
feel, before we will assent and believe, Isa. xxx. 33.

Who, that has seen a map of Africa, ever doubted whether there is such a
kingdom as that of Morocco, though he never saw it, or any of its natives? But
who, that has perused the gospel, never doubted, whether the kingdom of heaven
within us, or that state of righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost,
which God opens to believers upon earth, is not a mere imagination? Though
Christ himself invites us to it, and many pious persons not only testify they
enjoy it, but actually show its blessed fruits in heavenly tempers, a blameless
life, a triumphant death. Mark. i. 14. Luke xvii. 21. Romans xiv. 17. Rev. i. 6.

With what readiness do we depend upon an honest man's promise, especially if
it is reduced into a bond? But with what reluctance do we rely on the many
great and precious promises of God, confirmed by an oath, delivered before the
most unexceptionable witnesses, and sealed with the blood of Jesus Christ? 2
Pet. i. 4. 2 Cor. i. 2O. Heb. vi. 17.

And ye, numerous tribe of patients, how do ye shame those who call themselves
Christians! So entire is the trust which you repose upon a physician's advice,
whom perhaps you have seen but once, that you immediately abstain from your
pleasant food, and regularly take medicines, which, for what you know, may be
as injurious to your stomach, as they are offensive to your palate: But we, who
profess Christianity, generally quarrel with Christ's prescriptions; and if we
do not understand the nature of a remedy which he recommends, we think this is
a sufficient reason for refusing it. From Christ only, if we can help it, we
will take nothing upon trust.

One false witness is often sufficient to make us believe, that a neighbor
vows to do us an injury: But twenty ministers of Jesus cannot persuade us, God
has sworn in his wrath, that if we die in our sins we shall not enter into his
rest, Psalm. xcv. 11. or that if we come to him for pardon and life, he will in
no wise cast us out, John vi. 37. -- The most defamatory and improbable reports
spread with uncommon swiftness, and pass for matter of fact: But when St. Paul
testifies, that if any man has not the Spirit of Christ, he is none of his,
Romans viii. 9. who believes his testimony? Does not the same mind, that was open
to scandalous lies, prove shut against such a revealed truth?

Isaiah asks, Who has believed our report? And Jesus says, When the Son of man
comes, shall he find faith upon the earth? Alas! there would have been no room
for these plaintive questions, if the word of God had not been proposed to our
faith; for the most groundless and absurd assertions of men, find multitudes of
believers. We see daily, that an idle rumor about a peace or a war, meets with
such credit as to raise or sink the stocks in a few hours.

It is evident that man has a foolish and evil heart of unbelief, ready to
strain out a gnat in divine revelation, while he greedily swallows up the camel
of human imposture. Now if it is part of the gospel, which Christ commands his
ministers to preach to every creature, that he who believes not shall be
damned, Mark xvi. 16. how great is the depravity, and how imminent the danger
of fallen man, who has such a strong propensity to so destructive, so damnable
a sin as unbelief!

XXXIV. ARGUMENT.
But, let us come still nearer to the point. If we are not by nature conceived
in sin, and children of wrath, millions of infants, who die without actual sin,
have no need of the blood of Christ to wash their robes, nor his Spirit to
purify their hearts. The incarnation of the Eternal Word, and the influences of
the Holy Spirit, are as unnecessary to them, as the visits of a physician, and
his remedies, to persons in perfect health. Their spotless innocence is a
sufficient passport for heaven: Baptism is ridiculous, and the Christian
religion absurd in their case.

Nor does it appear, why it might not be as absurd with regard to the rest of
mankind, did they but act their part a little better: For if we are naturally
innocent, we have a natural power to remain so; and by a proper use of it, we
may avoid standing in need of the salvation procured by Christ for the lost.

Nay, if innocent nature, carefully improved, may be the way to eternal life,
it is certainly the readiest way, and the Son of God speaks like the grand
deceiver of mankind, when he says, I am the way, NO MAN comes to the Father
but BY ME. Christians! let self-conceited deists entertain the thought, but
harbor it not a moment: In you it would be highly blasphemous.

XXXV. ARGUMENT.
And, that you may detest it the more, consider further, that all the capital
doctrines of Christianity are built upon that fundamental article of our
depravity and danger. If all flesh has not corrupted its way, how severe are
those words of Christ, Except ye repent, ye shall all perish: And Except ye be
converted, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven? -- If all are not
carnal and earthly by their first birth, how absurd is what he said to
Nicodemus, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom of heaven? --
If there is any spiritual health in us by nature, how notoriously false are
these assertions, All our sufficiency is of God: Without me ye can do nothing?
-- If every natural man is not the reverse of the holiness in which Adam was
created, how irrational these and the like scriptures, If any man is in Christ,
he is a NEW CREATURE: In Christ Jesus neither circumcision avails any thing,
nor uncircumcision, but a NEW CREATURE? To conclude: If mankind are not
universally corrupt, guilty, and condemned; how unnecessarily alarming is this
declaration, He that believes not on the Son of God, is condemned already --
The wrath of God abides on him? And if we are not foolish, unrighteous,
unholy, and enslaved to sin; why is Christ made to us of God wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption?

Take away then the doctrine of the fall, and the tower of evangelical truth,
built by Jesus Christ, is no more founded on a rock, but upon the sand: Or
rather, the stately fabric is instantly thrown down, and leaves no ruins behind
it, but the dry morality of Epictetus, covered with the rubbish of the vilest
metaphors, and buried in the most impertinent ceremonies.

XXXVI. ARGUMENT.
One more absurdity still remains. If man is not in the most imminent danger of
destruction, nothing can be more extravagant than the great article of the
Christian faith, thus expressed in the Nicene creed: Jesus Christ, very God of
very God, by whom all things were made, for us men, and for our salvation came
down from heaven, was made man, and was crucified FOR US.

Is it not astonishing, that there should be people so infatuated, as to join
every Lord's day in this solemn confession, and to deny the other six, the
horrible danger to which they are exposed, till they have an interest in
Christ? Is not the least grain of common sense sufficient to make an attentive
person see, that if he, by whom all things were made, came from heaven for OUR
salvation, if he was made man that he might suffer and be crucified for US; he
saw US guilty, condemned, lost, and obnoxious to the damnation, which we
generally deprecate in the litany? Shall we charge the Son of God, in whom are
hid all the treasures of divine wisdom, with the unparalleled folly of coming
from heaven to atone for innocent creatures, to reprieve persons uncondemned,
to redeem a race of free men, to deliver from the curse a people not accursed;
to hang by exquisitely dolorous wounds, made in his sacred hands and feet, on a
tree more ignominious than the gallows, for honest men and very good sort of
people; and to expire under the sense of the wrath of heaven, that he might
save from hell people in no danger of going there?

Reader! is it possible to entertain for a moment these wild notions, without
offering the utmost indignity to the Son of God, and the greatest violence to
common sense? And does not reason cry, as with the sound of a thousand
trumpets, If our Creator could not save us, consistently with his glorious
attributes, but by becoming incarnate, passing through the deepest scenes of
humiliation and temptation, distress and want, for thirty-three years; and
undergoing at last the most shameful, painful, and accursed death in our place;
our wickedness must be desperate, our sins execrable, our guilt black as the
shadow of death, and our danger dreadful as the gloom and torments of hell?

' Shocking doctrine!' says the self-conceited moralist, as he rises from his
chair, full of indignation, and ready to throw aside the arguments he cannot
answer. Reader! if you are the man, remember that this is an appeal to reason,
and not to passion, to matter of fact, and not to your vitiated taste for
pleasing error. You may cry out at the sight of a shroud, a coffin, a grave, '
Shocking objects!' But your loudest exclamations will not lessen the awful
reality, by which many have happily been shocked into a timely consideration
of, and preparation for, approaching death.

But this doctrine, you still urge, drives people to despair. -- Yes, to a
despair of being saved by their own merits and righteousness; and this is as
reasonable in a sinner who comes to the Savior, as despairing to swim across
the sea, is rational in a passenger that takes ship. Our church, far from
speaking against it, says, that sinners should be dismayed at God's rightful
justice, and should DESPAIR indeed, as touching any hope th^^ may be IN
THEMSELVES. Hom. on falling from God, 2d part.

A just despair of ourselves, is widely different from a despair of God's
mercy, and Christ's willingness to save the chief of sinners, who flies to him
for refuge. This horrible sin, this black crime of Judas, springs rather from a
sullen, obstinate rejection of the remedy, than, as some vainly suppose, from a
clear knowledge of the disease: And, that none may commit it, Christ's
ministers take particular care not to preach the law without the gospel, and
the fail without the recovery: No sooner have they opened the wound of sin,
festering in the sinner's conscience, than they pour in the balm of divine
promises, and make gracious offers of a free pardon and full salvation, by the
compassionate Redeemer, who came to justify the ungodly and to save the lost.

And indeed those only who see their sin and misery, will cordially embrace the
gospel; for common sense dictates, that none care for the king's mercy, but
those who know they are guilty, condemned criminals. How excessively
unreasonable is it then to object, that the preaching of man's corrupt and lost
estate drives people to despair of divine mercy, when it is absolutely the only
means of showing them their need of it, and making them gladly accept it upon
God's own terms!

Leaving therefore that trite objection to the unthinking vulgar, once more,
judicious reader, summon all your rational powers; and, after imploring help
from on high to use them aright, say, whether these last arguments do not
prove, that no Christian can deny the complete fall of mankind, without
renouncing the capital doctrines of his own religion; overturning the very
foundation of the gospel, which he professes to receive; staining the glory of
the Redeemer, whom he pretends to honor; and impiously taking from his crown,
wisdom, truth, and charity, the three jewels that are its brightest ornaments.
-- Sum up then all that has been advanced concerning the afflictive dealings of
God's providence with mankind, and the base conduct, or wicked temper of
mankind toward God, one another, and themselves. -- Declare, if all the
arguments laid before you, and cleared from the thickest clouds of objections
that might obscure them, do not cast more light upon the black subject of our
depravity, than is sufficient to show that it is a melancholy truth. -- And
finally pronounce, whether the doctrine of our corrupt and lost estate, stated
in the words of the sacred writers, and of our pious reformers, is not
rationally demonstrated, and established upon the firmest basis in the world,
Matter of Fact, and the dictates of common sense.

FIFTH PART.
WHEN a doctrine has been clearly demonstrated, the truths that necessarily
spring from it, cannot reasonably be rejected. Let then common sense decide,
whether the following consequences do not necessarily result from the doctrine
of the fall, established in the preceding parts of this treatise.

I. INFERENCE. If we are by nature in a corrupt and lost estate, the grand
business of ministers is to rouse our drowzy consciences, and warn us of our
imminent danger: It behooves them to cry aloud and spare not, to lift up their
voice like a trumpet, and show us our transgressions and our sins. Nor are they
to desist from this unpleasing part of their office, till we awake to
righteousness, and lay hold on the hope set before us.

If preachers, under pretense of peace and goodnature, let the wound fester in
the conscience of their hearers, to avoid the thankless office of probing it to
the bottom: If, for fear of giving them pain by a timely amputation, they let
them die of a mortification: Or if they heal the hurt of the daughter of God's
people slightly, saying, Peace! Peace! when there is no peace; they imitate
those sycophants of old, who, for fear of displeasing the rich, and offending
the great, preached smooth things, and prophesied deceit.

This cruel gentleness, this soft barbarity, is attended with the most
pernicious consequences, and will deservedly meet with the most dreadful
punishment. Give sinners warning from me, says the Lord to every minister: When
I say to the wicked, the unconverted, Thou shall surely die; and thou give
him not warning, he shall die in his iniquity, in his unconverted state; but
his blood will I require at THY hand. See Matt. xviii. 3. Ezekiel. iii. 18. and
xiii. 10.

II. INFER. If we are naturally depraved and condemned creatures;
self-righteousness and pride are the most absurd and monstrous of all our sins.
The deepest repentance and profoundest humility become us: To neglect them, is
to stumble at the very threshold of true religion; and to ridicule them, is to
pour contempt upon reason, revelation, and the first operations of divine grace
on a sinner's heart.

III. INFER. If the corruption of mankind is universal, inveterate, and
amazingly powerful, no mere creature can deliver them from it. They must remain
unrestored; or they must have an almighty, omniscient, omnipresent, unwearied,
infinitely patient Savior; willing day and night to attend to the wants, and
public or secret applications of millions of wretched souls; and able to give
them immediate assistance throughout the world; in all their various trials,
temptations, and conflicts, both in life and in death. Is the most exalted
creature sufficient for these things?

When such a vast body as mankind, spread over all the earth for thousands of
years, made up of numerous nations, all of which consist of multitudes of
individuals, each of whom has the springs of all his faculties and powers
enfeebled, disordered, or broken: -- When such an immense body as this, is to
be restored to the image of the infinitely holy, glorious, and blessed God;
common sense dictates, that the amazing task can be performed by no other than
the original Artist, the great Searcher of hearts, the omnipotent Creator of
mankind.

Hence it appears, that, notwithstanding the cavils of Arius, the Savior is
GOD OVER ALL blessed for ever, all things were made by him, he upholds all
things by the word of his power, and every believer may adore him, and say,
with the wondering apostle, when the light of faith shone into his benighted
soul, My Lord and my God!

IV. INFER. If our guilt is immense, it cannot be expiated without a sacrifice
of an infinite dignity: Hence we discover the mistake of Heathens and carnal
Jews, who trusted in the sacrifices of beasts; the error of Deists, Mahometans,
and Socinians, who see no need of any expiatory sacrifice; and the amazing
presumption of too many Christians, who repose a considerable part of their
confidence in the proper merit of their works; instead of placing it entirely
in the infinitely meritorious sacrifice of the immaculate Lamb of God, humbly
acknowledging that all the gracious rewardableness of the best works of faith,
is derived from his precious blood and original merit.

V. INFER. If our spiritual maladies are both numerous and mortal, it is
evident, we cannot recover the spiritual health that we enjoyed in our first
parents, but by the powerful help of our heavenly Physician, the second Adam.
How absurd is it then to say, that we are saved, or recovered, by doing good
works, without the quickening grace of a Savior!

A wretched beggar is lame both in his hands and feet: An officious man,
instead of taking him to a person famous for his skill in relieving such
objects of distress, assures him, that the only way of getting well, is to run
of errands for his prince, and work for his fellow-beggars. You justly wonder
at the cruelty and folly of such a director: But you have much more reason to
be astonished at the conduct of those miserable empirics, who direct poor,
blind, lame sinners, laboring under a complication of spiritual disorders, and
sick even unto eternal death, to save themselves merely by serving God, and
doing good to their neighbors; as if they needed neither repentance toward
God, nor faith in our Lord Jesus Christ, nor yet free grace to enable them to
repent, believe, and serve God acceptably.

How much more rational is the evangelical method of salvation! We are saved,
says the apostle, we are restored to saving health, and a spiritual activity to
serve God and our neighbor, not by works, not of ourselves; but by grace, by
mere favor; through faith, through such an entire confidence in our Physician,
as makes us gladly take his powerful remedies, abstain from the pleasing poison
of sin, and feed on those divine truths, which communicate angelical vigor and
happiness to our souls. Ephesians. ii. 8.

VI. INFER. If our nature is so completely fallen and totally helpless, that in
spiritual things we are not sufficient of ourselves to think any thing truly
good as of ourselves, but our sufficiency is of God; it is plain, we stand in
absolute need of his Spirit's assistance, to enable us to pray, repent,
believe, love, and obey aright. Consequently, those who ridicule the Holy
Spirit, and his sacred influence, despise the great helper of our infirmities,
and act a most irrational, wicked, and desperate part. Romans viii. 26.

VII. INFER. If by nature we are really and truly born in sin, our regeneration
cannot be a mere metaphor, or a vain ceremony; our spiritual birth must be real
and positive. How fatal therefore is the mistake of those, who suppose that the
new birth is only a figurative expression for a decent behavior! How dreadful
the error of those, who imagine that all, whose faces have been typically
washed with material water in baptism, are now effectually born again of living
water and the Holy Spirit! And how inexcusable the case of the multitudes, who,
in the church of England, are under this dangerous mistake, so prudently
guarded against by our pious reformers!

In our catechism, they clearly distinguish between the outward visible sign or
form in baptism, and the inward spiritual grace: And by defining the latter, a
death unto sin, and a new birth unto righteousness, they declare that whosoever
is not dead or dying to sin and alive to righteousness, is not truly
regenerate, and has nothing of baptism but the outward and visible sign. In the
27th of our articles they mention, that baptism is not the new birth, but a
SIGN of regeneration or new birth, whereby, as by an instrument, they who
receive baptism rightly, are grafted into the church. And if our church returns
thanks for the regeneration of the infants whom she has admitted to baptism, it
is chiefly I say chiefly, because our church gives thanks also for Christ's
general grace and mercy to children, declaring herself persuaded of the
good will of our heavenly Father toward this [unbaptized] infant, through
Christ, who said, that of little children is the kingdom of heaven. The truth
lies between the error of the Pelagians, who suppose that unbaptized infants
are sinless like angels; and that of the Papists, who affirm that they are
graceless as devils.
upon a charitable supposition, that they have received it rightly, and will,
for their part, faithfully perform the promises made for them by their
sureties. If they refuse to do it when they come of age, far from treating them
as her regenerate children, she denounces a general excommunication against
them, and charges them not to come to her holy table, lest Satan brings them,
as he did Judas, to destruction both of body and soul.

VIII. INFER. If the fall of mankind in Adam, does not consist in a capricious
imputation of his personal guilt, but in a real, present participation of his
depravity, impotence, and misery; the salvation that believers have in Christ,
is not a capricious imputation of his personal righteousness; but a real,
present participation of his purity, power, and blessedness, together with
pardon and acceptance.

Unspeakably dangerous then is the delusion of those, whose brains and mouths
are filled with the notions and expressions of imputed righteousness; while
their poor, carnal, unregenerate hearts remain perfect strangers to the Lord
our righteousness.

IX. INFER. If the corrupt nature which sinners derive from Adam, spontaneously
produces all the wickedness that overspreads the earth; the holy nature which
believers receive from Christ, is also spontaneously productive of all the
fruits of righteousness, described in the oracles of God: Good works springing
out This is to be understood of a moral, and not of an absolute, irresistible
necessity; for faith never unmans the believer.
NECESSARILY of a true and lively faith, Art. xii.

Such ministers therefore, as clearly preach our fall in Adam, and that faith
in Christ which is productive of genuine holiness and active love, will
infallibly promote good works and pure morality: When those who insist only
upon works and moral duties, will neither be zealous of good works themselves,
nor instrumental in turning sinners from their gross immoralities. The reason
is obvious: Evangelical preachers follow their Lord's wise directions: Make the
tree good, and the fruit shall be good also; but moralists will have corrupt
trees bring forth good fruit, which in the nature of things is impossible,
Matt. xii. 33. Luke vi. 43. Therefore, as nothing but faith makes the tree
good, and as without faith it is impossible to please God; the Christian, that
will come to him with good works, must not only believe [as Heathens] that he
is, and that he is a rewarder of those who diligently seek him; but also that
he was in Christ, reconciling the world unto himself, etc.

X. INFER. If corruption and sin work so powerfully and sensibly, in the hearts
of the unregenerate, we may, without deserving the name of Enthusiasts, affirm,
that the regenerate are sensible of the powerful effects of divine grace in
their souls; or, to use the words of our 17th article, we may say, They feel in
themselves the workings of the Spirit of Christ: For where the poison of sin
has abounded, and has been of course abundantly felt; grace, the powerful
antidote that expels it, does much more abound, and consequently may be much
more perceived.

Therefore the knowledge of salvation by the forgiveness of sins, the assurance
of faith, and the peace of God passing all understanding, are the EXPERIENCED
blessings of the converted; as certainly as a guilty conscience, the gnawing of
worldly cares, the working of evil tempers, the tumults of unbridled appetites,
and the uproars of rebellious passions, are the EXPERIENCED curses of the
unconverted.

Reader! If these inferences are justly drawn, is it not evident, that the
Those doctrines, pointed out in the ten abovementioned inferences, are -- 1.
The alarming severity of the law. 2. The need of a deep, heartfelt repentance.
3. The divinity of Christ. 4. The infinite merit of his sacrifice. 5. Salvation
by faith in him. 6. The influences of his Holy Spirit. 7. The reality of the
new birth. 8. The necessity of a present salvation. 9. The zeal of believers
for good works, and 10. The comfortable assurance which they have of their
regeneration.
principles generally exploded among us, as enthusiastical or methodistical,
flow from the doctrine demonstrated in this treatise, as naturally as light
from the sun? These consequences lead you perhaps farther than you could wish;
but let them not make you either afraid or ashamed of the gospel. Prejudices,
like clouds, will vanish away; but truth, which they obscure for a time, like
the sun, will shine for ever. A great man in the law said, Fiat Justitia, ruat
mundus. Improve the noble sentiment, and say with equal fortitude, Stet
Veritas, ruat mundus: Let truth stand, though the universe should sink into ruins.

But happily for us, the danger is all on the side of the opposite doctrine;
and that you may be convinced of it, I present you next with a view of the
DREADFUL CONSEQUENCES necessarily resulting from the ignorance of our depravity
and danger.

1. As the tempter caused the fall of our first parents, by inducing them to
believe, that they should not surely die, if they broke the divine law: So, now
we are fallen, he prevents our recovery by suggesting, 'the bitterness of death
is past,' and 'we are in a state of safety.' -- Hence it is, that you sleep on
in carnal security, O ye deluded sons of men, and even dream, ye are safe and
righteous. Nor can ye escape for your lives, till the veil of unbelief is taken
away, and ye awake to a sight of your corrupt and lost estate: For there is no
guarding against, nor flying from, an unseen, unsuspected evil: Here, as in a
conspiracy, the danger continually increases, till it is happily discovered.

2. If we are not sensible of our natural corruption, and the justice of the
curse intailed upon us on that account; can we help thinking God a tyrant, when
he threatens unconverted moralists with the severest of his judgments, or cause
the black storms of his providence to overtake us and our dearest relatives?

Answer, ye self-righteous Pharisees, that so bitterly exclaim against the
ministers, who declare by the authority of scripture, that, except ye repent,
ye shall all perish. Answer, fond mother, whose tears of distraction mix with
the cold sweat of the convulsed, dying infant on thy lap. Do thou not
secretly impeach divine justice, and accuse heaven of barbarity? Ah! if thou
did but know the evil nature, which thou and thy Isaac have brought into the
world; if thou saw the root of bitterness, which the hand of a gracious
providence even now extracts from his heart; far from being ready to curse God,
and die with thy child, thou would patiently acquiesce in the kindly severe
dispensation: Thou would clear him when he is judged by such as thyself, and
even glorify him in the evil day of this painful visitation.

3. Though man's heart is hardened as steel, it does not frequently emit the
hellish sparks of such murmurings against God, because it can seldom be struck
by the flint of such severe afflictions; yet the mischief is there, and will
break out, if not by blasphemous despair, at least its contrary, presumptuous
madness. Yes, reader, unless thou art happily made acquainted with the strength
of thy inbred depravity, thou will rashly venture among the sparks of
temptation: With carnal confidence thou will ask, What harm can they do me? And
thou will continue the hazardous sport, till sin and wrath consume thee
together. Nor will this be more surprising, than that one, who carries a bag of
gunpowder, and knows not the dangerous nature of his load, should fearlessly
rush through the midst of flames or sparks, till he is blown up and destroyed.

4. This fatal rashness is generally accompanied with a glaring inconsistency.
Do not you make the assertion good, ye saints of the present age, who pretend
to have found the secret of loving both God and the world? Do not we hear you
deny to men, that you are condemned; and yet cry to God to have mercy upon you?
But if you are not condemned, what need have you of mercy? And if you are, why
do you deny your lost estate? Thou too, reader, wilt fall into this absurdity,
unless thou know thy just condemnation. But the mischief will not stop here;
for,

5. Ignorance of the mystery of iniquity within you, must, in the nature of the
things, cause you to neglect prayer, or to pray out of character. As unhumbled
moralists, instead of approaching the throne of grace, with the self-abasement
of the penitent Publican, saying, God be merciful unto me a sinner: you will
provoke the Most High, by the open profaneness of the Sadducee; or insult him
by the self-conceited services of the Pharisee, boasting ye do no harm, and
thanking God, ye are not as other men. On these rocks your formal devotion will
split, till you know, that, as the impenitent and prayerless shall perish, so
the Lord accepts no penitential prayer, but that of the man, who knows the
plague of his own heart; because he alone prays in his own character, and
without hypocrisy, 1 Pet. v. 5. 1 Kings viii. 38.

6. And as you cannot approach the throne of grace aright, while you remain
insensible of your corruption; so the reading or preaching of God's word, till
it answers the end of conviction, is of no service to you, but rather proves,
to use St. Paul's nervous expression, the savor of death unto death. For when
the terrors of the law only suit your case, you vainly catch at the comforts of
the gospel; or rather, you remain as unaffected under the threatenings of the
one, as under the promises of the other: You look on mount Sinai and mount Sion
with equal indifference, and the warmth of the preacher, who invites you to fly
from the wrath to come, appears to you an instance of religious madness. Nor is
it a wonder it should, while you continue unacquainted with your danger: When a
mortal disease is neither felt nor suspected, a pathetic address upon its
consequences and cure, must be received by any reasonable man, with the
greatest unconcern; and the person that makes it in earnest, must appear
exceedingly ridiculous. Again,

7. My people are destroyed for lack of knowledge, says the Lord. This is true,
particularly with regard to the knowledge of our depravity. Reader! if thou
remainest a stranger to it, thou will look upon slight confessions of outward
sins, as true repentance; and the godly sorrow that works repentance to
salvation, will appear to thee a symptom of melancholy. Taking an external
reformation of manners, or a change of ceremonies and opinions, for true
conversion, thou will think thyself in a safe state, while thy heart continues
habitually wandering from God, and under the dominion of a worldly spirit. In a
word, some of the branches of the tree of corruption thou may possibly lop
off, but the root will still remain and gather strength. For it is plain, that
a bad root, supposed not to exist, can neither be heartily lamented, nor
earnestly struck at with the ax of self-denial.

Even an Heathen could say, Initium est salutis notitia peccati, nam qui
peccare se nescit corrigi non vult: Deprehendas te opportet antequam emendes.
Sen. Ep. xxviii. -- Et hoc ipsum argumentum est in melius translati animi, quod
vitia sua, quae adhuc ignorabat, videt. Ep. vi.
The knowledge of sin, is the first step toward salvation from it: For he, who
knows not that he sins, will not submit to be set right: Thou must find out
what thou art, before thou can mend thyself. -- Therefore when thou
discoverest thy vices, to which thou wast before a stranger, it is a sign that
thy soul is in a better state.

8. It is owing to the want of this discovery, O ye pretended sons of reason,
that thinking yourselves born pure, or supposing the disease of your nature to
be inconsiderable, you imagine it possible to be your own physicians, when you
are only your own destroyers. Hence it is, that while you give to Jesus the
titular honor of Savior, you speak perpetually of being saved merely by your
duties and best endeavors. Hear him warning you against this common delusion:
O Israel, says he, thou have destroyed thyself, but in ME is thy help found.
The whole need not a physician, but they that are sick, beyond all hopes of
recovering themselves.

9. The prescriptions of this wise Physician, are excessively severe to flesh
and blood, and some of his remedies as violent as our disease. Therefore,
except we see the greatness of our danger, we shall beg to be excused from
taking the bitter potion. Who can have resolution enough to cut off a right
hand, to pluck out a right eye, to take up his cross daily, to deny himself,
and lose even his own life, or what is often dearer, his fair reputation? --
Who, I say, can do this, till a sight of imminent ruin on the one hand, and of
redeeming love on the other, makes him submit to the painful injunctions? Thou
lovely youth, noted in the gospel for thy harmlessness, I appeal to thy
wretched experience. When the Physician of souls, at whose feet thou wast
prostrate, commanded thee to sell all and follow him, what made thee go away
sorrowful and undone? Not barely thy great possessions, but the ignorance of
thy condition: For all that a man has will he give for his life, when he sees
it in immediate danger, Matt. xix. 22.

10. If it is a desperate step to turn away from the Prince of life, it is a
daring one to approach him with a mere compliment. Of this nevertheless you are
guilty, ye unawakened sinners, who daily appear before the throne of grace,
with thanks and praises to God, for his inestimable love in the redemption of
the world by our Lord Jesus Christ. Alas! When you deny the state of sin and
misery, in which you are by nature, and yet presume to thank God for redemption
from it, do not you mock him as solemnly as you would the king, were you to
present him every day an address of thanks, for redeeming you from Turkish
slavery, when you never knew yourselves slaves in Turkey? O how provoking to God
must these unmeaning thanksgivings be! Surely one day they will be ranked among
the indignities, offered by earthly worms to the Majesty on High.

11. Some indeed, more consistent than you, openly throw off the mask. Seeing
neither the unfathomable depth of their misery by the fall, nor the immense
height of their aggravated iniquities, they do not trifle with, but at once
deny, the Lord that bought them. Yes, far from admiring the established method
of a salvation, procured at so immense a price, as the incarnation and
crucifixion of the Son of God, they are not afraid to intimate it is
irrational: And upon their principles they may well do it; for if our ruin is
not immense, what need is there for an immensely glorious Redeemer? And if our
guilt reaches not up to heaven, why should the Son of God have come down from
thence, to put away sin by the sacrifice of himself?

12. As we slight or reject the Savior, till we are truly convinced of the
evil and danger of sin; so we worship a false god, a mere idol. For, instead of
adoring Jehovah, infinite in his holiness and hatred of sin, inviolable in the
truth of his threatenings against it, and impartial in his strict justice -- a
God in whose presence unhumbled sinners are not able to stand, and with whom
evil cannot dwell; we bow to a strange god, whom pious men never knew -- a god
formed by our own fancy, so unholy as to connive at sin, so unjust as to set
aside his most righteous law, and so false as to break his solemn word, that we
must turn or die, Ezekiel. xxxiii. 11. Is not this worshipping a god of our own
making; or as David describes him, a god altogether such as ourselves? To adore
an idol of paste, made by the baker and the priest, may be indeed more foolish,
but cannot be more wicked, than to adore one made by our wild imagination, and
impious unbelief.

13. We may go one step farther still, and affirm, that till we are deeply
convinced of sin, far from worshipping the true God, [which implies knowing,
loving, and admiring him in all his perfections] we hate and oppose him in his
infinite holiness and justice. The proof is obvious: Two things diametrically
opposite in their nature, can never be approved of at once. If we do not side
with divine holiness and justice, abhor our corruption, and condemn ourselves
as hell-deserving sinners; far from approving, we shall rise against the holy
and righteous God, who sentences us to eternal death for our sin: We shall at
least wish he were less pure and just than he is; which amounts to wishing him
to be no God. While proud fiends betray this horrid disposition, by loud
blasphemies in hell; ye do it, O ye unconvinced sons of men, by your aversion
to godliness upon earth. Haters of God, is then the proper name, and enmity
against him, the settled temper of all unhumbled, unconverted sinners, Romans i.
30. and viii. 7.

14. When the nature of God is mistaken, what wonder if his law is
misapprehended? The law is good, says St. Paul, if a man use it lawfully; but
if we make an improper use of it, the consequence is fatal. Since the fall, the
law of God, as contradistinguished from the gospel of Christ, points out to us
the spotless holiness, and inflexible justice, of its divine Author. It teaches
us with what ardor and constancy we should love both our Creator and our
fellow creatures. As a bank cast against the stream of our iniquity, it
accidentally serves to make it rise the higher, and to discover its
impetuosity; for by the law is the knowledge of sin. It demonstrates man's
weakness, who consents indeed to the law that it is good, but finds not how to
fulfill it, Romans vii. 16, 19. As a battery erected against our pride, when it
has its due effect, it silences all our self-righteous pleas, and convinces us
that a returning sinner is not justified by the works of the law, but by the
faith of Christ: a broken law, a law which works wrath, being absolutely
unable to absolve its violator. -- In a word, it is our schoolmaster to bring
us to Christ, and drives us with the rod of threatened punishments, to make us
touch the scepter of mercy, held out to us from the throne of grace.

But, while we remain strangers to our helpless and hopeless state by nature,
far from making this proper use of the law, we trust in it, and fancy that the
merit of our unsprinkled obedience to it, is the way of salvation. Thus we go
about to establish our own righteousness, making light of the atoning blood,
which marks the new and living way to heaven. This very mistake ruined the
Pharisees of old, and destroys their numerous followers in all ages, Romans ix.
31.

15. And when we form such wrong apprehensions of the law, is it possible that
we should have right views of the gospel, and receive it with cordial
affection? Reason and experience answer in the negative. What says the gospel
to sinners? You are saved BY GRACE, through mere favor and mercy, not by the
covenant of works, lest any man should boast like the Pharisee, Ephesians. ii. 8.
Now, ye decent formalists, ye fond admirers of your own virtue, are you not
utterly disqualified to seek and accept a pardon in a gospel way? For your
seeking it upon the footing of mere mercy, implies an acknowledgment, that you
deserve the ruin threatened against sinners. And suppose a pardon were granted
you, before you had a consciousness of your sad deserts, you could not receive
it as an act of mere grace, but only as a reward justly bestowed upon you for
the merit of your works. It is plain then, that according to the gospel plan,
none can be fit subjects of salvation, but those who are truly sensible of
their condemnation.

16. But as the grace of God in Christ, is the original and properly
meritorious cause of our salvation: So the grand instrumental cause of it is
faith on our part. Through faith are ye saved, says St. Paul. Now if to have
faith in Christ, is habitually to lift up our hearts to him, with an humble and
yet cheerful confidence, seeking in him all our wisdom, righteousness, and
strength, as being our instructing Prophet, atoning Priest, and protecting
King; it is evident, that till we awake to a sight of our fallen state, we
cannot believe, nor consequently be saved. O ye that never were sensible of
your spiritual blindness, can you with sincerity take Jesus for your guide, and
desire his Spirit to lead you into all truth? Does not David's prayer. Open
thou mine eyes, that I may see the wonderful things of thy law, appear to you
needless, if not fanatical? And is not the Redeemer's prophetic office thrown
away upon such sons of wisdom as you are?

Have you a greater value for Jesus than they, O ye just men, who have no
sensible need of heartfelt repentance, and whose breasts were never dilated by
one sigh, under a due sense of your guilt and condemnation? Can you, without
hypocrisy, apply to him as the High Priest of the guilty, claim him as the
Advocate of the condemned, or fly to him as the Savior of the lost?
Impossible! Ye fondly hope, ye never were lost, ye were always good livers,
good believers, good churchmen; ye need not make so much ado about an interest
in the blood of the new covenant.

And ye, who flushed with the conceit of your native strength, wonder at the
weakness of those, that continually bow to the scepter of Jesus's grace for
protection and power; can you without a smile of pity hear him say, Without me
ye can do nothing? Is it possible that you should sincerely implore the
exertion of his royal power, for victory over sins, which you suppose
yourselves able to conquer; and for the restoration of a nature, with the
goodness of which you are already so well satisfied? Your reason loudly
answers, No: Therefore, till you see yourselves corrupt, impotent creatures,
you will openly neglect the Redeemer, give to your aggravated sins the name of
'human frailties,' and trust to your baffled, and yet boasted endeavors.
Self-deception! art thou not of all impostors the most common and dangerous,
because the least suspected?

To sum up and close these important remarks: Look at those who, in mystic
Babylon, are not truly sensible of their total fall from God, and you will see
them setting their own reason above the holy scriptures; and their works in
competition with the infinitely meritorious sacrifice of Christ. Inquire into
their principles, and you will discover, that they either openly explode as
enthusiastical, or slightly receive as unnecessary, the doctrines of salvation
by faith in Christ, and regeneration by the Spirit of God. Examine their
conduct, and you will find they all commit sin, and receive the mark of the
beast secretly in their right hand, or openly in their foreheads, Rev. xiii.
16. Sort them, and you will have two bands, the one of Skeptics and the other
of Formalists, who, though at as great enmity between themselves as Pilate and
Herod, are like them made friends together, by jointly deriding and condemning
JESUS in his living members.

And if with the candle of the Lord you search the Jerusalem of professing
Christians, you will perceive that the want of an heartfelt, humbling
knowledge of their natural depravity, gives birth to the double-mindedness of
hypocrites, and the miscarriages or apostasy of those, who once distinguished
themselves in the evangelical race: You will easily trace back to the same
corrupt source, the seemingly opposite errors of the loose Antinomian, and the
pharisaic Legalist, those spiritual thieves, by whom the sincere Christian is
perpetually reviled: And in short, you will be convinced, that if you set your
eyes upon a man, who is not yet deeply conscious of his corrupt and lost
estate, or whose consciousness of it has worn away, you behold either a trifler
in religion, a dead-hearted Pharisee, a sly hypocrite, a loose Antinomian, a
self-conceited formalist, a scoffing infidel, or a wretched apostate.

You see, reader, what a train of fatal consequences results from rejecting, or
not properly receiving, the doctrine demonstrated in these sheets: And now,
that you may cordially embrace it, permit me to enumerate the UNSPEAKABLE
ADVANTAGES springing from an acting knowledge of our fallen and lost estate.

No sooner is the disease rightly known, than the neglected Jesus, who is both
our gracious Physician and powerful remedy, is properly valued, and ardently
sought: All that thus seek, find; and all that find him, find saving health,
eternal life, and heaven.

Bear your testimony with me, ye children of Abraham and of God, who see the
brightness of a gospel day and rejoice. Say, What made you first wishfully look
to the hills, whence your salvation is come, and fervently desire to behold the
sin-dispelling beams of the Sun of Righteousness? Was it not the deep, dismal
night of our fallen nature, which you happily discovered, when awaking from the
sleep of sin, you first saw the delusive dreams of life, as they appear to the
dying? What was the Desire of nations to you, till you felt yourselves lost
sinners? Alas! Nothing: Perhaps less than nothing; an object of disgust or
scorn. When the Pearl of great Price was presented to you, did you regard it
more, than the vilest of brutes, an oriental pearl? And, as if it had not been
enough to look at it with disdain, were not some of you ready to turn again,
and rend, after the example of snarling animals, those who affectionately made
you the invaluable offer? Matt. vii. 6.

But when the storm that shook mount Sinai, overtook your careless souls, and
ye saw yourselves sinking into an abyss of misery; did ye not cry out, and say,
as the alarmed disciples, with an unknown energy of desire, Save, Lord, or we
perish? And when, conscious of your lost estate, ye began to believe, that he
came to seek and to save that which was lost; how dear, how precious was he to
you in all his offices? How glad were ye to take guilty, weeping Magdalen's
place, and wait for a pardon at your High Priest's feet? How importunate in
saying to your King, as the helpless widow, Lord, avenge me of mine adversary,
my evil heart of unbelief! How earnest, how unwearied in your applications to
your Prophet, for heavenly light and wisdom! The incessant prayer of blind
Bartimeus was then yours, and so was the gracious answer which the Lord
returned to him: You received your spiritual sight. And Oh! what saw you then?
The sacred Book unsealed! Your sins blotted out as a cloud! The glory of God
shining in the face of Jesus Christ; and 'the kingdom of heaven opened to all
believers!'

Then, and not till then, you could say from the heart, This is a faithful
saying, and worthy of all acceptance, that Christ Jesus came into the world to
save sinners, of whom I am chief, 1 Timothy i. 15. Then you could cry out with his
first disciples, Behold what manner of love the Father has bestowed upon us,
that we should be called the sons of God! 1 John iii. 1. We are all the
children of God by faith in Christ Jesus, whom having not seen we love; in
whom, though now we see him not, yet believing, we rejoice with joy unspeakable
and full of glory, receiving the end of our faith, the salvation of our souls,
Gal. iii. 26. 1 Pet. i. 8. We trusted in him, and are helped: Therefore our
heart danceth for joy, and in our song will we praise him, Psalm. xxviii. 8. To
Him that has loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and has
made us kings and priests unto God and his Father; to Him be glory and dominion
for ever and ever, Rev. i. 5.

And this will also be your triumphant song, attentive reader, if, deeply
conscious of your lost estate, you spread your guilt and misery before him, who
came to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and
the opening of the prison to them that are bound; and to comfort all that
mourn, by giving them beauty for ashes, the oil of joy for mourning, and the
garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, Isa. lxi. 1. Your sorrow, it is
true, may endure for a night, but joy will come in the morning, the joy of
God's salvation, and the pardon of your sins. Having much forgiven you, you
will then love much, and admire in proportion the riches of divine wisdom,
goodness, justice, and power, that so graciously contrived, and so wonderfully
executed the plan of your redemption. You will be ravished in experiencing,
that a condemned sinner can, not only escape impending ruin, but enter into
present possession of a spiritual paradise, where peace and joy blossom
together, and whence welcome death will, ere long, translate your triumphant
soul to those unseen, unheard of, inconceivable glories, which God has
prepared for them that love him, 1 Cor. ii. 9.

Nor will the blossoms of heavenly peace and joy only diffuse their divine
fragrency in your soul; all the fruits of holiness will grow together with
them, to the glory of God, and the profit of mankind. And thou will not be the
last, thou fair, thou blushing Humility, to bend all the spreading branches of
the tree of righteousness. No, we cannot be vain, or despisers of others, when
we see that we are all corrupted, dying shoots of the same corrupted, dead
stock: We cannot be self-righteous, when we are persuaded, that the best fruit
which we can naturally produce, is only splendid sin, or vice colored over
with the specious appearance of virtue: We must lie prostrate in the dust, when
we consider the ignominious cross, where our divine Surety hung, bled, and
died, to ransom our guilty souls.

A genuine conviction of our corruption and demerit thus striking at the very
root of our pride, necessarily fills our hearts with inexpressible gratitude
for every favor we receive, gives an exquisite relish to the least blessing we
enjoy, and teaches us to say with the thankful patriarch, I am not worthy of
the least of all thy mercies: And as it renders us grateful to God, and all our
benefactors, so it makes us patient under the greatest injuries, resigned in
the heaviest trials, glad to be reproved, willing to forgive the faults of
others, open to acknowledge our own, disposed to sympathize with the guilty,
tenderhearted toward the miserable, incapable of being offended at any one,
and ready to do every office of kindness, even to the meanest of mankind.

Again, no sooner are we properly acquainted with our helplessness, than we
give over leaning on an arm of flesh, and the broken reed of our own
resolutions. Reposing our entire confidence in the living God, we fervently
implore his continual assistance, carefully avoid temptations, gladly
acknowledge, that the help which is done upon the earth, the Lord does it
himself, and humbly give him the glory of all the good that appears in
ourselves and others.

Once more, as soon as we can discover our spiritual blindness, we mistrust our
own judgment, feel the need of instruction, modestly repair to the experienced
for advice, carefully search the scriptures, readily follow their blessed
directions, and fervently pray, that no false light may mislead us out of the
way of salvation.

To conclude: A right knowledge, that the crown is fallen from our head, will
make us abominate sin, the cause of our ruin, and raise in us a noble ambition
of regaining our original state of blissful and glorious righteousness. It will
set us upon an earnest enquiry into, and a proper use of, all the means
conducive to our recovery. Even the sense of our guilt will prove useful, by
helping to break our obdurate hearts, by imbittering the baits of worldly
vanities, and filling our souls with penitential sorrow. Before honor is
humility. This happy humiliation makes way for the greatest exaltation: For
thus says the high and lofty One, that inhabitation eternity, I dwell in the
high and holy lace, (...) also that is of a contrite and humble spirit, to
revive the spirit of the humble, and the heart of the contrite, to fill the
hungry with good things, and beautify the meek with salvation, Isaiah lvii. 15.

If these advantages, which exceed the worth of earthly crowns, necessarily
result from the proper knowledge of our corrupt and lost estate, who but an
infatuated enemy of his own soul, would be afraid of that self-science? Who,
but an obstinate Pharisee, would not esteem it, next to the knowledge of
Christ, the greatest blessing which heaven can bestow upon the self-destroyed,
and yet self-conceited children of men?

Careless reader! if thou art the person, if, remaining unshaken in thy carnal
confidence, and supposing thyself wiser than seven men that can render a
reason, thou not only despisest the testimony of the sacred writers and our
pious reformers, laid before thee in the first part of this treatise, but
disregardest the numerous arguments it contains, tramplest under foot both
matter of fact and common sense, and remainest unaffected by the most dreadful
consequences of self-ignorance on the one hand, and by the greatest advantages
of self-knowledge on the other; I have done, and must take my leave of thee.

May the merciful and holy God, whose laws thou do daily violate, whose word
thou hourly opposest or forgettest, whose salvation thou do every moment
neglect, whose vengeance thou continually provokest, and whose cause I have
attempted to plead, bear with thee and thy insults a little longer! -- May his
infinite patience yet afford thee some means of conviction, more effectual than
that which is at present in thy hands! -- Or, should thou look into this
labor of love once more, may it then answer a better purpose than to aggravate
thy guilt, and enhance thy condemnation, by rendering the folly of thy unbelief
more glaring, and consequently more inexcusable!

END OF THE APPEAL.
A CONCLUDING ADDRESS TO The SERIOUS READER, WHO ENQUIRES What must I do to be
saved?

'Is there no balm in Gilead? Is there no Physician there? Why then is not the
health of the daughter of my people recovered?'

JER. viii. 22. CONTENTS OF THE ADDRESS.
I. REFLECTIONS on the nature and depth of penitential sorrow. II. DIRECTIONS
proper for an half-awakened sinner, who desires to be truly convinced of his
guilt and danger. III. CAUTIONS against many false ways of healing a conscience
wounded by sin. IV. The evangelical method of a sound cure. V. A scriptural
testimony of God's children, concerning the excellency of this method. VI.
Scriptural invitations and exhortations, to encourage a desponding penitent to
try this never-failing method. And, VII. The happy effects of such a trial.
AN ADDRESS TO The Serious Reader, etc.
HAVING taken my leave of the thoughtless and gay, who regard an appeal to
their reason, as little as they do the warnings of their conscience; I return
to thee, This address is only calculated for serious persons, who cordially
assent to the doctrine established in the Rational Demonstration of our fallen
and lost Estate. As other readers have been dismissed with the portion of truth
that belongs to them, they are desired not to meddle with this, lest their
cavils confirm St. Paul's observation, We preach Christ crucified, to the
self-righteous (...) a stumbling block, and to the self-conceited Greeks
foolishness.
serious and well-disposed reader. I am too much concerned for thy soul's
welfare, to lay down my pen, without showing thee more perfectly the way to the
kingdom of heaven, by testifying to thee repentance toward God, and faith in
our Lord Jesus Christ.

Thou art happily weary of feeding upon the husks of earthly vanities. I have a
right therefore, as a steward of the mysteries of God, to bring out of the
divine treasury, the pearls of evangelical truth; and I gladly cast them before
thee, persuaded, that far from awakening thy anger, they will excite thy
desires, and animate thy languid hopes.

Instead of ridiculing, or dreading an heartfelt conviction of thy lost
estate, thou now see it is a desirable privilege, an invaluable blessing.
Ready to mourn, because thou can not mourn, thou complainest, that thou have
only a confused view of thy total depravity. Thou want the feelings of the
royal penitent, when he said, Behold, I was shapen in iniquity, etc. I
acknowledge my transgressions, and my sin is ever before me; but conscious thou
can not raise them in thy heart by natural powers, thou desire some
scriptural directions suitable to thy case. Give me leave to introduce them by
a few

PRELIMINARY REFLECTIONS on the nature and depth of penitential sorrow.
I. Thou know, that except thou truly repentest, thou shall surely perish,
and that there is no true repentance, where there is not true sorrow for sin. I
rejoice, says St. Paul to the Corinthians, that ye were made sorry after a
godly manner: For godly sorrow works repentance to salvation, not to be
repented of; but the sorrow of the world works death. Hence it appears, that
there are two sorts of sorrow springing from opposite sources; God and the
world; the one a godly sorrow, and the other the sorrow of the world. Learn to
distinguish them by their various causes and effects, so shall thou avoid the
danger of mistaking the one for the other.

The sorrow of the world, which many cover with the cloak of religion, arises
from fear of contempt, dread of poverty, secret jealousy, revenge dissatisfied,
love disappointed, baffled schemes, losses in business, unkindness of friends,
provocation of enemies, or the death of some idolized relative. Nay, this
sorrow may sometimes spring from a mixture of self-righteous pride and slavish
fear. Some cannot bear to be robbed of their fond hopes of meriting heaven by
their imaginary good works: They lose all patience, when they see their best
righteousness brought to light, and exposed as filthy rags: They are cut to the
heart, when they hear, that their apparent good deeds deserve punishment as
well as their black enormities: Or like condemned malefactors, they dread the
consequences of their crimes, while they feel little or no horror for the
crimes themselves.

Exceedingly fatal are the effects of this sorrow, in the persons whom it
overcomes: Their indignant hearts, unable to bear either disappointment,
contradiction, or condemnation, rise against second causes, or against the
decrees of providence; fret at the strictness of the law, or holiness of the
Lawgiver; and pine away with uninterrupted discontent. Hence, spurning at
advice, direction, and consolation, they wring their hands, or gnaw their
tongues with anguish; impatience works them up into stupid sullenness, or noisy
murmuring; they complain, that their punishment is greater than they can bear;
and, imagining they are more severely dealt with than others, they hastily
conclude. Behold, this evil is from the Lord, why should I wait for him any
longer? Thus black despair seizes upon their spirits; and, if grace does not
interpose, they either live on (...) fill up the measure of their iniquities,
as Cain, Pharaoh, and Haman; or madly lay violent hands upon themselves, as
Ahitophel, and Judas.

This sorrow cannot be too much guarded against, as it not only destroys many
persons, but does immense hurt to religion. For those who are glad of any
pretense to pour contempt upon godliness, taking occasion from the instances of
this sorrow, harden their own hearts, and prejudice all around them against the
blessed, godly sorrow, which every minister of the gospel endeavors to excite;
maliciously representing it as one and the same with the mischievous sorrow of
the world.

Their mistake will be evident, if we trace godly sorrow back to its source. It
does not spring merely from fear of punishment; but chiefly from humbling views
of God's holiness, the impurity of the human nature, the exceeding sinfulness
of sin, and the transcendent excellency of the law, which condemns the sinner.

And this happy sorrow differs not less from the other in its effects, than it
does in its cause. The persons who are blessed with it, far from murmuring, or
fretting at the divine commandments, see it to be holy, just, and good, both in
its preceptive and penal part. They so absolutely acquicsce in it, that they
would not alter it, if they could. They clear God, accuse themselves, subscribe
their own sentence, and acknowledge, It is of the Lord's mercies, that we are
not consumed. Each of them can say, Wherefore should a living man complain, a
man for the punishment of sins? It is good that he should both hope, and
quietly wait for God's salvation: I will therefore watch to see what he will
say unto me, for he will speak peace unto his people. Thus in a constant use of
all the ordinances of God, they meekly wait, wrestling with their unbelieving
fears, till victorious faith comes by hearing of the matchless love of Jesus
Christ; and then, fearing the Lord and his goodness, they sing the song of the
Lamb, and run upon his delightful errands.

As thou see, serious reader, the nature, necessity, and excellence of godly
sorrow, thou art probably desirous of being informed, how deep thine must be,
to constitute thee a true penitent. Know then, that it must be deep enough to
imbitter thy most pleasing, profitable, and habitual sins, and to prevent thy
resting without a clear sense of thy peculiar interest in Christ. -- It must be
profound enough to make him and his gospel infinitely precious to thee, and to
produce, under God, the blessed effects mentioned in the fifth part of the
preceding treatise.

To be more particular, a true penitent may certainly without despair or
madness, go as far in godly sorrow, as David does in his penitential psalms, or
our church in the first part of the homily on fasting. When good men, says she,
feel in themselves the heavy burden of sin, see damnation to be the reward of
it, and behold with the eye of their mind the horror of hell, they tremble,
they quake, they are inwardly touched with sorrowfulness of heart for their
offenses, and cannot but accuse themselves, and open their grief unto Almighty
God, and call on him for mercy. This being done seriously, their mind is so
occupied, partly with sorrow and heaviness, partly with an earnest desire to be
delivered from this danger of hell and damnation, that all desire of meat and
drink is laid aside, and loathing of all worldly things and pleasures comes in
place, so that they like nothing better than to weep, to lament, to mourn, and
both with words and behavior of body, to show themselves weary of this life.

Nevertheless it must be observed, that godly sorrow needs not be equal, either
in degree or duration, in all penitents. Those, whose hearts, through divine
grace, open as readily and gently as that of Lydia, happily avoid many of
David's pangs and Job's terrors. The powerful and instantaneous, or the gentle
and gradual manner, in which souls are awakened; the difference of
constitutions; the peculiar services that a few are called to, and for which
they are prepared by peculiar exercises; the horrid aggravations that have
attended the sins of some; and the severe correction, which the Lord is obliged
to give others, for their stout resistance against his grace -- all this may
help us to account for the various depths of distress, through which different
penitents pass in their way to Christ and salvation.

The Lord does not needlessly afflict the children of men, any more than a
tender father unnecessarily corrects his disobedient children: He only wants us
to forsake our sins, renounce our own imaginary righteousness, and come to
Christ to be made partakers of his merits, holiness, and felicity. The sorrow,
which answers these ends, is quite sufficient; though it should be ever so
light, and of ever so short a duration. On the contrary, a distress as heavy as
that of Judas is unavailable, if instead of driving us from sin to Jesus
Christ, it only drives us from profaneness to hypocrisy, or from presumption to
despair.

If still perplexed, thou ask what thou must do, to get a sense of thy
depravity, productive of true repentance; I answer, that an affecting discovery
of the guilt, nature, and danger of sin, is only attained by the assistance of
God's Spirit, who alone effectually convinces the world of sin, John xvi. 8.
But the Lord has graciously appointed means, in the right use of which, he
never denies a sinner the convincing and converting power of his blessed
Spirit; and what they are, thou art informed in the following

DIRECTIONS, Proper for an half-awakened sinner, desirous of being duly
convinced of his corrupt and lost estate.
II. Beware of Fools, that make a mock at sorrow for sin, and at sin itself.
Beware of those blind leaders of the blind, who having a form of godliness,
deny the power thereof: Instead of pointing thee to the throne of grace, and
bidding thee behold the Lamb of God, that takes away the sin of the world,
they will only direct thee to the church walls and communion table; and
perhaps, if they see thee under dejection of spirit for thy sins, they will
recommend the playhouse, the card-table, or what they call a cheerful glass.
From such turn away, or they will persuade thee that repentance is melancholy;
conviction of sin, despair; and the love of God, enthusiasm, 2 Timothy iii. 5.

That they may not be able to laugh, or frown thee out of the way of salvation,
dwell in thy thoughts on God's awful perfections. Justice and judgment are the
habitation of his throne. The unspotted, resplendent holiness beaming forth
from him, as from an immensely glorious Sun of Righteousness, will show thee
thy sins as innumerable as the flying motes discovered in a dusty room, where
the natural sun can penetrate. Consider that they are committed by a worm of
earth, against the Majesty of heaven; and they will all appear to thee
infinitely great: especially if thou measurest them, and thyself by the true
rule, the oracles of God; casting away the three false standards which
self-deceivers measure themselves by, namely, the good opinion of their
worldly-minded neighbors, the defective examples of their fellow-sinners, and
the flattering suggestions of their own blind self-love.

Follow the example of the noble Bereans: Search the scriptures daily, whether
these things are so, Acts xvii. 11. View in that faithful mirror, the picture
both of the natural and of the regenerate man, and ask thy conscience which
thou resemblest most. If, imitating the godly man described in the first psalm,
thou meditatest in the law of the Lord day and night; the straitness of the
heavenly rule will soon show thee how very far gone thy thoughts, words,
actions, tempers, and nature, are from original righteousness.

To this meditation, add a frequent survey of the follies of thy childhood, the
vanity of thy youth, the worldly-mindedness of thy riper years, the capital
transgressions which conscience accuses thee of, and the hardness of heart, and
alienation from the life of God, that the scriptures charge thee with. Confess
all to the Lord as thou art able, remembering that the wages of sin is death,
who flies fast upon thee with the wings of time -- Death, who often gives no
warning, and ushers in judgment, with all the horrors of hell, or the joys of
heaven; and pray, that these awful realities may affect thee now, as they will
in thy last moments.

Frequently reflect, how total must be our loss of spiritual life, which cannot
be repaired but by a resurrection, a new birth, or a new creation, Col. iii. 1.
John iii. 7. Gal. vi. 5. and how desperate the disease of our fallen nature,
which cannot be healed but with the blood of a divine Physician. Consider,
attentively consider Him, whose piercing look softened the obdurate heart of
cursing Peter, whose amazing sufferings brought an hardened thief under the
deepest concern for his salvation, and whose dying groans rent the rocks, shook
the earth, and opened the graves. The tender flower of evangelical sorrow grows
best in the shade of his cross: A believing view of him, as suffering for thee,
will melt thee into penitential tears, and seal upon thy relenting heart the
gracious promise, They shall look upon him, whom they have pierced, and mourn,
Zech. xii. 10.

In the mean time, improve the daily opportunities, which thou have of studying
human corruption in the life and tempers of all around thee, but chiefly in thy
own careless and deceitful heart: Take notice of its pride and self-seeking, of
its risings and secret workings, especially when unexpected temptations trouble
thy imaginary peace of mind: For, at such a time, thy corruption, like the
sediment in the bottom of a vial that is shaken, will show its loathsomness and
strength.

Converse frequently, if thou can, with persons deeply convinced of sin.
Attend a plain, heart-searching ministry as often as possible; and when the
sword of the Spirit, the word of God, pierces thy soul, beware of fretful
impatience. Instead of rising with indignation against the preacher, and
saying, as proud Ahab did to the man of God, Have thou found me, O mine enemy?
account him thy best friend, that wounds thee deepest, provided he brings thee
to Christ for a cure: And when the arrows of the word fly abroad, drop the
shield of unbelief, make bare thy breast, welcome the blessed shaft, and
remember, that the only way of conquering sin, is to fall wounded and helpless
at the Redeemer's feet.

Nevertheless the impressions of the word will soon wear off, if thou do not
importunately entreat the Searcher of hearts, to light the candle of his grace
in thy soul, that thou may clearly see whether thy inward parts are holiness
to the Lord, as thou fondly supposest; or very wickedness, as the scripture
testifies. It is only in God's light, that we can clearly discover our
blindness.

This light, it is true, shines in darkness, but frequently the darkness
comprehends it not. That this be not thy dreadful case, do not grieve and
quench the convincing Spirit, by persisting in the wilful omission of any duty,
or deliberate commission of any sin: Nothing but obstinate unbelief darkens the
mind, and hardens the heart, more than this. Therefore instead of burying thy
one talent with the slothful servant, earnestly pray the Lord to make thee
faithful to thy convictions, and to deepen them daily till they end in a sound
conversion.

In order to this, do not slightly heal the wound in thy conscience: It is
better to keep it open, than to skin it over by improper means: Many, through a
natural forwardness and impatience, have recourse to them; and ruin is the
consequence of their mistake. That thou may avoid it, serious reader, I
entreat thee to pay a due regard to the following

CAUTIONS, Proper for a penitent, who desires to make his calling and election
SURE.
III. When thou have affecting views of thy lost estate, beware of resting like
Felix in some pangs of fear, fits of trembling, and resolutions of turning to
God by and by, when thou shall have a convenient season. Neither give place to
desponding thoughts, as if there was no appeal from the tribunal of justice to
the throne of grace.

Run not for ease to vain company, bodily indulgence, entangling affections,
immoderate sleep, excessive drinking, or hurry of business. Cain built a city
to divert his trouble of mind, and multitudes like him, by the cares of this
world, the deceitfulness of riches, or the desire of other things, daily choke
the good seed, the precious word of conviction, Mark iv, 19.

Be not satisfied with faint desires of living the life of the righteous, or
idle wishes of dying their death. Remember that the desire of the slothful
kills him: and if thou have experienced some drawings of grace, meltings of
heart, or breathings after God; sit not down at last, as the Laodiceans, in a
careless state, neither hot nor cold. It is far better to go on thy way
weeping, and seeking the pearl of great price till thou really find it, than to
rest contented with an hasty conceit that thou art possessed of it, when thou
art not.

Stop not in an outward reformation, and a form of godliness, like many, who
mistake the means or doctrines of grace for grace itself; and because they say
their heartless prayers both in public and private, or go far and often to hear
the gospel preached in its purity, fondly hope, that they are the favorites of
God, and in the high way to heaven.

Under pretense of increasing thy convictions, do not bury them in heaps of
religious books. Some read till their heads are confused, or their hearts past
feeling. Thus, though ever learning, they are never able to come to the
knowledge of the truth. Hear then, as well as read the word of life; but think
not thyself converted when thou have received it with joy: The stony-ground
hearers went as far as this: Herod himself heard John gladly, honored him, did
many things, but left the most important undone; for he never dismissed the
incestuous woman he lived with; and at last sacrificed to her revenge, the
honest preacher he once admired.

Do not confound the covenant of works made with innocent Adam before the fall,
and the covenant of grace made with sinful Adam after the fall, Genesis ii. 17.
and iii. 15. and Romans v. 11. -- 21. They are excellent in their place, but when
they are mixed together, they destroy each other's efficacy. The dreadful
thunders, heard in paradise lost; and the melodious songs uttered in paradise
regained, do not strike at once the same spiritual ear. The galling yoke of the
law of works, and the heavy load of its condemnation are dropped; when we take
upon us Christ's easy yoke, and submit to his light burden. In a word, the
first Adam gives place to the second when we find rest unto our souls. Let then
the curse of the law of innocence, be swallowed by the blessing of the gospel:
or rather, let it make way for the grace of Christ in thy soul, as an emetic
makes way for a cordial in a disordered stomach. If thou take them together,
their respective use is prevented. The first covenant loses its humbling
efficacy, and the second its restorative power. Therefore, if thou have really
received the sentence of death in thyself; leave the curse of the first
covenant in the grave of Christ, crucified for thy sins; and welcome the
pardoning, renovating grace of Christ, risen again for thy justification.

On the other hand, rest not contented with speculative knowledge, and
unaffecting, though clear ideas of the gospel-way of salvation. Light in an
unrenewed understanding, mistaken for the mystery of faith in a pure heart,
like an ignis fatuus, or false light, leads thousands through the bogs of sin
into the pit of destruction, Acts viii. 13.

Pacify not thy conscience by activity in outward services, and a warmth in
God's cause: Party spirit, or natural steadiness in carrying on a favorite
scheme, yea, or seeking thy own glory, may be the springs that set thee on
work. Jehu faithfully destroyed Baal and Jezebel, but his zeal for the Lord
covered the secret desire of a crown. Take care also not to mistake gifts for
graces; fluency of speech for converting power, the warmth of natural affection
for divine love; or an impulse of God's Spirit, on some particular occasion,
for an evidence of spiritual regeneration, Balaam spoke and prophesied like a
child of God, and many will one day say to Christ, Lord, have we not
prophesied, spoke all mysteries, cast out devils, and done many wonderful works
in thy name? to whom he will answer, Depart from me, I know you not.

Avoid the self-conceit of many, who feed on the corrupted manna of their past
experiences, and confidently appeal to the wasted streams of those
consolations, which once refreshed their hearts; when, alas! it is evident,
they have now forsaken the fountain of living water, and hewn to themselves
broken cisterns that held no water; unless the mire of evil tempers, selfish
views, and heartless professions of faith, may pass for the streams which
gladden the city of God.

Neither do thou heal thyself by touches of sorrow, by tears, good desires, or
outward marks of humiliation for sin, as king Ahab. Nor by excessive fasting,
retiring from business, or hard usage of the body, as many Roman Catholics: nor
yet by misapplying the doctrine of predestination, and setting down notions of
election for evidences of salvation, as many Protestants: No, nor by doting
about questions, strifes of words, and perverse disputings, which eat as a
canker, as some in St. Paul's days, and too many in ours, 1 Timothy vi. 4.

To conclude, think not thou art absolutely made whole when the power of
outward sin is weakened or suspended, when thou have learned the language of
Canaan, can speak or write well on spiritual subjects, art intimately
acquainted with the best ministers of Christ, and have cast thy lot among the
despised children of God, taken their part, shared in their reproach, and
secured their esteem and prayers. Judas did so for years: Saul was once also
among the prophets: Ananias and Sapphira were supposed to be good believers for
a time, the foolish virgins joined in society with the wise, and were perhaps
unsuspected, to the last; and Peter himself stood in need of conversion, long
after he had outwardly left all to follow Christ, Luke xxii. 32. So important
is that charge of our Lord! Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for many
will seek to enter in and shall not be able.

To these cautions against the various ways, by which the generality of
penitents skin over the wound of sin in their conscience, permit me to add an

EVANGELICAL EXHORTATION, Pointing out the divine method of a sound cure,
which, though least regarded, and last tried, by most sinners, is not only
effectual in some, but infallible in ALL cases.
IV. Would thou, serious reader, be made whole in an evangelical manner? To
thy convictions of original and actual sins, must be added a conviction of
unbelief. Feel then, that thou have neglected Christ's great salvation: Own
thou did never ask, or never persevere in asking the unfeigned, saving,
powerful faith, by which the atonement is received and enjoyed, Romans V. 11.
Acknowledge, that the faith thou have hitherto rested in, was not that gift of
God, that grace of his own operation, wrought in thee according to the working
of his mighty power, and mentioned Ephesians. ii. 8. Col. ii. 12. Ephesians. i. 19. And
confess, it was not the right Christian faith; because it chiefly grew from the
seed of prejudice and education, as the faith of Jews and Turks; and not from
the seed of divine grace and power, as the faith of St. Paul, Gal. i. 15. and
because it never yielded the heavenly fruits which gospel faith infallibly
produces: Such as -- a vital union with Christ, Gal. ii. 20. The pardon of
sins, Col. i. 14. Acts xiii. 30. -- Peace with God, Romans v. 1. -- Dominion over
sin, Romans vi. 14. -- Victory over the world, 1 John v. 4. -- The crucifixion of
the flesh, Gal. v. -- Power to quench the fiery darts of the wicked, Ephesians. vi.
15. -- Joy unspeakable, 1 Pet. i. 8. -- And the salvation of thy soul, 1 Pet.
i. 9. Heb. x. 39.

Be not afraid of this conviction of unbelief; for it generally goes before
divine faith, as the fermentation of a grain of corn in the earth, is previous
to its shooting its stalk toward heaven. God concludes, shuts us up in
unbelief, says St. Paul, that he may have mercy upon us, Romans xi. 32. When the
comforter is come, says our Lord, he will convince the world of sin, because
they believe not in me. This is the transgression which peculiarly deserves the
name of sin, as being the damning sin according to the gospel, Mark xvi. 16.
the sin that binds upon us the guilt of all our other iniquities, and keeps up
the power of all our corruptions. Its immediate effect is to harden the heart,
Mark xvi. 14. and make it depart from the living God, Heb. iii 12: and this
hardness and departure are the genuine parents of all our actual sins, the
number and blackness of which increases or decreases, as the strength of
unbelief grows or decays.

A conviction of this sin is of the utmost importance, as nothing but an
affecting sense of its heinousness and power, can make us entirely weary of
ourselves -- nothing but a sight of its destructive nature can prevent our
resting without a complete cure.

But when thou art once convinced of unbelief, do not increase the difficulty
of believing, by imagining true faith at an immense distance. Consider it as
very near thy heart. That which convinces thee of sin and unbelief can in a
moment, and with the greatest ease, convince thee of righteousness, and reveal
in thee Christ the hope of glory. How quickly can the Spirit take of the things
that belong to him, and show them unto thee! Say not then in thy heart, Who
shall ascend into heaven, or descend into the deep to get me the seed of faith?
But let St. Paul show thee the new and living way. The word is nigh thee, says
he, even in thy mouth and in thy heart, that is the word of faith which we
preach; that if thou shall confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus, and shall
believe in thy heart that God has raised him from the dead, thou shall be
saved; for we are saved by faith; faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the
word of God. Hear then the word of the Lord.

Are thy sins really grievous to thee? Is the burden of them intolerable?
Would thou part with it at any rate? Do thou fully ronounce thy speculative
and barren faith? Have thou received the sentence of eternal death in thy
conscience, acknowledging thy case [for any thing thou can do without Christ]
helpless, hopeless, desperate? And art thou truly brought to the grand enquiry,
What must I do to be saved? See, feel, confess, that thou stand in absolute
need of a divine Physician, an almighty Redeemer; and, that the God-man Jesus
Christ, joins both those extraordinary characters in his wonderful person.
Submit to be saved by grace, by free grace, through his infinite merits, and
not thy wretched deserts; and, instead of opposing, continually study God's
wonderful method of saving sinners, the worst of sinners, by faith in his blood.

There is no name but his under heaven, whereby we must be saved; neither is
there cure, or salvation in any other, Acts iv. 12. As by him all things were
created, so by him they subsist, and by him they must be restored. The power of
his word and breath, made man a living soul; and now that we are dead to God,
the same power, applying his blood and righteousness, must create in us clean
hearts, and renew right spirits within us. This, and this only, heals wounded
consciences, washes polluted souls, and raises the dead in trespasses and sins.

Would thou then be made whole? Determine, as St. Paul, to know nothing but
Christ, and him crucified: Aim at believing, realizing, applicatory views of
what he is, and what he has done and suffered for thee. Through all the clouds
of thy guilt and unbelief, which will vanish before our Sun of Righteousness,
as mists be-before the material sun, behold him as the Lamb of God, that takes
away the sin of the world, and thine. -- See the immense dignity of his person;
He is God over all blessed for ever; and yet he condescends to be Emanuel, God
with us, flesh of our flesh and bone of our bone. -- Consider the inexpressible
value, and inconceivable efficacy of his precious, all-atoning blood. It is the
blood of the sacred body, assumed by the eternal Logos, when he appeared in the
likeness of sinful flesh, both as a victim and a priest, to suffer the penalty
of his own righteous law for us, and to put away sin by the sacrifice of
himself -- the blood of the Lamb of God, slain to sprinkle many nations -- the
blood of that mysterious Being, who fills the bosom of the Father, and the
everlasting throne, at whose feet all the heavenly powers cast their crowns;
and to whom, in the midst of the acclammations and adorations of an innumerable
company of angels, in the midst of sounding trumpets, thunderings, lightnings,
and voices, the spirit of just men made perfect ascribe salvation, free, full,
immensely dear-bought salvation: And, to say all in one word, it is the blood
of God manifest in the flesh, Acts xx. 28. 1 Timothy iii. 16. For JEHOVAH our
righteousness is the Seed of the woman and the Son of man: The Godhead and the
manhood are wonderfully joined in him: And in consequence of this mysterious
union, he is not only a proper mediator between God and man, but the sole
medium of reconciliation and union, between the offended Majesty of heaven and
the rebellious sons of Adam. As the brazen serpent lifted up in the wilderness,
when viewed by the wounded Israelites, was the only means by which the poison
of the fiery serpents could be expelled, and health restored to their tortured,
dying bodies: So Jesus lifted up on the cross, when beheld by the eye of faith,
as bleeding and dying in our stead, is the only way by which sin, the sting of
death, can be extracted out of our guilty, perishing souls: the only antidote
that can restore us to saving health and eternal life, John iii, 14. Apply
whatever we will, besides this sovereign remedy, we may poison, but can never
heal the envenomed and mortal wound.

But remember, sinner, that faith alone can make the blessed application. Adam
fell by rejecting in unbelief the word of threatening, and thou can never
rise, but by receiving in faith the word of reconciliation, Genesis ii. 17. 2 Cor.
v. 19. Instead then of confusing thy thoughts, and scattering thy desires by
the pursuit of a variety of objects; remember that one thing is needful for
thee -- Christ and his salvation received by faith: For, to as many as receive
him, he gives power to become the sons of God, even to them that believe on his
name. Beseech him, therefore, to manifest himself to thee by his word and
Spirit. He is the author and finisher of faith, the giver of every good and
perfect gift; ask of him an heartfelt confidence, that God so loved thee, as
to give his only begotten Son, that thou should not perish, but have
everlasting life, a firm confidence, that as the first Adam wilfully ruined
thee; so he, the second Adam, freely loved thee, and gave himself for thee: And
that thou have redemption through his blood, the forgiveness of sins, not
according to thy merits, but the riches of his grace.

The least degree of this divinely-wrought confidence, will begin to attract
and unite thy soul to him, who is our life and peace, our strength and
righteousness. The everlasting gospel will then be music in thine ears, and
power in thy heart. Its cheerful, solemn found, will raise thy drooping
spirits, and make thee fix the eye of thy mind on the sign of the Son of man,
the up-lifted banner of the cross: And oh! while the self-righteous see nothing
there but the despised, rejected man of sorrow, what will thou discover? God in
Christ reconciling the world unto himself -- God manifest in the flesh to
destroy the works of the devil! Jehovah, Jesus, the Captain of our salvation,
treading the wine press of the fierceness and wrath of the Almighty! Of the
people there was none with him, therefore his own arm brought salvation unto
him.

While the gospel trumpet is blown in Sion, and the self-hardened, scoffing
infidel hears it with disdain and ridicule, what joy will the awful
declarations convey to thy penitent and listening soul! With what rapturous
delight will thou hang upon the lips of the messengers of peace, the sons of
consolation, who preach free salvation by the blood of Jesus! While he himself,
confirming the word of his servants, says to the melting heart with his still,
small, and yet powerful, renovating voice: Behold, I sit upon my throne making
all things new -- The words that I speak are spirit and life -- I do not
condemn thee, thy sins are forgiven -- Be thou clean -- Thy faith has saved
thee -- Go in peace and sin no more, Rev. xxi. 5. John vi. 63. Luke vii. 48.5O.
Matt. viii. 3. John viii. 11.

And oh! what will thy believing, enlarged heart experience in that day of
God's power, and thy spiritual birth! Christ, the true light of the world, the
eternal life of men, coming suddenly to his temple, and filling it with the
light of his countenance, and the power of his resurrection! Christ shedding
abroad in thy ravished soul, the love of thy heavenly Father, thy bitterest
enemies, and all mankind! -- In a word, the Holy Ghost given unto thee! Or,
Christ dwelling in thy heart by faith! John i. 4. 1 John v. 12. Romans viii. 15.
and v. 5. Gal. i. 16. Ephesians. i. 13. and iii. 17.

Being thus made partakers of Christ, and of the Holy Ghost, Heb. iii. 14. and
vi. 4. thy loving heart, thy praising lips, thy blameless life will agree to
testify, that the Son of man has power on earth to forgive sins, and that if
any man is in Christ, he is a new creature, old things are passed away; behold,
all things are become new, Matt. ix. 6. 2 Cor. v. 17.

Till this is thy happy experience, pray (as the drawings of the Father, and
convictions of the Spirit will enable thee) earnestly pray for living faith,
for a faith that may be to thee the substance of the pardon thou hopest for,
and the evidence of the great sacrifice thou do not see, but which our divine
Surety really offered upon the cross for thee. Consider how deplorable a thing
it is, that thou should be prevented from claiming, receiving, enjoying the
delightful knowledge of thy interest in the Redeemer's death; when his
pardoning love, and the word of his grace, offer it thee without money and
without price, and absolutely nothing but infatuating unbelief, or spiritual
sloth, keeps thee from the invaluable blessing. Be not satisfied idly to wait
in the divine ordinances, till thou see the kingdom of God come with power;
but as the violent do, take it by force.

Prisoner of hope, be strong, be bold,
Cast off thy doubts, disdain to fear,
Dare to believe, on Christ lay hold;
Wrestle with Christ in mighty prayer:
Tell him, I will not let thee go,
Till I thy name, thy nature know.
Be attentive to the calls of the Spirit, and follow the drawings of the
Father, till they bring thee to the Son; and keep thine eye upon the dawning
light of the gospel, till the morning star arise in thy heart. Venture,
confidently venture upon the boundless mercy of God in Jesus Christ. If a
spirit of infirmity bows thee down, yield not to it, seventy times seven times,
try to arise and look up, calling aloud for help against it. Say, if possible,
with tears, as the distressed father in the gospel, Lord, I believe, or, Lord, I
would believe, help thou my unbelief: Or with tempted Job, Though thou slay me,
yet will I trust in thee.

In this manner knock with the earnestness of the importunate widow, till the
door of faith open, and thou begin to see the salvation of God. But stop not
here at the threshold of Christianity. Have boldness to enter into the holiest
by the blood of Jesus. Go on from faith to faith, till thy day of Pentecost is
fully come, till thou art endued with power from on high, baptized with the
Holy Ghost and with fire, and sealed with that holy Spirit of promise, which
Christ received of the Father, and abundantly shed on his servants and
handmaids, when he was glorified. Compare Matt. iii. 11. Ephesians. i. 13. John vii.
39. Acts i. 5, 8. and ii. 33. 39. and viii. 15. and xix. 2. John vii. 39. Tit.
iii. 6.

In the mean time, use all the means of grace with an eye to their end; stir up
the gift of hope that is in thee; and to raise thy drooping expectation,
receive the encouraging testimony of God's redeemed, praising people, whose
hearts and tongues are ready to testify to thy ears, what the following lines
declare to thine eyes.

V. That which we have seen and heard, declare we unto you, that you also may
have fellowship with us, and truly our fellowship is with the Father and with
his Son Jesus Christ. For the life was manifested, and we have seen it, and
bear witness, and show unto you that eternal life, which was with the Father,
and is manifested unto us. Yes, we have found him, of whom Moses and the
prophets did write. From blessed experience we declare, that the Messiah is
come, that his essence is Love incarnate, his name free Salvation, and his
delight the eternal happiness of the children of men. He is the chief among ten
thousand prophets, priests, kings, and saviors; he is altogether lovely. We
staked our souls upon his eternal truth, and it was done to us, both according
to his word and our faith: Therefore with humble joy we declare, that he
answers the prayers, and delivers the souls of perishing sinners, as graciously
as he did in the days of his flesh.

Upon trials, a thousand times successfully repeated, we proclaim him the help
of the helpless, the hope of the hopeless, the health of the sick, the strength
of the weak, the riches of the poor, the peace of the disquieted, the comfort
of the afflicted, the light of those that sit in darkness, the companion of the
desolate, the friend of the friendless, the way of the bewildered, the wisdom
of the foolish, the righteousness of the ungodly, the sanctification of the
unholy, the redemption of captives, the joy of mourners, the glory of the
infamous, and in a word, the salvation of the lost.

Though he was the Creator of men and angels, he vouchsafed to be born of a
woman, that we, the wretched offspring of degenerate Adam, might be born again,
born of God. Though he had stretched forth the heavens like a curtain, and
bespangled them with stars innumerable; he wrapped himself in the scanty,
^^ding garment of our flesh, and put on the veil of our miserable humanity,
that we might be invested with the glory, and communicable perfections of the
divine nature. Though he was the King of kings, and Lord of lords, he did not
disdain to take upon him the form and office of a servant, that we might be
delivered from the slavery of Satan, and that angels might be sent forth to
minister for us, who are the heirs of salvation. Though he was the fullness of
him who fills all in all, he worked, that we might not want; toiled, that we
might rest; and endured hunger and thirst, that we might taste the hidden
manna, eat the bread of life, and drink with him the mystic wine of his
Father's kingdom. His omnipotent word covers a thousand hills with verdure, and
clothes millions of creatures with rich furs, glittering scales, and shining
plumage; but O infinite condescension! he submitted to be stripped of his plain
raiment, that our shame might not appear; he became naked, that we might be
adorned with robes of righteousness, and garments of salvation. Though his
riches were immense and unsearchable like himself, though heaven was his
throne, and earth his footstool, he became poor, and was destitute of a place
where to lay his head, that we might be rich in faith here, and heirs of the
kingdom hereafter. Though he was, is now, and ever shall be the joy of the
heavenly powers, and the object of their deepest adoration; he was voluntarily
despised of men, that we might be honored of God: He was acquainted too with
griefs, that we might rejoice with joy unspeakable and full of glory, Though
supreme Lawgiver and Judge of all, matchless love made him yield to be judged,
and unjustly condemned at Pilate's bar, that we might be honorably acquitted,
and gloriously rewarded before his awful tribunal. Though archangels laid their
crowns at his feet, and seraphim veiled their faces before him, unable to stand
the dazzling effulgence of his glory; he suffered himself to be derided,
scoffed, spit upon, scourged, and crowned with thorns; that we might be
acknowledged, applauded, embraced, and presented with never-fading crowns of
righteousness and glory. The Lord of Hosts is his name; he is deservedly called
Wonderful Counselor, the everlasting Father, the mighty God, the Prince of
peace; cherubic legions fly at his nod; and yet, astonishing humiliation! His
shoulders, on which is laid the government of the world, felt the infamous load
of a malefactor's cross; and barbarous soldiers, followed by an enraged mob,
led him as a lamb to the slaughter, that we might be delivered from the heavy
curse of the law, and gently conveyed by celestial powers into Abraham's bosom.
Let all the angels of God worship him, is the great decree, to which the
heavenly hierarchy submits with incessant transports of the most ardent
devotion. And yet he was crucified, as an execrable wretch, guilty of treason
and blasphemy; that we, daring rebels and abominable sinners, might be made
kings and priests unto God, partaking of his highest glory, as he partook of
our deepest shame: And, to crown his loving kindness, he expired in the midst
of rending rocks, and a supernatural darkness; that we might feel his tender
mercies, and be indulged with the light of heaven, when we go through the
dreary valley of the shadow of death, to reap the joys of eternal life.

Survey this wondrous cure:
And at each step let higher wonder rise!
Pardon for infinite offense! and pardon
Through means that speak its value infinite!
A pardon bought with blood! with blood divine!
With blood divine of him, we made our foe!
Persisted to provoke! though wooed and awed,
Blessed and chastis'd, bold, flagrant rebels still!
Bold rebels 'midst the thunders of his throne!
Nor we alone! a rebel universe!
Yet for the foulest of the foul he dies.
But this is not all: Having through the grace of God tasted death for every
man, and perfumed the grave for believers, He rose! He rose! He broke the bars
of death.
Oh the burst gates, crushed sting, demolished throne,
Last gasp of vanquished death! Shout, earth and heaven,
This sum of good to man; whose nature, then.
Took wing, and mounted with him from the tomb!
Then, then, we rose; then first humanity
Triumphant, passed the crystal gates of light.
YOUNG.

O the depth of the mystery of faith! O the breadth, the length, the height of
the love of Christ! All his stupendous humiliation from his Father's bosom,
through the virgin's womb, to the accursed tree; all his astonishing
exaltation, from the dust of the grave, and the sorrows of hell, to the joys of
heaven, and the highest throne of glory; all his immense progress of incarnate
love -- all, all is ours! His mysterious incarnation reunites and endears us to
God; his natural birth procures our spiritual regeneration; his unspotted life
restores us to a blissful immortality; his bitter agony gives us calm repose;
his blooly sweat washes away our manifold pollutions; his deep wounds distill
the balm that heals our envenomed sores; his perfect obedience is our first
title to endless felicity; his full atonement purchases our free justification;
his cruel death is the spring of immortal life; his grave, the gate of heaven;
his resurrection, the pledge of glory; his ascension, the triumph of our souls;
his sitting at the right hand of the Majesty on high, the earnest of our future
coronation and exalted felicity; and his prevailing intercession, the
inexhaustible fountain of all our blessings.

Come then, conscious sinner, come to the feast of pardoning love; taste with
us, that the Lord is gracious. Let not a false humility detain thee, under
pretense, that 'thou art not 'yet humbled and broken enough for sin.' Alas! who
can humble thee but Jesus, that say, Without me ye can do nothing? And how
can thou be broken, but by falling upon this chief cornerstone? If
humiliation and contrition are parts of the salvation which he merited for
thee, is it not the quintessence of self-righteousness, to attempt to obtain
them without him? Away then, for ever away with such a dangerous excuse!

Nor let the remembrance of thy sins keep thee from the speediest application
to Jesus for grace and pardon. What! though thy crimes are of the deepest dye,
and most enormous magnitude; though they are innumerable as the sand on the sea
shore, and aggravated by the most uncommon and horrid circumstances; yet thou
need not despair: He has opened a fountain for sin of every kind, and
uncleanness of every degree; his blood cleanses from ALL sin.

He is a Redeemer most eminently fitted, a Savior most completely qualified to
restore corrupt, guilty, apostate, undone mankind; the vilest of the vile, the
foulest of the foul not excepted. He is almighty, and therefore perfectly able
to restore lapsed powers, root up inveterate habits, and implant heavenly
tempers. He is love itself, compassionate, merciful, pardoning love, become
incarnate for thee. And shall he, that spared not his own life, but delivered
himself up for us all -- shall he not with his own blood, also freely give us
all things?

Behold, oh! behold him with the eye of thy faith: Cruelly torn with various
instruments of torture, he hangs aloft on the accursed tree, between two of the
most execrable malefactors; and there, insulted more than they, he bears our
infamous load of guilt. He knows no sin, and yet he is made sin for us: He
becomes a curse, to redeem us from the curse of the law: His own self bears our
sins in his own body on the tree: He is wounded for our transgressions, and
bruised for our iniquities; the chastisement of our peace is upon him, God has
laid on him the iniquity of us all, and with his stripes we are healed.

See, PARDON FOR LOST SINNERS is written with pointed steel and streaming
blood, on his pierced hands and feet: The double flood issuing from his wounded
side, more than seals the dear-bought blessing: The handwriting against us, is
nailed to his cross, and blotted out with his precious blood: His open arms
invite, draw, and welcome returning prodigals; and there encircled, the worst
of sinners may find a safe and delightful retreat, a real and present heaven.

O sinner, let thy heart fly thither on the wings of eager expectation and
impetuous desire -- By all that is near, dear, and sacred to thee, fly -- Fly
from eternal death -- Fly for eternal life. The law, violated by ten thousand
transgressions, pursues thee with ten thousand curses: The sword of divine
vengeance flames over thy devoted head: Sin, the sting of death, has been a
thousand times shot into thy wretched breast; its subtle and dire poison
continually works in thy hardened, or distressed heart: Guilt, the sting of sin
-- the never-dying worm, perpetually benumbs thy stupid soul, or gnaws thy
restless conscience: Raging Lusts, those sparks of the fire of hell, which
nothing but the blood of the cross can quench; or fierce Passions, those
flashes of infernal lightning, that portend an impending storm, frequently
break out in thy benighted soul; an heartfelt pledge of tormenting flames:
Satan, whom thou have perhaps invoked by horrid imprecations, goes about as a
roaring lion, seeking to ensnare his careless votary, or devour his desperate
worshippers: Death levels his pointed spear at thy thoughtless or throbbing
heart: Hell itself is moved from beneath, to meet thee at thy coming; and the
Grave gapes at thy feet, ready to close her hideous mouth upon her accursed
prey.

Fly then, miserable sinner -- if thy flesh is not brass, and thou can not
dwell with everlasting burnings, fly for shelter to the bloody cross of Jesus.
There thou will meet him, who was, and is, and is to come; Emanuel, God with
us, who appeared as the son of man, to make his soul an offering for sin, for
thy sin; and saved thy life from destruction, by losing his own in pangs, which
made the sun turn pale, shook the earth, and caused the shattered graves to
give up their dead.

He is even now near to thy heart; he stands at the door, and gently knocks by
the word of his grace. If thou hear his voice, and openest by believing, he
will come in; the word of reconciliation shall be powerfully ingrafted in thy
heart; thou shall know, experimentally know the truth, and the truth shall make
thee free. Assured that he has by himself purged thy sins, abolished death,
and brought life and immortality to light through the gospel, thou shall sup
with him and he with thee; thou shall eat the bread of God, which came down
from heaven, to give life to a perishing world. Evangelical truth received by
faith, will heal, nourish, comfort, and sanctify thy soul.

But perhaps thy guilty heart receives no consolation from these lines. Thou
still considerest Christ: only as a severe Lawgiver, or as an inflexible Judge;
and not as the propitiation for thy sins, and thy gracious, all-prevailing
Advocate with the Father. Oh! how do thou wrong both him and thyself, by such
false conceptions! And how soon would thy gloomy fears give place to triumphant
joy, if thy thoughts of him corresponded with his gracious designs concerning
thee!

Would thou know him better; behold him through the glass of his word, and
not through the mist of thy fears; and thou will see that, far from watching
over thee for evil, he fixes upon thee the piercing eye of his redeeming love;
waits, that he may be gracious to thy soul, and calls, continually calls for
thee. Oh! if thou have an ear, listen; and as thou listenest, wonder at the
kind, reviving words, which proceed out of his mouth.

VI. This part of the address is almost literally transcribed from the
scripture, and it is designed for none but mourners in Sion, dejected sinners,
who are backward to come to Christ, that they may have life. These want line
upon line, and invitation upon invitation; and it is well if, after all, they
are encouraged to come. As for full souls, I know they will loath this
honeycomb. But while they complain it has too many cells, and they are filled
with the same thing; some poor hungry heart will say, One thing is needful for
us. We cannot have too much virgin honey; its sweetness makes amends for the
want of variety. If the manna falls abundantly round our tents, it will stir us
up to praise, and not to murmur. Fullness of the bread of life will not make us
wax fat and kick like Jeshuram, but bless God for his rich profusion, and with
the disciples, we shall even gather the fragments, that nothing be lost.
Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, says the Lord; speak ye comfortably to
Jerusalem, and cry unto her, that her warfare is accomplished, and her iniquity
is pardoned; for, in me, she has received of the Lord's hand, double for all
her sins: He is well pleased for my righteousness sake, I have magnified the
law, and made it honorable; I have been lifted up, and now I draw all men unto
me. My delights are with the sons of men, and therefore am I exalted, that I
may have mercy upon them. Behold, I come with a strong hand, my reward is with
me, and my work before me. Every valley shall be exalted, every mountain and
hill shall be made low; the crooked shall be made strait, and the rough places
plain; my glory shall be revealed, and all flesh shall see it together.

Hearken unto me, ye stout-hearted, that are far from righteousness; I bring
near my righteousness, it shall not be far off, and my salvation shall not
tarry. Seek ye me while I may be found, call upon me while I am near: Return
unto me, and I will have mercy upon you; and though ye have only done evil
before me from your youth, I will abundantly pardon: For my thoughts are not
revengeful as your thoughts, nor my ways unloving as your ways: In me you shall
be saved with an everlasting salvation.

Come therefore unto me, all ye that travel and are heavy laden, and I will
give you rest: My yoke is easy, my burden light, and my rest glorious. Ho!
every one that thirsts, come ye to the waters, and he that has no money;
come ye, buy and eat all that can revive, strengthen, and delight your souls;
yea, come, buy wine and milk without money and without price. Wherefore do ye
spend your money for that which is not bread, and your labor for that which
satisfies not? Hearken diligently unto me, eat that which is good, and let
your soul delight itself in fatness. Incline your ear, and come unto me; hear,
and your soul shall live: I will make an everlasting covenant with you, even
the sure mercies of David, and you shall all know me, from the least to the
greatest; for I will forgive your iniquity, and remember your sin no more.

Oh, if thou knew the gift of God, wretched sinner, and who it is that says
unto thee, If any man thirst, let him come to me and drink, thou would have
asked of him, and he would have given thee living water; a well, a fountain of
it would have sprung up in thee unto everlasting life; yea, out of thy belly,
thy inmost soul, rivers of living water, the greatest abundance of the purest
joy, would have flowed for ever. I, even I, am he, that blotteth out thy
transgressions for my own sake, and will not remember thy sins: I will guide
thee continually, and satisfy thy soul in drought; and thou shall be like a
watered garden, or like a spring of water, whose waters do not fail.

O how often would I have gathered thee in years past, as a hen gathers her
brood under her wings! How often would I have led thee, as an eagle fluttereth
over her young, spreads abroad her wings, takes them, and bears them! But
thou would not. Nevertheless, this is still the day of my power, mercy, and
love: I pardon those whom I reserve, and I will yet be pacified toward thee,
for all that thou have done. I was angry with thee, but mine anger is turned
away, my thoughts toward thee are thoughts of peace, and I am become thy
salvation. Come then, let us now reason together, and though thy sins be as
scarlet, they shall be as white as snow; though they be red like crimson, they
shall be as wool.

Why does not thy drooping heart, O sinner, leap for joy, or melt with
gratitude, at these tender invitations of thy Savior? Think thou, they do
not belong to thee? Do thou suppose, that Jesus, who is all purity and
holiness, must turn away with abhorrence from such a guilty, polluted, and
abominable creature as thou art? -- One so void of all good, so full of all
evil, so completely lost and undone as thou see thyself? Art thou afraid that
thy relapses into sin have been so frequent, and thy backslidings so
multiplied, that hope, which comes to all, can no more come to thee? Or does
the enemy of thy soul suggest thou art careless, hardened, and sunk in stupid
unbelief? -- Does he insinuate, thou have so long trifled with divine grace,
art gone such lengths in horrid wickedness, or have contracted such
unconquerable habits of indulging thy carnal mind, or following thy vain
imaginations, that infinite mercy can no longer pardon thy sins, or infinite
power change thy nature? Art thou even tempted to believe, thou have committed
the sin against the Holy Ghost, and art almost, if not altogether, given up to
a reprobate mind? O check those gloomy, despairing thoughts; resist the devil;
and give place to more true and honorable sentiments of Jesus.

Wherefore do thou doubt, O thou of little faith? Is any thing too hard for
the Lord? Are not all things possible with God? Can the Almighty, who became
incarnate to die, as man, in thy place, want either ability or willingness to
help thee, be thy case ever so deplorable and desperate? Are not darkness or
light, sickness or death, all one to him, who is the light of the world, and
the Prince of life; and who, with a word or a touch, raised the dead, whether
they were yet warm on a bed, cold in a coffin, or already putrefied in a grave?

Confine not then, poor dejected sinner, thy Savior's boundless mercy within
the narrow limits of thy unbelieving thoughts. Get scriptural views of his
pardoning love, and true discoveries of his redeeming power. To guess aright at
the prodigious extent of his mercy, lift up the dim eyes of thy struggling
faith, and behold a great multitude, which no man can number, standing before
the throne, with their robes washed, and made white in the blood of the Lamb.

Among those countless monuments of divine mercy, those illustrious trophies of
free grace, see David, who, after having been admitted to close communion with
God, plunged for ten months in the horrible guilt of adultery, treachery,
hypocrisy, and murder! -- See Paul, once so fierce an enemy to the truth, so
fiery a blasphemer of Jesus, so raging a persecutor of the saints, that his
very breath was threatenings and slaughter against them! -- See Peter, who,
after a great profession of faithfulness, and upon an apparently slight
temptation, denied three times his Master, his Savior, and his God, in his
very presence -- Peter guilty of lying, cursing, and perjury; immediately after
he had been apprised of the imminent temptation, and armed against it, both by
receiving the holy sacrament at our Lord's own hand, and being admitted to see
his wonderful agony, and glorious miracles. These, and thousands more, agree to
tell thee, For this cause we obtained mercy, that in us first, Jesus Christ
might show forth all long-suffering, for a pattern to them, which should
hereafter believe on him to life everlasting.

If all these witnesses do not silence thy doubts, and encourage thy hopes;
Jesus himself, the faithful and true witness, will yet plead the cause of his
dying love, against thy unbelieving fears: Thy gracious Advocate with God, will
yet be God's condescending Advocate with thee. O let thy clamorous conscience
keep silence, while he preaches to thee the everlasting gospel of his grace.
And if today thou hear his voice, harden not thy heart, come out of the
cave of unbelief, wrap thyself in the mantle of divine mercy, and worship the
pardoning God, the God of never-failing truth, and everlasting love.

Gracious Savior! make thine own words spirit and life to the soul thou have
formed by thy breath and purchased with thy blood. Blessed Comforter! While thy
precious sayings strike the eyes of this hopeless reader, let the love which
thou sheddest abroad, soften, melt, and revive his poor, oppressed heart, and
let salvation come this day to the house of a son or daughter of Abraham! A
touch, a breath from thee, will break the bars of iron, burst the gates of
brass, and make the everlasting doors lift up their heads, that the King of
glory may come in.

Who is this King of glory? Who is this, that comes from Edom, with dyed
garments from Bozrah? This, that is glorious in his apparel, traveling in the
greatness of his strength?

I, that speak in righteousness, mighty to save. I have trodden the wine press
alone, mine own arm has brought salvation unto me, salvation for the lost: It
is gone forth; my righteousness is near; the isles shall wait on me, and on my
arm shall they trust. The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me: He has anointed
me to preach good tidings to the meek; he has sent me to bind up the
brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the
prison to them that are bound, to comfort all that mourn, and by the blood of
the covenant, to send forth the prisoners out of the pit where there is no
water.

Fear not, therefore, thou worm Jacob, I am the first and the last, he that
lives and was dead, and behold, I am alive for evermore. Yes, I ever live to
make intercession for thee; and because I live, thou shall live also. All power
is given, all judgment is committed to me in heaven and earth: I have the keys
of death and hell: A Jonah, who cries to me out of the very belly of hell, is
not out of the reach of my gracious and omnipotent arm.

Who art thou, that have feared continually every day, because of the fury of
the oppressor, as if he were ready to destroy? I, even I, am he that comfort
thee. I bring glad tidings of great joy, which shall be to all people. I have
triumphed over all thine enemies on the cross. I have led captivity captive,
and received gifts for men, even the promise of the Father, that the Lord God
by the Spirit may dwell in them. At my command the great, the evangelical
trumpet is blown, and they that are ready to perish in the land of Assyria, and
the outcasts in the land of Egypt do come, and are welcome to mount Sion.
Hasten with them, thou captive exile, hasten to me, that thou may be loo^^d,
and that thou should not die in the horrible pit of thy natural state.

Thy helplessness is no hindrance to my loving kindness: I break not the
bruised reed, I quench not the smoking flax: I uphold all that fall, I raise
up all those that are bowed down: I say to the prisoners, Go forth; and to them
that are in darkness, Show yourselves: I strengthen the weak hands, and confirm
the feeble knees: I say to them that are of a fearful heart, Be strong, fear
not; behold, I will come with vengeance and a recompense, I will come and save
you.

My tender mercies are over all my works. When the poor and needy seek water,
and there is none, and their tongue fails for thirst; I, the Lord, will hear
them; I, the God of Israel, will not forsake them, I will open rivers in high
places, I will make the wilderness a pool, and the dry land springs of water.

It is true, thou have sinned with an high hand, both against thy light, and
against my love; but how shall I give thee up, Ephraim? How shall I deliver
thee, sinner? How shall I make thee as Adamah, and set thee as Zeboim, those
rebellious cities, on which I poured my flaming vengeance? My heart is turned
within me, my repentings are kindled together; I will not destroy thee; for I
am God and not man. I have seen thy ways, and will heal and lead thee, and
restore comfort to thee; for I create the fruit of the lips, Peace! peace to
him that is afar off, and to him that is near, I will heal him.

Thou have not chosen me, but I have chosen thee; thou art my servant, fear
not, for I am with thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy God. My strength is
sufficient for thee; I will help thee; yea, I will uphold thee with the right
hand of my righteousness. They that war against thee shall be as nothing, for I
the Lord thy God will hold thy right hand, and make my strength perfect in thy
weakness. I will bring thee by a way thou have not known. I will make darkness
light before thee, and crooked paths strait: When thou passest through the
waters, I will be with thee, and when thou walk through the fire, thou shall
not be burnt, neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, for I am the Lord, thy
Savior and thy God. I have carried thee from the womb, and even to hoary hairs
will I bear and deliver thee.

Therefore hear now this, thou afflicted and drunken, but not with wine: I will
not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth; for the spirit would fail
before me, and the soul which I have made. I turn the water of affliction into
the wine of consolation. Behold, I take out of thy hand the cup of trembling,
even the dregs of the cup of my fury: thou shall no more drink it again; I will
put it into the hand of them that afflict thy soul: And in the room of it, I
give thee the cup of the New Testament in my blood, shed for the remission of
sins: It is now ready, draw near, drink thou of it, and taste that I am
gracious.

Come near, that I may speak a word in season to thy weary spirit. Why stand
thou afar off? Come near, I say, that my soul may bless thee. Let me show thee
my glory, and proclaim my soul-reviving name: The Lord! The Lord God! merciful
and gracious, long-suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth, keeping mercy
for thousands, and forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin! Let me wash thy
heart from iniquity, guilty sinner; for, unless I wash thee, thou have no part
with me. Unless thou art born again of water and of the Spirit, thou can not
see the kingdom of God. But this is the covenant of promise which I make with
thee: I will sprinkle clean water upon thee, and thou shall be clean, a new
heart will I give thee, and a new spirit, even my own Spirit will I put within
thee, and thou shall be completely born of God; and at that day thou shall know
that I am in the Father, and thou in me, and I in thee.

Who is he that condemns? It is I, who died for thy sins, yea rather, who
rose again for thy justification, who am even at the right hand of God, who
also make intercession for thee. The same compassionate love, that made me weep
over ungrateful Jerusalem, and groan over dead Lazarus, made me bleed and die
for thee. O that in this thy day, thou may know the things that belong unto
thy peace, and the efficacy of that sacrifice, by which I have for ever
perfected them that are sanctified! O that unbelief, so injurious to me, and so
pernicious to thee, may no longer hide my love from thine eyes!

What! afraid of my purity, art thou ready to cry out as my apostle, Depart
from me, O Lord, for I am a sinful man? And do thou tremble at my words as a
criminal at the sentence of his judge? O be of good cheer, it is I, be not
afraid. Am not I thy light and strength, thy shield and buckler, thy tower and
resting place, thy strong hold whereunto thou may always resort, thy castle
and fortress, the horn also of thy salvation, and thy refuge? As for thy sins,
if thou desire to part with them, they will no more hinder me from visiting
thee, than the sickness of a patient prevents a physician from giving him his
attendance.

I know thou art a sinner -- a great sinner: For this cause came I down from
heaven to Bethlehem -- to Gethsemane -- to Calvary. I know thine iniquities are
more in number than the hairs of thy head; like a sore burden, they are too
heavy for thee to bear; and therefore have I borne them for thee in my own body
on the tree. I came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance: I am
the man that receives sinners, and eats with them: I am the friend of
returning publicans and harlots; all manner of sins and blasphemies shall be
forgiven them through faith in my blood: God was in me reconciling the world
unto himself, not imputing their trespasses unto them: And now, I beseech thee,
be thou (for one) reconciled to God; for in me God is reconciled to thee, thy
sin is covered, and thine iniquity forgiven.

Great as thy crimes are, poor mourner in Zion, I upbraid thee not with them;
my infinitely meritorious sacrifice has long ago atoned for their heinousness,
and now I cast the mantle of my pardoning love over their multitude: Thou art
ashamed of them, and shall I be ashamed of thee? -- Far be the thought from
thee -- I glory in extending my boundless mercy to such miserable objects as
thou art. This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all men to be received, that
I came into the world to save sinners: and if, with my servant Paul, thou see
thyself the chief of them, let me do the chief part of the errand on which I
came; look unto me -- partake with him of my richest salvation -- lose thy
cares in the bosom of my mercy -- and receive the atonement I made for thee,
but receive it now; for I have heard thee in a time accepted, and in the day of
salvation have I succored thee: Behold, now is the accepted time: Behold, now
is the day of salvation, the day in which I bind up the breach of my people,
and heal the stroke of their wound. --

Whence arise, O poor sinner, thy backwardness and misgivings? I have ransomed
thee from the power of the grave, and thou art mine: I come to heal thee, and
reveal to thee the abundance of peace and truth: I bring thee a cure for thy
wounded conscience, and saving health for thy sin-distempered soul!

In a little wrath, and for a small moment, I have hid my face from thee; but
with everlasting kindness will I have mercy on thee; for I am the Lord thy
Redeemer. Believe it, and faith will work by love, and love will cast out fear:
Thus shall thou take hold of my strength, that thou may make peace with me,
and thou shall make peace with me; for I am a strength to the needy in his
distress, an hiding place from the wind, a covert from the tempest, as rivers
of water in a dry place, and as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land.

Come then, be not of them that draw back from me to perdition, but of them who
believe to the saving of the soul. Far from casting away thy little confidence,
which has great recompense of reward, hold it fast; resist even unto blood,
striving against the damning sin of unbelief; trust in me for ever, for in me,
Jehovah thy righteousness, is everlasting strength; and let me no longer
complain that thou (one of my oppressed people in spiritual Egypt) wilt have
none of me, and wilt not even come to me, that thou might have life more
abundantly.

Not by works of righteousness which thou have done, but according to my mercy
I saved thee. I am the Lamb slain from the foundation of the world. What my
gracious purpose planned before time, I have executed in time. My life and
death have completed the wonderful bridge, by which thou can go over the
great deep fixed between an holy God, and thy sinful soul. Concerning a main
arch of this mighty work, with one of my last breaths I said, It is finished;
and I now confirm the glad tidings with regard to the whole. With my right
hand, and with my holy arm, I have gotten myself the victory, and parted for
thee, not the waves of the red sea, but the dreadful billows of the fiery
gulf. And now I return to see thee safe over. Leave only the world and sin
behind, and walking by faith, follow me through the regeneration to a throne of
glory. --

Whence arises, sinner, this backwardness to trust in my promise, and venture
after me? Do thou suspect the sincerity of my tenders of grace? And by
thinking, that I secretly except thee from my mercy, when I offer it thee
openly, do thou still make me a dissembler, a liar? O wrong me not so far. I
am the Truth itself: I abhor dissimulation in my creatures: And I, that say, A
man should not use deceit, shall I use deceit? Shall I have concord with
Belial? Shall there be an agreement between the faithful Witness, and the
father of lies? Shall I sentence him, that loves a lie, to the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone, and be guilty of making one myself? Horrible
to suppose! Reject the blasphemous thought, sinner, it wounds me in the
tenderest part.

No, no, I do not put on a mask of pretended love, to hide a rancorous,
unforgiving temper: The general invitation that formerly passed my lips, is
still the very language of my heart, Whosoever will, let him come and take of
the water of life freely; and the promise which I formerly made, is still
firmer than the pillars of heaven, Him that comes unto me, I will in no wise
cast out. Let these words, like incorruptible seed, beget thee again to a
lively hope, and help thee to stir thyself up to lay hold on me, and my great
salvation.

I grant that no man comes unto me, except the Father draw him: But does he
not say, I have loved thee with an everlasting love, therefore with
loving kindness, with the cords of a man, with bands of love have I drawn thee?
Does he not draw thee even now? Who stirs thee up to repentance? Who raises in
thee a desire of coming unto me by prayer? Who indulges thee at times with
sweet hopes and alluring joys, to encourage thee to come? Is it not my Father,
and thine, thou poor, starving prodigal? And that nothing may be wanting on his
part to make thee come, to drawing does he not add driving? Does he not
obstruct all thy prospects of creature-happiness, and blast all thy worldly,
yea, and all thy self-righteous schemes? And while he touches thy heart with
the rod of distress, does he not lay the scourge of affliction on thy back, and
put this gracious invitation in thy hand? Away then with thy hard thoughts of
my Father: He and I are a flame of eternal love: I and the Father are one.

Neither say thou in thy heart, This is a day of trouble, rebuke, and
blasphemy; the children are come to the birth, and there is not strength to
bring forth. Shall I bring to the birth, and not give strength according to the
day? Do thou fear that my zeal, my strength, and the sounding of my bowels
toward thee are restrained? Am not I Jesus still? Is my love waxed cold that
it cannot pity? Is my hand shortened at all that it cannot save? Is mine ear
heavy that it cannot hear? Or have I no power to deliver? Behold, at my rebuke
I dry up the sea, I clothe the heaven with blackness; and if, in the greatest
storm, I say to the raging billows. Be still! There is a great calm: Fear not
then, the zeal of the Lord of hosts -- my zeal will do this, and more, for thy
soul; yea, I will do for thee exceeding abundantly above all that thou can
ask or think.

I see what passes in thy heart, O thou unwise and slow of heart to believe,
all that I and my prophets have spoken: I read thy new excuses. Thou say thou
do not suspect me, my faithfulness and my power; but thyself, thy
helplessness, and the treachery of thy own desperately wicked heart. -- What!
shall this sore evil hinder thee from coming to me, who alone can remedy it?
Will thou pray to be excused from believing, on such an account as this? O drop
this last, this most absurd plea; and walk in the steps of the faith of thy
father Abraham, Romans iv. 16. Consider not the deadness and hardness of thy
heart, but the reviving, softening love of mine; not thy want of power, but my
omnipotence; not the suggestion of Satan, but the declarations of my gospel.
Wrestle not only against flesh and blood, but against the powers of internal
darkness, and the spiritual wickedness of an unbelieving thought. Strive to
enter in at the strait gate of faith, Against hope believe in hope, that I
quicken the dead, and call the things which are not as though they were.
Stagger no more at my promises through unbelief, but be strong in faith, and
give glory to God, by being fully persuaded, that what I promise, I am able and
willing to perform.

In me thou may find the richest and readiest supply of all thy wants: I am
both the resurrection of the dead, and the life of the living: he that
believes in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live; and he that lives and
believes in me, shall never die. Believe then, and thou shall not come into
condemnation -- Believe, and thou shall receive power; thou shall see the glory
of God; thou shall be established; yea, and sealed with the holy Spirit of
promise -- Believe, and thou have everlasting life, and shall not come into
condemnation -- Believe, and a grain of faith will remove mountains of guilt
and unbelief -- Believe with all thy heart -- All things are possible to him
that believes, and he shall inherit all promises: For to him that overcomes
(and faith is the victory) will I give to eat of the hidden manna, and to sit
with me on my throne; as I also overcame, and am set down with my Father on his
throne -- Only believe then, and through faith thou shall subdue the kingdom of
darkness, work righteousness, obtain promises, stop the mouth of the roaring
lion, quench the violence of temptation's fire, escape the flaming point of
Satan's darts, out of weakness be made strong, wax valiant in fight, turn to
flight the armies of thy spiritual adversaries, and receive thy dead soul
raised to life again.

Thou have played with the fiery serpents, they have bitten thy heart, but I
have already sucked the worst of the mortal poison. In the perilous attempt my
soul was seized with sorrow even unto death, and an unheard of agony, attended
with a bloody sweat, came upon my body. A racking cross was the bed I was
stretched upon: Sharp thorns proved the pillow on which I rested my fainting
head. The bitterest sarcasms were my consolations; vinegar and gall my
cordials; a band of bloody soldiers the cruel wretches appointed to tear open
my veins; whips, nails, hammers, and a spear, the instruments allowed them to
do the dreadful operation. For hours I bled under their merciless hands: And
thy fearful curse, O sinner, flowed together with my blood. In the mean time,
noonday light was turned into the gloom of night, a dire emblem of the
darkness that overspread my agonizing soul: And at last, while earthquakes
rocked me into the sleep of death, I gave up the ghost, with cries that
astonished my bitterest enemies, and made them smite their breasts in pangs of
involuntary sympathy. Thus, to make thee partaker of my saving health, I took
the shameful and painful consequences of thy mortal distemper upon me. And now,
sinner, despise no more such amazing love, requite it with a believing look.
Consider my wounds, till thy conscience feels their wonderful effect. Behold my
atoning blood, till thou can witness it heals all thy infirmities.

Knowing the terrors of the Lord, I persuade men. Come, thou poor prisoner of
hope, turn by faith to the strong hold of my protection. -- Up! for God will
destroy this Sodom, the wicked world where thou lingerest -- Up! for the great
and terrible day of the Lord approaches. -- As I live, there is but one step
between thee and death, and another between death and hell.

Let my love even constrain thee to arise, and to follow me, that I may receive
thee unto myself, and complain no longer, that, with respect to thee, I have
labored in vain, and spent my strength for naught. Surely, sinner, I deserve
thy grateful love, for I have fought thy fiercest enemies. Dreadful was the
battle! My flesh was torn, my blood spilt, my life lost in the obstinate
combat: But I have slain the lion and the bear, I have vanquished Death and the
Grave, and rescued thy poor, helpless soul: And now let thy good Shepherd
rejoice over his lost sheep: Let gratitude compel thee to come into the fold of
my church, and join the little flock of my faithful followers. And if thou
can not come, do but look wishfully at me, and I will lay thee on my
shoulders rejoicing, and carry thee in triumph into the richest pastures of my
grace.

Once more I turn supplicant: Once more I stand at the door and knock -- Saul!
Saul! It is hard for thee to kick against the sharp goads of my love -- Martha!
Martha! one thing is needful, Choose the good part, choose me -- O Absalom, my
son! my son! Give me thy heart; I have died for thee, do not crucify me afresh
-- Lay down the spear of unbelief, and thine is my grace, my glory, my kingdom,
the kingdom of heaven.

Be not afraid to surrender; rebellious as thou art, I love thee still -- Can a
woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have compassion on the son
of her womb? Yea, she may forget, yet will I not forget thee. If thou will not
take my word, believe my oath: Because I can swear by no greater, I swear by
myself: As I live, I have no pleasure in the death of the wicked, but that the
wicked turn from his way and live: Turn then, turn unto me, for I have redeemed
thee: I have cast all thy sins into the depth of the sea, and will subdue all
thy iniquities.

And if thou can not believe my oath, credit these scars -- See! I have
graven thee upon the palms of my hands. Long, too long have I waited for thy
return, thou poor, wandering, weary prodigal. Let me see in thee the travel of
my soul, and be satisfied. By the mystery of my holy incarnation and dreadful
temptation, by my agony and bloody sweat, by my infamous death and glorious
resurrection, I beseech thee, come to the pardoning God by me. If thou have
nothing to pay, I forgive thee all the debt: Whether it be fifty or five
hundred pence, or ten thousand talents, I frankly forgive thee all. Only let me
heal thy backslidings, and love thee freely; let my left hand be under thy
head, and let my right hand embrace thee. See the wounds which I have received
for thee in the house of my friends! Reach hither thy finger, and behold my
hands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it into my side, and be not
faithless, but believing. Cleave to me with full purpose of heart, follow me
through the regeneration, and thou shall not only be one of my jewels, but a
crown of glory, and a royal diadem in the hand of thy God: Yea, as the
bridegroom rejoiceth over the bride, so will I rejoice over thee, and give thee
a name better than that of Son and Daughter -- I, the Holy One of Israel, will
be thy life and glory -- I, thy Maker, will be thy husband, and thy all.

And are these, O sinner, the gracious sayings of God to thee? -- The
compassionate expostulations of God, become incarnate for thee? -- Did God so
love thee, as to set forth his only begotten Son, as a propitiation through
faith in his blood, thus to declare his righteousness, for the remission of
sins that are past? May the Almighty now be just, and yet the justifier of him
that believes in Jesus? Is there no difference, no respect of persons with
him? And is the same Lord over all, rich unto all that call upon him? Then
shout, ye heavens! Triumph, thou earth! And thou, happy sinner, know the day of
thy visitation, be wise, ponder these things, and thou shall understand the
loving kindness of the Lord.

Be no longer afraid, that it will be presumption in thee to believe, and that
God will be offended with thee, if thou make so free with Jesus, as to wash
instantly in the fountain of his atoning blood. He not only gives thee LEAVE to
believe, but he INVITES thee to do it freely. Nay, he COMMANDS thee to believe,
for This is his COMMANDMENT, that we should believe on the name of his Son
Jesus Christ. He even enforces the precept by a double PROMISE, that if thou
believe, thou shall not perish, but have everlasting life. And that nothing
may be wanting to stir thee up to this important business, he is gracious
enough to threaten the neglect of it with the most dreadful PUNISHMENT; for he
that believes not, shall not enter into his rest, and shall be damned; and
that he that to the end remains fearful and unbelieving, shall be cast into the
lake that burns with fire and brimstone, which is the second death. How can
thou doubt then, whether thou art welcome to receive the Son given, by
believing on his name?

Come to him just as thou art, and he will make thee what thou should be.
When he counsels thee to buy of him the gold of faith, and the garment of
salvation, take him at his gospel word: Come without regarding thy stuff: The
poorer thou art, the better: The oil of his grace flows most abundantly into
empty vessels: His charity is most glorified in the relief of the most
miserable objects: His royal bounty scorns the vile compensation of thy
wretched merits: He sells like a king, like the King of kings, without money
and without price. Ask and have, and Take freely, are the encouraging mottos
written upon all the unsearchable treasures of his grace.

Be of good comfort then, rise, he calls thee: Stretch out thy withered hand,
and he will restore it: Open thy mouth wide, and he will fill it: Bring an
empty vessel, a poor, hungry heart, and he will give into thy bosom good
measure, pressed down, shaken together, and running over.

And now what meanest thou, sleeper? Why tarriest thou? Arise, and wash away
thy sins, calling on the name of the Lord. Lose not time in conferring with
flesh and blood; much less in parleying with Satan, or consulting thy
unbelieving heart: Here delays lead to ruin: The Philistines are upon thee,
instantly shake thyself: If thou art not altogether blinded by the god of this
world, and led captive by him at his will; this moment, in the powerful name of
JESUS, burst the bonds of spiritual sloth -- break, like a desperate soul, out
of the prison of unbelief -- escape for thy life -- look not behind thee --
stay not in all the plain. -- This one thing do; leaving the things that are
behind, Sodom and her ways, press forwards toward Zoar, and escape to the
mount of God, lest thou be consumed. By the new and living way consecrated for
us, in full assurance of faith, fly to the Father of mercies -- pass through
the crowd of Laodicean professors -- press through the opening door of hope --
take the kingdom of heaven by violence.

With halting, yet wrestling Jacob, say to the Friend of sinners, I will not
let thee go unless thou bless me. If he makes as if he would go farther; with
the two mournful disciples, constrain him to stay; or rather with the
distressed woman of Canaan, follow him whithersoever he goes -- take no denial
-- through the veil, that is to say, his flesh, torn from the crown of his head
to the sole of his feet -- through this mysterious veil, rent from the top to
the bottom, rush into the blood-besprinkled sanctuary -- embrace the horns of
the golden altar -- lay all thy guilt on the head of the sin-atoning victim --
read thy name on the breast of thy merciful high priest -- claim the safety,
demand the blessings, receive the consolations bestowed on all that fly to him
for refuge -- and begin a new, delightful life, under the healing and peaceful
shadow of his wings.

But perhaps thou art now devoid of active power, and broken in spirit. The
hurry of thy self-righteous nature subsides. Wounded and half dead, thou lie
in the way of misery, waiting for the passing by of thy heavenly Deliverer.
Thou had set thy heart upon being blessed in one particular manner, and God
in his wisdom thinks it best to bless thee in another. Thou would scale the
new Jerusalem and storm heaven; but he chooses it should come down into thy soul
as a fruitful shower descends into a fleece of wool. Be still then, and know
that he is God. Let him break thy self-will, which hides itself under godly
appearances; and let him practically teach thee, that salvation is not of him
that wills, nor of him that runs; but of God who shows mercy.

Meekly dive into the amazing depth of these words, In quietness and rest shall
be your strength. Stand still and see the salvation of God. The fire, the
earthquake, and the rending of the rocks are over; silence takes place; the
still, small voice will soon follow. Thou art for a time taken from the foaming
billows of self agitation, and led by the still waters; a calm succeeds the
impetuous storm, and a passive waiting thy restless, fruitless endeavors. Thou
art in the case of one fallen into the sea, who having struggled long and hard
to escape drowning, is obliged to yield at last. Yield then, weary sinner,
yield to thy happy fate. Fully surrender to the God of thy life. Entirely
abandon thyself to Jesus. Freely trust him with thy present and eternal
salvation. Whether thou swim or sink, let thyself go into the ocean of mercy.
Catch at no broken reed by the way, but calmly venture into the unfathomable
depths of redeeming love. Lose thus thy life, and thou shall find it. The power
of God will soon be made perfect in thy weakness; and when thy strength is
renewed, earnestly wrestle again. Thus go on, alternately striving and waiting,
according to the leadings of the Holy Spirit, till, having passed through all
the interior dispensations of divine grace, thou enter by faith into the rest
that remains for the people of God, and take possession of that kingdom of God,
which consists in righteousness, peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

VII. In that kingdom, happy believer, the times of refreshing fully come from
the presence of the Lord; mercy and love embrace thee on every side; and thy
sprinkled conscience enjoys the peace of a sin-pardoning God. -- Then smiling
Justice, more than satisfied by the meritorious death of Christ, sheathes her
flaming sword, and declares, There is now no condemnation to them that are in
Christ Jesus: They are justified from all things, and freely forgiven all
trespasses. -- And now thou art more than conqueror through him that loved
thee. Standing by humble faith in his omnipotence, thou can do all things,
through his grace strengthening thee. Sin has no dominion over thee: The cruel
and bloody tyrant, that reigned unto death, is dethroned; and grace, rich
grace, sweetly reigns through righteousness unto eternal life. Triumphing in
Christ over thy fiercest enemies, and putting thy victorious foot upon the neck
of the last, thou challengest his utmost rage, and shoutest, O Death, where is
thy sting? O Grave, where is thy victory? Thanks be to God, who gives us the
victory through our Lord Jesus Christ!

Now thou see and feel that God is LOVE. Thou dwell in Him, and He in
thee. Love, the fulfilling of the law, diffusing itself through all thy heart,
influences thy looks, words, and actions, and makes thee spring after Jesus in
the chariot of cheerful obedience: Thy heart is as his heart; and while active
grace draws thy willing soul along, God's free Spirit pours the oil of gladness
upon the servid wheels of thy affections: Supported, and animated by the Lord's
presence, thou swiftly movest, thou delightfully fliest in all the ways of
duty: Mountains of difficulties sink into plains before thee; wisdom's roughest
ways are ways of pleasantness, and all her paths are peace.

Now thou rejoicest to be thought worthy to suffer shame for Christ's name, and
countest it all joy, when thou fallest into diverse trials. With him the cross
loses its dreadful aspect and enormous weight: When thou find it in the
highway of holiness, instead of consulting with flesh and blood, how thou shall
go aside to avoid it, thou immediately take it up, and it proves a comforting
staff, a never-failing prop.

Christ crucified works this miracle of grace, for Him thou receivest with
every cross; and the moment thou do so in the power of his Spirit, God, even
thy own God, gives thee his choicest blessing: He crowns thee with
loving kindness and tender mercies; and with the inexpressible complacence of a
Father, who receives a lost son; with the triumphant joy of a Savior, who
embraces a raised Lazarus; He says to the myriads that surround his throne: One
more sinner repents unto life! Hallelujah! He has escaped the avenger of
blood -- he has passed the gate of the city of refuge! Hallelujah! Shout, ye
sons of the morning! My angels, strike your golden harps! Dance every heart for
joy, through the realms of heaven! Let bursts of triumphant mirth -- let peals
of ravishing praise roll along the transporting news. -- Let all your exulting
breasts reverberate, let all your harmonious tongues echo back our glorious
joy! For this my son was dead, and is alive again! This your brother was lost,
and is found!

And irradiating thy soul with the light of his reconciled countenance, he says
to thee from a throne blazing with grace and glory, Penitent believer, receive
the adoption of a son. Because thou receivest my Son, my only begotten Son into
thy heart, I admit thee into the family of the firstborn: Be thou blameless
and harmless, a son of God without rebuke, in the midst of a crooked and
perverse generation, among whom I allow thee to shine, as a burning light in a
benighted world. Son! all that I have is thine, be ever with me, and thou shall
inherit all things. Yes, whether Paul or Apollos or Cephas; whether my first
apostles, or my choice ministers; or the world, or life, or death, or things
present, or things to come; all is thine, for thou art Christ's, and Christ is
mine. As thou have received him, so abide and walk in him, worthy of me unto
all pleasing; being fruitful in every good work, and increasing in his
knowledge, till thy faith is turned to sight, and I am all in all.

Start not, believing reader, at these sayings, as if they were too glorious to
be credited. They are the true sayings of God. The Lord himself spoke them for
thy comfort. They are the precious pearls, which I promised thee out of the
unsearchable treasures of Christ: If swine trample them under their feet, wear
thou them on thy breast. Instead of being offended at their transcendent
excellence, magnify the God of all consolation, who, having delivered up his
own Son for us all, with him also freely gives us all things, consequently the
richest mines of gospel grace. And giving vent to the just transports of thy
grateful heart, cry out with the beloved disciple, Behold what manner of love
the Father has bestowed upon us, that WE should be called the sons of God! --
Unto Him who thus loved us, and washed us from our sins in his own blood, and
has made us kings and priests to God and his Father; to him be glory and
dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

END OF THE ADDRESS.
APPENDIX, Concerning the evangelical harmony that subsists between living
faith and loving obedience.
THE mystery of our salvation is thus opened by St. Paul, By GRACE are ye
saved, through faith, which WORKS by love. This apostolic declaration
subdivides itself into the following propositions, which, on account of their
clearness and importance, may, with propriety, be called GOSPEL AXIOMS. 1. Ye
are saved by GRACE. 2. Ye are saved through a faith which WORKS by love. These
propositions, like two adamantine pillars, support the whole doctrine of
Christ, concerning faith and works; grace and rewardableness; or mercy on God's
part, and obedience on our own: -- A doctrine, which, though clear as the day,
has nevertheless been so obscured by endless controversies, that thousands of
Protestants and Papists know it in its purity no more.

According to the first of these axioms, all that go to heaven, give divine
grace the glory of their salvation; because they are all saved by mere favor,
through the redemption that is in Jesus Christ. And according to the second
axiom, all that go to hell, are obliged to clear divine justice, because they
are condemned merely for their avoidable unbelief, and obstinate disobedience.
Upon this evangelical plan, the righteous are graciously rewarded, and the
unrighteous justly punished: The doctrines of God's mercy, in giving grace for
Christ's sake, and of man's faithfulness in using it bv Christ's help, sweetly
coincide; and from their blessed union springs the just proportion of every
part of the gospel.

These axioms are so strongly maintained, and so frequently alluded to by the
sacred writers, that whoever rejects either the one or the other, might as well
reject one half of the bible. Attentively consider them asunder, and your
unprejudiced reason will perceive their equity. Impartially compare them
together, and instead of finding them incompatible, (as some prepossessed
persons would persuade us they are) you will see, that they harmonize in so
exquisite a manner, as to answer the most excellent ends in the world.

To give you an idea of their working in the breast of believers, permit me to
compare them to those two opposite, and yet consentaneous motions of the heart,
which anatomists call diastole and systole. The one forcibly dilates, the other
powerfully contracts, that noble part of the human body; and both together, by
means seemingly contrary, cause the circulation of the blood, and diffuse vital
powers through all the animal frame. -- Just so passive faith, and active love.
-- The one perpetually receives favors from God, the other perpetually bestows
them upon man; and thus, by continually performing their contrary (not
contradictory) offices, they make spiritual life circulate through the
believer's soul, and enable him to diffuse kindness and good works throughout
the social body, of which he is a member.

From the animal, pass we to the planetary world; and we shall see another
striking emblem of the harmonious opposition, which subsists between the two
gospel axioms. There we eminently discover the centripetal and the centrifugal
force. Though opposed to each other, they are nevertheless so admirably joined
together, that from their exquisite combination, results the harmonious dance
of the spheres; I mean, the circular motion of the planets around the sun, and
around each other. -- Such is the wonderful effect of evangelical promises, and
legal precepts, when they meet in a due proportion in an upright heart. The
promises, which are all wrapped up in the first gospel axiom, powerfully draw
believers to Christ, who is the Sun of Righteousness, and the center of the
Christian system: The precepts, which the second axiom necessarily supposes,
drive them forward in the strait line of duty. Being thus delightfully
attracted, and powerfully impelled, like planets of a different magnitude, in
the firmament of the church, believers rapidly move in the orb of evangelical
obedience, where the original light of Christ warmly shines into their own
souls, and their borrowed light mildly gleams upon their fellow-mortals.

If ever you saw a person, thus swiftly and evenly moving in the immense circle
of religious and social duty; freely receiving all from his God, and freely
imparting all to his neighbor; you have seen one of the stars in the Lord's
right hand -- you have seen one, who practically holds the two gospel axioms --
one, who believes as a sinner, and works as a believer -- one, in whose heart
the doctrines of faith and works, free grace and free obedience, divine
faithfulness and human fidelity, are justly balanced -- one, who keeps at an
equal distance from the dreadful rocks, upon which Antinomian believers, and
Antichristian workers, are daily cast away -- In a word, you have seen an
adult Christian, a man who adorns the doctrine of Christ our Savior in ALL
things.

If the two gospel axioms are of such importance, that the health and vigor of
every Christian, flow from the proper union of their power in his heart; is it
not deplorable to see so many people every where rising against them?
Self-conceited moralists violently attack the first axiom; and self-humbled
solifidians will give the second no quarter. Those opposed assailants have all,
I grant, a zeal for God, but not according to knowledge; for the former know
not, that they rob God of his glory; and the latter do not consider, that they
pour upon him our shame. The one refuse to acknowledge him the grand author of
our bliss: The other, to mend the matter, represent him as the grand contriver
of our ruin. Both, nevertheless, have truth on their side; but alas! it is only
a part of the truth as it is in Jesus; and truth divided, like an animal cut
through the middle, is dreadfully mangled, if not entirely destroyed.

You are also desired to observe, judicious reader, that as a just proportion
of sail and ballast, next to a favorable wind, makes a ship sail with speed
and safety; so the just balance of the two gospel axioms, next to the Spirit of
God, makes a believer run swiftly and safely the race that is set before him.
He does not properly run, he merely hops in the way of truth, who, discarding
one of the gospel axioms, moves only upon the other. Antinomian Laodiceans
therefore, and Antichristian Pharisees, are equally blameable. For the piety
of the former stands only upon the first axiom; and the devotion of the latter
has no other basis than the second. The one will hear of nothing but faith; the
other will be told of nothing but works. But the sound believer is for a faith
that works righteousness.

Faith unfeigned, and obedient love, are of equal importance to the true
Christian. Those precious graces, which answer to the gospel axioms, like a
well proportioned pair of heavenly steeds, mutually draw the steady chariot of
his profession across the valleys of discouragement, and over the hills of
difficulty, which he meets with in his way to heaven. If I might carry on the
allegory, I would observe, that all the advantage, which the right hand steed
has over the other, is, that it is first put in the traces: But this is no
proof of his superiority, for he will be taken off at the gate of heaven; and
obedient love alone, shall have the honor of drawing the Christian's triumphal
car through the realms of glory.

Reader, if in the theory and practice you maintain both gospel axioms; if,
instead of setting up the one in opposition to the other, you stand upon the
scriptural line in which they harmonize; you have surmounted the greatest
difficulty there is in the Christian religion; you hold the faith once
delivered unto the saints. And now, prepare to contend for it: Arm yourself for
the fight; for Antinomian believers will attack you on the left hand, and
Pharisaic unbelievers on the right. But be not afraid of their number;
patiently receive their double fire. They may gall one another, but they cannot
hurt you.

Truth is great, and Love powerful; if you fight under their glorious banners,
though the arrows of contempt, and the brands of calumny, will fly thick around
you, you shall not be dangerously wounded. Only take the shield of faith, with
this motto, ' By grace I am saved through faith; and quench with it the fiery
darts of self-conceited legalists. Put on the breast plate of righteousness,
with this inscription, Faith works by righteous love, the mother of good works:
This piece of celestial armor, will keep off the heaviest strokes of
self-humbled gospellers. And animated by the Captain of your salvation, through
the opposite forces of those adversaries, urge your evangellically-legal way,
till you exchange the sword of the Spirit for a golden harp, and your daily
cross for an heavenly crown.

Such is the happy medium, that the author of this book desires to recommend.
Some time ago, he thought himself obliged to oppose good mistaken men, who, in
their zeal for the first gospel axiom, wanted to represent the second as a
'dreadful heresy.' And now he lets these papers see the light, not only to
prove to the free thinkers of his parish, that the first axiom is highly
rational; but to convince the enemies of the second axiom, that, though he has
exposed their mistakes with regard to works, he receives the genuine doctrines
of grace as cordially as they; and is ready scripturally, and rationally, to
defend salvation by faith, against: the most plausible objections of
self-righteous moralists.

He just begs leave to observe, that the preceding pages guard the first gospel
axiom; that the Four Checks to Antinomianism, guard chiefly the second; that
the Equal Check to Pharisaism and Antinomianism, guards both at once; and that
those tracts contain a little system of practical and polemical divinity,
which, it is hoped, stands at an equal distance from the errors of moral
disbelievers, and immoral believers.

This book is chiefly recommended to disbelieving moralists, who deride the
doctrine of salvation by grace through faith in the day of conversion, merely
because they are not properly acquainted with our fallen and lost estate. And
the Checks are chiefly designed for disbelieving Antinomians, who rise against
the doctrine of a believer's salvation by grace through the works of faith in
the great day, merely because they do not consider the indispensable necessity
of evangelical obedience, and the nature of the day of judgment.

In the Appeal, the careless, self-conceited sinner is awakened, and humbled.
In the Address, the serious, humbled sinner, is raised up, and comforted. And
in the Checks, the foolish virgin is re-awakened, the Laodicean believer
reproved, the prodigal son lashed back to his Father's house, and the upright
believer animated to mend his pace in the way of faith working by love, and to
perfect holiness in the fear of God.

THE END.

