DEFENSIVE ARMS VINDICATED; AND THE LAWFULNESS OF THE AMERICAN WAR MADE
MANIFEST.

TO WHICH IS ADDED, A short Receipt for a Continental Disease, etc.

DEDICATED TO HIS EXCELLENCY GENERAL WASHINGTON.

By A MODERATE WHIG.

PRINTED FOR THE AUTHOR, 1783.

To His Excellency GEORGE WASHINGTON, Esquire. Generalissimo of the army of the
United States in America, Lieutenant General in the army of France, and
Commander in Chief of all the French forces by sea and land in America.
SIR,
MUCH might be said, were it necessary, for the dedication (...) books unto
persons of worth, interest, service, and honor, by reason it has been the
almost constans practice of the best and wisest men, in all the ages of the
world. Besides, Sir, a performance of this nature could not possibly be
dedicated to any person more suitable than yourself, as being the great patron
of the American cause; and one who h^s shown to the world that he was sent into
it to perform wonders, under God. It is needless to relate your great talents
in bearing both with prosperity and adversity, therefore I need not make no
other apology for my present pro^^^ce. What is written is permanent litera
scripta manet, and spreads itself farther by far, for time, place, and persons,
than the voice can reach. Augustine writing to Volusian faith, "That which is
written is always at hand to be read when the reader is at leisure." Great sir,
pray let it be the top of your ambition, and the height of all your designs,
to glorify God, to secure your interest in Christ, to serve your generation, to
provide for eternity, to walk with God, to be tender of all that have, a^iquid
Christi, any thing of Christ shining in them, and so to steer your course in
this world as that you may give up your account at last with joy. Matt. xxx.
21. For, dear sir, all other ambition is base and low ambition, (faith are) a
g^^ded misery, a secret pois^n, a hidden plague, the engineer of deceit, the
mother of hyp^crisy, the parent of envy, the original of vices, the m^th of
holiness, the blinder of hearts. It is said that it so blinded Cardinal
Bourbon, that he said he would not lose his part in Paris for his part in
Paradise. But, alas! what is all the glory of this world but a mere blaze. It
is said that at the enthronization of the Pope before he is set in his chair,
and puts on his tripple crown, a piece of tow, or a wad of straw, is set on
fire before him, and one appointed to say, (...) transit gloria (...), the
glory of this world is but a blaze* High seats are always ^^easy, and crowns
themselves are always stuffed with thorns, which made one say of his crown O
crown! More noble than happy! May the spirit of God, the grace of God, the
power of God, the presence of God, a^^ you against all other sins, evils,
snares, and temptations, as you are by a good hand of Heaven armed against
wor^^ly ambition and worldly glory.

Sir, (...) a Soul that said honor me before the people, and he was a J^h^
that said come see my zeal for the Lord of ^osts. Sir, men of great honor and
worldly glory stand but in slippery places. Ad^nibe^^k, a mighty prince, was
made fellow (...) with the dogs Judges i. 7. Henry IV emperor, in sixty two
battles for the most part became victorious, yet he was deposed and driven to
that misery that he desired only a clerk's place in a (...) at Spi^e, of his
own building, which the bishop of that place denied him, whereupon he broke
forth into that speech of Job, chap. xix 21. misenemini mei amies quia manus
dei te^igit m^, have pity upon me, O my friends, for the hand of God has
touched me. He at last died of grief and w^^t. By which instances (...) many
more that might be brought, it is most evident that worldly glory is but a
breath, a vapor, a f^^oth, a phantom, a shadow, a reflection, an apparition, a
very nothing.

Sir, if there be any thing glorious in the (...), it is a mind that (...)
contemns that glory; and such a mind I judge and hope God has given unto you.
I have given this small hint of worldly glory, and the vanity thereof, because
(...) this little piece passing up and down this continent, may (...) to fall
into the hands of such as may in fact be troubled with that (...); end if so,
who can tell but what that little which I have said may prove a sovereign sal^e
to cure that Egyptian batch; and if so, I have my end. And now, Sir, to
conclude, I pray the day may shortly commence, when you can, with honor and
safety, withdraw from the noise of war and clashing of arms to your seat, from
which you have been so long absent in the service of your country, and in the
cause of religion and virtue; and may your lady live to be an honor to God, to
be truly wise for eternity, to be a pattern of piety, humility, modesty, etc to
others.

O may you both be blessed, with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus! And may you all around be crowned with the highest glory,
happiness, and blessedness in the world to come; may you long live in the sense
of divine love; and, at last, die in the sense of divine favor. Now, to the
everlasting arms of divine protection, and to the constant influences of free,
rich, and sovereign grace and mercy, he commends you and yours, who is, Sir,
your unknown friend and most obedient humble servant.

A MODERATE WHIG.

PREFACE TO THE READER.
IT is now going on three years since I first wrote this piece. Great and
glorious events have since taken place in our political affairs; and, I hope,
the day is not far distant when peace, on the most honorable and advantageous
terms, for America, shall be proclaimed throughout these United States.
However, not knowing now much longer the war, by reason of our sins, might be
continued, I concluded it might not be amiss to cast my mite into the treasury,
in order to vindicate the conduct of all those brave officers and men who have
already, and may yet fall in the American war, in defense of our rights and
liberties, civil and religious; and also to clear up the doubts and scruples of
tender consciences, as to the lawfulness of taking up arms in any case
whatsoever. I acknowledge that there have already been many able pens employed
in stating the justice of our cause, and none, in my opinion, merits more our
thanks than the author of Common Sense; but none, that I have seen, has, to my
satisfaction, cleared up the lawfulness of the use of defensive arms against
tyrants and tyranny, whenever they shall endeavor to deprive a people of their
liberty and property. It is, surely, a pity that some abler hand had not
undertaken the ^as^e, who might have done greater justice to the cause. All
that I have, or choose, to say, in praise of the performance, is, that the
author means honestly, and shall ever pray for the success of the American
arms* and those of her allies, in the present just defensive war; and that he
never has, nor never means to spare himself, whenever he may be called upon to
face the enemies of his country, if even it should, as it may, cost him his
life; for where could ^e offer it better than on the altar of religion and
liberty, fighting in defense of both?

And now for a word of advice to the brave officers and soldiers composing the
American army. -- Gentlemen officers, let m^ entreat you to desist from all
vice, and practice virtue; fear God and obey your superio^s; set good examples
before your men; be tender and careful of their lives and health;
discountenance vice and encourage virtue in them; do not correct nor abuse them
but according to martial law. -- I once read of a good old general that was
walking through his army, when at length, he saw a young prodigal officer
beating an old soldier unmercifully: O! says the general, lay on, for you know
that he dare not strike you again! Which reproof, though very modest, covered
the officer with blushes, and caused him to desist. -- And, in fact, it is a
sure sign of a coward, to be beating a man that we know dare not, for his life,
resist.

Some time past I was at West-Point, and saw an officer, with an unmerciful
club, beating a poor druken soldier; and, after he was tired, ordered some
under^ing to continue the chastisement, which he did in a most horrid manner,
knocking him down, and beating him over head and face, until the blood gushed
out of almost every part of his body; many officers gathering round, said lay
on, and damning him that dare say otherways, until I thought he would have been
killed right out: but at length one h^m^ne, good o^^^cer spoke, an^ said, stop!
if he has done amiss, confine him; and if, upon trial, he is found guilty, let
him be punished accordingly. -- He was confined, and, I suppose, punished again
for the same essence; which is contrary to all justice, to punish a man twice
for the same crime.

And you, my dear brother soldiers, let me beg of you to consider you have
souls to be saved or lost; therefore cease from the practice of sin, and
practice holiness in the fear of God; honor and obey your officers; and see
that you become the true soldiers of Jesus Christ; and not on^^ he fighting
soldiers, but praying ones also. But to conclude I would inform ^oth gentlemen
officers and soldiers, that you shall have my prayers for your present and
eternal welfare, etc.

A MODERATE WHIG.
New Marlborough, June 17, 17^2.
Defensive Arms Vindicated, etc.
I DO freely confess, that this truth is of such a nature, that it can scarcely
be illustrated by demonstration; not for the darkness thereof, but for its self
evidencing clearness, being scarcely capable of any farther elucidation than
what it offered to the rational understanding by its simple proposition, as
first principles can hardly be proven, because they need no pr^bation, and
cannot be made any clearer than they really (...) and such persons as cannot,
or will not, consent to then, (...) in my opinion, incapable of conceiving any
(...) And I do affirm, that self preservation and defense i^ right and lawful,
because it is congenite with, and (...) nature that has a self which it can
preserve, can scarcely be more illustrated that it may do so, than that it can
do so; and therefore, all that have a true respect to their own* as well as a
due concern in the interest of (...) and their country's rights and liberties;
I say, to such worthy characters it might seem superfluous to make a doubt or a
debate of this self evident truth. And was it not that there have been, and
still are, a generation of morta^s shall I call them men) in our land that are
as great monsters in nature (...) they are malignant in religion; and as great
perve^ters of the law of nature as they are sub^erters of municipal laws, and
verters of the laws of God, I have reason to believe this present war would not
have been spun out to such a length. -- I have not undertaken to write this
small piece with any great prospect of convincing such characters; but my chief
view was to comfort the minds of such persons whose near and dear connections
have fallen, or may yet fall, in the glorious cause of liberty and virtue; and
to clear up the doubts that tender consciences may entertain, as to the
lawfulness of a defensive war. -- It does appear clear, that it has been the
practice of all nations in the world, and the greatest and best of men have, in
all ages, maintained this principle; and many, for adhering to it, have
suffered death, and sealed the truth thereof with their blood. Read Wo^drow's
and Cruckshank's history of the two brothers bloody reign, from 1660, to the
glorious revolution in 1688, containing twenty-eight years; which, by the
godly, was justly called the killing time. Also let us read our own history of
the American war from April 19, 1775, to June, 17, 1779, and we shall not be
wanting of instances of many suffering by the hands of British tyranny, for
maintaining this principle of self defense, in defense of our lives and
liberties. It is well known that the Americans did not hastily, nor violently,
rush in to the present war. They did petition, remonstrate, and restrained
trade; nay* took every reasonable method that reasonable creatures could
invent, in order to prevent the effusion of human blood. But when they found
all their humble petitions rejected, and treated with the greatest scorn and
contempt; and that nothing would go down with proud, haughty North and his
s^^ly tool George the III, and their associates in wickedness, but a total
surrender of all our rights and liberties, and an unconditional submission,
they did take up arms to defend themselves from the unjust and wicked
encroachments of haughty Britain; and, if we may judge from the success of our
arms, we may rationally conclude that heaven approves of our undertaking, and
that the God of battle has gone forth with our armies. -- But not to enlarge
upon a subject so manifest, I now proceed to prove the lawfulness of taking up
arms to oppose all tyranny, oppression, and those who ab^se and misuse their
authority. This great truth is sufficiently made manifest by the most famous
and learned patrons and champions for this excellent privilege of mankind, the
unanswerable authors of Lex Rex, the apologetical relation Naphta^i and Jus
Populi Vindicatum. But because it is easy to add to what is found, I shall
subjoin my mite; and their arguments being various and scattered at large
through their books, I shall endeavor to collect a compend of them in some
order.

The two first of these authors do treat of a defensive, war under the
direction of a parliament, like that in England (...) the year 1645; and the
two last of resistance against the abuse of a lawful power, when the (...) no
access to maintain our rights and liberties in any other way; which seems to
come the nearest to our case, for we (...) no British parliament to be
conducted by; but, in the (...) thereof, had recourse to a congress; nor did we
ever dispu^e the lawfulness of the king of England's right to the crown, and to
govern according to the laws and constitution thereof; but when he and his
creatures undertook to govern us (...) to law, then did we most justly
undertake to (...) encroachments of a tyrant. But, (...) the enemies (...)
country, it is no ways lawful, in any case, or upon any ^^^ence whatsoever, to
resist kingly authority, in whomsoever it be resident, or which way soever it
be erected or conducted. O! poor passive slaves!

I shall now endeavor to consider it more complexly and extensively, and plead
both for resistance against the abuse of a lawful power are against the use and
usurpation of a tyrannical power, and ^^ser not only the lawfulness of
resisting kings, when they abuse their power, as is made manifest by the above
named authors, but also the expediency and necessity of the duty of resisting
this tyrannical power, whenever we are, by a good providence of God, called
there unto; and this we must do, if we would not be found betrayers of the
liberties of our country and brethren, together with the ruin of our poor
posterity, which, if we should neglect to do, we shall be instruments of
delivering up these i^^stimable blessings into the devouring jaws of tyranny;
which if we should be tame enough to do, shall we not bring on us the curse of
Meroz and the curse of our brethren's blood, crying for vengeance on the heads
of the shedders thereof, and upon all who being in a capacity came not to their
rescue; -- and the curse of posterity would have been upon us for not
transmiting that liberty whereof we were, by the valor of our worthy
forefathers, put and left in possession of. I shall not, therefore, restrict
myself to the question propounded ordinarily, to wit, whether or not, when a
limited king does really injure, oppress, and invade his subjects civil rights
and liberties, and sends out his bloody emissaries, with armed violence against
them; and when all redress, or hope, by any address or petition, is rendered
void; then, and in that case, may a community of such subjects defend
themselves and their liberties by arms, in resisting his bloody emissaries. But
to bring it home to our present case, and answer the laxness of the adversaries
position of the uncontroulableness of every one that wears a crown, I shall
slate it thus, whether or not it is a duty for a community to endeavor, in the
defense of their lives, laws, and liberties, to resist the tyranny of
prevailing dominators, using and abusing their power, to the subverting and
invading the liberties and overturning the fundamental laws of the country? --
I hold to the affirmative, and shall attempt to prove it; and, in prosecuting
this subject, I shall first premit some concessory considerations to clear it,
and then bring reasons to prove it.

In the first place for clearing of this truth, and taking of mistakes, then
concessions may be considered.

First. I do allow that the ordinance of majestracy, which is of God, is not to
be resisted; no, not so much as by disobedience or non-obedience; nay, not so
much as menta^ly, by cursing in the heart. Eccles. x. 20. But a person clothed
therewith abusing his power, may be so far resisted; but tyrants, or
magistrates turning tyrants, are not God's ordinances; and there is no hazard
of damnation for resusing to obey their unjust commands; but rather, the hazard
of that is in walking willingly after the commandment, when the statutes of
Omri are kept; so that what is objected from Eccles. viii. 2. 4. I counsel thee
to keep the king's commandments, etc. Is to be understood only of the lawful
commands of lawful things.

Second. I do allow that rebellion is a damnable sin, except: where the word is
taken in a lax sense, as Israel of old is said to have rebelled against
Rehoboam and good Hezekiah against Senacherib, which was a good rebellion and a
clear duty. Being taken there for resistance and revolt, in this sense, the
Americans rising in arms may be called rebellion, for it is right and lawful,
to all intents and purposes, to rebel against tyrants, as all are who offer, or
attempt, to govern contrary to the laws of the land; for where law ceases,
tyranny begins. But because the word is generally taken in an evil sense, many
do not make the proper distinction between a lawful rebellion against tyrants,
and an unlawful one against lawful authority. As I said before, I do allow that
rebellion against lawful magistrates is a most damnable sin, which was of old
most exemplarily punished in Ko^ah and his company, who rebelled against Moses
and in Sheba and Absalom, who rebelled against David. For to punish the just is
not good, nor to strike princes for equity. Prove. xvii. 26. And they that
resist shall receive to themselves damnation. Romans xiii. 2. So that this
objection, brought from this place, as if the apostle was commanding their
subjection, without resistance ^o N^^o and such like tyrants as he, is very
impertinent; and to explain this a little, I shall show that the apostle was
here vindicating christianity from that reproach of casting off, or refu^ing
subjection to all magistrates, as if christian liberty had destroyed that
religion, or that they were not to be subject to heathen magistrates; where
upon, to undeceive them in this point he binds ^his duty of subjection to
magistrates for conscience sake in general; and it is very considerable what
Buchanan says in his book (De Jure regni:) that Paul did not write to the kings
themselves because they were not christians, and therefore the more might be
ho^ne with from them, though they should not understand the duty of
magistrates. But upon supposition there had been some christian king who had
turned tyrant and a limited one also ^ho by his tyrannical proceedings, was
endeavoring to overturn the laws, charters, and liberties of his subjects,
what would he have written then? Surely if he had been like himself he would
have denied that he should be owned for a king; and would have interdicted all
christian communion with him; and that they should account him no king, but
such as they were to have no fellowship with according to the law of the gospel.

Second. The apostle here was, no doubt, speaking of lawful rulers, not
tyrants; but of all such as are defined and qualified here, being powers
ordained of God, terrors to evil works, ministers of God for good. Yea, but say
tories and their adherents, these are only motives of subjection to all powers,
not qualifications of the powers. To which I answer, they are indeed motives,
but such as can be extended to none but to those powers that are so qualified.

Third. He speaks of lawful powers indefinitely in the plural number, not
specifying any kind or degree of them, as if only kings and emperors were here
meant. It cannot be proved that the power of the sword is only in them, neither
was there, at that time, at Rome a plurality of kings and emperors to be
subject to. It is clear to me, that if he had meant the Roman emperor, he would
have designed him in the singular number; for all the reasons of the text agree
to inferior judges. Also, for they are ordained of God; they are called rulers
in scripture, and God's ministers, revengers by office, who judge not for man
but for the Lord. And inferior magistrates also are not to be resisted when
doing their duty, 1 Peter, ii. 13. Yet all will allow, when they go beyond
their bounds, and turn little tyrants, they may be withstood.

Fourth. He does not speak of Nero, concerning whom it cannot be proved, that
at this time he had the sovereign power, at the famous and learned Mr. Prin
shows; or if he had, that he was a tyrant at this time; and if he meant him at
all, it was only as he was obliged to be by right, not as he was indeed: all
men know, and none condemns the fact of the senate hat resisted N^^o at length,
without transgreshing this precept. Yea, I should rather think the senate is
the power that the apostle applies this text to, if he appled it to any in
particular.

Fifth. The subjection here required is the same with the honor in the fifth
command, where of this is an exposition, and is ^ppostle to he contra
ordinateness here condemned. Now subjection takes in all the duties we owe to
magistrates, and (...) all the contraries forbidden; but unlimited obedience is
not here required, so neither unlimited subjection.

Third. I do allow passive subjection, in some cases, even to tyrants, when the
Lord lays on that yoke; and, in effect, says he will have us lie under it
awhile, as he of old commanded the Jews to be subject to Nebuchadnezzar. Of
which passage, adduced to prove subjection to tyrants universally, Buchanan as
above infers, that if all tyrants are to be subjected to because God by his
prophet commanded his people to be subject to one tyrant, then it must be
likewise concluded that all tyrants ought to be killed, because Ahab's house
was commanded to be destroyed by Jehu. But passive subjection, when people are
not in a capacity to resist, is necessary; but I do not say passive obedience,
which is a mere chimera, invented in the brains of such sycophants and jack
asses as would make the world slaves to tyrants. Whosoever suffers, if he can
shun it, is an enemy to his own being, and is a first cousin to a
self-murderer; for every natural thing must strive to preserve itself against
what annoyeth it; and also, he sins against the order of God who, in vain, has
ordained so many lawful means for the preservation of our being, if we suffer
it to be destroyed, having power to help it.

Fourth. I do abhor all war of subjects, professedly declared against a lawful
king, who governs and rules according to law; as also all war against lawful
authority, founded upon, or designed for maintaining princ^ples inconsistent
with government, or against policy and piety; yea all war without authority;
yet when all authority of magistrates supreme and subordinate is perve^^ed and
abused, contrary to the ends thereof, to the oppressing of the people and
overturning their laws and liberties, people must not in such cases, which was
exactly ours, suspend or delay their resistance, waiting for the concurrence of
men of authority, and neglect the duty in case of necessity, because they have
not m^n of authority to lead them; for if the ground be lawful, the call clear,
the necessity cogent, the capacity p^cb^b^e, they that have the law of nature,
the law of God, and the fundamental laws of the land on their side, cannot want
authority, although they may be (...) of a king to lead them. Also, it is
proper h^^e to observe that people have this privilege of nature to desent
themselves, and their rights and liberties, as well as kings; and had it before
they erected and constituted kings; for I affirm, that there is no distinction
of quality in (...) of nature, though there be in civil order; but self defense
is not an act of civil order, in such interest people must not depend upon the
priority of their superiors, nor suspend the duties they owe to themselves and
their neighbors, upon the manuduction of other men's greatness the law of
nature allowing self defense, and the defense of our brethren, against all
unjust violence, which fully justifies the conduct of the different states
appearing in and flying to arms in defense of our distressed and injured
brethren of the Massachusetts Bay state, in the year 1775, when Britain laid
her (...) hand of tyranny and oppression upon them. It is a great and incumbent
duty on all people to defend their religion and liberties, and those of their
countrymen, against king (...) who shall attempt to destroy the rights and
liberties of the subjects for all the power of a king or ruler is surely
cumulative, not privative, for the ^orse condition of a ruler ought not to be
by producing. Why then shall the king, betraying his trust, wrong the cause of
the people whose trustee be is? Nay if it were not lawful for people to defend
their religion, lives, and liberties against the unjust encroachments of a
tyrannical king, then I say the people would be in a worse situation with a
king than without him, for they have done it before they had them, and so had
better be without them still. But it is as clear as the sun at noon day in the
firmament, that it is lawful to resist kings when they, by their mal
administration, forfeit their subjects allegiance, as the king of England, by
his has surely done. Poor foul, I believe he repents, but it is like poor
Esau's all too late.

Fifth. I do disallow all war, without real necessity and great wrongs
sustained; and that it ought not to be declared or undertaken upon supposed
grounds, or pretended causes; and so the question is impertinently stated by
the to^ies, whether or not it be lawful for subjects, or a party of them, when
they think themselves injured, or to be in a capacity, to resist or oppose the
supreme power of a nation? For the question is not if, when they think
themselves injured, they may resist; but when the injuries are real. Neither is
it every reality of injuries will justify a people's resistance; but when their
dearest and nearest liberties are invaded, especially when such an invasion is
made as threatens the total subversion of them. Nor do I say that a people,
esteeming themselves in a capacity, or their being really in a capacity, does
make resistance a duty, except all alike they have a call, as well as a
capacity, which requires real necessity, and a right to he (...); and the
things contended for to be real and legal. Rights really and i^^^^ally
encroached upon their capacity, gives them only a convenience to go about the
duty that is previously lawful upon a moral ground. No man need to say who
shall be judge the king or people.

For first. All who have eyes in their head may, I think, judge whether the sun
shines or not; and all who have common sense may judge in this case; for when
it comes to a necessity of resistance, it is to be supposed that the grievances
complained of, and sought to be redressed by arms, are not hid, but manifest.
Now it cannot be so with a people only pretending their suffering wrong. As to
the grievances of the good people of America, it is so manifest to the world,
that some of the nations thereof have espoused our righteous cause, and the
rest seems to be silent.

Second. There is no need of the formality of a judge in things evident to
nature's eye, ^s grass is not tyranny. Undermining and overturning religion and
liberty, must be nature in the acts of necessitated resistance. In such a case
is judge, party, accuser, witness, and all. Neither is it an act of judgment
for people to defend their own. Defense is no act of jurisdiction, but a
privilege of nature. Hence arises these common sayings, all laws permits force
to be repelled by force; and the great and first law of nature allows
selfdefence. I say, that the defense of life is necessary, and slows from the
law of nature.

Third. Be judge who will, the tyrant cannot be judge in the case; for in those
tyrannical acts that forces people to resistance, he cannot be acknowledged as
king, and of course no judge; for it is always supposed that the judge is
absent when he is the party that does the wrong; as such, is inferior to the
innocent.

Fourth and lastly. Let God be judge, and all the world take cognizance of the
justness of our cause.

Sixth. I condemn all rising to revenge private injuries, whereby a country may
be covered with blood, for some pe^ty wrongs done to some persons great of
small. I also abhor all revengeful usurping of the magistrates sword, to avenge
ourselves for personal injuries, as David's ki^ing of Saul would have been. I
Sam. xxiv. 10, 12, 13. Ibid xxvi. 9, 10. To object this, in this case, were
very impertinent; for it would have been an act of offense, in a remote
defense, if Saul had been immediately assaulting of him, it could* by no means,
be deemed to have been lawful; and it would have been an act of private
revenge, for a personal injury, and a sinful preventing of God's promise of
David's succession, by a scandalous assassination; but it is clear then, David
was resisting him and that is enough for my argument; and he supposes he might
descend into battle and perish. I Sam. xxvi. 10. Not excluding but that he
might perish in battle against himself resisting. I do allow, indeed, that we
are commanded, in scripture, not to resist evil, but whosoever shall smite us
on the one cheek, to turn to him the other also. Mat v 39. And ^o recompense to
no man evil for evil. Romans xii. 17. But this does not condemn self defense, and
resisting of tyrants, violently endangering our lives, laws, religion, and
liberties; but only resistance by way of private revenge and retaliation; and
enjoins patience, when the clear call and dispensation do inevitably call unto
suffering, but not to give way to all violence, to the subverting of religion
and liberty. These texts do no more condemn private persons retaliating the
magistrates than magistrates retaliating private persons; unless magistrates be
exempted from this precept, and consequently be not among Christ's followers;
yea, they do no more forbid private persons to resist the unjust violence of a
king than to resist the unjust violence of any private person. That objection
from our Lord's reproving Peter. Matt. xxvi. 3, 2. Put up thy sword for all
they that take the sword shall perish by the sword. Has no weight here, for
this condemns only making use of the sword either by way of private revenge, or
usurping the use of it without authority, and so condemns all tyrants, which
private subjects do not want to defend themselves, their religion, and liberty,
or using it without necessity, which was not Peter's case, both because Christ
was able to defend himself, and becase he was willing to deliver up himself.
Pools synops critic in l^cum. Christ could easily have defended himself, but he
would not, and, therefore, in course there was not the least necessity for
Peter's rashness. It condemns, also, a ^ash precipitating, and preventing the
call of God, to acts of resistance. But otherwise it is plain it was not
Peter's fault to defend his master, but a necessary duty. The reason our
blessed Lord gives for that inhibition at that time was twofold, one expressed
Matt. xxvi. 52. For they that take the sword. etc. Which do not belong to
Peter, as if he was hereby threatened, but to those that were coming to take
Christ. They it were that, indeed, usurped the sword of tyrannical violence,
and therefore are threatened with destruction by the bloody sword of the
Romans. So is that commination to be understood of anti^h^ist and the tyrants
that serve him Rev. (...). 10. He that kills with the sword must be killed
with the sword. Which really is a most terrible word against persecutors and
tyrants. The reason is, John xviii. 11. The (...) which my father has given me
shall I not drink. Which clearly repels that objection of Christ's
non-resistance. To which it is answered, that suffering was the end of his
voluntary suscepted humiliation, and his grand errand to the world, appointed
by the father, and freely undertaken by himself, which is not the rule of our
practice; though it be true that, even in his suffering, he left us an example,
that we should follow his steps. 1 Pet. ii. ^1. In many things, ^s he was a
martyr, his sufferings were the purest rule and example for us to follow, both
for the matter and frame of spirit, submission, patience, constancy, meekness,
etc. But not as he was our sponsor, and ^^ter the same manner, for then it
would be unlawful for us to flee, as well as to resist, because he would
notifies at that time.

Seven. I do also disclaim all rising in arms for trifles of our own things, or
small injuries done to ourselves, but in a case of pure necessity, for the
preservation of our lives, religion, laws, and liberties, when all that is dear
to us as men and christians, are in hazard. So I am not for rising in arms to
force any people to be of any particular religion, but to defend my own, and my
country's religion and liberties, from unjust force and violence, against kings
and tyrants, that may encroach thereon. I do not believe that it is the way
that Christ has appointed to propa^ate religion by arms. Let persecutors and
lambs of antichrist take that to them. But I am convinced that it is a
privilege that Christ has allowed to mankind, to defend and preserve their
religion and liberties by arms, especially when they have been established by
solemn charters, and the laws and constitution of the land, and thereby become
a land right, and the dearest and most precious of all rights and interest we
have to contend for. It is true, faith Christ. John xviii. ^6. My kingdom is
not of this world; if it was of this world, then would my servants fight, that
I should not be delivered to the Jews. But this objection, which is so much
re^ied on by Quakers, and those who disown all use of war and arms, in any case
whatsoever, will not conclude that Christ's kingdom is not to be defended and
preserved by resistance of all such who would impiously and sacrilegiously
spoil ^s of it in this world, because it is not of this world, for then all
would be obliged to suffer it to be run down by slaves of hell and satan, and
antichrists v^ssals; yea, kings themselves, in such a case, must not fight for
it, for they are among his servants. But the good confession he witnesses here
before Pilate, is, that he has a kingdom which, as it is not in opposition to
any Cesarean majesty, must not be usurped by any king of clay; but is specially
distinct from all the kingdoms of the world, and subordinate to no earthly
power, being of a spiritual nature, whereof this is a demonstration, and
sufficient security for earthly kingdoms, that his servants, as such, that is
as christians and as ministers, were not appointed by him to propagate it by
arms, not to deliver him their king, at that time, because he would not suffer
his glorious design of redemption to be any longer retarded. But this does not
say that though they are not to propagate it as christians and as ministers, by
carnal weapons, yet they may preserve it with such weapons as men. Hence that
old saying may be vindicated, prayers and tears are the arms of the church. I
grant they are so, the only best prevailing arms, and without which all others
would be ineffectual, and that they, together with preaching and church
discipline, are the only ecc^esiastical or spiritual arms of a church as a
church; but the members thereof are also men, and as men they may use the same
weapons as others do. And ye my flock, the flock of my pasture, are men, faith
the Lord. Ezekiel xxxiii 31. And from this I shall take an argument, that if it be
lawful for private subjects to resist a tyrant by prayers and tears, than it is
lawful also to resist them by violence; but the former is true, therefore the
latter. This personal resistance by violence is as consistent with that
command, Romans xiii. 1, 2. Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers.
Whosoever, therefore, resists the power, resists the ordinance of God; as
resistance by prayer is with that (...) Tim. ii. 1, 2. I exhort that
supplication be made for kings and for all that are in authority. If the king
be good, the one resistance is as unlawful as the other; and is a sinful
resistance of the ordinance of God, to pray against him no less than the other
to fight against him. Therefore, when a king turns a tyrant, and a destroyer of
the religion and liberties of the people, I may not pray for him, except
conditionally, but against him as an enemy, so I may also fight against him. As
such the tyrant of Britain, I mean George the III, and his burning bloody
emissaries, who do, at least, by their actions, acknowledge that the resistance
made against them, by the prayers and tears of the faithful, is more powerful
and effectual than that made by arms. Witness the spite and enmity they have
shown in all their tours of plunder and burnings, against the houses dedicated
and set apart for prayers and praises to Almighty God. What has become of one
or two near Springfield, in the state of New Jersey, when they murdered the
minister's wife there? How have they destroyed two at Somerset, in said state?
Also, at Crumpond, and Bedford in the state of New York? And no doubt many more
that at present does not occur to my mind. And farther, the law used to make
the one resistance as treasonable as the other, and that very deservedly too,
when the king was doing his duty. But when he turns tyrant, neither of those
methods of resistance can justly be condemned.

These things being admitted, I shall now come to the thing in hand, and
endeavor to prove this truth, that it is a necessary duty for a people to
endeavor, in the defense of their religion, ^^ves, laws and liberties; to
resist and repr^ss the tyranny of a king, using and abusing his power for
subverting religion, invading the liberties, and overturning the fundamental
laws of the country. I propose to be as short as possible, because I think this
truth insufficiently confirmed already, to convince any but these who are
determined not to be convinced; yet I propose to hint at some others, and
prosecute them in the following order. First, I shall produce some arguments
from the law of nature and nations. Secondly, From the common practices of all
christian people. Thirdly, From express scriptures.

First, The arguments of the first class are very multifarious. I shall
endeavor to reduce them to a few as compendiously as may be, and only give the
strength of them in a syllogistical form, without expatiating, save where the
matter requires.

First, The great antagonists of this truth, through the clearness thereof, are
forced to assert and grant such particulars as will, by consequence, justify
this plea. First, Barclay, contra monarchum, is cited by the Apal Relat, and
Jus Populi, asserting, That if a king will alienate, and subject his kingdom,
without his subjects consent, or be carried with a hostile mind to the
destruction of his people, his kingdom is actually lost, and the people may not
only lawfully resist, but also depose him. Grotius de jure Belli, lib. 1. cap
4. asserts the same, and adds, 'If he but attempt to do so, he may be
resisted.' The Surveyor of Naphtali grants the same. P. 23. 24. Yea, this has
been granted in many of the councils and open courts of christian nations, that
in case of the king's alienating his kingdom, he may be resisted; which will
fully justify the American resistance; for surely Britain, by her conduct, was
about to sell or destroy her liberties and property; and has effectually
estranged and drawn off our affections from her, even to the world's wonder. I
need say no more than this, that a king's carrying a hostile mind, to the
destruction of his people and kingdom, does give the people a right to resist
him. Doctor Fern acknowledges, That personal defense is lawful against the
sudden, illegal, and inevitable assaults of the kings messengers, or of
himself, so far as to ward off his blows, or hold his hands; as also he
allows private persons liberty to deny subsidies and tribute to the prince,
when he employeth it to the destruction of the commonwealth. From hence I
argue, if one may defend himself against the sudden, illegal and inevitable
assaults of the king or his messenger* then may many men, in defense of their
lives and liberties, defend themselves against the surprising massacre^s, and
sudden assaults of the king of England and his bloody emissaries, which were
all illegal; but the former is true, therefore the latter.

Thirdly, Bodin de Repub. lib. 2. chap. 5. grants, If a king turn tyrant, he
may lawfully, at his subjects request, be invaded, resisted, condemned, or
slain by a foreign prince -- Hence, if a foreign prince may lawfully help a
people opp^^ssed by their own sovereign, then people may resist themselves, if
they be able; but the former is true, therefore the latter. The consequence
cannot be denied, for foreigners have no more power or authority over another
sovereign, than the people have themselves.

Fourth, Arnisaeus de author Pri^i. chap. 2. 10. Grante^h, That if the king
proceed extrajudically without order of law, by violence, every private man
has power to resist So the Surveyor of Naphtali, as above, grants, So much of
a woman's violently resi^ting attempts against the honor of her chastity, and
tending to ensnare he^ in sin, whereof her n^n^resi^^ance makes her guilty.
Hence. If every extrajudical violence of a prince may be resi^ted, then also
all contrajudical violence against law or reason, must be opposed, for that is
more grievous, and all their violences, wherein they do not act as judges, must
be resisted and that is altogether, for in none of them they can act as judges;
but the former is true, therefore the latter. If a woman may defend her
chastity against the king, lest her non-resistance make her guilty, then may a
nation, or any part of it, resist a king's attempt upon their religion and
liberties, enticing them to fornication, lest their non resistance make them
guilty; but the former is true* therefore the latter.

Five, That same Arnisaeus, cap. 4. says of the former, to wit, He who is
called a tyrant in title, it is determined by all, without any difficulty, that
he may be lawfully repulsed, or if by force he be gotten into the throne, he
may warrantably be then^e removed, because he has not any jot of power which
is not illegitimate, and unto which resistance is forbidden, for the fear of
God and for conscience sake; and therefore he is no further to be looked at
than as an enemy

Sixth. Grotious de jure belli lib i. cap. 4. Grants, the law of not
resisting does not bind, when the danger is most weighty and certain; and I do
not plead for it in any other case. And further, he faith, the law of
non-resistance seems to have flowed from them who first combined together
into society, and from whom such as did command, did derive their power. Now if
it had been asked of such whether they would chose to die, rather than in any
case to resist the superior with arms, I know not if they would have yielded
thereto, unless with this addition, if they could not be resisted but with the
greatest perturbation of the common wealth, and destruction of many innocents.
And afterward he has the words, Nevertheless I scarce dare condemn every one,
or the lesser part, which may only be done, at utmost extremity;
notwithstanding respect is to be had to the common good From all which I need
not make the least inference, the concession is so large, that it does to all
intents and purposes confirm my arguments.

Seventh. The surveyor of Naphtali, in the place above cited, grants legal
self-defence, against the sovereign, by way of plea in court, for safety of a
man's person or estate; as also is the case of most habited not our and
complete tyranny, against law to the destruction of the body of a people; and
of all known legal liberties, and the being of religion, according to law, and
in case of hi^ not being in his right wits.

Hence I argue, that if it be lawful to resist the king by a plea in law, for
an estate, yea the law will allow, by actual force if he come to take
possession of it illegally; then it must be lawfor their lives and estates,
liberties and religion, to resist him by force, when the legal resistance is
not admitted; but the f^rmer is true therefore the latter. The reason of the
connection is, the municipal law permits the one, and the law of na^^^^ and
nations, which no municipal law can infringe, will warrant the other. He has
no more right to be both judge and party in this case, than in the other.
Second. If it be lawful to resist tyranny against law, to the destruction of
the rights of the people, their religion and liberties, then I want no more to
prove the lawfulness of the American resistance against the tyranny of Britain,
exercised for years past against us, which has proven the desolation and ruin
of many hundreds of families, besides all the rivers of blood that have been
drawn from the veins of our dear country men; and all this perpetrated for the
professed purpose of subverting our religion and liberties, and to establish an
arbitrary government. And here I think it proper to answer an objection that
some may make, viz. That I have blended religious liberty with civil, as a
cause of the American resistance, when the former was not in the least invaded
by any British act of parliament that was complained of; but all freedom left
to the conscience in that respect, and therefore I ought not to have made use
of the word in this piece. In answer whereof, I offer the following as my
reason for so doing: I do freely acknowledge that I have not seen or heard of
any British act of parliament that did, in direct terms, and in so many words,
declare that the people of America should all be of one uniform religion, upon
pain of death and confiscation of goods; but I have seen and read one that
carried all that in it is bowels, to wit. The declaratory act, wherein they
declare they had a right to bind the Americans in all cases whatsoever; which
if once they could have put into full execution, what would there be left we
could call our own any longer than at the will and pleasure of a tyrannical
king and parliament, for there is no exception in the word whatsoever? Besides,
whoever knew or heard of a people's enjoying their religious liberties when
their civil was taken from them? They were born twins, knit together, therefore
if-one of them dies, the other cannot live; at least this is my opinion, and
every one has a right to judge for themselves. Now under the full conviction of
this, and that had our civil liberties been taken from us, our religious ones
would not long survived. I was led to blend them together, and shall throughout
this piece.

Third. Suppose the king should run mad, and out of his wits, and then should
run upon an innocent man to kill him, or make an attempt to cut his own throat,
would it then, and in that case, be lawful to resist him? Yea, it would be a
great sin not to do it. Then surely, when in a mad rage, he is seeking to
destroy many hundred of the good people of America, he may and ought to be
resisted. But the former is true therefore the latter. It is easily to be seen
by the above concessions of adversaries to my principles, that the absolute
subjection they talk of will not hold good, nor the prerogative be so
uncontrollable in every case as they would pretend; and that in many cases the
safety of the people has the supremacy above it, and that also in these cases
the people must be judges whether they may resist or not.

Second. From the law of nature I may argue. First. If God the fountain of all
power, and author of all right, has given unto man both the power, and the
right of, and reason to manage self-defence, and has no ways interdicted it in
his word, to be put forth against tyrants, th^n it is duty to use it against
him upon occasion; but the former is true, therefore the latter. Second. If
this power and right were restrained in man against the unjust violence of any,
it would either be by policy or grace, or some express prohibition in the word
of God; but none of these can be said, therefore policy cannot destroy nature,
but is rather cumulative to it. A man entering into a politic incorporation,
does not lose the privilege of nature. If one particular nature may defend
itself against destroying violence out of society, then must many of these
natures, combined in society have the same right; and so much the more that
their relative duties superadd an obligation of mutual assistance. Grace does
not restrain the right of sinless nature, though it restrains corruption. But
self-defence is no corruption. Grace makes a man more a man than he was, and
nothing can be more dishonorable to the gospel than that, by the law of
nature, it is lawful to resist tyrants. But we are bound by religion from
withstanding their cruelty. The laws of God do not interfere one with another.
Third. That law which allows comparative ^re offending, so as to kill rather
than be killed, teache^ (...) resistance. But so the law of nature allows,
except we be guilty of murder, in the culpable omission of self defense. The
reason is because the love of self is nearer and greater, as to temporal life,
than the love of our neighbor; that being the measure of this, therefore it
obliges rather to kill than be killed, the exigence of necessity so requiring.
Fourth. If nature put no other difference between the violence of a tyrant than
of another man, then it teaches to resist both alike; but it putte^h no
difference, but rather aggravates that of a tyrant, being the violence of a
man, the injustice of a member of the common wealth, and the cruelty of a
tyrant; and it is most absurd to say, that we might defend ourselves from the
l^s^er violence, and not from the greater. Fifth. If particular nature must
yield to the good of universal nature, then must one man, though in greatest
power, be resisted rather than the universal common wealth suffer hurt. But the
former is true therefore the latter; for that dictates the necessity of the
distracted father to be bound by his own sons, le^t all the family be hurt;
therefore the greatest of men, or kings, when destructive to the common wealth,
must be (...), for (...) is but one man, and so but particular nature* Sixth*
That which is (...), and reflects upon p^o^ide^ce, as putting (...) in a worse
condition than brutes, is absurd and contrary to the law of nature; but to say
that the brutes have power to defend themselves, by resisting what annoys them,
and deny this power to ^aen, is irrational, and reflects upon providence as
putting men in a worse condition than brutes; therefore it is absurd and
contrary to the law of nature.

Third. From the institution of government, I may argue thus, that power and
government, which is not of God, may be resisted. The tyrant's power and
government in breaking charters, overturning laws, subverting religion,
oppressing subjects, is not of God, therefore it may be resisted. This is
clear, because that is only the reason why he is not to be resisted, because
the ordinance of God is not to be resisted. Romans xiii. 2. But they resisting a
man, destroying all the interests of mankind, do not in this resist the
ordinance of God. And if it were not so, this would tend ^^remedables^ly to
overthrow all po^i^cs, and open a gap to all disorder. Injustice and cruelty
would give as great encouragement to tyrants to do what they list, as thieves
would be encouraged, if they knew that nobody would resist them, or b^ing them
to punishment.

Fourth. From the original constitution of government by men, it may be argued
thus, if people, at the first erection of government, acted rationally and did
not put themselves in a worse ^ase than before, wherein it was lawful to defend
themselves against all injuries, but devolved their rights upon the fiduciary
^utory of such as should remain still in the rank of men, that can do wrong,
who had no power but by their gift, consent, and choice, with whom they
associated, not to their detriment, but for their advantage; and determined the
form of their government, and time of its continuance, and in what cases they
might ^^cur to their primeval liberty and settled a succession to have course,
not by hereditary right, but by right and force of law for good ends; then they
did not give away their birth right of ^^lf defense and power of resistance,
which they had before to withstand the violence* injuries, and oppressions of
men they set over them, when they pervert the form, and convert it to tyranny;
but did re^ain a power and privilege (...) ^^sist and revolt from them, and
repel their violence when they should do violence to (...) constitution, and
pervert the ends thereof. But the former (...) true, ergo, the ^o^^exion is
confirmed from this. If the estates of a kingdom give the power to a king, it
is their own power in the (...); and if they give it for their own good, they
have power to judge when it is used against themselves and for their evil; and
so power to limit and to resist the power that they gave.

Fifth. From the way and manner of erecting governors, by compact, the
necessity whereof is clear, many arguments might be deduced. I shall reduce
them to this form, if people must propose conditions unto kings to be by them
acqui^sce^ in, and submitted unto, at their admission to the government, which
thereupon becomes the fundamental laws of the government, and security for the
peoples rights and liberties, giving a law claim to the people to pursue the
king, in case of fa^^ing in the main and principle thing covenanted, as their
own covenanted mandatarius, who has no right or authority of his own, but what
he has from them, and no more power but what is contained in the conditions
upon which he undertaketh the government. Then whenever a tyrant does break all
these conditions, which he ^nce accepted, and so become, in strict law, no king
and the people be, in strict law, liberated from subjection to him, they may
and must defend themselves, and their fundamental rights and privileges,
religion and laws, and resist the tyranny overturning them. But the former is
true, therefore, etc.

Sixth. From the nature of magistracy, it may be argued thus: That power which
is properly neither parental nor merital, nor masterly and despotick over the
subjects and goods* but only fiduciary, and by way of trust, is more to be
resisted than that which is properly so. But that power which is properly so,
that is parental power and marital and masterly, may be resisted in many cases
Therefore that power which is not so properly, but only fiduciary, is more to
be resisted than a king's power over his subjects, is neither parental nor
marital, etc. is most clear. The minor is clear, by instances. First. If
children may in case of necessity, resist the fury and mad rage of their
father, seeking to destroy them, then must private subjects resist the rage and
tyranny of kings, seeking to destroy them, and what is dearest to them; for
there i^ no stricter obligation moral between king and people, than between
parents and children, nor so strict; and (...) tyrants and people there is none
at all, therefore the former ca^no^ be denied. Second. If wives may lawfully
defend themselves against the unjust violence of enraged husbands, then m^st
(...) subjec^s have power to (...) the furious assaults of enraged tyran^s, for
there is not so great a tie betwixt them and people* as be w^^n man and ^i^e;
yea there is none at all; but the former i^ true. Ergo, Three. If servants may
defend themselves against their masters, then m^st private subjects against a
tyrant or his emissaries; but the former is true. Ergo, Four. If the king's
power is only fiduciary, and by way of pawn, which he has got to keep, then
when that power is manifestly abused, to the hurt of them that entrusted him
with it, he ought, by all means, to be resisted by all those which he undertook
to protect; but the former is true, therefore the latter.

Seventh. From the limited power of kings it may be thus argued: If kings be
limited by laws and contracts, and may be resisted by pleas in law, and have no
absolute power to do and command what they will* but must be limited both by
the laws of God and man, and cannot make what laws they will, in prejudice of
the people's rights, nor execute the laws made according to their pleasure* nor
confer on others a lawless license to oppress whom they please; then when they
turn tyrants* and arrogate a lawless absoluteness, and cross the rules and
transgress the bounds prescribed by God's laws and man's laws, and made their
own lusts a law, and execute the same arbitrarily, they must be resisted by
force when a legal resistance cannot be had, in defense of religion and
liberty. But all kings are limited, etc and the connection may be thus confirmed
in short: That power which is not the ordinance of God, may be resisted; but an
absolute illimited power crossing the rules and transgressing the bounds
prescribed by God's law and man's, is not the ordinance of God, therefore it
may be resisted.

Eighth. Further from the rules of government it may be argued several ways.
First. That power which is contrary to law, evil and tyrannical, can tie none
to subjection; but if it oblige to any thing, it ties to resistance. But the
power of a king against law, religion, and liberty, is a power contrary to law,
evil and tyrannical, therefore, etc.

The major is plain, ^or wickedness can tie no man but to resist it. That power
which is contrary to law, evil and tyrannical is wickedness. Second. That power
and those acts, which neither king can exercise nor command, nor others
execute, nor any obey* must certainly be resisted; but such is the power and
acts that oppress the subjects, and overturn religion and liberty, therefore,
etc.

The minor is evident from scripture, condemning oppression and violence, both
in them that command and in them that execute the same* and also them that obey
such wicked commands. The major is very clear from reason, both because such
power and such acts as cannot be commanded cannot be executed, cannot be obeyed
lawfully, are ^^^ful and wicked; and because it cannot be a magistratical
power, for that may always be exercised and executed lawfully; and what a man
cannot command, the resisting of that he cannot punish; but acts of oppression
against law, religion, and liberty, a man cannot command, ergo the resisting of
these he cannot punish. Third. That government and administration which is not
subordinate to the law and will of God, who has appointed it, must be
resisted. But that government, or administration, which under mines or
overturns religion and liberty, is not subordinate to the law and will of God,
therefore, etc. The major is clear, for nothing but what is the ordinance of
God, subordinate to his law and will, is irresistible. Romans xiii. 2. The
assumption is undeniable.

Ninth. From the very end and true design of government, which must be
acknowleged by all to be the glory of God and the good of mankind; yea all that
have been either wise or honest have always held that the safety of the people
is the supreme law. The argument may run thus in short. First. That doctrine
which makes the holy one to cross his own ends, in giving governors, must be
absurd and unchristian, as well as irrational; but such is the doctrine that
makes all kings, and tyrants irresistible upon any pretense whatever; which, by
the bye, is the ancient and modern to^y doctrine, ergo the the minor. I prove
that doctrine which makes God, intending his own glory, and the peoples good,
to give governors both as fathers to preserve and as murderers to destroy them,
must make the holy one to cross his own ends, for these are contradictory; but
the doctrine that makes all kings and tyrants irresistible, etc. is such, for
by office they are fathers to preserve, and by office also they must be
murderers, vested with such a power from God by the first act. If they be
irresistible when they do so, seeing every power that is irresistible is the
ordinance of God. Hence also when a blessing turns a curse it is no more the
ordinance of God, but to be resisted with all our might and strength; but when
a king turns a tyrant, overturning religion and liberty, then a blessing turns
a curse, therefore* etc.

Second. Means are to be resisted when they are not useful for, but destructive
to the ends for which they were appointed; but kings overturning religion and
liberty, are means not useful for, but destructive to the ends for which they
were appointed. Seeing then they are neither for the glory of God nor the good
of mankind, therefore, etc.

Third. If all powers and prerogatives of men are only means appointed for* and
should vail unto the supreme law of the peoples safety, and all laws be
subordinate to and corroborative of this law; and when cross to it, are in so
far null, and no laws; and all law formalities in competion with it are to be
laid aside, and all parliamentary priviledes must yield to this, and king and
parliament, both conspiring, have no power against it; and no sovereign power,
by virtue of any resignation from the people can comprize any authority to act
against it; then it is duty to obey the supreme law, in resisting all powers
and prerogatives, all laws and law formalities, and all conspiracies whatsoever
against this supreme law, the safety of the people; but the former is true,
therefore, etc.

Fourth. That power which is obliged and appointed to command and rule justly
and religiously, for the good of the people, and is only set over them on these
conditions, and for that end, cannot tie them to subjection, without
resistance, when the power is abused to the destruction of laws, religion,
liberty, and people; but all power is so appointed and obliged, therefore
whenever it is so abused* it cannot tie people to subjection, but rather
oblige them to the rejection of it.

Tenth. From the obedience required to government it may be argued thus: First.
If we may flee from tyrants then we may resist them; but we may flee from
tyrants therefore we may resist them. The connection I prove, First. If all
grounds of justice will warrant the one as well as the other, then, if the one
be duty so is the other; but the former is true; for the same justice and
equity that warrants declining a tyrants unjust violence by flight, will
warrant resistance when flight will not do it; the same principle of self
defense that makes flight duty, when resistance is not possible, will also make
resistance duty when flight is not possible; the same principle of charity to
wives and children, that makes ^light lawful when, by resistance, they cannot
avoid tyranny, will make resistance duty when by ^light they cannot evita^e it;
the same principle of conscience to keep religion free, that prompts to flight
when resistance will not save it, will also prompt to resist it when ^light is
not practicable. Second. If to flee from a just power when, in justice we are
obnoxious to its sword, be to resist the ordinance of God, and so sin, then to
flee from an unjust power must be also a resisting of the abusing of it, and so
duty, for the one is resistance as well as the other; but the difference of the
power resisted makes the one lawful, the other not. Again, if kingly power may
be resisted, by interposing ^eas, and miles, why not by the same rule by
interposing walls and arms? Both is resistance, for against a lawful king or
magistrate that would be resistance. Third. If a tyrant has irresistible power
to kill and destroy the people, he has also irresistible power to cite and
summon them before him; and if it be unlawful to resist his murders, it must be
as unlawful to resist his summons. Fourth. For a community of people to flee
with wives and children, strong and weak, young and old, to escape tyrannical
violence, and leave the land, were more unlawful than to resist, Alas! where
should or could we of America have fled to have escaped the power of tyranny?
Therefore it was ou^ duty to resist, for what is not possible as a natural
means of preservation, is not a lawful mean; but this was not a possible mean,
neither is it warranted in nature's law, or God's word* for a people that have
God's right, and man's law, to the land, and the rights and liberties thereof,
to leave the country and its liberties all into the hands of a tyrant, and his
crew. And farther, if it is duty to disobey, it is also duty to resist tyrants
in defense of religion and liberty. But it is duty to disobey them, therefore,
etc. The connection only will be ^l^ck at, which is thus strengthened, if
subjection be no more pressed in scripture than obedience. Then, if non
obedience be duty, non subjection must be so also, and consequently resistance;
but subjection is no more pressed in scripture than obedience, for all commands
of subjection, to the higher powers as God's ministers, under pain of
damnation, do only respect lawful magistrates, and in lawful things, and do
include obedience; and non-obedience to the power so qualified is a resisting
of the ordinance of God, as well as non subjection. If then obedience to
magistrates be duty, and non-obedience sin, and obedience to tyrants sin, and
non obedience duty, then, by parity of reason, subjection to magistrates is
duty, and non-subjection is sin; and also subjection to tyrants is sin* and non
subjection duty.

Eleventh. From the resistance allowed in all governments, it may be argued
thus: -- If (...) be duty to defend our religion, lives and liberties, against
an invading army of ^ut throats, Turks, Tartars, etc. without or against the
king's warrant, then of course, it is and must be duty ^o defend the same
against home b^ed tyrants, except we would subscribe ourselves home born
slaves; but the former is true, therefore, etc. The minor cannot be doubted,
because the king's power cannot be p^i^ative and destructive to defense of our
religion, lives, and liberties; nor neither can it take away nature's birth
right, to defend th^se or make it ^a^e the worse than if we had no king at all.
Now if we had no king at all, we might defend these against invaders; and
whether we have king's or not, we are under moral obligations of the law of God
to endeavor the defense of these. But this need not be insisted on; the
connection of the proposition is clear, if king's be more tyrannical, in
invading religion and liberty themselves, than in suffering others to do it, or
hindering them to be opposed; and if their invasion be more tyrannical,
hurtful, and dangerous, than the invasion of strangers, then, if it be duty to
resist strangers, invading these interests, it is more duty to resist home bred
tyrants invading the same; but the former is true, therefore the latter.
Resistance in the one case is no more resisting the ordinance of God than in
the other.

Twelfth. From the motives of resistance we may draw this argument, which might
indeed be branched out into several; but for brevities sake, I propose to
reduce it to this complex one: If when we are in a capacity we cannot acquit
ourselves in the duty that we do owe to our country* ourselves, and posterity,
and absolve ourselves from the sin and judgment of tyrants, who overturn
religion and liberty, oppress our countrymen, impose slavery on ourselves, and
intail it upon posterity, by a passive subjection, submission to, and not
opposing these mischiefs, then this instance is necessary; but the former is
true, therefore, etc. The connection is clear, for there cannot be a medium, if
we cannot discharge these duties by subjection, submission, and not opposing;
then, we must do them by non subjection, non submission* and opposing, since
they must be done some way. The assumption is thus confirmed Second. The duties
we owe to religion, when it is like to be overturned, which no doubt would have
been the case had our civil liberties been taken from us, it is, I say, in this
case, our duty to resist tyranny, by making use of defensive arms. This must
surely be as necessary as that of our civil liberties, which is an interest of
our bodies, which is, indeed far inferior, and as necessary a duty as to defend
our civil liberties from perpetual slavery, and as preferable thereunto as
Christ's interests is to man's; and as the true end of all self preservation is
to the means of it, the preservation of religion being the end of all self
preservation. But this duty cannot be discharged without resistance in a mere
passive subjection and submission, otherwise the same might be discharged in
our universal submission to Turks or Indians, coming to destroy our religion.
Surely this passive way of conducting ourselves cannot answer the duty of
pleading for truth. Isa. ix. 4. Seeking the truth. Jer. v. 1. Being valliant
for it. Jer. lix. 3. Making up the ^edge, standing in the gap, etc. Ezekiel. xxii.
30. Which yet are really necessary and incumbent duties according to our
capacity; therefore we cannot answer the duties we owe to religion, in a mere
passive way. I say farther, the duty we owe to our countrymen, and to those of
each state, is to assist and defend them, and relieve them when oppressed,
which fully and completely justifies the conduct of all those brave officers
and men who so cheerfully flew from their ploughs to the sword, to the relief
of our brave, but oppressed brethren at Boston, in the year 1775, as truly we
were bound, by all laws of humanity, and of God, to do; and by the royal law of
Christ, the foundation of all righteousness among men, toward each other.
Matt. vii. 12. All things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, do ye
even so to them. Reader, never let this direction slip your memory, for surely
as we would wish to have others help us, when we are oppressed, so should we do
to them when it is in the power of our hands to do it, and not forbear to
deliver them, for the Lord will require their blood at our hand. Prove. xxiv,
11, 12 But this cannot, by any means, be done by a mere subjection without
resistance. Third. There is no way to free ourselves of the sin and judgment of
tyrants, by mere passive subjection. We find in the sacred scriptures, how that
the people of old have been involved and punished for the sins of tyrants, as
the people of Judah for Manasseh. 2 Kings xxi. 11. etc. Jer. xv. 4. Whose sins,
if they had not been committed, the judgment for them had been prevented* and
if the people had hindered them, they had not smarted, but being jointly
included with their rulers in the same bond of fidelity to God, and made
accountable as joint principles with their kings for that debt, by their mutual
as well as several engagements, to walk in his ways, they were liable to be
punished for their rebellion and apostasy, because they did not hinder it.
Hence I say, resistance against tyrants and tyranny is right and lawful, etc.

Secondly. This truth is confirmed from the common practice of the people of
God, even under persecution, from whence I propose to draw an argument from
some notable examples which, to condemn, were impious, and to deny were most
impudent; and, for forms sake, it may run thus: What the people of God under
both testaments have frequently done, in time of persecution, for defending,
vindicating, or recovering their religion and liberties, may and ought to be
done again in the like circumstances, when these are in the like hazard; but
under both testaments, the people of God frequently, in times of persecution,
have defended, vindicated, and recovered their religion and liberties by
defensive arms, resisting the sovereign powers that sought to destroy them;
therefore this may, and ought to be done again when these religious, civil and
natural privileges are in the like hazard to be destroyed by the violent
encroachments of the sovereign powers. The proposition cannot be denied, except
by all such as are open professed enemies to the people of God, as I take all
the enemies to their country really to be. And I am ready to believe that, by
an impartial and strict ^ernt^^y, it will be found that the examples of their
endeavored resistance will be little inferior, if not superior, in number and
importance to the examples of their submissive sufferings in all ages of the
world, which will appear in the probation of the assumption by adduction of
many instances which I shall only cursorily glean out of that plentiful harvest
that histories do afford us, both of ancient and modern date.

First. I need only just touch on that most well known and famous history of
the Maccabees, of undoubted verity, though not of cannonical authority, in
which, according to scripture predictions, we have a most notable account of
many heroic enterprises, achievements, and exploits performed by them that
knew their God, and tendered his glory and their religion and country's
liberties, above the common cate^hre^^^k no^i^us of uncontrollable,
irresistible royalty and ab^^^^te, implicit, loyalty, that have abused the
world in all ages. (...) we have an account of the noble and successful
re^i^^ance of a party of a few godly and zealous patriots, without the
concurrence of civil authority, or countenance of the (...) or nobles of the
kingdom, against a king universally acknowledged and subjected unto, that came
in peaceably and (...) the kingdom by flatteries, with whom the greatest part*
and those of the greatest note, took part and did wicked (...) the covenant and
nation's interest, and were corr^^^^^ by flatteries; yet a few priests, with
the assistance of some (...) countrymen, did fly to arms against him and them,
and the Lord did wonderfully assist them for a considerable time, as was
foretold by Daniel xi. And all this did fall out under the persecution of
Antiochus Epip^anes, and was happily begun by Matthias* a godly priest and his
five sons, who being commanded under severe certifications, to worship
according to the law then and at that time in force, and according to the
king's wicked lust^. However they refused, and did most valiantly resist that
most horrible abomination, and flew to defensive arms, which, while living, he
patronized, and when dying ^id encourage his sons to it by a notable oration,
showing them what a deplorable ease hi^ country was in, and what a duty and
dignity it was to redee^ and deliver it; and this was vigorously prosecuted by
Judas Maccab^^^, expressly for the quarrel of religion and liberty, against the
mighty tyrant and all his emissaries. A great undertaking indeed. And have not
we of America great reason to bless God, and to stand amazed at the great
goodness and providence of God, that when the king of Great Britain, and his
venal parliament, was about to destroy our civil, and of course, our religious
liberties, that he raised us up a second Matthias, even the great WASHINGTON,
as an instrument in his hands to save this land from ruin and slavery; who has,
by his great generalship, rendered himself a world's wonder and a wonder to the
world. But nothing is too hard or impossible with God, who always fits and
furnishes instruments suitable to the work he has to do.

Second. To come down to the history of the gospel dispensation, I allow indeed
that in the time of the primitive persecutions, under the heathen emperors,
this great and well approved privilege of se^^ defense was not much improved or
made use of by christians, who studied more to play the martyrs than to play
the men as christian soldiers; because* at that time, the Lord was pleased, in
his good providence, to spirit them up, and call them unto, and accept of their
hands passive testimonies, while they were incorporate under a civil relation
with the heathens, in subjection to governors, who did not, by open tyranny
overturn their civil liberties; but did only endeavor to eradicate religion,
which, at that time, had never become their right by law, while they were
scattered* and out of capacity, and never could come to a separate formed
community, by joint concurrence and correspondence, to undertake a declared
resistance, while religion was only propagating through the nations, and the
Lord did providentially preclude the least appearance that might be of
propagating of it by any armed and formed force, being the gospel of peace,
designed to save and not to destroy; yet even then* and in that case, there
were instances of christians resisting their enemies, and rescuing of their
ministers, etc. as they are found on record. First. How some inhabiting Marcota
with force rescued Dionysius of Alexandria out of the hands of such as were
carrying him away, about the year of our Lord 255. Second. How about the year
310 the Armenians waged war against Maximus, who was come against them with an
army, because of their religion. Third. About the year 342 the citizens of
Athanasius their minister, against G^gorious, and Sy^ianus the emperor's
captain, who came with strong force to put him in. Fourth. How about the year
356 the people of Constantinople did, in like manner, stand to the defense of
Paulus against Constan^ius the emperor, and killed his Captain Hermogenes; and
afterward, in great multitudes, they opposed the intrusion of the heretic
Macedonius. Fifth. How when a wicked edict was sent forth to pull down the
churches of such as were for the clause of one substance, the christians that
maintained that testimony resisted the bands of soldiers that were procured at
the emperors command, by Macedonius, to force the Mantinians to embrace the
Arian heresy, but the christians at Mantinium kindled with an earnest zeal
toward the christian religion, went against the soldiers with chear^ul minds,
and valliant courage, and made a great slaughter of them. Sixth. How about the
year 387 the people of Cesa^ea did defend Basil their minister. Seventh. How
for fear of the people, the Lieutenant of the emperor Vallens durst not execute
those eighty priests who had come to supplicate the emperor, and was commanded
to be all killed by him. Eighth. How the inhabitants of Mount Ni^^ia espoused
By^il's quarrel, and assaulted the Lieutenant, and forced his guards to flee.
Ninth. How about the year 404, when the emperor had banished Chry^ostom, the
people flocked together, so that the emperor was necessitated to call him back
again from his exile. Tenth. How the people resisted also the transportation of
Ambrose by the command of Valentinian the emperor, and chused rather to lose
their lives than to suffer their pastor to be taken away by the soldiers.
Eleventh. How the christians, oppressed by Ba^atan^s king of Persia, did flee
to the Romans to seek their help, and Theodosius the emperor is much praised
for the war; (which, by the bye, fully justifies the Americans seeking relief
from France, from the cruel tyranny of Britain, and of Louis XVI for granting
of it, by which conduct of his he has endeared himself to every good whig, and
to all who has a true regard for the rights of mankind; and to add still more
to his greatness and goodness, if I am rightly informed, he tolerates the free
exercise of the protestant religion throughout his dominion. Who can say but
what God, in his providence, is about by this great revolution to pull down one
of the ten horns which has long supported the beast?) But not to add here*
pardon the digression, I now return; which (...) had commenced against
Chrasroes king of Persia upon this inducement that the king sought to ruin and
extirpate these christians in his dominions that would not renounce the gospel.

Third. But when religion was once embraced in i^bodied corporations, and
established by law, and became a people's common interest and liberty, in a
capacity to defend it with their lives and other liberties, and when it was
propagated through the nations, then the Lord did call for other more active
testimonies in the preservation and defense of it, of which we have many
instances in histories. About the year 894 the Bohemian christians resisted
Drahomica their Queen, who thought to have destroyed them, and to have
re*introduced paganism. About the year 1420 they maintained a long defensive
war against the government, and the popes legates, under the management of
their brave Captain Zizca, which was further prosecuted after him by the
remaining Thaborites; and again in the year 1618, they maintained a defensive
war against the emperor Ferdinand. Eleventh. Electing and erecting a new king
in opposition to him Frederick Pal^tine of the Rhine in which cause many
received a crown of martyrdom; and this was also espoused by king James the
First of England, who aided his son in law against the emperor; but it is
generally allowed not so effectually as he ought, and might have done, for
indeed he was a poor weak Prince, and the father of tyrants.

Fourth. If we look into the history of the Walde^ses, alias, Walloons, these
constant oppose^s (...), we (...) find many instances of their resistance about
the year ^^94. Very early, while Waldo, from whom they had their name, was
alive, they began to defend themselves by arms, after the bloody edict of
Alphonsus, king of Arragon; and in the year 1488, they resist by arms Albert de
Capitanei^, sent by Pope Innocent VIII, in Pragola and F^ass^niere, and
throughout Pied Mont, wherefor the most part the offspring of the old Wa^denses
had their residence, where, very evidently, through many successions of ages,
they showed themselves to be the true successors of their worthy progenitors,
valliant for the truth; that is a most famous instance of their resistance in
opposing vigorously the Lord of Trinity, in that same Pied Mont, at which time
they so solemnly asl^^ed their ministers whether it was lawful or not to defend
themselves against his violence, who did answer them in the affirmative, and
accordingly they did it with wonderful success at that time, and many times
afterward; especially it is must remarkable how, in in the year 1655, a most
vigorous d^^ensive war was prosecuted against the duke of Savoy, by their
captains Ginavel, Jahie^, etc. which was espoused by many protestant princ^^.

Fifth. If we take a survey of the ^^^^ories of the Albi^e^ses, we find many
instances of their defensive resisting their oppressing superiors. About the
year 1200 they defended themselves against the Popes legate, and his crossed
soldiers, under the conduct first of the Earl of Beziers, and then of the Earl
of Foise, and Earl of Remand, of Toulouse, and where helped by the English, who
then possessed Guienne, bordering upon Thoulouse, which resistance continued
many years.

Sixth. In Spain we find the people of Arragon contesting with Alph^nsus III,
and associating themselves together against him; and they tell Pedro III, their
king, that if he would not govern by, and according to law, they would pursue
him by arms, about the year 1283, as also other Spaniards who rose in arms
several times against Pedro, the first king of Castile.

Seventh. It was this that brought the Cantons of Helvetia into this state of
freedom, wherein they have continued many years; for about the year 1260, they
levied war against their oppressing nobles; and in the year 1308, they joined
in covenant to defend themselves against the house of Austria; and in the year
1315* they renewed it at Brunna, in which, at length, the rest of the Cantons
joined and formed themselves into a common wealth.

Eighth. If we take a view of the Germans, we will find, at the very
commencement of the reformation, as soon as they got the name of protestants,
they resisted the emperor Charles V* the Duke of Saxon, the Landgrave of Hesse,
and the city of Magedburgh, with the advice of lawyers concluded, "that the
laws of empire permitted resistance of the emperor, in some cases; that the
times were then, so dangerous, that the very force of conscience did leave them
to arms and to make a league to defend themselves, though Caesar, or any in his
name, should make war against them; for since he attempteth to root out
religion, and subvert our liberties, he gives us cause enough to resist him
with a good conscience." The matter standing as it does, we may say they
resist, as may be showed, both by sacred and profane histories, and so on, the
whole they undertook, and stated the wa^ upon the account of religion and
liberty.

Ninth. If we but cast an eye over the history of Holland, we will find how
much they are indebted to this practice of defensive arms, having thereby
recovered both religion and liberty, and established themselves into a most
flourishing state; we find even in the time of D. de Alvas's persecution, they
began to defend Haerlem, and Valenciennes in Hainault, and went on till under
the conduct of William of Nassau, Prince of Orange, they declared the king of
Spain to have fallen from the government of those countries, and so effectually
shook off the yoke of tyranny.

Tenth. If we turn to the French Hugonots, we will find many instances among
them, and many brave heroes raised up to maintain the principles, and prosecute
the practices thereof, of older and later date. The history of the civil wars
of France is stored with their trophies, and the memories of Conde and Co^igni
will ever be fragrant. There were many instances of resistance in those times,
etc.

Eleventh. The many practices of the Hungarians, resisting the encroachments of
the house of Austria, prove the same; and when Matthias denied the free
exercise of religion unto the protestants of Austria, they took up arms in
their own defense, and sent a protestation unto the states of Hungary,
requiring their assistance agreeable to their league.

Twelfth. The Polonians have oftentimes levied war against their kings, and we
are furnished by Clark in his Martyrol* with a late instance of their
resistance against the sovereign powers at L^s^a, in Poland, as late as the
year 1655.

Thirteenth. The Deans and Swedes have not been slack on their parts, in taking
course with their Christierns, kings of that name, whom they resisted and
punished, and generally, wherever the reformation was received, we find this
principle espoused, and the practice of it prosecuted; nay there has been no
nation in the world but it will be found they have either resisted or killed
tyrants.

Fourteenth. The most deserving and celebrated monarchs in the world, have
espoused the quarrel of oppressed subjects not only such as Tamerlane, whose
observable saying is noted when he advanced against Bajazet, I go, (says he) to
chastise his tyranny, and to deliver the afflicted people; and Philip and Lewis
of France, who assisted the barons of England, against king John; and Charles
the great, who upon this ground undertook a war against the Lombards, in Italy.
But even Constantine the Great has it recorded, to his great honor, that he
employed his power and force against Licinius, upon no other motive but because
he banished, tortured, and destroyed those christians in his dominions that
would not renounce their religion. And queen Elizabeth, of glorious memory, is
to be highly commended for assisting the Dutch to maintain their religion by
force, when they could not enjoy it by favor. And king James First did give
public aid to the protestants in Germany and Bohemia, against the emperor;
against whom also Gustavas Adolphus marched, that he might deliver the
oppressed cities from the bondage that Ferdinand had brought them into. Yea
poor silly Charles First pretended, at least, to assist the protestants in
France at Ree and Rachel, and though he himself was resisted by the parliaments
of both kingdoms, yet he did declare in his acts of oblivion and pacification,
the Scots taking up arms against him, in defense of their religion and
liberties, to be no treason or rebellion. See Apol. Relat. Sect. 11. page 149;
and although the late tyrant Charles Second condemned all the r^sings of the
people of Scotland for defense of religion and liberty, which his own tyranny
forced them into; yet he justified the revolt of Heathen and Mohammedan
subjects, as in the instance of the young king of Bantam, when by reason of his
tyranny his subjects revolting and resisting of him, h^ the said Charles
Second, furnished the revolters with ammunition. etc. Indeed many instances
might be adduced which shows the righteousness of such residances, when the
greatest of kings and queens have undertaken the patronising of them.

Third. From scripture proofs, the best of all proofs, I shall endeavor
briefly to gather some of the many that might be pressed, which being put
together to me, seem impregnable. I shall reduce them to these heads. First. I
shall adduce some practices of the Lord's people, frequently reiterated, never
condemned, always approved, confirming this point. Second. Some severe
reprehensions for their omission of this duty in the season thereof. Third.
Some promises both of spiriting for the duty and of countenancing of it when
undertaken. Fourth. Some precepts commanding such a^chievements. Fifth. Some
prayers, supplicating for them, all which, put together, I think will make a
strong argument, for practices of this kind is common in scripture history.

First. I shall begin at the first war, which we find recorded in the world,
wherein it seems the godly at first suffered some, but afterward, by the
virtue and val^u^ of their brethren, they were vindicated, and the victory
recovered with great honor. Lot and his family, living in Sodom, ^^r taken
prisoner by Chedarlaon^er and his confederates. Genesis x^v. 12. But Abraham soon
hearing of it armed his (...), and pursued them hot f^^t to Dan, and rescued
him. Verse 14. 19. Thereby justifying that rebellion of the (...) of the pl^in
by taking part and vindicating the rebels. Hence he that may rescue subjects
from the arms of tyrants, by arms, may also rise with these subjects to oppose
that violence; but here is a clear example of that in Abraham, therefore, etc.

Second. When the Lord's people were possessed of Canaan, and forgetting the
Lord, did enter into affinity with these interdicted nations, some of them were
left to prove Israel, that the generations of the children of Israel might know
to teach them war. Judges iii. 1 2. And when they did evil in the si^ht of the
Lord, he sold them into the hand of Cushan-rishathaim king of Mesopotamia, whom
they served and were subject to full eight years. Verse 8. But when they
humbled themselves, and cried unto the Lord, their rebellion, in shaking off
that yoke, was successful under the conduct of O^hniel. Verse 10. And after a
relapse, unto the l^ke defection, they became subject to Egl^n, king of Moab,
whom they served eighteen years. Verse 14. But attempting the same remedy by
arms, under the conduct of E^^ud, they recovered their liberty; and after his
death, ^alling into that sin again, which procured the like misery, they became
subject to Ja^in king of Canaan, who twenty years mightily oppressed them.
Judge. iv. 1, 3. But by the Lord's commandment, under the conduct of Deborah and
Barak, they rebelled and prevailed. Whence I infer, if the Lord's people,
serving a haughty tyrant, may shake off the yoke of their subjection, then it
is duty to defend themselves, and resist them, for there is no other way of
shaking it off; but these examples prove the former, therefore, etc. Obj. if
any should reply, and cavil, and declare these were not their own kings, to
whom they owed allegiance, but only invading conquerors, whom they might
resist, I answer, First, Yet they were the sovereign powers, for the time
being, and therefore if the doctrines and principles of both ancient and modern
to^ies be true and good, they ought, upon no pretense whatsoever, to be
resisted (O! poor slaves, that believes such doctrines!) and perhaps by
compact, they were not their kings, yet by conquest they were, as much as that
would make them, and by their own consent, when they paid them kings due, (viz)
tribute. Second, No more are they our kings who attempts to destroy charters*
overturn religion, liberty, and law, as the king of Britain and his venal
parliament lately did. Witness the Boston charter, etc. I say to such we owe no
allegiance, no more than Israel of old did to those tyrants, for tyranny is the
same in all ages. Third, I retort that old colewort, twice boiled, who should
be judge whether they were their own lawful kings or not, for they acted as
kings, and thought themselves their absolute Lords, and gave themselves out to
be such; and yet we find an approved rebellion against them. Mr. Gee, in his
magistrates original, Chap 8. Sect. 4. Page 268, improves these instances to
the same purpose, and adds. "Neither as far as my observation goes, can any
immediate or extraordinary command of word, for what they so did, be pretended
to or pleaded from the text, for many of them, or for any, save Barak or
Gideon."

Third. Yet Gideon's example, though he had an extraordinary call, cannot be
pretended as unimo^able on the matter, for that was ordinary, though the call
and manner was extraordinary; he, with the aid of a few m^n, did break the yoke
of subjection to Midian. Judge. vi. 7. And having called his brethren out of all
Mount Ephraim, into a conjunction with him, in the pursuit of his victory, when
he demanded supply of the princes of Succoth, and of the men of Penuel, and
they denied it, he served them as enemies. Whence I conclude, if a small party
may, with God's approbation, deliver themselves and the whole of their
community from the bondage of their oppressing masters, whom they had served
several years, and may punish their kings that do not turn out to their
assistance, and encourage them in that attempt, then must it be duty to defend
themselves against their oppressors, that rule over them, and all ought to
concur in it, or else there would not be justice in punishing them that were
defective in this work; but we see the former by this example, therefore, etc.
Obj. If it ^e said that Gideon, and the rest of the extraordinary raised
judges, were magistrates, therefore they might defend and deliver their
country, which a private people, that are only subjects* may not do. I answer,
First* They were subject to those tyrants that oppressed them, who were then
the sovereign powers of that time; and yet they shook of that yoke be defensive
arms. Second* They were not then magistrates when they first appeared for their
countries defense, and deliverance; neither in that did they act as such, but
only as Captains of rebels in the esteem of them that had power over them. Just
so has our modern oppressors and to^ies looked upon all our generals and
officers in this grand struggle for American liberty. It is (...), Gideon was
no ruler, until that authority was conferred (...) him after the deliverance.
See Judge. viii. 22, etc. Yet he did all this before.

Fourth. When his bastard Ab^melech usurped the government, and was made king
by the men of Shechem, at length, God sending an evil spirit between him and
his accomplices, that (...) him up, not only was he resisted by the treacherous
Shechemites, which was their brand and bane, in the righteous judgment of God,
for their aiding at first in killing his brethren. Judge. ix. 23, 24. etc. But
also he was opposed by others of the men of Israel, as at Thebez, where he was
slain by a woman. Verse ^0, at the end. Whence, if an usurping tyrant
acknowleged as king by the generality, may be disowned by the godly, and
threatened with God's vengeance to consume both him and his accomplices, that
comply with him; and if he may be opposed and resisted, not only by those that
set him up, but also by others that were in subjection to him, and at length be
killed by them, without resentment of the rest of the nation, then most it
certainly be duty for a people who had no hand is the setting up such a tyrant
to defend themselves against his force; but the former is true by this example,
therefore, etc.

Fifth. When Israel of old, ^ell under the tyranny of a Ammon, oppressing them
eighteen years, they did, by resisting these supreme powers, shake off their
yoke, under the conduct of J^phthah; and being challenged sharply by the men of
Ephraim, who, it seems, claimed the p^ero^ative of making war, and therefore
came to revenge and reduce J^phthah and his company to order, just like tories,
who are very tenacious of this plea of the Eph^a^mites, that at least, without
the nobles of the kingdom, no war is to be made; yet we find Jephthah did not
much regard it, but stoutly defended himself, and slew of them 42 000 m^n, by
their Shibboleth. Judge. xii. I^ people then, when questioned for defending
themselves by them that claim a superiority over them, and should deliver them,
may defend themselve both without them, and against them, then I say, it is a
people's duty and privilege; but the former is true by this example, therefore,
etc.

Sixth. They were then made subject to the Philistines forty years, whom the
men of Judah acknowledged for their rulers, yet Samson, that rough handed
saint, never ceased from pelting them upon all occasions; and when challenged
for it by the men of Judah saying knowe^t thou not that the Philistines are
rulers over us, what is that thou have done? Samson objects nothing against
their b^i^g rulers, but notwithstanding prosecutes his purpose of vindicating
himself in defense of his country. As they did unto me says he, so have I done
unto them. Judge. xv. 11. Hence, if ^^ints may avenge themselves upon them whom
the country ca^^s rulers, and when enab^ed by God, may do to them as they did
to them, then must it be a duty for them to defend themselves against them; but
the antecedent is true by this example, therefore, etc.

Seventh. When Saul, in the pursuit of the (...), had charged the people with a
foolish oath not to eat any food until the evening, Jonathan his own son ta^ed
but a little honey, and (...) he must die! which Saul confirmed with another
peremptory oath, God do so to him, and more also, if he should not die.
Whereupon the people, as resolute on the other hand to save him, resisted the
rage of Saul, and swore as peremptorily that not one hair of his head should
fall to the ground; so the people rescued Jonathan that he died not. 1 Samuel
xiv. 44, 45. Hence if people may covenant, by oath, to resist the commands and
rescue a man from a tyrant's cruelty, then it is duty to defend themselves
against him. The Antecedent is true here.

Eighth. Afterward, when the manner of the king, presaged by Samuel, was
verified in Readiness degeneration, into many abuses of government, this privilege
of resistance was not wholly ^^^^cipated, but maintained by David* defensive
appearance; with his little army, he took Goliah's swo^d, not for ornament o^
only to fright Saul, but to defend himself with it, and was Captain first to
400 men. 1 Samuel xxi. 2. Had a mind to keep ou^ Keilah against him with 600 men.
1 Samuel xxiii. 13. And afterward a great host came to him to Z^k^^g* while he
kept himself close because of Saul, the son of K^sh. 1 Chronicles. xii. 1.
Throughout wh^^ they left Saul, and came and helped David against him. This is
proved at large by Lex Rex, Quest. 22, page 340.

Ninth. The city Abel, whether Sheba the traitor had ^led, did well to resist
(...) the king's general coming to destroy a whole city for one traitor's sake,
and not offering pe^ce to it according to law. Deuteronomy. xx. 10. And defended
themselves by gates and wa^ls, notwithstanding he had a commission from the
king, 2 Samuel xx. And after the capitulating, they are never challenged for
rebellion.

Tenth. The ten tribes revolted from the house of David, when Rehoboam claimed
an absolute power and would not acquiesce to the people's just conditions. 1
King's xii. 2 Chronicles. x. Hence If it be lawful for a part of the people to sh^ke
off the king, refuse subjection to him, and set up a new one, when he but
resolves to play the tyrant, then it must be duty to resist his violence when
he is tyrannizing; but the antecedent i^ clear by this example, and is fully
vindicated by J^s. Pop Ch 3. p. 52.

Eleventh. The example of E^isha the prophet is considerable* (...) King's vi.
32. E^isha sat in his house, and the elders sat with him, and the king seat a
man before him, but ere the messenger came to him, he said to the elders see
how this son of a murderer has sent to take away mine head. Look when the
messenger comes, shut the door; is not the sound of his masters feet behind
him. Here was violent resistance resolved both against the man and his master,
though the king of the land for the time; and this calling him the son of a
murderer, and resisting of him is no more extraordinary, though it was an
extraordinary man's act, than it is sot a plaintiff to libel a true crime
against a wicked person, and for an oppressed man to close the door upon a
murderer. Lex Rex, Quest 32 p. 3^6. Hence I argue, if a king of his messenger
coming to use unjust violence, against an innocent subject, be no (...) to be
regarded than a murderer's emissary, but may be resisted by that innocent
subject, then must a community of such innocent subjects defend themselves
against a tyrant, o^ his bloody emissaries, coming against them on such a
wicked errand. The Antecedent is here clear, which to all intents and purposes,
justifies the justness of the American defense, as Gage, George's tool and
bloody emissary, was sent for the express purpose, to murder the Bostonians, if
they should not ^^^ely surrender up all their rights and privileges without
resistance.

Twelfth. The city Libna^ revolted from under Jehoram's tyranny. 2 Chronicles. xxi.
10. P. Martyr on the place says, they revolted because he endeavored to
compel them to idolatry. Hence if it be lawful for a part of the people to
revolt from a tyrant, then it is duty to defend themselves against his force.
The former is true therefore, etc.

Thirteenth When Athaliah usurped the monachy. Jehoiada the priest strengthened
himself and made a covenant with the Captains, etc to put her down and set up
Joash. 2 King^ xi. 2. Chron. xxiii. and when she came and cried out treason!
treason! they regarded it no, but commanded to kill her and all that help her.
Whence I argue, if those that are not kings, may lawfully kill an usurpress,
and all that help her, then may a people resist them. But J^hoi^da, though no
magistrate, did it; therefore, etc.

Fourteenth. The repressing and punishing Amaziah, the son of Joash, is an
undeniable instance, vindicated by the great and l^arned Mr. Knox. After the
time that he turned away from following the Lord, the people made a conspiracy
against him in Jerusalem, and he fled to Lachish; but they sent and slew him
there. 2 Kings xiv 19. 2 Chronicles xxv. 27. Hence (...) fortiori if people may
conspire and concur in executing judgment upon their king, turning tyrant, then
much more must they defend themselves against his violence.

Fifteenth. The same power of people's resisting kings was exemplified in
Uzzah, or Azariah, when ^e would needs be supreme in things sacred as well as
civil. 2 Kings xv. 2 Chronicles. xxvi. Fourscore priests that were valliant men
withstood him, and thurst him out of the temple; they troubled him, faith
Natables; they expelled him faith Armon. Vid. Pool Synopsis, etc. See this
vindicated by Mr. Knox, page 48 49. Hence if private subjects may by force
resist and hinder the king from transgressing the law, then must they resist
him when forcing them to transgress the law.

Sixteenth. After the return from the Babylonish captivity, when the Jews set
about building the Temple, which they chose to do themselves, and not admit of
any association with enemies; upon their misinformation and false accusation,
that they were building the rebellious and bad city, and would refuse to pay
the king his custom, they were straightly discharged by A^^axe^x^^, to proceed
in their work, and the inhibition was executed by force and power. Ez^^ ^v. But
by the encouragement of the prophet. Haggai and Zechariah, countermanding the
king's decree, they would not be hin^red, the eye of their God being upon them,
though (...) the governor of those parts Shetharbonnai and their companions
would have boasted them from it, with the usual arguments of tories. Who has
commanded you to do so and so? Ezra v. 3, 5. And yet all this was before the
decree of Darius was obtained in their savor. Ezra vi. Hence I argue, if a
people may prosecute without and against a king's command, and before all
allowance by law can be obtained, then may a people resist these commands and
force used to execute them.

Seventeenth. When Nehemiah came to Jerusalem, and invited the Jews to build up
the walls of the city, they strengthened their hands for that very good work
against great opposition; and when challenged by S^nba^^at the Horonite, Tob^ah
the servant the Ammonite, and Geshem the Arabian, great king's men, all of
them, who despised and boasted them, what is this that ye do? Will ye rebel
against the king? Say they he would not plead authority, though in the general
he had the king's authority for it; yet he would not give them any other
satisfaction than to intimate whether they had that or not, having the call of
God to the work, they would go on in their duty, and God would prosper them
against their opposition. Nehemiah ii 19. 20. And they went on, and were
directed to remember the Lord and fight for their brethren, etc. and to build,
with weapons in their hands. Neh. iv. And brought it to an end, notwithstanding
of all their practices to fright them from it. Chap. vi. Hence (...), if
neither challenges of rebellion, nor practices of enemies, who pretend
authority, nor any discouragements whatsoever, should deter people from a duty
which they have a call and capacity from God to prosecute, and if they may
remove it against all opposition, by defensive arms, then when a people are
oppressed and treated as rebels for a necessary duty, they may and must defend*
themselves and maintain their duty, notwithstanding of all pretentions of
authority against them.

Eighteenth. I shall now conclude with one instance more, which is vindicated
by Jus. Populi, from the history of Esther, because Mordecai refused to do
homage to a hangman, Haman I should say, at that day, now a proud North, a
cruel edict was procured from Ahasuerus to destroy all the Jews at that time;
now from George III. to destroy all the Bostonians by starving them etc. which
was written and sealed with the king's ring, according to the laws of the Medes
and Persians, becoming a law irrevocable and irreversable. Esther iii. 12, 13.
Yet the Lord's providence, always propitious to his people, brought it about so
that Haman being hanged, and Mordecai advanced, the Jews were called and
capacitated as well as necessitated to resist that armed authority that decreed
to massacre them, and that by the king's own allowance. Esther ix. When his
former decree drew near to be put in execution, in the day that the enemies of
the Jews hoped to have power over them, it was turned to he contrary, that no
man could withstand them. Here they had the allowance of authority to resist
authority, and this was not a gift of a new right by that grant, which they had
not before, only it was corroborative of the irradical right to defend
themselves; which is not the donative of kings, and which they had power to
exercise and use without this, though may be not the same capacity, for the
king's warrant could not make it lawful in point of conscience, if it had not
been so before. Hence I argue, if people may have the allowance of well
advised-authority to resist the decree and force of unlawful authority, then
may people maintain right authority in defending themselves against the
injuries of pretended authority; but by this very instance we plainly see, that
the Jews had Ahasuerus's allowance to resist the decree and force of his own
ill-advised authority, though irreversable, and hence we learn, that
distinction in this point is not groundless between resisting the authority of
supreme power and the abuses of the same.

Secondly. We have in scripture both tacit and express reproofs for neglecting
this duty in the right season thereof.

First. In Jacob's swan song, or prophetical testament, wherein he foretells
what should be the fate and future condition of each of the tribes, and what
should be remarked in their carriage, influencing their after lot in their
generations, for which they should be commended or discommended approved or
reproved* coming to Issachar he prophetically exp^obates his future ass-like
stupidity, and that indulging himself in his lazy ease and lukewarm security,
he should emancipate himself and his interests into a servile subjection unto
his oppressors impositions; even when he should be in a capacity to shake them
off, and free himself by resistance. Gen x^ix 14, 15. Issachar is a strong ass,
couching down between two burdens. A true picture this of toryism. This is set
down by the Holy Ghost as the brand and bane, not of the pers^^ of Issachar,
Jacob's son, but of the tribe to be i^nured upon them, when they should be in
such a condition, by their own silliness. Hence I argue, if the Holy Ghost
^^p^obate a people for their stupid subjection to prevailing tyranny, when they
do not approve their ability, capacity, and right to maintain and defend their
liberties and privileges, then this implies a commanded duty to defend them
according to their capacity from all unjust invasion. But the former is true
here also the latter.

Second. In Debo^ah's song, after their victorious resistance, the people are
severely upbraided for not assisting in that expedition. Judges v. 16, 17, 23.
And Meroz is particularly cursed for not coming to the help of the Lord,
against the mighty. This is recorded as a resting reproof against all that will
withdraw their helping hand from the Lord's people, when necessitated to appear
in defensive arms for the preservation of their lives and liberties. On the
other hand, Zebulon and Naph^ali are commended for jeoparding their lives in
the high places of the fields, and are approved for that practice of fighting
against the king of Canaan, that then ruled over them. Verse 18, 19. Hence I
argue, if people be reproved and cursed for ^^aying at home to lo^k to their
own interests, when others jeopard their lives for their country's defense and
freedom, then this implies it is duty to conc^^ in so venturing. But here
Re^b^n, Dan, Aster, and Meroz (...) reproved and cursed for staying at home,
when Zebulon and N^^h^ali jeoparded their lives. Ergo.

Third. We have in scripture many promises of the Lord's approving and
countenancing the duty of defensive arms, even against their oppressing rulers.

First. In that foresighted testament of the patriarch Jacob, in that part of
it which concerns God, he prophecies that tribe shall have a lot in the world,
answering his name, and be engaged in many conflicts with oppressing
dominators, who at first should p^^vail over him, but at length God should so
bless his endeavors to free himself from their oppressions, that he should
overcome. There is an excellent elegancy in the original, answering to the
etymology of the name of Gad, which signifies a troop, reading thus in the
Hebrew: Gad a troop, shall over-troop him, but he shall over-troop them at the
last. Genesis x^ix. 19. And Moses, homologating the same tistimony in his blessing
the tribes before his death, shows that be should make a very forcible and
successful resistance, and should execute the justice of the Lord over his
oppressors. Deuteronomy. xxxiii. ^0, 21. Wherein is implied a promise of resistance to
be made against oppressing tyrants, who should acquire the supreme rule over
them for a time, and the success of that resistance for overcoming necessarily
supposes resistance to be made against oppressing conquerors and tyrants. Hence
I argue, where there is a promise of success at last, to a people's conflicts
against tyranny, there is implied an approbation of the duty, and, also a
promise of its performance wrapped up in that promise. But here is a promise,
etc.

Second. In that threatening against tyrants* showing how they shall be th^^st
away and burnt up with fire* there is couched a promise, and also an implied
precept of resisting them. 2. Sam. xxi^i. 6. The sons of Belial shall be all of
them as thorns thu^st away with hands fenced with iron, etc. Which clearly
implies resistance, and even more than that, rejection and repression. Hence I
farther argue, if it be threatened as a curse against rulers of Belial, and
promised as a blessing that they shall be so roughly handled, then this implies
a duty to resist them, who cannot be otherwise taken; but here this is
threatened, therefore, etc.

Third. When the Lord shall have mercy an Jacob and choose Israel, it is
promised. Isaiah xiv. 2, 3. That they shall take them captives whose captives
they were, and they shall rule over their oppressors. This necessarily implies
and in^^^^^ promise of resistance against these oppressing rulers, in the time
of their dom^neering, as well as revenge, after their yoke should be broken,
and some^^^ng of men's actions, as well as God's judgment, in breaking that
yoke for they could not take them cap^i^^^* (...) rule over them, except first
they had resisted them whose cap^^^^^ ^^ey were. (...) is (...) the (...)
power, (...) where unto was the bondage wherein they were made to serve. Hence
I argue, that if it be promised that a captivated, subjugated people, shall
break the yoke, and free themselves of the bondage of them that had them in
subjection, then it is promised, in that case, they must resist the supreme
powers for such were they whose captives they were. The a^^ecedent is here
express.

Fourth. There are promises that the Lord's people, when those that rule over
them are incensed against them on account of their holy lives, and when many
shall be ^^ighted from their duty by fear, or corrupted with flattery, shall be
made strong to exploits, though in such enterprises they may want success for
some time, and fall by the sword and flame and by captivity and spoil many
days. Dan. xi. 30, 34 This was very eminently fulfilled in the history of the
Maccabees before ^^^^arsed. Hence I argue, if it be promised that a people
shall be strong to do exploits in resisting the arms of their rulers opposing
their religion and liberties, then it is clear such resistance is lawful even
though it should fail of succes^ for a time. But ^his is here promised to the
same purpose. It is promised that after the Lord's people have been long kept
as prisoners under the (...) of tyrants they shall, by a vigorous resistance,
be saved from their tyranny. Zech. ix. 13, 17 When the Lord (...) for him, and
raise up Zion's sons against the son of Greece.

So it was in their resistances and victories against the successors of
Alexander, who had the rule over them for a time. And so it may be again* when
the Lord shall so b^nd his people (...) him. Hence I argue, that if the Lord
promises to (...) his people for action, against their oppressing rulers, (...)
their attempts when so fitted and spirited, with glorious success, then it is
their duty, and also their honor, to resist them; but here that is plainly
promised, therefore, and

Fifth. There are promises of the Lord's making use of his people, and
strengthening them to break in pieces the power of his and their enemies, and
(...) and (...) them against all their power and (...) over them, a^ is
promise^ in the threatened (...) of the Babylonian usurpation Jer. ii. 20, 25.
Thou art, says he (...) (of whom he speaks) as the ^od of his inheritance. In
the preceding verse. My battle-ax^ and weapons of war, and with thee will I
break in pieces powers that (...) supreme over them. Hence I argue, that if the
Lord will make use of his people's vindictive arms against Babylon, (...) over
(...), then he will justify their defensive arms against Babylon oppressing
them. Here it is promised therefore, etc. So Micah, iv, 11. To the end many
nations shall be gathered to defile and look upon Zion, and then the Lord shall
give allowance and commission to his people to arise and thr^^h, etc. What time
the full accomplishment is refered to is not my concern at present to enquire
into. It seems to look toward the New Testament times, wherein the Lord's
people shall be first in greatest (...) and then enlarged. But to restrict it
to the spiritual conquest over the nations, by the ministry of the wo^d though
I will not deny but that may be included* seems too great a straitning of the
scope, and not so opposite to the expressions, which certainly (...) to import
some forcible action of men, and more than the peaceable propogation of the
gospel. It is usually referred to the latter days of that dispensation, when
both the Jewish and Ge^til^ Zion shall be totally and finally delivered from
Babylonian or antichristian tyranny, before or about which period the enemies
of Christ and of his people shall attempt their utmost power to destroy the
church, groaning under their bondage. But when they are all well mattered in a
general rendezvous, the Lord's people shall have a gallant game at the chase.
But whenever the time ^e of fulfilling the promise it ensures to the people
of God, (...) success of their (...) arms against them that pretended a
domination over them. And it looks to a time when they should have no rulers ^f
their own, but them under (...) they had been long groaning, and now brought to
a very low pass; yet here they should not only resist but thresh (...). Hence I
argue that if in the latter days the people of (...) honored and acted so the
with such a spirit and capacity to thre^^ and (...) down these powers under
which they have been long groaning (...), when the Lord puts them in such
capacity to (...) it* they should be ambitious of such an honor. But here
(...) promised* therefore, etc.

(...) from the prophets vision. Zach. i. 19, 20 (...) resisting the four
horns; (...) Judah, so that no man did lift up his head: (...) them to cast out
the horns of the (...) their horn over the land of Judah. These horns had (...)
power over Judah for a time, wh^^e they were in (...) capacity to resist them;
but as soon as the Lord (...) them (...) capacity and instruments, empowered to
resist them, they do it effectually. The carpenters are certainly the (...)
people themselves, for here they are opposite to the Gentiles, which all were
except the Lord's people. Hence I argue, that if the Lord promises, when
reconciled to his people, to furnish them with instruments to fray and scatter
the power of tyrants, who have long bore down their head, then, when they are
so furnished, they may resist them; but the Lord here promises that; therefore,
etc. This is more plainly promised (...) 5. etc. Then they shall be as mighty
men, which (...) their enemies, and the pride of Assyria shall (...) Hence I
further argue, that if the Lord shall have mercy on his people, will bless
their resistance against their enemies (...) arms is lawful and duty to use,
when the (...).

Fourth. We have also precepts from whence we (...) consequently conclude the
approven duty of defensive arms against oppressing rulers.

First. The children of Israel are commanded to vex the Midianites and smite
them, for, says the Lord, they vex you with their ^iles. Numb. xxv. 17, 18.
And to avenge themselves. Numb. xxx. 2. Which did not only oblige the people
when they had M^ses for their magistrate to lead them forth, but, in the days
of Gideon, when they were under their rule, whom they were to avenge themselves
upon. Hence I argue, if people must vex their enemies, and avenge themselves of
them by a war offensive, much more may they resist them by a war defensive,
when invaded by their cruelty.

Second. There is a command to punish every city or party, making apostasy unto
idolatry. Deuteronomy. xiii. 12, 15. upon this moral ground was Israel's war against
Benjamin. Judges xx. and their bringing Amaziah unto cordign punishment, which
is vindicated by Mr. Knox. Hence I argue, if people are to bring to condign
punishment idolatrous (...) much more ought they to resist all tyrants, seeking
to (...) all (...) and liberty, for they are twins Where the spirit of the Lord
is, there is liberty. As I said before, (...) the one (...) the other cannot
live.

Third. There is a precept not only to defend, but also, to rescue and deliver
our brethren when in Hazard. Pr^v. xx^v. 11, 1^* we must not forbear to deliver
them (...) drawn to (...); which will at least infer the duty of (...) when
(...) themselves; for if it be (...) from any, (...) power that would take
(...) much more is it (...), and ourselves both (...) violence, but it is duty
to rescue them, the (...).

Fourth. All those that would learn to do well are commanded, Isa. i. 17. to
relieve the oppressed; which is not spoken to kings only, many of whom were the
oppressors. The Princes were rebellious and companions of thieves, Verse 23. So
also, Isa. lviii. 6. It is required of a people that would be accepted of God
in their humiliations, to let the oppressed go free, and to break every yoke.
Hence I argue, if it be duty to relieve the oppressed, by breaking the yoke of
them that oppress them, then it is duty to defend them and ourselves, both
against them that would oppress us more. But the former is here commanded,
therefore, etc.

Fifth. There is a command for a spoiled oppressed people, when the Lord is
reconciled to them, and sympathizes with them, to deliver themselves from their
rulers servitude. Zech. ii. 7. Deliver thy self O Zion, which dwells with the
daughter of Babylon. Which comprehends all the ordinary active means of
people's delivering themselves from oppressing powers that rule over them; and
consequently defensive resistance, for it cannot only be restricted to flight,
included verse 6. the promise annexed verse 9 imports more, when they that
spoiled them, shall be a spoil to their servants. Whereby it is infinuated they
were so to deliver themselves as not only to free themselves from their
servitude, but to bring their masters under subjection. Hence I argue, if the
Lord's people being subject to tyrants ruling over them for the time, may
deliver themselves from their oppressing masters, then may they resist them,
and defend themselves, therefore, etc.

Sixth. There is a command given by the blessed Jesus to his disciples, to
provide themselves with weapons for their defense against them that should
attempt their lives, as well as with other things necessary for their
sustenance. Luke xxii. 36. Now he that has a purse, let him take it, and
likewise his scrip; and he that has no sword, let him sell his garment and buy
one. Before, when he had sent them out upon an extraordinary commission, as it
were to serve their apprenticeship in the work of the gospel, he did not allow
them such solicitous care to provide themselves, because he would give them a
proof of his sufficiency to sustain and protect them without the ordinary means
of their own diligence; but now, when he was about to withdraw his bodily
presence from them, and would warn them of the many discouragements they were
to look for in the prosecution of their more continued work, which they had a
commission for, not to be retracted, he would not have them expect provision
and protection by a course of miracles, but to provide themselves with means
for their sustenance, and also for their defense against the violence of men,
which chiefly was to be expected from their rulers, who would persecute them
under the notion of transgressors of the laws of the kingdoms and countries. He
was not, indeed, to make much use of them at that time for himself, who was
then to finish the work of redemption by suffering, only that what was written
might be accomplished in him, he would make so much use of them as voluntarily
to be involved under the censure and reproach of rebellion, being taken among
men in arms, that he might be reckoned among transgressors. Verse 37. Therefore
when they told him they had two swords, he said it is enough. Verse 38. I think
I need not stand long here to confute that impertinency of a conceit that these
were spiritual swords, which indeed deserves no confutation, being fitter to be
put among the many delicious destractions, and other errors of Quakers, than to
be numbered among the notions of men of common understanding. Indeed I could
hardly be brought to believe they did hold such an error, if I had not been
informed by a person of credit, who assured me he had it from the mouth of one
of their speakers or teachers. O horrid blasphemy! Purchase the spirit of God,
or the sword of the spirit, or a spiritual sword, with the price of an old
garment. Surely if this was true, then the purse and scrip must be spiritual
too, and these bought by selling of old garments; and yet they would be such
spiritual swords as would cut off carnal ears, and such as would be both
visible and sensible, and two of them would be enough. But it does not admit of
a doubt, but what they were ordinary and material swords, which the Lord did
command his followers to provide themselves with for their defense as men, in
cases of necessity, and when they should be in a capacity to improve them
against their murdering persecutors, against whom he gives his royal grant of
resistance, that the world may know his subjects, though they have more
privileges spiritual, yet they have no less human privileges than other men,
although at that period of his determined suffering, he would not allow the
present use of them. From hence I argue, that if the Lord's people should
provide themselves with arms of defense, though they should, by a wicked world,
be reputed sinners and the greatest of transgressors for so doing, then surely
they may use these arms of defense against them that persecute them; therefore
etc.

Fifth. We may infer the same truth from some of the prayers of the saints,
wherein they glory in the constant expectation of the Lord's strengthening
them, and favoring and approving their helpers, and in the experience of the
Lord's assisting them, while in the mean time constitute in a formed appearance
of resistance. I shall only hint these.

First. In that prayer, Psalm. xliv. 5. They glory in hope, that through the
Lord they will push down their enemies, etc. Yet then at that time they were
under the power of tyrants, which they were resisting, for Verse 9. They
complain they were put to shame, because the Lord went not forth with their
armies, and they which hated them spoiled them; and for his sake were killed
all day long. Hence they plead, that the Lord would awake and not forget their
affliction and oppression; whereby it is evident, they were under the yoke of
tyrants, and resisting according to their might; which, by whomsoever or upon
what occasion soever, the psalm was compiled, shows that no want of success in
resisting tyrants can mar the saints faith in pleading for the Lord's
assistance and approbation of the duty. Hence I argue, that if they that in
faith may pray for and boast of their treading down their enemies, that rise
like tyrants up against them, they may also in faith attempt the resisting them
in their own defense. But here the Lord's people did the former; therefore, etc.

Second. We find David, under Readiness persecution, while h^ had a party of 600
men to defend himself against his rage, in the psalms which he composed upon
that occasion, not only complaining of oppressors, but encouraging himself in
the faith that God would be with them that assisted him in his attempt to
defend himself, and imprecating destruction to Saul and his accomplices. That the
Lord would ^ut them off in his truth and let him see his desire upon them.
Psalm. live. 4, 5. last verse, and Psalm. lvii, 4. and Psalm* lvii throughout, and
Psalm. cxl. 7, 9. He imprecates against the head of them that compassed him
about, and of course against Saul. Whence I argue, First. If the Lord's people,
conflicting with and encompassed with oppressing rulers, as so many lions and
dogs, may pray and praise for the help of those that assist them in their
endeavors of self-preservation from them, then may they make use of their help
for their defense for which they pray and praise. But here we see the Lord's
people did the former; therefore they may and ought to do the latter.

Second. If (...) may pray against kings, and for preservation from them, then
may we defend ourselves against them, and endeavor the means of that
preservation for which we pray? The connection is before cleared, yet here I
add, that which will give a dispensation from our duty of praying for them,
will also dispense from the duty of being passively subject to their will, and
consequently will allow the defending ourselves from their violence. And here
we see tyranny and treachery, and designed mischief, will give a dispensation
from our duty of p^aying for them, although that be duty as indispensible a^
subjection. Again if any thing deter us from resisting of kings, it must be
respect to their majesty and the character of the Lord's anointing upon them.
But we see no respect to that will deter a believer from praying in faith
against them, therefore no such respect will hinder, but that he may defend
himself against his violence; and indeed, if we do but consider it right, if
the impression of any majesty God has put upon kings, should tie up our hands
from any resistance, it will also restrain from prayer resistance; for if that
impression have any force at any time, it must be when a man is most solemnly
stated before God, and speaking to God as a christian, rather than when he is
acting as a man with a man like himself; and as prayer resistance is the most
formidable and forceable resistance of any in the world* as this Saul, and our
la^e George, and many other tyrants have found, by their woeful experience, so
it is more restricted than other resistance, for we may defend ourselves
against many whom we (...) not pray against, to wit, our private (...), for
whom we are commanded to pray; (...) no body will deny but we may resist their
violence; and likewise, we are commanded to pray for kings, when invested with
God's authority; but when, by their degeneration, we are loosed from that
obligation to pray for them, and allows us to pray against them, when they turn
enemies to God, and oppressors of his people, as we see in the prayer of the
Psalmist, then may we most warrantably resist them by defensive arms.

Third and lastly. Among the hallelujahs in the end of Psalms, there is one
calculated for the prevailing time of the church, when the Lord shall take
pleasure in his people. In that time of the saints being joyful in glory, when
they may glory in the rest and security the Lord will vouchsafe upon them, they
are prophetically, and very pa^hetically, excited to praise prayer wise. Psalm.
cxlix. 6. To the end let the high praises of God be in their mouth, and a two
edged sword in their hand to bind their kings with chains, to execute upon them
the judgment written. This honor have all the saints, hallelujah. This was
their praise and honor when they were brought on to execute vengeance on their
kings and nobles of Canaan; this also in David's time was the ambition and also
the attainment of the saints in their triumphant victories over many of their
oppressors round about them. But it looks to a further and more famous
execution of vengeance upon the tyrants of the world, when they have long kept
under the church of God, and at length, the Lord shall give his people a
capacity to break their yoke, which, whenever it shall be, shall be then great
honor. Hence I argue lastly, if it will be the honor of the saints, when the
Lord puts them in capacity to execute vengeance upon their enemies, though they
be kings, nobles* etc. that oppress them, then it may be their ambition to seek
it; at least they may resist them. Thus I think I (...) shown from the law of
God, the law of nature, (...) of nations the lawfulness of the use of defensive
arms, (...) defend our rights, liberties civil and religious, when attacked by
tyrants; at least I think it will convince all but such as are determined not
to be convinced. Especially, I think it appears clear from scripture practices,
reproofs, promises, precepts, and prayers, this truth has been proven; although
I allow that other precious truths are more natively dedu^^d, yet this great
truth by unstrained and unconstrained consequence, may, and is also, clearly
inferred.

A short Receipt for a Continental Disease, The name whereof is the love of
Money.
THE holy scriptures informs us, that the love of money* is the root of all
evil. And this our daily experience does also make manifest. It drives people
into the commission of all evil, to the ruin of themselves and others. How are
people daily distressing each other in sueing and tearing each other limb from
limb, in order to handle a little of this trash, a world of which will not
purchase a spark of grace, nor one inch of time, when on a death bed. Paying no
regard to the distress of the times, nor to the cries of the poor, the needy,
widow, and fatherless children. Perhaps such whose fathers have fought, bled,
and died by our sides, nobly fighting in our glorious cause. How doleful the
thought, that we who have so nobly joined hand in hand to defeat British
cruelty and oppression, should now devour one another? Which is daily
practicing. I shall now give a word of advice to creditors and debtors, which I
shall divide into two classes. First public creditors and debtors. Secondly
private ditto. Public creditors is our rulers and governors, who have a right,
for our good and safety, to demand taxes from us. Gentlemen, let me beg of you
to be as sparing in your demands as possible. You are not unsensible that the
times are hard, and cash scarce. Endeavor to give satisfaction to the
commonalty, that what they pay in taxes is faithfully applied to the uses it
were paid for. The money is the people's to pay and yours to apply, which ought
to be done with the greatest economy. Let no one get rich that handles public
money. I think I have once read of a great general that had served his country
long and faithfully, when he car^e to die all he could call his own was his
dish and spoon, and was buried by charity. A rare instance indeed, but a noble
one. He prefered the publick's interest to his own.

You, my countrymen, public debtors. Gentlemen, please to consider that no war
can be carried on, no government kept up, without taxes, and hea^^ ones too;
and consider what a situation you would soon be in, if there was no government.
Could you sleep one night in peace? Could yo call any thing your own one day*
Therefore if you are wise you will most cheerfully part with some of your
wealth to secure the rest; for I am confident he is an enemy to himself and
country too, that is backward in paying his taxes. Consider that it is not for
us common people to be led into all the secrets of government. Surely we must
believe that those which we have trusted at the helm of affairs does know best
what sums is necessary to be raised from us for our good and protection; and I
think we may rest assured that our legislature will not lay any needless
bu^thens upon us; for my own part, I have that confidence in them that I am
determined to pay my taxes as long as I have a copper left, or can raise it;
for I am sure if the enemy should overcome, or government fails, I am gone
finally.

You gentlemen that may be called private creditors, let me entreat of you to
make use of every method to come at your rights and money, besides law. If it
is a matter of dispute submit it to reference. If it is clear debt, exercise
patience, bear and forbear with your poor debtors. Let nothing but the utmost
necessity, let me say extremity, drive you to distress mankind at this doleful
day. Cause not the cries of the poor and needy widow, fatherless and orphan
children, to ascend up to Heaven against you for distressing them in order to
obtain ca^^ to lay out in toys, to adorn your and families bodies with.
Remember, O remember, a judgment day to come.

And now to you gentlemen debtors. I would have you remember those scripture
sayings owe no man any thing, pay to all their dues. See that you pay to all
their just dues, as fast as possible. If you have not cash turn out any thing
you can possibly spare; yea, offer all you have to your creditors; and surely,
if they are christians, and endowed with humane hearts, if they see you thus
willing to distress yourselves to pay them, they will nobly refuse it and grant
you longer day. Use them well, give them good language, and if possible deceive
them not. Practice industry and good economy, for a creditor has hawk's eyes;
and do not love to see their debtors struting about in fine rigging at their
expense. Above all, remember the golden rule, do to all men as you would have
them do to you again.

A MODERATE WHIG.
June 17, 1782.
FINIS.

