A DISCOURSE CONCERNING The PROCESS of the GENERAL JUDGMENT. IN WHICH The
modern Notions of Universal Salvation are particularly considered.

BY NATHANAEL EMMONS, A. M. PASTOR OF THE CHURCH IN FRANKLIN.

Behold, I come quickly; and my Reward is with me,
To give every Man according as his Work shall be.
The SUPREME JUDGE. PROVIDENCE ( Rhode Island) PRINTED BY BENNETT WHEELER, 1783.

MATTHEW XXV. 31 -- 46. When the Son of Man shall come in his glory, and all
the holy angels with him, then shall he sit upon the throne of his glory. And
before him shall be gathered all nations: And he shall separate them one from
another, as a shepherd divides his sheep from the goats. And he shall set the
sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left Then shall the King say unto
them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world. For I was an-hungered and ye
gave me meat: I was thirsty and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger and ye took
me in: Naked and ye clothed me: I was sick and ye visited me: I was in prison
and ye came unto me. Then shall the righteous answer him, saying, Lord, when
saw we thee an-hungered and fed thee? or thirsty and gave thee drink? When saw
we thee a stranger and took thee in? or naked and clothed thee? Or when saw we
thee sick or in prison and came unto thee? And the King shall answer and say
unto them, Verily I say unto you, inasmuch as ye have done it unto one of the
least of these my brethren, ye have done it unto me. Then shall he say unto
them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire,
prepared for the devil and his angels. For I was an-hungered and ye gave no
meat: I was thirsty and ye gave me no drink: I was a stranger and ye took me
not in: Naked and ye clothed me not: Sick and in prison and ye visited me not.
Then shall they also answer him, saying, Lord, when saw we thee an-hungered, or
a thirst, or a stranger, or naked, or sick, or in prison, and did not minister
unto thee? Then shall he answer them, saying, Verily I say unto you, inasmuch
as ye did it not to one of the least of these, ye did it not to me. And these
shall go away into everlasting punishment: but the righteous into life eternal.


IT is the intention of this discourse, to explain and confirm the sense of
this passage of scripture. And since scripture is the best interpreter of
itself, we shall compare the various representations in the text, with the
general tenor of the sacred oracles.

I. Our Lord here gives us a particular and lively representation of the
general judgment. "When the Son of Man shall come in his glory, and all the
holy angels with him, then he shall sit upon the throne of his glory. And
before him shall be gathered all nations, etc." This description of the great
day resembles that of several other inspired writers. Enoch also, the seventh
from Adam, prophesied of it, saying, "Behold the Lord comes with ten thousands
of his saints to execute judgment upon all." Solomon says, "God shall bring
every work into judgment, with every secret thing, whether it be good, or
whether it be evil." The apostle Paul declares that God has appointed a day,
in the which he will judge the world in righteousness by that man whom he has
ordained; whereof he has given assurance unto all men, in that he has raised
him from the dead." We are told the fallen angels are "reserved in everlasting
chains under darkness, unto the judgment of the great day." And the apostle
John beheld in vision this great, and glorious, and solemn scene. "I saw the
dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books were opened; and another
book was opened, which is the book of life: And the dead were judged out of
those things which were written in the books according to their works." These
declarations are too explicit to need any comment; they literally speak the
language of the text, and confirm the representation it gives of the general
judgment: Which is also agreeable to the nature and apprehensions of mankind as
well as the character of the Deity and the present dispensations of divine
providence.

It is, in the first place, perfectly consonant to the nature of men as moral
agents. They are endued with perception, reason, memory, conscience, and all
the powers and faculties which are requisite to moral agency. And being moral
agents, they are proper subjects of law and moral government. The Supreme Being
therefore will treat them but according to their nature, to call them to an
account for all the deeds done in the body, and give them a just recompense of
reward. Hence every man carries in the very frame and constitution of his
nature an irresistible evidence of a future judgment.

Accordingly, this is agreeable to the natural apprehensions of mankind. As
they are sensible they lie open and naked to the view of the omniscient God, so
they naturally expect he will call them to an account for all the inward
motions and exercises of their hearts as well as outward actions of their
lives. The man who embrues his hand in the blood of his fellow creature, though
concealed from every other eye but the omniscient, has a secret fearful
apprehension of the righteous judgment of God. And, though he is neither
accused nor suspected of his crime, yet his own conscience binds him over to
the judgment of the great day. This is the secret voice of nature, which has
discovered itself on many occasions. The Barbarians, when they saw the viper on
Paul's hand, "Said among themselves, no doubt this man is a murderer, whom
though he has escaped the sea, yet vengeance suffers (...) to live." The
mariners in the ship with Jonah, when they found themselves in danger of
perishing by a mighty tempest, "Said, come let us cast lots, that we may know
for whose cause this evil is come upon us" And when Joseph's brethren were
thrust into prison, and subjected to great and unexpected misfortunes, they
immediately recollect their cruel and unnatural treatment of their brother, as
the procuring cause of their present calamities. "They said one to another, we
are verily guilty concerning our brother, in that we saw the anguish of his
soul, when he besought us, and we would not hear: Therefore is this distress
come upon us." All men thus feel the natural connection between moral evil and
physical, between sinning and suffering, between guilt and punishment. Hence
every man's conscience presages a future day of retribution, when he must give
an account of himself to God, as the supreme and final Judge.

And this is further confirmed by the rectitude of the divine character and
government. Since the Author of Nature is infinitely holy, just and good, he
must necessarily conduct agreeably to these divine attributes in the government
of moral beings, and dispense rewards and punishments according to their
respective characters. The present state of things, however, clearly evinces
that the day of retribution is yet to come. Here, as Solomon observes, all
things come alike to all, there is one event to the righteous and the wicked,
and no man knows either love or hatred, by the present dispensations of
divine providence toward him. But as things cannot always continue so under
the administrations of a Being of perfect rectitude; so the present state of
the world is a clear demonstration of a future general judgment, when the
Supreme Being will review the conduct of all his intelligent creatures, and
reward the righteous and punish the wicked according to their works.

II. Our Lord speaks of one distinction in the characters of men, which will
absorb all other distinctions, and divide the whole world into two classes at
the last day. "Before him shall be gathered all nations: And he shall separate
them one from another, as a shepherd divides his sheep from the goats: And he
shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left. Then shall
the King say unto them on his right hand, Come, ye blessed (...) my Father,
etc. -- For I was an-hungered, and ye gave me meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave
me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me in: Naked and ye clothed me: I was
sick, and ye visited me: I was in prison, and ye came unto me. Then shall he
say also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, etc. -- For I
was an-hungered, and ye gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me no
drink: I was a stranger, and ye took me not in: Naked, and ye clothed me not:
sick and in prison, and ye visited me not."

In many respects the righteous and the wicked resemble each other. They are
often alike as to their natural powers and abilities. In this view, Absalom,
Joab and Ahitophel resembled Moses, David and Solomon. There is also a
resemblance in their natural tempers and dispositions. Absalom and the young
man in the gospel, were perhaps, in this respect, as amiable as Moses, or the
beloved disciple who leaned on Jesus' breast. These, and many other
circumstances which arise from birth, rank, fortune, religious denominations,
etc. are common both to the righteous and the wicked, and will not characterise
mankind at the last day. But there is a difference in the HEARTS of men, which
forms a capital distinction in their characters, and will finally place some on
the right, and some on the left hand of their Judge. And this is the
distinction, which our Lord here mentions and describes. He represents the
righteous as possessed of that divine love and charity, by which they sought
the glory of God and the good of their fellow creatures in all their actions.
But he represents the wicked as actuated by a low, mean, mercenary, contracted
disposition, which confined all their views and pursuits to their own good.
Both these dispositions are described by the apostle Paul. His description of
charity or divine love is in these words. "Though I speak with the tongues of
men and of angels, and have not charity, I am become as sounding brass, or a
tinkling cymbal. And though I have the gift of prophecy, and understand all
mysteries, and all knowledge; and though I have all faith, so that I could
remove mountains, and have not charity, I am nothing. And though I bestow all
my goods to feed the poor, and though I give my body to be burned, and have not
charity, it profits me nothing." So says our Lord in the text: But the
description continues. "Charity suffers long, and is kind; charity envieth
not; charity vaunteth not itself, is not puffed up, does not behave itself
unseemly, seeks not her own, etc. Whereas the contrary disposition, the
apostle says, makes "men lovers of their own selves, covetous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy, without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusers, incontinent, fierce, despisers of
those that are good, traitors, heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasure, more
than lovers of God." Heat and cold, light and darkness cannot be more
diametrically opposite in their nature and effects, than these two dispositions
are. And since all mankind are governed by one or the other of these two
principles of action, so there is an essential distinction in their characters,
which justly denominates them all either righteous or wicked. Accordingly we
find the scripture every where takes notice of this capital distinction in the
characters of men, and marks it by such discriminating epithets as these -- the
godly and the ungodly -- the holy and the unholy -- the just and the unjust --
saints and sinners -- the friends of God and the enemies of God -- the children
of light and the children of darkness -- the children of God and the children
of the devil.

As this distinction is of great importance, and closely connected with the
subject before us, we shall consider it a little more particularly.

The Supreme Being, in the course of providence, has acknowledged and-paid a
visible regard to this distinction between the righteous and the wicked. In
describing the character of Noah, he represents him as essentially different
from the rest of mankind at that day. "God looked upon the earth, and behold it
was corrupt: For all flesh had corrupted his way upon the earth: -- And the
Lord said unto Noah, come thou, and all thy house into the ark: For thee have I
seen righteous before me in this generation." Here God distinguished the
righteous from the wicked, and, to exhibit a public and visible regard to this
distinction, he saved the righteous and destroyed the wicked.

He likewise asserted and vindicated the distinguishing character of Job. "The
Lord said unto Satan, Have thou considered my servant Job, that there is none
like him in the earth, a perfect and upright man, one that fears God and
escheweth evil" The great accuser of the brethren disputed the truth of this
divine declaration. "Then Satan answered the Lord, and said, Does Job fear God
for naught? Have thou not made an hedge about him, and about his house, and
about all he has on every side? Thou have blessed the work of his hands; and
his substance is increased in the land. But put forth thine hand now, and touch
all that he has, and he will curse thee to thy face." As if he had said, There
is nothing singular in the character of Job. He conducts no otherwise than any
other person would in the same situation. Let any other man receive equal
tokens of thy love and favor, and he will make equal returns of gratitude and
obedience. Sinners love those that love them. He is, like all other men,
entirely governed by mercenary motives. Therefore only touch his interest, and
strip him of those peculiar favors thou have lavished upon him, and he will
drop the mask, discover his hypocrisy, and curse thee to thy face. To wipe off
these aspersions from Job's character, and to convince Satan that he acted from
truly noble, disinterested motives, God gives him leave to try him with any
afflictions or calamities short of death. Satan with pleasure makes the
experiment. He brings a train of evils upon Job in thick succession. He strips
him of his wealth. He slays his servants. And to close the scene, he rends from
his heart, the dear objects of his affections, by the sudden and surprising
death of his children. Thus he tumbles him, in a moment, from the summit of
human glory into the depths of human woe. Here is a fair trial. And what is the
effect? Does he curse God as Satan predicted, and as an unholy, unsubmissive
heart would naturally prompt him to do under such a severe, corrective stroKe?
Nothing more remote. "Then Job arose, and rent his mantle, and shaved his head,
and fell down upon the ground, and worshipped, and said, Naked came I out of my
mother's womb, and naked shall I return thither. The Lord gave, and the Lord
has taken away; blessed be the name of the Lord." Here is, as far as can be, a
visible demonstration of the essential difference between nature and grace,
between a saint and a sinner.

On another very memorable occasion, God explicitly acknowledged the reality
and importance of this distinction. He had resolved to destroy Sodom. But
previously to the execution of this design, he revealed his purpose to Abraham,
who immediately breaks forth into the most fervent intercession for those
miserable objects. And this is the language in which he addresses the Most
High. "Will thou destroy the righteous with the wicked? That be far from thee
to do, after this manner, to slay the righteous with the wicked: And that the
righteous should be as the wicked, that be far from thee, shall not the Judge
of all the earth do right? God graciously replies to this and his repeated
importunity, that if he found fifty, or forty-five, or forty, or thirty, or
twenty, or even ten righteous persons in the city, he would spare the whole
place for their sakes. And when neither of these numbers could be found, he
delivered just Lot, as a standing monument that the Judge of all the earth
would do right. Such are the public, visible, striking testimonies, which God
himself has borne to the distinction between the righteous and the wicked.

David mentions and describes this distinction almost in every psalm. It may
suffice to quote the first as a specimen of the rest. "Blessed is the man that
walks not in the council of the ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners,
nor sits in the seat of the scornful. But his delight is in the law of God;
and in his law does he meditate day and night. And he shall be like a tree
planted by the rivers of water, that brings forth his fruit in season; his
leaf also shall not wither, and whatsoever he does shall prosper. The ungodly
are not so: but are like the chaff which the wind drives away. Therefore the
ungodly shall not stand in the judgment, nor sinners in the congregation of the
righteous: but the way of the ungodly shall perish." If it be said, this psalm
refers to Christ, it is sufficient to observe that there is no evidence of it
from any description of his person or character, nor from any part of it being
applied to him in the new testament.

The book of Proverbs is, in a manner, one continued contrast between the
righteous and the wicked.

The declarations of Christ on this head deserve special attention and regard.
His sermon on the mount contains a beautiful description of the discriminating
characters of the righteous. "Blessed are the poor in spirit: For theirs is the
kingdom of heaven. Blessed are they that mourn: For they shall be comforted.
Blessed are the meek: For they shall inherit the earth. Blessed are they which
do hunger and thirst after righteousness: For they shall be filled. Blessed are
the merciful: For they shall obtain mercy. Blessed are the pure in heart: For
they shall see God." That Christ here intends to distinguish saints from
sinners, in respect to the inward motions and affections of their hearts, is
not only evident from the description itself, but from the observation which he
immediately subjoins. "For I say unto you, That except your righteousness shall
exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case
enter into the kingdom of heaven." And in the conclusion of this chapter, he
more particularly describes the nature and essence of the distinction, which he
had before been speaking of. "Ye have heard that it has been said, Thou shall
love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy: But I say unto you, Love your
enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for
them that despitefully use you, and persecute you; that ye may be the children
of your Father which is in heaven; for he makes his sun to rise on the evil
and on the good, and sends rain on the just and on the unjust. For if ye love
them that love you, what reward have ye? do not even the publicans the same?
And if ye salute your brethren only; what do ye more than others? do not even
the publicans so? Be ye therefore perfect, even as your Father which is in
heaven is perfect." Our Lord here represents the children of God as bearing his
divine image, and possessing his divine spirit, which distinguishes them from
the rest of mankind who are utterly destitute of such a holy and heavenly
temper. And in his conference with Nicodemus, he points out the source from
whence they derive this special grace, and who it is that makes them to differ.
"Verily, verily, I say unto you, Except a man be born again, he cannot see the
kingdom of God. That which is born of the flesh, is flesh: and that which is
born of the spirit, is spirit: marvel not that I said unto you, Ye must be born
again."

We have only to add the testimonies of the apostles to this important
distinction. St. Paul declares, "If any man have not the spirit of Christ, he
is none of his." Again, "If any man be in Christ, he is a new creature: Old
things are passed away; behold, all things are become new." And he represents
saints as distinguished not only from sinners, but from themselves whilst in a
state of nature, by the special influences of the divine Spirit. "And you has
he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins, wherein in time past ye
walked according to the course of this world, according to the prince of the
power of the air, the spirit that now works in the children of disobedience:
Among whom we all had our conversation in times past; in the lust of our flesh,
and of the mind: And were by nature the children of wrath, even as others." And
in another place, after mentioning a catalogue of the blackest characters, he
reminds the saints, "That such were some of you; but ye are washed, but ye are
sanctified, but ye are justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the
Spirit of our God." The apostle John in the first chapter of his gospel, says,
"As many as received Christ, to them gave he power to become the sons of God,
even to them that believe on his name: Which were born, not of blood, nor of
the will of the flesh, nor of the will of man, but of God." And in the third
chapter of his first epistle, he insists on the same distinction as a matter of
high importance. "Little children, let no man deceive you (by pretending there
is no difference between saints and sinners, for) he that does righteousness is
righteous, even as he, that is Christ, is righteous: He that commits sin is
of the devil; for the devil sins from the beginning. Whosoever is born of
God does not commit sin; for his seed remains in him: And he cannot sin,
because he is born of God. In this the children of God are manifest, and the
children of the devil: Whosoever does not righteousness is not of God. neither
he that loves not his brother." Thus the essential distinction between the
righteous and the wicked appears to be perfectly consonant to the whole tenor
of the sacred oracles.

III. Christ further asserts that the righteous and the wicked shall be
separated from each other, and respectively rewarded and punished at the last
day. "And he shall separate them one from another, as shepherd divides his
sheep from the goats: And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the
goats on the left. Then shall the King say unto them on his right hand; Come,
ye blessed of my Father, inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the
foundation of the world. Then shall he say also unto them on the left hand,
Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and
his angels." This representation of the process of the last day falls in with
the natural apprehensions of mankind. They naturally expect a future judgment,
and they as naturally expect the judgment of God will be according to truth,
and proceed upon the immutable principles of perfect rectitude.

And we have sufficient grounds to expect this, from many instances of the
divine conduct. God separated the fallen angels from the rest of the heavenly
hosts, and doomed them to a state of darkness and despair. He approved and
preserved Noah, whilst he condemned and destroyed the ungodly world. He
preserved just Lot from the ruins of Sodom. And he distinguished Moses and
Aaron, Caleb and Joshua from that evil generation, who were doomed to fall in
the wilderness. These instances presage a more general and perfect display of
retributive justice at the last day. And in this light they are considered and
improved by the inspired writers of the new testament. The apostle Peter urges
them as incontestible proofs of future rewards and punishments. "For, says he,
if God spared not the angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell, and
delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment; and
spared not the old world, but saved Noah the eighth person, a preacher of
righteousness, bringing in the flood upon the world of the ungodly; and turning
the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, condemned them with an overthrow,
making them an ensample unto those that after should live ungodly; and
delivered just Lot, vexed with the filthy conversation of the wicked: -- The
Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to reserve the
unjust unto the day of judgment to be punished." And the apostle Paul reasons
in the same manner upon the divine conduct toward the devoted Israelites. "But
with many of them God was not well pleased; for they were overthrown in the
wilderness. Now all these things happened unto them for ensamples; and they are
written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come." These
instances leave us no room to doubt, that God will finally dispense rewards and
punishments to all mankind with perfect rectitude and impartiality.

Nor is this less evident from the whole tenor and spirit of the gospel, which
sets the rewards of the righteous, and punishments of the wicked after death,
in the clearest and strongest light. The gospel not only proclaims divine mercy
to all penitent and believing sinners, but on the contrary, denounces
inevitable destruction to all who finally reject the offers of life.
Accordingly our Lord, when he sent forth his apostles to preach the gospel,
gave them special charge to proclaim its solemn sanctions as well as its
gracious proposals. "And he called unto him the twelve, and began to send them
forth by two and two. -- And he said unto them, In what place soever ye enter
into an house, there abide till ye depart from that place. And whosoever shall
not receive you, nor hear you, when ye depart thence, shake off the dust under
your feet, for a testimony against them. Verily, I say unto you, It shall be
more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah, in the day of judgment, than for that
city." After Christ's resurrection, and just before his ascension into heaven,
he gave a commission to his apostles, and to all their successors in the
ministry, to preach the gospel wherever divine providence should call them. And
their commission runs in this solemn form. "Go ye into all the world, and
preach the gospel to every creature: He that believes and is baptized shall be
saved; but he that believes not shall be damned." Here is the very genius and
spirit of that gospel, which is to be unfolded and inculcated by all the
ministers of Christ in every age of the church. And according to this summary
of the gospel, future rewards and punishments appear to be not only consistent
with the gospel, but an essential part of it. Indeed the gospel gives as full
assurance of the destruction of unbelievers, as of the salvation of believers;
and as infallibly fixes the certainty of future punishments as of future
rewards.

This truth evidently runs through the whole frame and contexture of the
gospel, and is interwoven with all its peculiar and leading sentiments. We
might instance in the doctrine of election, divine sovereignty, regeneration,
etc. But we shall only mention the terms of salvation, which are the cardinal
precepts of the gospel.

Repentance is one of these. It is much insisted on both in the old testament
and new. Solomon says, "He that covers his sins shall not prosper: But whosoever
confesses and forsakes them, shall have mercy." David tells us, "The
sacrifices of God are a broken spirit: A broken and a contrite heart, O God,
thou will not despise." Christ also declares, "He came not to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance. And he expressly told sinners, on a
certain occasion, "Except ye repent, ye shall all likewise perish."

Faith in the Mediator is a term of the divine acceptance. "He that believes
and is baptized shall be saved: But he that believes not shall be damned."

Love to Christ is a condition of divine approbation at the last day. "If any
man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be Anathama maranatha." That is to
say, let him be accursed when the Lord comes to judgment.

A forgiving spirit is likewise necessary in order to obtain divine
forgiveness. "When ye stand praying forgive if ye have ought against any: That
your Father also, which is in heaven, may forgive your trespasses. But if you
do not forgive, neither will your Father which is in heaven forgive your
trespasses."

And it is equally necessary to persevere in all christian graces and duties,
in order to receive the end of our faith, even the salvation of our souls. "Now
the just shall live by faith: But if any man draw back, my soul shall have no
pleasure in him. But we are not of those who draw back unto perdition: But of
them that believe to the saving of their souls." These terms of salvation speak
for themselves. If they have any meaning, they must mean that those who comply
with them shall be saved; but those who reject them shall be lost.

The doctrine of future rewards and punishments may receive additional proof
from many express declarations of scripture. To recite every passage in favor
of this truth, would be to transcribe a great part of the bible. We shall
therefore only mention a few which are the most plain, and pertinent to our
subject. We read in the ninth psalm, "The wicked shall be turned into hell, and
all the nations that forget God." There was a set of men, in the days of
Malachi, who ridiculed all experimental religion and vital piety. They said it
was a vain thing to serve God, to walk mournfully before him, or to keep his
ordinances. They called the proud happy, and applauded the workers of iniquity.
In contrast with such persons, the prophet points the characters and future
prospects of the righteous in the most lively colors. "Then they that feared
the Lord spoke often one to a^^^her; and the Lord hearkened and heard it, and a
book of remembrance was written before him, for them that feared the Lord and
thought upon his name. And they shall be mine, says the Lord of hosts, in the
day when I make up my jewels; and I will spare them as a man spares his own
son that serves him. Then shall ye return, and discern between the righteous
and the wicked; between him that serves God, and him that serves him not."

The apostle Paul speaks equally plain and determinate on this head, in the
second chapter of Romans. "But we are sure the judgment of God is according to
truth, against them that commit such things. And think thou, O man, that
judge those that do such things and do the same, that thou shall escape
the judgment of God? Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness, and
forbearance, and long suffering; not knowing that the goodness of God leads
thee to repentance? But after thy hardness and impenitent heart, treasurest up
to thyself wrath, against the day of wrath, and revelation of the righteous
judgment of God; who shall render to every man according to his deeds: To them,
who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory, and honor, and
immortality; eternal life: But unto them that are contentious, and do not obey
the truth, but obey unrighteousness; indignation and wrath, tribulation and
anguish upon every soul of man (not sin of man, but soul of man) that does
evil, of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile."

To these may be added the declarations of Christ. "Wide is the gate, and broad
is the way that leads to destruction, and many there be which go in thereat:
Because strait is the gate, and narrow is the way, which leads unto life, and
few there be that find it." "Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord,
shall enter into the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my Father
which is in heaven. Many will say unto me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not
prophesied in thy name? And in thy name cast out devils? And in thy name done
many wonderful works? And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you:
Depart from me, ye that work iniquity." "Fear not them that kill the body, but
are not able to kill the soul: But rather fear him, which is able to destroy
both soul and body in hell."

To enforce these solemn warnings, our compassionate Redeemer, as it were, sets
before our eyes the certainty and danger of future punishments, by a number of
well-chosen and striking parables. To this end he spoke the parable of the
vineyard -- of the sower -- of the rich fool -- of the marriage supper -- of
the ten virgins -- of the talents -- of the tares -- and of the rich man and
Lazarus. Each of these parables would greatly serve to illustrate the subject
before us, but especially the two last; which, therefore, we beg leave to
recite at large. The parable of the tares is in the thirteenth of Matthew. "The
kingdom of heaven is likened unto a man which sowed good seed in his field: But
while men slept, his enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat, and went his
way. But when the blade was sprung up, and brought forth fruit, then appeared
the tares also. So the servants of the householder came, and said unto him, Sir,
did not thou sow good seed in thy field? From whence then has it tares? He
said unto them, an enemy has done this. The servants said unto him, Will thou
that we go and gather them up? But he said, nay; lest while ye gather up the
tares, ye root up also the wheat with them. Let both grow together until the
harvest: And in the time of harvest, I will say unto the reapers, Gather ye
together first the tares, and bind them in bundles, to burn them: But gather
the wheat into my barn." Our Lord's exposition of his own parable supersedes
any other comment. It is this. "He that sows the good seed is the Son of man;
the field is the world; the good seed are the children of the kingdom, but the
tares are the children of the wicked one: The enemy that sowed them is the
devil; the harvest is the end of the world; and the reapers are the angels. As
therefore the tares are gathered and burnt in the fire; so shall it be in the
end of the world. The Son of man shall send forth his angels, and they shall
gather out of his kingdom all things that offend, and them which do iniquity:
And shall cast them (not their sins, but them personally) into a furnace of
fire: There shall be weeping and knashing of teeth. Then shall the righteous
shine forth in the kingdom of their Father."

The parable of the rich man and Lazarus, in the sixteenth of Luke, gives us a
still more visible and affecting representation of the miseries of the damned.
"There was a certain rich man which was clothed in purple and fine linen, and
fared sumptuously every day. And there was a certain beggar, named Lazarus,
which was laid at his gate, full of sores; and desiring to be fed with the
crumbs which fell from the rich man's table: Moreover the dogs came and licked
his sores. And it came to pass that the beggar died, and was carried by the
angels into Abraham's bosom. The rich man also died, and was buried: And in
hell he lifted up his eyes, being in torments, and sees Abraham afar off, and
Lazarus in his bosom. And he cried and said, Father Abraham, have mercy on me,
and send Lazarus, that he may dip the tip of his finger in water, and cool my
tongue: For I am tormented in this flame. But Abraham said, Son, remember that
thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things, and likewise Lazarus evil
things: But now he is comforted, and thou art tormented. And besides all this,
between us and you there is a great gulf fixed: So that they which would pass
from hence to you, cannot, neither can they pass to us, that would come from
thence. Then he said, I pray thee therefore that thou would send him to my
father's house; for I have five brethren, that he may testify unto them, lest
they also come into this place of torment. Abraham says unto him, They have
Moses and the prophets: Let them hear them. And he said, nay, Father Abraham;
but if one went unto them from the dead, they will repent. And he said unto
him, if they hear not Moses and the prophets, neither will they be persuaded
though one rise from the dead." Nothing short of dreadful experience can give
us clearer evidence of future torments than this parable; nor afford a better
comment upon our Lord's representation of the final separation between the
righteous and the wicked, and their respective rewards and punishments at the
last day.

There is one thing more contained in the text, which deserves particular
notice, and that is,

IV. The endless duration of future rewards and punishments. "Then shall he say
also unto them on the left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed, into everlasting
fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. And these shall go away into
everlasting punishment: But the righteous into life eternal." This is the
general voice of scripture. The prophet Daniel says, "Many of them that sleep
in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting life, and some to
shame, and everlasting contempt." The apostle Paul asserts, that "the Lord
Jesus Christ shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty angels, in flaming
fire, taking vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel
of our Lord Jesus Christ: Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction
from the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power." In Rev. 20th,
3d, the apostle John tells us, "He saw Satan cast into the bottomless pit."
This epithet, which we meet with no less than six times besides in this book.
expresses in the strongest manner the neverending miseries of the wicked, the
smoke of whose torments is repeatedly said to ascend forever and ever. Our Lord
once before asserted the eternity of future punishments as clearly as he does
in the text. "If thy hand offend thee cut it off: It is better for thee to
enter into life maimed, than having two hands to go into hell, into the fire
that never shall be quenched: Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not
quenched. And if thy foot offend thee, cut it off: It is better for thee to
enter halt into life, than having two feet to be cast into hell, into the fire
that never shall be quenched: Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not
quenched. And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out: It is better for thee to
enter into the kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes to be cast
into hellfire: Where their worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched." In
this last passage the eternity of hell torments is expressed in terms which
admit of no evasion. Our Lord's argument here turns upon the infinite disparity
between temporal and eternal pains. Duration is the only point to be
illustrated. And finite is here set in contrast with infinite duration. And
this infinite duration is expressed by a variety of epithets, which are, of all
others, the most plain, determinate and unexceptionable.

As to the words -- eternal -- everlasting -- forever and ever -- they
generally signify a duration which is absolutely boundless, and are to be taken
so here, unless there be some special reason for restricting them to a limited
duration. When they are applied to subjects which are in their own nature
temporary; this naturally leads us to understand them in a limited and
restricted sense. But when they are applied to the souls of men which are
immortal, the subject allows us to interpret them in their most common and
extensive meaning. The souls of the wicked may exist as long as the souls of
the righteous, and therefore the miseries of the former may run parallel with
the happiness of the latter. And this is asserted in the text. The same word in
the original is used to express the duration of future punishments, which is
used to express the duration of future rewards. "And these shall go away into
everlasting punishment: But the righteous into life eternal." The Greek word
here rendered eternal and everlasting, is rendered so fifty-seven times in the
new testament; and there are but two places in the new testament, where the
word eternal or everlasting comes from any other Greek word. The same Greek
word is likewise used both in the old and new testament, to signify the
eternity of the divine existence. See Genesis 22, 23. Isaiah 40, 28, and 26, 4,
and 57, 15. Psalm 41, 13. and 90, 2, and 93.2, and 106, 48. Daniel 12, 7. Romans
16 26. 1 Timothy 1, 17.
And the Earl of Nottingham has shown, that this Greek word signifies eternity
in the writings of Plato, Aristotle, Plutarch, and the best Greek authors, and
that they have no better word in their language, by which to express a proper
eternity or endless duration. See his criticisms on those words in his answer
to Mr. Whiston, Ed. 9. p. 36, 37, 38.
Indeed Dr. Hartley, who maintains that the miseries of the damned will finally
cease, allows that the scripture expressions concerning the eternity of
hell torments are sufficiently plain and determinate, and would establish the
point if any mere expressions could possibly do it, which, however he
absolutely denies. And though Mr. Seigvolk and others say, the Greek words
which the inspired writers here made use of to express the eternity of future
punishments, only signify an age, or ages, or ages of ages, or periodical
eternities of 50, 100, 1000, 2000 years continuance, yet they do not tell us
what other words could have been used to express an absolute eternity with more
certainty and precision, or more to their satisfaction. According to their
criticisms, if the inspired writers had really intended to assert the endless
duration of future punishments, they could not have done it, because there is
no word in any language, which primarily signifies an absolute eternity. But
these and all other critics, however, are obliged to own, that the inspired
writers have used such expressions as sometimes signify eternity, and
acknowledge that the sense of such expressions ought to be determined by the
nature of the subjects to which they applied, and the connection in which they
are used. Hence there appears no force in the criticisms which have been made
upon the words, by which the eternity of future punishments is expressed in the
sacred oracles. So far as words, or mere expressions can determine the matter,
it is absolutely certain, that both the miseries of the wicked, and the
happiness of the righteous will run parallel with the interminable ages of
eternity.

Nor is there any thing in scripture or reason to take off the force of these
expressions, or lead us to imagine the wicked will ever be released from
punishment and restored to the divine favor.

1. We have no reason to think so from the nature of sin. All allow that sin
and guilt are inseperably connected, and therefore that every sin deserves some
punishment. But many imagine, that no transient, momentary act of a finite
creature can contain such malignity and guilt, as to deserve an eternal
punishment; and therefore that the damned must finally be released from
punishment, upon the foot of equity, having paid the uttermost farthing which
they owed to divine justice. And if their guilt shall ever cease, we may be
assured their punishment will also cease, for the Judge of all the earth will
do right, and punish them no longer than they deserve. But who, in the whole
circle of the intelligent creation, can tell us when their guilt, or desert of
punishment will cease? Sin and guilt are inseperably connected. Guilt can no
more be separated from sin than criminality. There is no sin without
criminality, and no criminality without guilt, or desert of punishment.
Therefore both the criminality and guilt of a crime must continue as long as
the crime continues, or till it ceases to be a crime and becomes an innocent
action. But can murder, for instance, which is a crime in the very nature of
things, ever become a virtue? Can time, or obedience, or sufferings, or even a
divine declaration, alter its nature, and render it an innocent action? Virtue
and vice, sin and holiness are founded in the nature of things, and so must
forever remain immutable. Hence that which was once virtuous, will forever be
virtuous; that which was once vicious, will forever be vicious; that which was
once praiseworthy, will forever be praiseworthy; that which was once
blameworthy, will forever be blameworthy; and that which once deserved
punishment, will forever deserve punishment. Now if neither the nature of sin
can be changed, nor the guilt of it taken away, then the damned, who have once
deserved punishment, will forever deserve it, and consequently God may, in
point of justice, punish them to all eternity.

2. There is no ground to expect that the punishments of the damned will ever
soften and purify their hearts, and so prepare them, in some distant period, to
exchange the regions of darkness for the mansions of bliss. Among others Dr.
Hartley and Chevalier Ramsay build their strongest hopes of the final
restitution of all lapsed beings to the divine favor, upon this foundation.
They imagine the punishments of the wicked will naturally soften and meliorate
their hearts, and finally qualify them for the society and enjoyments of the
blessed. They suppose God's ultimate view in punishing the wicked after death
is to reclaim them, and bring them to good. They look upon such persons as die
in impenitence and unbelief as peculiarly perverse and obaurate, whom none of
the mild methods of providence and grace could effectually subdue and reclaim
in this life, and therefore God is reduced to the disagreeable necessity of
purging and purifying them by the harsh and severe means of hell torments. They
imagine God constantly desires and uniformly pursues the happiness of every
individual of the human race, and will bring them all to pure and permanent
felicity as soon as he can possibly do it consistent with their moral freedom
and inveterate habits of sin. And "as God cannot be eternally frustrated in his
designs; as finite impotence, folly and malice cannot forever surmount infinite
power, wisdom and goodness; as the sacrifice of the Lamb slain cannot be
forever void and of no effect; reprobate souls and angels cannot be forever
unconvertible, nor God unappeaseable, nor moral and physical evil
undestructible. Wherefore infernal punishments must at last cease, and all
lapsed beings be at length pardoned and re-established in a permanent state of
happiness and glory, never more to fall again. This is the end and consummation
of all things, and the designs of all God's promises and punishments."

But is there any thing in divine revelation to support this hypothesis? That
God visits the righteous, in this life, with pains, trials and afflictions for
their spiritual benefit, he has expressly told us, and they have sound to be
true by happy experience. "My son, despise not the chastening of the Lord, nor
faint when thou art rebuked of him. For whom the Lord loves he chasteneth, and
scourges every son whom he receives. Furthermore, we have had fathers of our
flesh, which corrected us, and we gave them reverence: Shall we not much rather
be in subjection unto the father of our spirits, and live? For they verily for
a few days chastened us after their own pleasure; but he for our profit, that
we might be partakers of his holiness." And David gratefully acknowledges that
he derived real benefit from the divine corrections. "Before I was afflicted, I
went astray; but now have I kept thy word. I know, O Lord, that thy judgments
are right, and thou in faithfulness has corrected me." Thus God lets his
children know the salutary nature of his fatherly chastisements. But where do
we find the least intimation in scripture, that God intends to punish the
wicked in a future state, for their benefit, as he here corrects his children
for their spiritual good: Has he not, on the contrary expressly assured the
wicked, that he intends to punish them, after death, not to save, but destroy
them, not to express his love toward them, but his indignation and wrath? This
is the plain import of the sentence to be denounced against them at the last
day. "Depart from me ye cursed, into everlasting fire, prepared for the devil
and his angels." "Vengeance is mine, and I will repay, says the Lord." "If I
whet my glittering sword, and mine hand take hold of judgment; I will render
vengeance to mine enemies, and will reward them that hate me." "What if God,
willing to show his wrath, and make his power known, endured with much long
suffering the vessels of wrath fitted to destruction." Here the wicked after
death are represented as the enemies of God, and as the objects of his wrath;
and he is represented as punishing them to reward them for their wickedness,
and to express his wrath and displeasure toward them, without the least regard
to their amendment and benefit. But if future punishments were intended as
fatherly chastisements to purify the wicked, and qualify them for the eternal
joys of heaven, why are they then represented as expressive of divine wrath,
indignation and vengeance, instead of the tender mercy of God toward his
offending but beloved offspring? The truth is, these expressions put it beyond
doubt, that God has diametrically opposite ends in chastising the righteous in
this life, and punishing the wicked in the next. And we may be assured God can
and will make his own means answer his own ends. As he designs future
punishments shall not soften, but harden, shall not save but destroy the
wicked; so they will eventually have this, and no other effect upon them.
Accordingly, we find this confirmed by the most incontestible evidence. A
punishment of near six thousand years continuance has hitherto, in no measure,
subdued or softened the heart of Satan, who still remains an avowed and
malignant enemy to God and man. The signal plagues sent in rapid succession on
Pharaoh, instead of softening, hardened his stubborn heart, and made him seven
fold more a vessel of wrath fitted to destruction, according to the divine
purpose and prediction concerning him. And the tremendous judgments which fell
on the subjects of Satan's kingdom, at she pouring out of the sixth vial had
the same hardening effect and impression on their impenitent hearts. "The fifth
angel poured out his vial upon the seat of the beast: And his kingdom was full
of darkness, and they knawed their tongues for pain, and blasphemed the God of
heaven, because of their pains and their sores, and repented not of their
deeds." Hence we are to conclude that the vials of divine wrath to be poured on
the enemies of Christ at the last day, instead of softening and meliorating
their hearts, will only serve to confirm and increase their malignant
dispositions, to render them more odious to God, and more unmeet for the
society and enjoyments of the blessed: And being thus eternally unqualified for
heaven, they will never find admission into those realms of love and unpolluted
bliss. Besides,

3. There is no intimation in the word of God, that those who are once
separated from the righteous at the last day, shall ever be united to them
again. Our text and many other passages of scripture clearly ascertain the
time, manner and reason of the separation between the righteous and the wicked,
but there is not a text to be found, which intimates when, how, or for what
reason they shall be reunited. Every representation of the general judgment
naturally leads us to suppose, that God will then finally settle all the
affairs of mankind, and irreversably fix their characters and conditions for
eternity. Accordingly none of the most able writers, that we have met with, in
favor of the final happiness of all lapsed beings, have presumed to tell us
when this important event shall take place, or the miseries of the damned shall
cease. But if God intended to release them, one would imagine, that he would
have made it known in his word, and relieved them from that intolerable
despair, to which they may now be liable for ages of ages. Why should be so
particularly fix, and reveal, and describe the day when their punishments shall
commence, but never give the least hint concerning the time and circumstances
of their release? Is not this bare silence a strong presumption that they shall
never be released, and a full demonstration that no man can prove that they
ever will?

N. B. This Discourse may be divided here.

NOW if the above observations have fully established the eternity of future
punishments, then we are obliged to believe the doctrine, whether we can answer
all the objections made against it, or not. It would be very absurd for a man
to deny his own existence, the existence of his fellow creatures, and the
earth's annual productions of herbs, fruits and flowers, because, after all his
philosophical researches, he is unable to investigate the mode of the divine
operation in creation and providence. And it is equally a surd to disbelieve
the being of God, the inspiration of the scriptures, or the eternity of future
punishments, because there may be some things connected with these subjects,
which lie beyond the sphere of human comprehension. It is not the intention of
these observations, however, to preclude an examination of any objections that
may be urged against the eternity of hell torments, or any other doctrine of
the gospel; or to insinuate that we are bound to believe real contradictions
and absurdities; but only to prepare the mind to look at the difficulties which
we propose to consider, with candor and impartiality; and lead us to rest our
faith upon the firm foundation of real evidence.

It is said, that by the separation between the sheep and the goats in the
text, is not to be understood a separation between saints and sinners, but only
a separation between sin and the sinner. The sins of men shall be separated
from their persons, and their persons shall be saved, whilst their sins, and
the father of them, the devil shall be destroyed. See a late catechism, which,
perhaps injuriously, claims the merit of a female production.
This our Lord teaches in the parable of the tares, and the apostle Paul
acknowledges to be true, when he says, speaking of his own evil conduct, It is
no more I that do it, but sin that dwells in me.

In answer to this, it is easy to observe, that though a sinner may become a
saint, and a saint may become perfectly holy, or free from all in-dwelling sin
and corruption; yet the relation between him and his past sins cannot be
dissolved. It will, for instance, forever remain true, that the apostle Paul
persecuted the church of Christ, and that sin will always be his. He has never
sinned since he arrived to heaven, and never will sin again, yet the connection
between him and his past sins will forever remain and be felt, so as to enhance
his own happiness, and display the riches of divine grace toward him. The
notion therefore that sin can be perfectly disconnected from the sinner, that
it can be burnt up, destroyed or annihilated is a gross absurdity.

Besides our Lord tells us in plain terms, that by sheep and goats, he means
all nations. And he uses these metaphors in the same sense in which other
inspired writers use them. Sheep signify good men, and goats bad, in many other
places of scripture. John 10, 15, 26, 27, 28, 29. Dan. 8. Zach. 10, 3.
But if any one would feel the absurdity of supposing that goats represent
sins, let him only read the text according to this construction. "Then shall he
say also unto them on his left hand, Depart from me, ye cursed sins, into
everlasting fire, prepared for the devil and his angels. For I was an-hungered,
and ye sins gave me no meat: I was thirsty, and ye sins gave me no drink: I was
a stranger, and ye sins took me not in: Naked, and ye sins clothed me not:
Sick, and in prison, and ye sins visited me not. Then shall those sins answer
him, saying, etc."

It is objected farther, that Christ as mediator was so united to mankind, that
his actions were theirs, his obedience theirs, and his sufferings theirs, and
consequently he has as fully restored the whole human race to the divine
favor, as if they had all obeyed and suffered in their own persons. The divine
law now has no demands upon them, nor condemning power over them. Their
salvation solely depends upon their union to Christ, which God constituted and
established before the world began. And by virtue of that union, they will all
be admitted to heaven, at the last day, and not one of Christ's members, not
one of Adam's race will be finally lost. Mr. Relly says, Treatise on union.
Boston Ed. p. 22.
Christ having taken on him the seed of Abraham, he in them, and they in him,
fulfilled all righteousness, obeyed the law, and underwent the penalty for the
past transgression, being thus made perfect in one. According to this union, or
being in him, as branches in the vine, as members in the body, etc. the people
are considered together with him through all the circumstances of his birth,
life, death, resurrection and glory. P. 26.
And thus considering the whole law fulfilled in Jesus, its precepts obeyed,
its penalties endured, he now inherits the promise. And apprehending ourselves
in him, united to him, through all his doings, and sufferings, his condition,
and state is ours. And thus standing in him, we can indeed read the law, or the
doctrine of rewards, and punishments, without fear: Because the punishment, yea
all the threatenings in the book of God, have been executed upon us (as sinners
and law-breakers) in him. Page 40.


This is the corner stone, this is the sole foundation which supports the
scheme of universal salvation as maintained by Mr. Relly, Mr. Murray, and their
followers. If this should give way, their whole fabric falls to the ground, and
their hopes perish. We shall therefore consider this point with particular
attention.

To suppose that mankind were "with Christ through all the circumstances of his
birth, life, death, resurrection and glory," is repugnant to the plainest
dictates of common sense. Christ was born of the virgin Mary; was circumcised
the eighth day; was, at thirty years old, baptized of John in Jordan; was,
after this, led into the wilderness, where he fasted forty days and forty
nights, and baffled all the devices of Satan; and being thus prepared, he went
forth preaching the gospel, healing the sick, casting out devils and raising
the dead; till finally, he was betrayed by Judas, condemned by Pilate,
crucified between two malefactors, buried by Joseph of Arimathea, and after
lying three days and three nights in the grave, he arose from the dead,
ascended up into heaven, and set down on the right hand of the Majesty on high.
Were any, much less, the whole human race with Christ in all these
circumstances of his birth, life, death, resurrection and glory? Where is the
man who is conscious of being, acting, and suffering with Christ in any of
these extraordinary and stupendous scenes? But had there been such an union
between Christ and mankind, that his obedience was theirs, his sufferings
theirs, and his glory theirs, they must all, in every age of the world, be
conscious of having the same motives, the same affections, the same sorrows,
and the same joys that he had; and of doing the same miraculous actions that he
did. But what concord had Christ with Belial? What union of heart with an
ungodly world? Was he not pure, and harmless, and separate from sinners,
through the whole course of his life and conduct upon earth?

It may, perhaps, be said that this is an unfair representation of the matter,
and that by "Christ's being in mankind, and they being in him," is only
intended, that according to a certain divine constitution, God considers what
Christ did and suffered as being done and suffered by mankind personally. The
answer to this is obvious. No divine constitution or appointment whatever,
could make Christ's personal obedience and sufferings ours. A divine
constitution cannot alter the nature of things, nor effect impossibilities. Can
we conceive that it is now in the power of the Supreme Being, by a new,
positive constitution, to make Christ the betrayer of Judas, the crucifier of
his crucifiers, and the perpetrator of all the sin and wickedness of the whole
human race? But it is no more impossible for God to do this now, than it was
from eternity, to make a constitution, by which, not only the actions of Christ
and of Judas, but the actions of Christ and of all mankind should be the same.
The supposition of a divine constitution relieves no difficulty here. The
notion that all mankind were "with Christ through all the circumstances of his
birth, life, death, resurrection and glory," is as absurd as the doctrine of
transubstantiation, of which no man can form an idea.

And besides all this, it is entirely unscriptural. It is not to be found among
any of the unions which are mentioned in the bible. We there find indeed the
union between the human and divine natures in the person of the Mediator.
Christ often asserted both his humanity and divinity. He proclaimed himself not
only the Son of Man, but the Son of God; and professed to be not only David's
Son, but David's Lord. Accordingly, the Jews, who understood the true import of
such phrases, considered him as assuming divinity and equality with God the
Father; for which they accused him of the crime of blasphemy. And our Lord, to
vindicate himself, never denied, but maintained his claim to the last; which
claim was founded upon the union between his human and divine nature. Hence the
apostle John tells us, "The word was made flesh and dwelt amongst us." And we
read, "Great is the mystery of godliness; God manifest in the flesh." Such an
union of the two natures in the person of Christ, was necessary to qualify him
for the work of redemption. For the divine nature seperately considered, could
neither suffer, nor obey; and the human nature separate from the divine, could
not atone by obedience and death; but both these natures being united in the
person of Christ completely qualified him for the mediatorial work. Besides,
this union was also requisite in order to point out the objects for whom he
made atonement. He would appear to die for those, in whose nature he died. Had
he took upon him the nature of angels, and died in their nature, this would
have proclaimed him the Mediator betweeen God and them. But inasmuch as he did
not take upon him the nature of angels, but that of the seed of Abraham, this
proclaimed him the Mediator between God and man. Now if Mr. Relly had only
asserted the necessity of such an union as this, in order to render the
sufferings of Christ in the room of mankind, consistent with the divine
attributes, we should have had no disposition to dissent from him. For we grant
it would have been inconsistent with the divine truth, justice, mercy, wisdom
and love, to have subjected Christ to those sufferings which he endured in the
room of sinners, had he not been united to human nature, and so become the
Mediator between God and man. But Mr. Relly overlooking this union between
Christ and innocent human nature, maintains that Christ was united to sinful
man, and partook of their guilt, and on that account deserved to suffer, in
point of justice. Page 3, 4, 5, 6.
In this view indeed, the sufferings of Christ appear perfectly just, but not
in the least degree meritorious, for there can be no merit in suffering a just
punishment. So that had it been possible for such an union to have existed as
Mr. Relly pleads for, it would have defeated the ends of Christ's death, and
prevented an atonement for sin.

The scripture likewise mentions an union between Christ and the elect. A
certain number of mankind were chosen to salvation from eternity, and given to
Christ, in the covenant of redemption, as the reward of his sufferings. These
are called the elect, or the church, and often alluded to in scripture,
particularly in the following passages. "Blessed be the God and Father of our
Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us with all spiritual blessings in heavenly
places in Christ; according as he has chosen us in him, before the foundation
of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before him in love." "Be
thou partaker of the afflictions of the gospel, according to the power of God;
who has saved us, and called us with an holy calling, not according to our
works, but according to his own purpose and grace, which was given us in
Christ, before the world began." "Ye also, as living stones, are built up a
spiritual house, an holy priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices,
acceptable to God by Jesus Christ. Wherefore also it is contained in the
scripture, behold I lay in Zion a chief corner stone, elect precious; and he
that believes on him shall not be confounded. Unto you therefore, who believe,
he is precious: But unto them who are disobedient, the stone which the builders
disallowed, the same is made the head of the corner; and a stone of stumbling,
and a rock of offense, even to them who stumble at the word, being disobedient,
whereunto also they were appointed. But ye are a chosen generation, a royal
priesthood, an holy nation, a peculiar people." These, and many other passages
of scripture speak of the elect, and speak of them as peculiar, and distinct
from the rest of mankind. All the world are not the elect, but the elect are
those who from eternity were chosen out of the world, and who are represented
in scripture, as entirely distinct from the world. Our Lord has taken care to
fix and determine this matter with great precision. He says in the 24th of
Matthew, "And many false prophets shall arise, and shall deceive many, and
shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch that (if it were possible) they
shall deceive the very elect" Here the elect are distinct from the many that
were to be deceived. Again, in the 15th of John, Christ tells his followers,
"If the world hate you, ye know it hated me before it hated you. If ye were of
the world, the world would love his own: But because ye are not of the world,
but I have chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hates you." In the
17th chapter, he has these expressions. "I have manifested thy name unto the
men which thou gave me out of the world. I have given them thy word; and the
world has hated them, because they are not of the world, even as I am not of
the world."

Now as the elect were chosen to salvation from eternity, in Christ, as the
means, and for Christ, as the reward of his sufferings and death; so it may be
truly said, that there has been a certain union or connection between Christ
and the elect from eternity. But besides this, there is another more intimate
and vital union between Christ and the elect, which commences in time; but
shall endure forever. For whom God predestinates, them he also calls; and whom
he calls, them he also justifies; and whom he justifies, them he also
glorifies. Hence, says, the apostle, speaking of the success of his labors
among the Gentiles, " As many as were ordained to eternal life, believed." All
the elect are brought in this life, by the influences of the divine Spirit, to
repentance and faith. And in faith, this vital union to Christ commences. The
believer then becomes united to Christ in his affections, views, and interests.
He loves what Christ loves, and hates what Christ hates. He has the same views
of the divine Majesty, of the divine law, of sin, and of himself, that Christ
has. And he has a joint interest with Christ in the love of God, in the
protections of providence, and in all the blessings which result from the work
of redemption. This union is of the same nature with that which subsists
between Christ and his Father. Accordingly he prays, in the 17th of John, that
this union might commence, in time, between him and those whom his Father had
given him from eternity. "Neither pray I for these alone, but for them also who
shall believe on me through their word; that they all may be one; as thou,
Father, art in me, and I in thee, that they may also be one in us." This union
makes the principal figure in the sacred writings, and is oftener alluded to
there than any other. It is on account of this union, that saints or believers,
in distinction from the world, are said to die with Christ, to be crucified
with Christ; to be buried with Christ; to be quickened with Christ; to rise
with Christ; to live with Christ; to be circumcised with Christ; to be baptized
with Christ; to be complete in Christ; to be members of his body, of his flesh,
and of his bones. And it is on account of this union, that Christ and the
church are so often prefigured and represented by the various metaphors or Adam
and Eve; of Adam and his posterity; of the husband and wife; of Aaron and his
robes; of the vine and its branches; of the head and its members; and of the
corner stone and superstructure.

These unions, which we have now mentioned and described, are the only ones
respecting Christ and men, that are to be found in the sacred oracles. And
these are so far from bearing the least affinity to that union between Christ
and all mankind, which Mr. Relly pleads for, that they are utterly inconsistent
with it, and subversive of it. It these be true, that must be false. And if
these be true, thereto one or other of them, must every passage of scripture,
which speaks of men's union to Christ, necessarily refer; and of course, leave
Mr. Relly's notion of union as destitute of all support from divine revelation,
as from reason and common sense.

But it may be still urged in savor of the universal salvation of mankind,
that Christ tasted death for every man, and made full atonement for the sins of
the whole world. And it is preposterous to imagine that any of those who have
been redeemed by the precious blood of the son of God, should be finally lost.
I answer,

First, this objection supposes that God is obliged, in justice, to save all
mankind. Therefore,

Secondly, it supposes that mankind stand in no need of divine forgiveness. For
if the price of redemption which Christ has paid, has fully discharged the
debt which sinners owed to God, then they now owe him nothing, and if they owe
him nothing, they have nothing to be forgiven; and therefore can never with
propriety use that petition in the Lord's prayer, "Forgive us our debts as we
forgive our debtors." Wherefore.

Thirdly, there can be no grace displayed in the salvation of sinners, by the
gospel. For it they all deserve to be saved, it is an act of justice, but not
of grace, for God to save them. Though the apostle indeed tells believers that
they are "justified freely by his grace, through the redemption that is in
Jesus Christ." But,

Fourthly, this objection is entirely founded in a misapprehension of the
nature of Christ's atonement. It was not the intention of Christ, by his
obedience and death, to make void the law, to alter the nature of sin, to move
God in mercy, or oblige him, in justice, to save sinners; for all this was
impossible. But his design was, to establish the law, to condemn sin in the
flesh, and maintain the dignity of the divine character and government, and
thereby open a door for the display of divine mercy and forgiveness toward a
perishing world. The death of Christ indeed has removed all the obstacles,
which before stood in the way of the exercise of divine mercy; and that is all.
God is no more obliged, in point of justice, to save sinners, than if Christ
had never died, and made atonement for sin. If God saves any of the human race
now, it is an act of mere grace, and not of justice. Hence the extent of
Christ's atonement does not in the least determine, whether more or less,
whether a part or the whole of mankind will finally be saved. This can be
determined only by the divine declarations, and gracious promises to Christ,
which, as we have shown, all concur to reprobate the notion of universal
salvation.

It is said by some, that God being from eternity perfectly and independently
blessed, could have no other motive in giving being to his creatures than their
good, and of consequence, he must infallibly bring them all, sooner or later,
to a state of perfect happiness.

Though this objection is not void of plausibility, yet it seems to carry
something in it extremely absurd and dishonorable to the divine Majesty. For
the Supreme Being to have himself entirely out of view in all his works, and to
make every thing i. he universe solely subservient to the good of the creature
looks like setting the creature above the infinitely great Jehovah! Besides, if
the Deity aims solely at the good of the creature, why should not the creature
aim solely at his own good, and make his own happiness the sole object of all
his desires and pursuits? And why should God blame him, if in the pursuit of
this object, he casts off fear, restrains prayer, and loves and serves the
creature more than the Creator? Moreover, if the Divine Being aims solely at
the good of every individual person, why has he not made every man perfectly
happy* through every stage and period of his existence? Why has he made this
world an Aceldema, a field of blood, and scene of every evil, where men are
born to trouble as the sparks fly upward? Why has he not rather poured one
continued, uninterrupted stream of happiness upon us, as he has upon the
angels above, who have never felt one sinful passion, nor one painful sensation
since their existence? Perhaps it will here be said, that though God aims
solely at the good of the intelligent creation in general, yet this does not
necessarily imply that he must constantly seek and promote the good of every
individual. We grant it, and abide the consequence, which is this. If the good
of the intelligent creation in general, may sometimes, require God to give up
the good of individuals, then it may, for aught we know, require him to give up
the good of individuals forever. If the general good of mankind once required
the temporal destruction of Pharaoh and his hosts, who knows but the general
good of the whole intelligent creation, may also require their eternal
destruction? Therefore allowing that God does, in this sense, aim supremely and
solely at the general good of the intelligent creation, yet he may nevertheless
make myriads and myriads of individuals finally and eternally miserable.

There is, however, no reason to think that God had, from eternity, no other
view in all his works of creation and providence, than the general good of the
created system. This supposition seems to originate from a false conception of
the nature and blessedness of the Divine Being. God is not an infinite
Intelligence, who is perfectly destitute of all propensions. He is not, as the
Epicurians dream, an infinite Stoic, who is entirely unaffected with, and
indifferent to, all created and uncreated objects. But he is a Being of
infinitely clear views, of infinitely wise designs, and of infinitely strong
propensities and affections. And the perfect, undisturbed, eternal
gratification of all these, is absolutely essential to his infinite, immutable
blessedness. Though God was indeed perfectly blessed from eternity,
independently of his creatures, yet not independently of his own views,
purposes and affections. Could we only suppose it possible, that God's purposes
and designs should now be erased from his mind, or that he should now find
himself unable to carry them into execution, this would prove an eternal
diminution of the divine blessedness. But since known unto God are all his
works from the beginning; since they have always stood present to his view, as
fully accomplished, they have been an eternal source of ineffable satisfaction,
self-complacency and delight. Now if God be capable of great and noble designs,
if he be capable of great and noble exertions, and capable of taking a true,
real, infinite pleasure and delight in all his works, then it is easy to
conceive that he might make his own pleasure, his own blessedness or glory the
grand and supreme object in all his works of creation and providence, and have
but an inferior and subordinate respect to the good of the creature.
Accordingly the scripture represents this as his ultimate and supreme end in
the creation of the world. "The Lord has made all things for himself; yea,
even the wicked for the day of evil." Prove. 16.4. The apostle says, that "of
him, and through him, and to him are all things." Romans 11.36. And it is the
general voice of heaven, "Thou art worthy, O Lord, to receive glory, and honor,
and power; for thou have created all things, and for thy PLEASURE, they are and
were created." Besides, the whole course of providence from the beginning to
this day, clearly demonstrates that God has sought his own glory supremely,
and the good of the creature but subordinately in all his conduct. He expelled
the rebel angels from heaven, destroyed the old world, and burnt up Sodom and
Gomorrah, not for their good, but for his own glory. And we know the perdition
of Pharaoh and of Judas was not designed for their good, since Christ has said
of the one, that it had been good for him, if he had never been born, and God
has told us, he raised up the other, that his name might be declared
throughout all the earth Hence the supreme and ultimate ends of the Deity in
the creation of the world, afford no evidence in favor of the universal
salvation of the human race. It may be consistent with God's original and
eternal designs, for aught we know, to continue the miseries of the damned to
all eternity.

We often hear the infinite love and mercy of the Deity pathetically urged as
an irresragable argument against the eternity of future punishments. It is
said, this doctrine represents the divine benevolence as far below the pity and
compassion that are found in the human heart. A parent's love cannot endure the
thought that the dear offspring of his own bowels should be made fuel for
quenchless flames. And the most malevolent man on earth does not even wish that
his worst enemy should lie down in eternal sorrow, and dwell with everlasting
burnings. Much less can the kind parent of the universe, who is good unto all,
and whose tender mercies are over all his works, find it in his heart to doom
any of the human race to the pains of hell forever.

This objection appears to be rather an address to the soft and tender passions
of human nature, than an appeal to the cool and impartial dictates of right
reason. The weaker passions of our animal nature, recoil in the view of those
acts of public justice, which, our reason, our conscience, and our real
benevolence approve, and which the divine authority has absolutely required.
But who would hence conclude that our love and compassion transcend the tender
mercies of the Deity? Did not Noah preach an hundred and twenty years to a
stupid and impenitent world? Did he not offer up strong prayers and cries to
the Father of Mercies; that he would graciously avert the dire destruction
which hung over their guilty heads? And did he not rise in fervor and
importunity, as the period of their day of grace and space of repentance drew
nigh? How then must he have felt when he stood a spectator of their final doom!
Who can describe or conceive the tender emotions of his heart, the painful
conflicts and tumults of his breast, when the tremendous scene opened to his
view! When he beheld the rains falling, the fountains of the great deep
breaking up, and all nature in convulsions; and heard the waves roaring, and a
guilty world, day after day, crying, and praying, and rending the heavens with
their last, expiring groans! But shall we imagine that God was equally shocked
on this solemn occasion! No! He, (if we may be allowed the comparison) stood,
like Brutus, with stern justice on his countenance, and beheld his beloved, but
guilty offspring receive the due reward of their deeds.

With what fervent importunity did Abraham beseech the Most High to spare the
devoted cities of Sodom and Gomorrah? And next morning, when he repaired to the
place where he had stood and prayed before the Lord, and looked toward Sodom
and Gomorrah, and toward all the land of the plain, and beheld, and lo, the
smoke of the country went up as the smoke of a furnace, how did it awaken every
tender feeling of humanity and benevolence? But who will hence conclude that
the Father of Mercies had less love and compassion toward the workmanship of
his own hands, than Abraham? Hence nothing but our danger can equal our
delusion, if we imagine the Divine Being to be altogether such an one as
ourselves, and judge of the divine clemency by our own. What if Noah, what if
Lot had done so! What if Noah had said, "I know the world is become universally
corrupt. I know the earth is filled with violence. I know God has told me his
patience is limited to one hundred and twenty years. But I know my own heart
recoils at the thoughts of their destruction, and it is my sincere desire and
prayer to God that they might be saved. And I also know God is infinitely more
kind, and gracious, and merciful than I am. I will therefore neglect the ark,
and build my house on the sand, and fear no evil." But behold! the floods come,
the winds blow, and the storms beat on his house, and it falls, and great is
the fall of it! What if Lot had considered the divine threatenings as a mere
mockery, like his sons-in-law, would he not have perished with them in the
ruins of Sodom? And is it not equally dangerous to reason in the same manner
now, against the threatenings of the wrath to come?

But still, says the objector, is not God a God of love? and is it the nature
of love to punish, especially its beloved objects? I answer, yes; it is the
genuine tendency of true love, under certain circumstances to punish. True love
to his child, induces the kind and indulgent parent to use the rod of
correction for his good. So says Solomon, "He that spares his rod, hates his
son, but he that loves him, chasteneth him betimes." So whom the Lord loves
he chasteneth. But this reaches not the case, replies the objector. I can
easily conceive that love should punish its beloved object for its good; but
will it extend further? Will it punish more than the benefit of the object
punished requires? Will it therefore punish forever? No doubt it will, when the
good of the object punished is not the end proposed by the punishment. It is
not always the intention of punishment to consult the good of the object
punished. This is never the case with respect to capital punishments in this
life. It is love to his country, or a tender regard to the public good, that
induces the civil magistrate to condemn the traitor or murderer to a painful
and ignominious death. It was love to God that fired the breast of Phineas,
when he rushed into the camp of Israel, and slew Zimri and Kozbi. And then it
was considered, approved and rewarded by the God of love. "And the Lord spoke
unto Moses, saying, Phineas the son of Eleazer, the son of Aaron the priest,
has turned my wrath away from the children of Israel (while he was zealous for
my sake among them) that I consumed not the children of Israel in my jealousy.
Wherefore say, Behold, I give unto him my covenant of peace, (...). It is love
to the objects injured, and not to the objects punished, that dictates the
nature, degree and duration of their punishment. Thus it is God's love to
himself, to his son, to his law, and to the general good of the universe that
induces him to punish the wicked after death. And as his infinite love to these
objects will eternally remain, so it will induce him to punish the wicked
forever. His love will burn to the lowest hell. Hence we find the most
exemplary acts of divine justice are represented in scripture as the
expressions of divine mercy. "O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good; for
his mercy endures forever. To him that by wisdom made the heavens; for his
mercy endures forever. To him that smote in Egypt in their first born; for his
mercy endures forever. And brought out Israel from among them; for his mercy
endures forever. But overthrew Pharaoh and his hosts in the Red Sea; for his
mercy endures forever. To him that smote great kings; for his mercy endures
forever. And slew famous kings; for his mercy endures forever. Sihon king of
the Amorites; for his mercy endures forever. And Og king of Bashan; for his
mercy endures forever." Here the displays of divine justice are considered as
the displays of the same goodness which first gave birth to the creation of the
world But to whom is the display of this justice, a mercy? To the wicked? Nay,
but to the Israel, to the church of God. Hence the degree and duration of the
punishments of the wicked will always hold proportion to the degree and
duration of the divine love to the righteous. Accordingly God represents his
punitive justice as the necessary fruit and effect of his infinite goodness and
mercy. When Moses requested a special manifestation of his glory. He told him
he would cause all his goodness to pass before him. And to do this, he
proclaimed himself "the Lord, the Lord God, merciful and gracious, long
suffering, and abundant in goodness and truth -- and that will by no means
clear guilty." Thus it appears that divine goodness may, and infallibly will
punish the wicked forever, if the good of the universe requires their eternal
punishment.

"The punishments of the damned," say some, must disturb the joys of the
blessed. For how can those pure and benevolent spirits behold, without pain,
multitudes of their fellow creatures, whom they love as themselves, eternally
weltering under the vials of divine wrath.

In answer to this it may be observed,

First, that the punishments of the damned are the displays of divine justice
toward them.

Secondly, that they are the displays of divine goodness toward the blessed.
Hence,

Thirdly, as displays of divine goodness, the heavenly hosts ought not only to
approve of them, but to rejoice in them, and praise God for them. And hence,

Fourthly, the scripture tells us, that the pure spirits above do rejoice in
and praise God for the eternal punishments which he inflicts upon his and their
enemies. Upon the fall of mystical Babylon, it is said, "Rejoice over her, thou
heaven, and ye holy apostles and prophets; for God has avenged you on her."
"And after these things I heard a great voice of much people in heaven, saying,
Alleluia: "Salvation, and glory, and power unto the Lord our God: For true and
righteous are his judgments; for he has judged the great whore, which did
corrupt the earth with her fornication, and has avenged the blood of his
servants at her hand. And again they said, Alleluia. And her smoke rise up
forever and ever."

It is said, If God should save some of mankind and finally punish others, then
he would be a respecter of persons.

To this it is sufficient to reply, that divine inspiration assures us, that
God's rewarding the righteous and punishing the wicked is the very thing, which
demonstrates him to be no respecter of persons. "But if ye call on the Father,
who, without respect of persons, judges according to every man's work, pass
the time of your sojourning here in fear." 1 Pet. 1.17. "And whatsoever ye do,
do it heartily, as to the Lord, and not unto men; knowing that of the Lord ye
shall receive the reward of the inheritance; for ye serve the Lord Christ. But
he that does wrong, shall receive for the wrong which he has done: And there
is no respect of persons." Coloss. 3.23, 24, 25. And the apostle tells the
finally impenitent sinner, that God will render to every man according to his
deeds: To them, who, by patient continuance in well-doing, seek for glory, and
honor, and immortality; eternal life: But unto them that are contentious, and
do not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness; indignation, and wrath,
tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil, of the Jew
first, and also of the Gentile. For there is no respect of persons with God."
Romans 2.6, 7, 8, 9, 11.

It is further urged against the eternal punishments of the wicked, that though
God is obliged to fulfill his promises, yet he is not obliged to fulfill his
threatenings; and therefore notwithstanding he has threatened eternal
destruction to the finally impenitent, yet we cannot hence absolutely determine
that he will make them eternally miserable.

This objection does, in a great measure, if not entirely defeat itself. For it
supposes,

First, that God has really threatened eternal destruction to the wicked.

Secondly, it supposes that God may consistently with tice make them eternally
miserable.

Thirdly, it supposes that it is utterly impossible for us to know and prove,
that he will not punish them eternally, because this cannot be known unless God
has promised not to fulfill his threatenings, which is absurd.

Fourthly, it supposes that it is probable that he will punish the wicked
forever. Divine threatenings must, at least, imply that it is in some measure
probable, that God will fulfill them, or else they imply nothing, have no
meaning, and answer no end. And this probability is greatly corroborated by the
many instances, which the scripture gives us, of God's fulfilling his
threatenings. He threatened to destroy the old world, in the space of an
hundred and twenty years. And accordingly at the time appointed he destroyed
them. He threatened to judge and destroy the Egyptians, after a period of four
hundred years. And when the time of the promise and threatening came, he
overthrew the Egyptians, and set the seed of Abraham free from the house of
bondage. He threatened destruction to the Canaanites, and he destroyed them
accordingly. He threatened a seventy years captivity to his people Israel, and
he fulfilled his threatenings. He threatened the total excision of the Jews,
their city and temple, and they were cut off at the time predicted. He
threatened the ruin of the seven churches of Asia; and his threatenings have
long since been fulfilled. He threatened the utter extinction of Babylon and
Ninevah, and his threatenings have had a most exact and punctual
accomplishment. See Newton on the prophecies.
These and many other instances which might be adduced, afford a strong
probability and presumption that God will fulfill all his threatenings according
to their real nature and import. Nor does the case of Ninevah rightly
understood suppose the contrary. God's threatenings against Ninevah were
evidently conditional, agreeably to that divine maxim in the 18th of Jeremiah.
"At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation -- If that nation, against
whom I have pronounced turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I
thought to do unto them." And Jonah and the king of Ninevah evidently
understood the threatening with this implied condition; or why did Jonah
preach, or the Ninevites fast? Besides,

Fifthly, this objection supposes that it is as certain, as it can be, that God
will punish the wicked eternally. Nothing can make this more certain than the
divine threatenings. If God's threatenings do not fix the certainty of future
and eternal* punishments beyond doubt, then if God really intends to punish the
wicked to all eternity, he cannot make them certain of it in this life, for he
can give them no higher evidence of it than his express declarations and
threatenings. So that if they will not believe this evidence, neither would
they be persuaded, though one rose from the dead. Accordingly God assures us,
that his threatenings are as much to be relied on as his promises, and that his
truth and divinity are pledged in both. Thus his promises and threatenings are
set upon a level in the 18th of Jeremiah. "At what instant I shall speak
concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to pluck up and to pull down,
and to destroy it; if that nation, against whom I have pronounced turn from
their evil, I will repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them. And at
what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a kingdom, to
build and to plant it; if it do evil in my sight, that it obey not my voice,
then I will repent of the good wherewith I said I would benefit it." Here God
exhibits the same evidence of the truth and certainty of his threatenings as of
his promises. And in other places he sets them both on the same immutable
footing. "If ye be willing and obedient, ye shall eat the good of the land."
Here is a promise. "But if ye refuse and rebel, ye shall be devoured with the
sword. Here is a threatening. And then both are confirmed, by the following
emphatical asseveration, " for the mouth of the LORD has spoken it." And this
mode of asseveration is often used with respect to the divine threatenings as
well as promises. The threatenings against Tire run in this solemn form:
"Therefore, thus said the LORD GOD, Behold I am against thee, O Tyrus, and I
will cause many nations to come up against thee, as the sea causes his waves
to come up. And they shall destroy the walls of Tyrus, and break down her
towers: I will also scrape her dust from her, and make her like the top of a
rock; it shall be a place for the spreading of nets in the midst of the sea:
For I have spoken it says the Lord." Ezekiel. 17. 3, 4, 5. This threatening
proved true, and was fully accomplished many ages ago See Newton on the
prophecies.
There is another threatening against God's own people of the same tenor.
"Because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged
from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee. I
the Lord have spoken it; it shall come to pass, and I will do it." Ezekiel. 14.13,
14. Thus it appears that God's threatenings have the same ground of certainty
as his promises. They are both founded on the infallible veracity, and absolute
immutability of Him who cannot lie.

Another objection is this. If sin and misery be not totally abolished, and all
mankind finally saved, then Satan will triumph, and Christ will fail of
accomplishing one of his principal ends in the work of redemption, which is to
bruise the serpent's head, and destroy the works of the devil.

To this it may be replied, in the first place, that merely the abolishing of
sin and misery will not destroy the works of the devil, and bruise the
serpent's head. For supposing in any period of eternity, sin and misery should
be perfectly abolished, Satan would still have cause to triumph, that he had
brought an indelible stain upon the divine character, and done an irreparable
injury to his creatures, and so far frustrated the kind and benevolent purposes
of the Deity in the work of creation. Unless,

Secondly, all the sin and misery which he had proved the means of introducing
into God's world, are turned against him, and made instrumental of bringing
more glory to God, and more happiness to the universe than if they had never
existed. When this is done, Satan is effectually conquered, his head is
bruised, and his works destroyed. But,

Thirdly, if the sin and misery of ages, can be made the means of bringing more
glory to God, and more happiness to the universe, than if they had never
existed; then the sin and misery of the damned through eternity, may prove the
means of promoting the same ends forever. Therefore, in order effectually to
destroy the works of the devil; and bruise the serpent's head it may be
absolutely necessary that Satan and multitudes of his followers should be
eternally miserable. Accordingly the scripture represents Christ as triumphing
over Satan, by turning all his schemes and works against him, and finally
casting him and his adherents into the bottomless pit, under the wrath of God,
and the everlasting contempt of the heavenly world. And thus Christ is exalted,
and his enemies are made his footstool.

Having shown that there will be a general judgment -- that there is an
essential distinction between the righteous and the wicked -- that agreeably to
this distinction, they will be separated at the last day, and rewarded and
punished according to their works -- that their respective rewards and
punishments will endure forever -- and that there be no solid objections
against these solemn and interesting truths; it only remains to conclude this
discourse with such reflections as are naturally suggested by the subject.

It is obvious to remark, in the first place, that every scheme of universal
salvation is utterly destitute of any foundation in the word of God. The
foregoing observations equally strike at the root of this opinion, in whatever
shape it appears, or on whatever ground it is built. Various schemes have been
pursued to establish the notion of the final restoration and happiness of all
lapsed beings. This notion perhaps was first conceived in the fertile brain of
Origin, who, like other great and (...) minds, made such gross blunders in
speculation, (...) of an inferior size are incapable of committing. (...)
opinion of his transpired with several others equally absurd and romantic. He
maintained -- that "the souls of men do pre-exist -- that through their fault
and negligence they appear here inhabitants of the earth clothed in terrestial
bodies -- that the mystery of the resurrection is this, that we shall be
clothed with heavenly or aetherial bodies -- that after long periods of time
the damned shall be delivered from their torments, and try their fortunes again
in such regions of the world as their natures fit them for -- and that the
earth, after her conflagration, shall become habitable again, and be the
mansions of men and other animals; and this in eternal vicissitudes." Phoenix,
Vol. 1. Page 11.
Such crude and undigested notions were propagated by Origin, which probably
would have dropped into oblivion ages ago, had not the name of their author
carried more weight with some, than the strength of his arguments. Out of this
rubbish, however, the Romish clergy formed the absurd doctrine of Purgatory.
And after them, Chevalier Ramsay, Dr. Hartley and others have built, on the
same foundation, the doctrine of the final restoration of all lapsed beings to
the divine favor.

Others have founded their expectation of the final happiness of the whole
intelligent creation on the infinite goodness and mercy of the Supreme Being.
They suppose that the endless misery of the creature cannot be reconciled with
the nature of his crime, nor the boundless love and benevolence of the Deity.
This scheme has been generally adopted by deistical writers.

And, of late, Mr. Relly has devised another method of arriving to the same
conclusion, and maintained that all men will be saved by virtue of their union
to (...) which God constituted and established from (...) without any act or
exercise of theirs. This is the (...) improvement upon the doctrine of
universal salvation; and is, of all others, the most absurd and repugnant to
the genius and spirit of the gospel.

But the notion of universal salvation, in every form of it, is so absurd, that
it has never met with general acceptance among those that have called
themselves Christians. They have never adoped it as an article in any of their
formulas, creeds, or confessions of says. Even the Romish church have not
embraced it. They do not imagine that every sinner will have the benefit of
purgatory, but suppose multitudes are so guilty as to be sent directly to hell,
and shall there remain forever. Only a few individuals have believed and
propagated this doctrine, in any age of the world, as Dr. Hartley frankly
acknowledges. His words are these. Observations on man, 1 Vol. Page 467, 468.
"It is farther to be observed, that the fear of death is much increased by the
exquisiteness of the punishments threatened in a future state, and by the
variety of the emblems, representations, analogies, and evidences, of natural
and revealed religion, whereby all the terrors of all other things are
transferred upon those punishments; also by that peculiar circumstance of the
ETERNITY of them, which seems to have been a general tradition previous to the
appearance of christianity, amongst both Jews and Pagans, and which has been
the doctrine of the christian world ever since, some very few persons
excepted." This general disbelief of the doctrine of universal salvation bears
a very dark aspect upon the truth of it. For had it been true, and plainly
revealed in the sacred oracles, it is strange that the christian world could
never yet be brought to embrace it; especially since it is a doctrine so every
way adopted to please and gratify all the natural desires of the human heart.
The belief of it would not have afforded half the evidence of its truth, as the
disbelief of it, for so many ages, affords of its falsehood. There has been
every thing to lead mankind to embrace it, and nothing to reject it, had it
been true. But on the other hand, there has been every thing to lead mankind to
reject, and nothing to embrace the doctrine of eternal punishments, had it been
false. Therefore it is next to a miracle, that the christian world should, for
so many ages, embrace the doctrine of eternal punishments, and reject that of
universal salvation, had not the doctrine of universal salvation been really
false, and that of eternal punishments most evidently true. In no case,
perhaps, the general voice of the christian world ought to have more weight
than in this; especially since it so fully concurs with the general voice of
scripture. We have seen that all the doctrines, declarations, precepts,
promises and threatenings of the gospel conspire to condemn the notion of
universal salvation. Indeed had the bible been written on purpose to refute it,
we can hardly conceive that it could have contained any thing more plain, full
and determinate against it. And Chevalier Ramsay acknowledges, that "St. Jerome,
St. Gregory, of Nyssa, St. Augustine, and St. Cyril, of Alexandria, attacked and
confuted this opinion, as maintained by Origin, before the fifth general
council held at Constantinople." Philosophical Principles, 2 Vol. Page 245. and
sub finem.
In short, there is every kind of evidence against it. It stands condemned by
scripture, by reason, and by the general voice of mankind for more than a
thousand years past.

Secondly, it appears from what has been said, that this sentiment is not only
false, but very dangerous.

If there be an essential difference between saints and sinners; if they shall
be separated from each other, at the last day, and eternally rewarded and
punished according to their works, as we have endeavored to show in the
preceding discourse, then the notion of universal salvation, especially as
maintained by Mr. Relly and his followers, is fundamentally wrong and
absolutely fatal. Their doctrine teaches, that holiness and piety are empty
names; that faith, love, repentance, humility and submission, are no other than
hypocrisy, pride and idolatry; that it is impossible for a man to prevent his
salvation by the most irreligious, abandoned, profligate life; that there is no
essential difference between the righteous and the wicked; that they shall not
be separated at the last day, but Cain, Pharaoh, Haman, Herod, Judas, Pilate,
and all the rest of the impenitent world, shall sit down with Abraham, Isaac
and Jacob in the kingdom of glory, and no human soul be finally shut out. Such
a doctrine as this is replete with infinite mischief. It strikes at the root of
all experimental religion. It confounds all notions of virtue and vice. It
destroys all distinction of characters. It saps the foundation of morality. It
takes off every restraint from vice. It opens the stood gates of iniquity. It
renders even God, and Christ, and the prophets and the apostles, the ministers
of sin. It speaks peace to the wicked, to whom, faith God, there is no peace.
It has indeed every signature of a damnable doctrine. There are many errors, no
doubt, in regard to the modes and forms, and some of the doctrines of religion,
which, though they cannot abide the clear light of the last great day, will not
exclude men from the savor of God, or the kingdom of heaven. But this is a
practical error of the first magnitude, which will eventually prove fatal in
the day of decision. Our Lord has so clearly described the process of the
final judgment, that we may as certainly know now, that all unregenerate,
unholy, impenitent, unclean, impure persons shall then be condemned, as if we
now stood before that awful tribunal, and heard the last decisive sentence
denounced against them, Depart, ye cursed, into everlasting are, prepared for
the devil and his angels.

Some seem reluctant to pronounce absolutely upon the fatal tendency of this
doctrine, and choose only to say, if it be true, we are as safe as those who
embrace it. But we ought nather to say, if there be no future judgment then we
are all safe, but not otherwise. Admit a future judgment, and there remains no
room for doubt, whether God will make at difference between him that serves
him, and him that serves him not; between him that swears, and him that
fears an oath. Indeed the supposition that no distinction will be made
between the righteous and the wicked at the last day, wholly supersedes the
necessity and even propriety of a general judgment, Why should God appoint a
day, in which, to judge the world in righteousness, if no persons were to be
judged, no characters to be examined, and no displays of retributive justice to
be made! "Be not deceived, God is not mocked; for what a man sows, that shall
he also reap. For he that sows to the flesh, shall of the flesh reap
corruption: But he that sows to the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life
everlasting."

Did the human heart naturally prefer light to darkness, and truth to error, it
would be sufficient to discover the truth and expose the error and leave every
person to follow the cool dictates of his own understanding. But since the case
is quite the reverse, it becomes proper to address the hearts and consciences,
the hopes and fears of men, and give divine truths all the advantages which
they necessarily derive from the motives of eternity. Hence the apostles
addressed mankind on the weighty concerns of the soul, with great solemnity,
tenderness and pathos. "Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord, we persuade
men." "Now then we are ambassadors for Christ, as though God did beseech you by
us; we pray you in Christ's stead, be ye reconciled to God." Supported and
directed by such examples as these, there needs no apology for addressing those
who are particularly concerned in this serious subject, and warning them
against the fatal dangers to which they are ominently exposed.

There are many, at this day, who are laboring to reason themselves out of the
belief of all truth both human and divine; and boast of arriving to a certainty
that all things are uncertain. But it may be questioned whether the human mind,
which is formed to see and feel the force of truth, will permit any man to
approach nearer to perfect skepticism, than perfect knowledge. By an habit of
resisting truth, however, some may have unsettled their minds respecting divine
things, at least; and become exposed to embrace error, if any thing, instead of
truth in matters of religion. And for this reason, they are very liable to fall
in with the delusive scheme of universal salvation, which has a tendency to
diffuse some glimmering rays of light in their dark and despairing minds. But
let such be entreated to awake from their reveries, and attend to the great
realities with which they are surrounded and connected. Eternal rewards and
punishments are substantial realities, whether they believe them to be so or
not. By shutting their eyes against them, their danger is not in the least
diminished, but greatly enhanced. The period is hastening when they must be
thoroughly awakened from their delusive dreams. The solemn scenes of the last
day will draw the curtain aside, and open upon their astonished minds the great
realities which we have described. And these objects, which, at a distance,
made Felix and Belshazzar tremble, will equally shock their guilty souls,
whenever their presence can no longer be resisted. A realizing sense of guilt,
and folly, and the divine wrath will make any human heart stoop, and fill it
with unutterable anguish, horror and despair. O! that they would therefore turn
from such gloomy prospects, and attend to those luminous truths, which will
pour a flood of light into their ravished minds, and give them that joy which
is unspeakable and full of glory.

There is a larger number than these, perhaps, who are making swift and bold
advances in the cause of infidelity, and leave no methods unemployed to
discredit divine revelation, and subvert the foundations of christianity. They
need not tell the world their motives. Were they not convinced that the bible
contains the doctrine of eternal punishments, they would not wrack their
inventions to find arguments to persuade themselves and others that the
scriptures are a cunningly devised fable. Let this doctrine be erased from the
bible, and every deist would become its votary, and exchange his Bolingbroke,
Voltaire or Chesterfield for that sacred volumn. It is this doctrine alone that
compels them to renounce a book, which bears so many signatures of divinity,
and which they are compelled to acknowledge contains the most excellent
instructions, institutions and commands. But so weak is their infidelity, we
presume they would rejoice to find the bible on their side, to confirm their
wavering hopes and feeble prospects of future happiness. And this is what the
scheme of universal salvation proposes. It flatters them the bible is their
friend, and announces eternal felicity to them and to all mankind. Accordingly
numbers of a deistical turn have become converts to this agreeable doctrine,
and many others are eminently exposed to fall into the fatal snare. But this is
flying from the iron weapon and rushing on the bow of steel. For if any discard
the bible because they imagine it does contain the doctrine of eternal
punishments, or embrace it because they think it does not, they will infallibly
meet with disappointment and ruin in the end. There is one way and but one, in
which, they may escape the wrath which is to come, and that is, by repentance
toward God, and faith in our Lord Jesus Christ. This is the only foundation of
hope, that God has provided and revealed; nor can any other foundation be
laid, which will not give way, when the winds blow, and the storms of divine
wrath beat upon the guilty soul.

The sons of pleasure, who indulge to every sinful gratification, find it
exceedingly difficult, in their serious intervals, to stifle their natural
apprehensions of guilt and punishment, and therefore readily catch hold of any
thing which promises them impunity in the paths of vice. The doctrine of
salvation for all men, without exception, or distinction of characters,
perfectly gratifies their hearts and coincides with their reigning views and
pursuits. Accordingly, when this is proposed to their belief, they will, if
possible, yield their assent, and shake off those painful fears of the wrath to
come, through which, they have all their life time been subject to bondage. But
let them beware of this slender shelter. It will infallibly deceive and
disappoint them. The agreeableness of the doctrine is a strong indication of
its repugnancy to the gospel of Christ, which was never relished by persons of
an immoral, profligate character. When John preached Herod was offended. When
Christ preached the whole congregation was filled with wrath. And when Paul
preached upon righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come, the loose and
abandoned Felix trembled. And it is the genuine tendency of the doctrines of
the gospel to convince profligate sinners that they are in the gaul of
bitterness and bonds of iniquity. They may therefore be assured that the
soothing doctrine of universal salvation is diametrically opposite to the truth
as it is in Jesus. Let them not then listen to the pleasing delusion, and bless
themselves, saying, we shall have peace, though we walk in the imagination of
our hearts, to add drunkenness to thirst. For the Lord will not spare them, but
his anger, and his jealousy shall smoke against them, and all the curses that
are written in the book of God shall lie upon them forever. "Rejoice, O young
man, in thy youth, and let thy heart cheer thee in the days of thy youth, and
walk in the ways of thine heart, and in the sight of thine eyes: But know thou,
that for all these things God will bring thee into judgment." "Be not deceived:
Neither fornicators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor effeminate, nor abusers
of themselves with mankind, nor thieves, nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor
revilers, nor extortioners shall inherit the kingdom of God."

There is another class of men whose case borders upon despair, and calls aloud
for the prayers and compassion of every pious heart: I mean those who have
renounced their former faith, and built all their hopes for eternity upon the
slender foundation, that no man can possibly be lost. My friends, are you
certain that without love, without says, without holiness, you can see the
Lord? Are you certain, notwithstanding all the divine threatenings, there is no
wrath to come? Are you certain, that men cannot be under strong delusions, to
believe a lie, that they may be damned? Are you certain that you can appear
before the judgment seat of Christ with safety? Are you certain that there is
no meaning in this saying of our compassionate Redeemer, "What is a man
profited, if he should gain the whole world, and lose his own soul? or what
shall a man give in exchange for his soul?" In a word, are you certain, it is
absolutely impossible, that your precious and immortal souls should be lost
forever? If not, what an amazing risk do you run, to suspend all your eternal
interests upon a single point of mere speculation, which stands condemned by
the concurrent voice of reason, of conscience, of scripture, and of the
christian world! But (to use nearly the words of an eminently great and pious
divine) if you are determined to enquire no farther into the matter now, give
me leave, at least, from a sincere concern, that you may not heap upon your
heads more aggravated ruin, to entreat you, that you would be cautious how you
expose yourselves to yet greater danger, by what you must yourselves own to be
unnecessary, I mean, Attempts to pervert others from believing the truths of
the gospel Leave them, for God's sake, and for your own, in possession of those
pleasures, and those hopes, which nothing but the truth as it is in Jesus can
give them; and act not as if you were solicitous to add to the guilt of an
infidel the tenfold damnation, which they who have been the perverters and
destroyers of the souls of others, must expect to meet, if those divine
threatenings which they have so adventrously opposed should prove, as they
certainly will, the most serious, and to them the most dreadful, truths. If I
cannot prevail here, but the pride of displaying a superiority of understanding
should bear on such readers, even in opposition to their own favorite maxims of
the innocence of error, and the equality of all religious consistent with
social virtue, to do their utmost to trample down the truths of the gospel with
contempt; I would however dismiss them with one proposal, which I think the
importance of the affair may fully justify. If you have done with your
examination into the promises and threatenings of the gospel, and each of you
determine to live and conduct himself as if they were assuredly false, sit down
then, and make a memorandum of that determination. On such a day of such a
year, I deliberately resolved, that I would live and die rejecting all
experimental religion. This day I determined, not only to renounce all vital
piety, but also to make it a serious part of the business of my life, to
destroy, as far as I possibly can, all regard to it in the minds of others; in
calm, steady defiance of that day, when the followers of Christ say, he shall
appear in so much majesty and terror to execute the vengeance threatened to his
enemies. Dare you write this, and sign it? I firmly believe that many a man,
who would be thought an Universalist, and endeavors to increase the number,
would not do it. And if you in particular dare not do it, whence does that
small remainder of caution arise? The cause is plain. There is in your
conscience some secret apprehension, that these opposed, these rejected, these
derided truths of the gospel may, after all prove true. And if there be such an
apprehension, then let conscience do its office, and convince you of the
impious madness of acting as if they were most certainly and demonstrably
false. Let it tell you at large, how possible it is that happily you may be found
fighting against God: That, bold as you are in desying the terrors of the Lord,
you may possibly fall into his hands; may chance to hear that despised
sentence, which when you hear it from the mouth of the eternal Judge, you will
not be able to despise: I will repeat it again, in spite of all your scorn, you
may hear the King say to you, Depart accursed, into everlasting fire, prepared
for the devil and his angels.

If any thing farther needs to be added, it is by way of direction, how to shun
the baneful influence of these dangerous opinions, which it is the business of
some, at this day, to propagate with great apparent zeal.

And here the first thing that occurs is, to search the scriptures, which are
the infallible standard of truth and error. We should carry every doctrine,
which offers itself to our belief, "to the law and to the testimony," and abide
that divine decision. The rule is perfect. The only danger lies in the
misapplication, which indeed is too often the case. No corrupt principle of a
religious nature, has ever failed to press the bible into its service, and
claim the sanction of divine authority. But though some disjointed sentences in
the word of God, may seem to countenance the most absurd and licentious
opinions, and their votaries may fly to this divine sanctuary for protection;
yet the sacred oracles taken in their general connection, fully reprobate every
false scheme of religion that ever has been, or ever can be devised. They draw
such a character of the Supreme Being, of Jesus Christ, of the Divine Spirit,
of the human heart, and of the genuine nature and effects of pure and undefiled
religion, that the doctrines according to godliness, may be clearly
distinguished from all their counterfeits. The scriptures in general have a
plain, determinate, consistent meaning, which may be clearly understood.
Therefore no two opposite doctrines of religion can both be agreeable to the
word of God; but one or the other must necessarily stand condemned by it.
Hence, for instance, if the doctrine of eternal punishments be really agreeable
to the bible, as we have endeavored to show, then the doctrine of universal
salvation is entirely contrary to it, and not one text that can be found, does,
in its true sense, give the least degree of evidence in its favor. This being
the case, there is all encouragement to search the scriptures, to see which of
these two diametrically opposite doctrines is true. It would be strange indeed
if this could not be determined by every honest enquirer. If any are in doubt
therefore, we would entreat them to take heed to this sure word of prophecy,
which is able to make them wise unto salvation.

In the next place, there is caution to be used against the seduction of those
who propagate corrupt and dangerous sentiments. Be not deceived by their
pretensions to superior penetration and knowledge. Men of the strongest minds
and most extensive literature have often committed the grossest blunders in
their religious speculations, and then employed all their learning and
abilities to maintain and propagate them. Some of the enemies of divine
revelation, and of the peculiar doctrines of the gospel, have displayed shining
talents and a profusion of learning, in pleading the cause of error, and
attempting to shake the pillars of our holy religion. And many of their
admirers appear to have been dazzled and allured into their snares by an
implicit faith in their great abilities. But this betrays weakness. Great men
are not always wise: They are liable to err; and therefore we should examine
their opinions as well as those of other men, and admit them only upon the foot
of real evidence.

Nor are we to be biassed in favor of men's licentious principles, on account
of their amiable moral characters. It is a just observation of Dr. Brown, that
men of strict morality have often disseminated the most licentious and
pernicious doctrines. It is well known, that Epicurus, the father of doctrinal
licentiousness, never lived up to his principles, but maintained a regular and
exemplary life. Spinosa, the father of speculative Atheism, was a man of
sobriety and apparent devotion. Lord Herbert, who was, if not the father, yet
the principal advocate for Deism in the last century, appears to have had a
serious mind, and a conscientious regard to duty. And we Know that some of the
advocates for universal salvation, are men of amiable natural dispositions and
fair moral characters. But ought we hence to entertain a more favorable regard
for atheism, deism, or any other licentious doctrines. By no means. Those
principles are still to be shuned at the peril of our souls.

Nor again, are we to believe the propagators of error, though they throw out
the most pompous and solemn asseverations of their sincerity, impartiality and
uncommon intercourse with the Deity, and concern for his glory. Though we scruple
not their sincerity, yet we scruple the propriety of throwing out the
profession of it, which can have no tendency to enlighten, but only prejudice
the minds of the credulous. This, which we venture to call an artifice, is
often employed by the advocates for universal salvation. Mr. White, in his
treatise on the universal restoration of all sinful creatures to the divine
favor, Page 6.^
makes the most solemn asseverations of his sincerity and sacred regard for the
divine glory. His expressions are these, And here I do in the fear of God most
humbly prostrate myself before his divine Majesty, and in the deepest sense of
my own darkness and distance from him, do with all my might beg of that
infinite goodness I am endeavoring to represent to others, that if something
like this platform and prospect of things, be not agreeable to that revealed
and natural light he has given to us, that my understanding may be interrupted
and my design fall, and that the Lord would pardon my attempt: and I know he
will do so, for he has given me to have no further concern for this matter,
than as I apprehend it to be a most glorious truth, witnessed to both by the
scriptures of truth and by the most essential principles of our own reason, and
which will be found at the last opening of the everlasting gospel, to recover
in that opening a degenerate world. Mr. Relly holds out the same lure to his
readers, to place an implicit faith in the rectitude of his views, and the
divinity of his doctrines. In a preface to one volume of his writings, he
assures his readers that his discourses were delivered extempore, without any
previous study or forethought, and flowed from his lips as they were dictated
by the divine spirit. For says he, I followed that divine direction given to
the apostles, "Take no thought beforehand what ye shall speak, neither do ye
premeditate: for it is not ye that speak, but the Holy Ghost." How presumptous
is it for any man, at this day, to pretend to imitate the apostles in this
respect! and especially for Mr. Relly, who in his writings every where
ridicules all experimental religion, inward, piety, holy affections, and
christian graces and tempers!

Error often employs such artifices as truth neither needs nor approves. They
sometimes, however, prove successful, and deceive the inattentive and
unguarded. Those who use them therefore are dangerous persons, and their
corrupting influence is studiously to be avoided. Their doctrines are fatal if
imbibed; and even when they are not fully adopted, they tend to harden the
heart, and stupify the conscience. The bare thought that some maintain that all
will be saved, begets a secret hope that possibly it may be true, and that
there is not so much danger in impenitence and unbelief as many have long
imagined, and pretended. Therefore to hear the universalists preach, or read
their writings, merely to know what they can say in defense of their errors, is
like Eve's listening to the reasoning of the serpent, and may, in the event,
prove equally fatal. Accordingly the scripture characterises false teachers,
and warns you to avoid them. The apostle Paul, who was troubled with the
perverters of the gospel, treats them with great plainness and severity. "But
though we, or an angel from heaven, preach any other gospel unto you, than that
which we have preached unto you, let him be accursed. As we said before, so say
I now again, if any man preach any other gospel unto you than that ye have
received, let him be accursed." The apostle John directs man to have no
intimate connection with false teachers. "If any come unto you, and bring not
this doctrine, that is the doctrine of Christ mentioned in the preceding
verse, receive him not into your house, neither bid him God speed. For he that
bids him God speed, is partaker of his evil deeds." And Solomon gives a
similar caution and direction. "Cease, my son, to hear the instruction that
causes to err." Thus you have not only the voice of reason, but the voice of
God to warn you to shun the presence and influence of those that lie wait to
deceive.

The last direction is, to repent and believe the gospel. This will place you
beyond the reach of all fatal errors. When your hearts are established with
grace, you will no longer be liable to be carried about with diverse and
strange doctrines. When you yield cordial obedience to the divine will, there
is a promise that you shall know of doctrines whether they be of God. When you
embrace the gospel from the heart, it will be out of the power of Satan or any
of his instruments to deceive you. When you sincerely love God, all things
shall work together for your good, and prepare you more and more for the great,
and glorious, and solemn scenes, which death, judgment and eternity will soon
open to your view. But so long as you remain in a state of impenitence and
unbelief, you are in imminent danger of making ship wreck not only of your
faith, but of your precious and immortal souls. Though you should escape every
fatal error, and in speculation, clearly understand every doctrine of the
gospel, yet if you hold even the truth in unrighteousness, you will certainly
perish. An orthodox creed and a fair external appearance are of no avail, in
point of divine acceptance, without a broken and contrite heart, and an
unfeigned love of the truth. For with the heart man believes unto
righteousness: And without holiness no man shall see the Lord. Therefore let
the wicked forsake his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts: And let him
return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy on him; and to our God for he will
abundantly pardon. Nor is there the least excuse for a moment's delay. Behold,
now is the accepted time; behold, now is the day of salvation. Life and death
are now set before you. This is the only day of grace and space of repentance
you will ever enjoy. You are now placed between two vast eternities of
happiness and woe. You are therefore of all the creatures of God, in the most
critical, serious and solemn situation. Your life, or your death, your
happiness, or your misery for a boundless eternity, is suspended on the slender
thread of life. And death is advancing with rapid speed to seal up your account
for the judgment of the great day; when in the view of the assembled universe,
you must hear your doom, and either rise with the righteous to mansions of
eternal bliss, or sink with the wicked down to regions of eternal darkness,
horror and despair! Be entreated then, O sinner, to agree with thine adversary
quickly, while thou art in the way with him, least he deliver thee to the
Judge, and the Judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison.
Verily thou shall by no means come out thence, till thou have paid the
uttermost farthing.!!

FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 19. 15th line from the top, for points read paints.

Page 38. 13th line from the top, for man read men.

Page 41. 5th line from the bottom, for thereto read then to.

Page 43. 8th line from the bottom, for have read leave.

Page 49. 12th line from the bottom, for then read thus.


