Mr. Cumings's ELECTION SERMON May 28, 1783.

A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE HIS HONOR THOMAS CUSHING, Esquire LIEUTENANT GOVERNOR,
THE HONORABLE THE COUNCIL, AND THE TWO BRANCHES OF THE GENERAL COURT OF THE
COMMONWEALTH OF MASSACHUSETTS MAY 28, 1783.

BRING THE ANNIVERSARY OF GENERAL ELECTION.

BY HENRY CUMINGS, A. M. Pastor of the Church in BILLERICA.

BOSTON: PRINTED BY T and J. FLEET, 1783.

Commonwealth of Massachusetts. In SENATE, May 29, 1783.
ORDERED, That Jeremiah Powell, Moses Gill, and Ebenezer Bridge, Esquires, be a
Committee to wait on the Rev. Mr. Henry Cumings, and return him the Thanks of
this Board for the Sermon delivered by him, Yesterday, before his Honor, the
Lieutenant Governor, the Council, and the two Branches of the General Court;
and to request a Copy of the same for the Press.

S. ADAMS, President.

AN Election SERMON.
I PETER V.5. Yea, all of you be subject to one another.
WITHOUT enquiring into the particular meaning of these words, considered in a
sense restrained by their coherence with what proceeds and follows, I shall
take them as an independent sentence; in which detached view, they comprehend
all those duties of civil and social life, which mankind owe to one another,
whatever difference there may be among them, as to their respective capacities
and outward condition in the world.

As men are formed for society, and cannot be happy in a state of separation
from one another; so their well-being depends upon mutual assistance and
support, and a reciprocal interchange of those offices of friendship and
benevolence, which their mutual dependence requires, and both reason and
religion prescribe.

That all men ought in some sense to be subject to one another, is the plain
doctrine of the apostle Peter, in the words just read. This doctrine concerns
all societies, under every form and constitution of government, whether
monarchal, popular or mixed. It is especially suited to the genius of a
commonwealth, founded upon this leading principle, that "all men are born free
and equal;" that is, come into the world on even ground in regard to authority;
no one having a right to govern, in virtue of primogeniture, or descent from an
higher and more noble parentage than others.

The subject therefore is worthy of the attention of this respectable auditory;
and the speaker has no doubt but they will afford him their can did indulgence,
while he modestly attempts to offer a few thoughts upon it, though he should
not be able to handle it, in a manner answerable to it is dignity and importance.

According to it is most common use, the word subjection signifies the
submission of an inferior to a superior, and applies only to those duties,
which men owe to those, who have authority over them. In order therefore to
accommodate the doctrine of mutual subjection, to all the members of a
community, we must sometimes depart from the strict sense of this word, or vary
the meaning of it, so as to make it consist with the differences between men,
in regard to their several abilities; and with those distinctions of office,
rank and authority, which are necessary in society.

It is evident that the duties, which men owe to one another, and to society,
are not, in all cases, precisely the same; but must be different, according to
the difference of their respective advantages, opportunities and other
circumstances. And when any one fulfils the obligations resulting from his
particular condition and station in life; or that arise from the particular
sphere of action, whether high or low, in which he moves; he does, on his part,
conform to the great law of mutual subjection, and render himself a good and
useful member of society.

Every one ought to consider, that he was born, not for himself alone, but for
others, for society, for his country; and consequently that he is indispensibly
obliged to render the best assistance and service in his power, to his
fellow-citizens around him, and to contribute his share toward the general
interest of the community to which he belongs. This obligation is not confined
to a few; but extends to all, from the highest officer in the state, through
all subordinate ranks, and interior orders and degrees, down to the lowest
peasant and plebcan. For though all are not able to render themselves useful
and beneficial, in the same respects; yet there is no one, who enjoys the
powers of reason and health, in any tolerable degree, but may, by a suitable
employment of his faculties and abilities, not only serve himself, but the
public, and make himself a blessing, in some respect or other.

There is a resemblance between the natural body and the body politic. The
natural body is composed of many members; none of which are useless; but all
calculated to answer some valuable purpose, and subserve the good of the whole.
What therefore the apostle Paul says of the natural body with a view to
illustrate the union, which ought to subsist between the members of the
christian church, is equally applicable to civil societies. The body, says he,
is not one member, but many. If the foot shall say, Because I am not the hand,
I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the body? And if the ear shall
say, Because I am not the eye, I am not of the body; is it therefore not of the
body? If the whole body were an eye, where were the hearing? If the whole body
were hearing, where were the smelling? But now has God set the members, every
one of them in the body, as it has pleased him. -- The eye cannot say unto the
hand, I have no need of thee; nor again the head to the feet, I have no need of
you. Nay, much more those members of the body, which seem to be more seeble,
are necessary. -- God has so tempered the body together, -- that there should
be no schism in it; but that the members should have the same care one for
another. And whether one member suffer, all the members suffer with it; or one
member be honored, all the members rejoice with it. So that the union and
connection between the several parts of the natural body, and their necessary
dependence one on another, is an apt illustration of the great law of mutual
subjection in civil societies; the members whereof, whether rich or poor, in
high life or low, in office or out of it, stand in need of mutual assistance
and support; without which it will be impossible to promote the common
interest, or to preserve the peace and harmony of the whole.

A man's being raised above others in wealth or office, does not render him
independent on those who are beneath him, in these respects. He cannot say, he
has no need of those, who are in a lower condition and meaner circumstances;
for, without Their aid and service, he would lose the advantage of his
elevation; and, like Samson, shorn of his locks, become weak like other men.

The mechanic and tiller of the ground are as necessary in society as the
legislator, civil magistrate, or any other profession. The labors of the poor
and services of the lower classes of people, in their several callings and
occupations, are of as great importance to the general welfare of a state, as
the counsel of the wise, the bounty of the rich, and protection of the
powerful. If therefore any one, capable of attending to the common business of
life, is an unprofitable and useless member of the community, it is not owing
to any necessity arising from his outward condition in the world, but to some
faulty cause.

Whoever, suppressing a regard for the good of others, confines himself to the
narrow circle of his own private interest, does thereby render himself, at
best, a nuisance to society. Such an one can have no just claim to honor and
respect, let his station in life be what it will. It is not the external
splendour of their circumstances, but a constant endeavor to be good, and to do
good, according to their abilities, that makes men truly great and honorable.
In the sight of God, who respects not persons, but in judging of men regards
only the moral differences between them, no outward condition is more
honorable than another. The true criterion of real worth is a man's conduct,
in that station or post in life, whether conspicuous or obscure, which
providence has allotted to him.

It is the business of civil rulers, who are entrusted with the high powers of
government, to enact and take care for the effectual execution of such laws, as
shall be best calculated to restrain the exorbitancy of the human passions to
guard individuals against insults and outrages, and secure every one in the
peaceable enjoyment of liberty, property and all the blessings of society. And
while they employ their authority and power in pursuit of these great ends of
their promotion, it is the duty and interest of people at large, to yield a
cheerful obedience to them, and a ready compliance with those rules,
regulations and laws, which are made and provided, for the benefit of each
particular member, in harmony with the prosperity and welfare of the whole
collective body.

The grand end of social union and of the institution of civil government, is
the good of the whole, and of every individual in consistence therewith. This
end may be frustrated, not only by an abuse of power in rulers; but also by an
abuse of liberty in the people. Power abused ceases to be lawful authority, and
degenerates into tyranny. Liberty abused, or carried to excess, is
licenciousness. Neither of these can consist with the good of society. The
former, unresisted, will introduce slavery, and ignominious servitude, among
the lower ranks and orders of people. The latter is a prolific source of
disorder and anarchy.

When rulers take the advantage of the powers they are vested with, to oppress
their subjects and rob people of their just rights, in order to enrich and
aggrandize themselves, they counteract the very end of their advancement, and
instead of being ministers of God for good, become rods of his school for
correction (not to say, ministers of the devil for mischief.) And when people,
under presence of liberty, refuse obedience to lawful authority, and oppose the
measures of just government, merely because such measures do not coincide with
their private views and sepa rate interests, the principles on which they act,
are evidently inconsistent with a state of society, and lead directly back to a
state of nature. For where such an excess of liberty is claimed and allowed, as
leaves it optional with every individual to obey or disobey the civil
authority, according as he shall judge it to be for or against his particular
interest, a state of society cannot differ much from a state of nature.

If every man, without compulsion, would strictly conform to the obligations of
natural law, there would be no occasion for forming any social connections, or
uniting under any forms of civil government. But such is evidently the state of
human nature; such the disorder of the human passions; such the power or envy,
prejudice and a lust of domination; such the force of evil byasses, proceeding
from ignorance, contracted views and competitions of interest; that without the
introduction of social compact and civil authority, mankind could have no
dependence upon mutual help and assistance, nor any security against abuses and
injuries, violence and rapine.

It being necessary for men to unite in society, and establish civil
government, in order effectually to avail themselves of the advantages of
mutual succor, defense and protection; without which, their enjoyments would
be few and precarious, and their inconveniences and dangers great and
distressing: this being the case, every one, who has just conceptions of things
(far from claiming a liberty to do whatever his ambition, avarice or partiality
to himself might dictate to be right) must feel himself obliged to consult the
general welfare, by conforming to the laws of society, constitutionally made by
public authority, for the good of the whole; though such laws should sometimes
interfere with his private views, and contradict his prejudices.

The public good is the attracting point, the common center of gravity, which
should consine, regulate and govern the motions of all the members of society.
When any fly off from this point and take an excentric course, the coercion of
law should be used, to check their irregular motions, and reduce them back to
their proper center, in order that the economy and beauty of the politic system
may be preserved, and the bands of society remain unbroken.

That a due subordination may be kept up between the several parts of the
politic body; and all the members thereof be made to conspire, in the exercise
of their respective functions, to the health and happiness of the whole;
effectual care should be taken to prevent government from falling into
contempt. To honor those, who are entrusted with the powers of government, is
one thing, evidently necessary for this end. This therefore is a duty which we
owe to society. And that people may have no excuse for not doing their duty, in
this respect, it concerns all civil officers, especially those in high rank and
authority, to maintain their dignity, by a decent gravity of deportment, an
inflexible adherence to the rules of justice and equity, and a steady
application to the business of their exalted stations. Such a conduct, in
rulers, has a powerful tendency to attract esteem, and command respect and
veneration. But though they should justly merit the highest honors, by a worthy
behavior, and a zealous uniform pursuit of the great ends of their promotion,
it would not be at all strange, to find some few, disposed to withold from them
due respect and submission. For there always have been, and probably always
will be, some in the world, who under the baneful influence of those levelling
principles, that cannot brook any civil distinctions and restraints, despise
government, and speak evil of dignities. Persons of this description are
dangerous members of society, as their principles and practices are subversive
of all civil authority, and tend directly to plunge civil government into an
universal wrack of ruin.

It deserves to be remembered, that we honor society, when we honor those, who
are clothed with lawful authority. For as all lawful authority in rulers, is
derived from the people, through the medium of that constitutional compact,
which binds them together in one body; so to treat the rulers of a people, with
respect and hono^r, suitable to their public characters, and the offices which
they sustain, is a proper expression of that reverence, which individuals owe
to the community, as a body. I may add, that as the respect shown to those, who
are in public stations, redounds to the public; so it also tends to make a
people appear respectable, and to give to government the energy, necessary for
attaining the ends of it. On the contrary, to withold respect from those, who
have been constitutionally promoted to offices of authority and power, is to
cast a flight and contempt on the whole body of the people, and tends to make a
society appear mean and despicable, to relax the reins of government and
undermine the very foundations of it.

It is reasonable indeed for a people to keep a jealous eye upon those, who are
betrusted with power, in the several departments of government. This is
necessary to keep them on their guard against all encroachments on their
liberties, and to preserve them in a readiness to resist the first approaches
of despotism. But suspicions may be carried too far. When upon insufficient
grounds, they are indulged to such a degree, as to destroy all confidence in
civil rulers, and encourage the impatience of people under the restraints of
law, they are of dangerous consequence; as they plant the feeds of faction, a
convulsive disease, that threatens the dissolution of the body politic. When
saction enters a state, with its usual train of virulence, malevolence and
abusive invective, it unstrings the nerves of government, and introduces such
disorder and uncertainty into public measures, and such strife and division
among people, as are inconsistent with the public safety, security and
prosperity. This distemper is generally the offspring of envy and disappointed
ambition. Avarice always stands ready to foster and nurse, to increase and
inflame it, by groundless criminations of men and measures; especially when the
public exigences require heavy taxes, and expensive exertions.

The inconveniences and mischiefs, that must acrue to society, from this, and
every other gross violation of the law of mutual subjection, are sufficient to
convince any one of the necessity of a strict adherence to it. Our obligation
to avoid divisive principles and practices, and by a constant intercourse of
mutual good offices, to endeavor to make ourselves beneficial to one another
and serviceable to society, is therefore a plain dictate of reason and common
sense. I would add (if any desire further satisfaction) that this obligation is
enforced upon us, in the sacred scriptures, by the authority of the supreme
Legislator and Governor of the world. The words at the head of this discourse
are the words of an apostle, under the inspiration of God. Another inspired
apostle expresses himself to the same purpose, in these words, Let no man seek
his own; but every man another's wealth. -- Look not every man on his own
things; but every man also on the things of others. The meaning of which is,
that men ought not to confine their views to their own private interest, but to
extend their regards to the welfare of others, and exercise a benevolent
concern and care for the good of their fellowcreatures.

This also is a doctrine expressly taught by the great author of our holy
religion, when he commands us to love our neighbor as ourselves; and enjoins
upon us that comprehensive rule of equity and charity, All things whatsoever ye
would that men should do to you, do ye even so to them.

It may not be improper to observe here, that the christian religion recommends
itself to the embraces of every lover of mankind, by its being the most
benevolent institution in the world, admirably calculated, by it is doctrines,
precepts and sanctions, to promote peace on earth, and good will among men. And
whoever duly considers the nature of christianity, and attends to it is
adaptedness to suppress the corrupt lusts, and restrain the irregular passions
of men; to fill the mind with noble sentiments of piety and benevolence, and
engage people in pursuits, suitable to the dignity, and conducive to the
happiness of their reasonable natures; cannot doubt, but (other things being
alike) he, who has imbibed the spirit and principles of this religion, will
make a better magistrate, a better legislator, a better judge, and in short,
fill every office and department in government, with more honor to himself and
advantage to the public; and, in private life, make a better subject and a
better citizen; than one who has formed his views and sentiments, upon any
other system of religion and morals.

It has indeed been objected, as an essential defect in christianity, by some
not well affected to it, that it no where particularly recommends the noble
virtue of patriotism. But (not to insist on any thing else) it is sufficient to
reply to this objection, that whatever there is excellent and laudable in
patriotism, is included in that generous and diffusive benevolence, which is
the animating soul of this religion. Virtuous patriotism, far from implying any
ill will to the rest of mankind, is nothing else, but the principle or
universal benevolence, exercised as far as a man's power extends, upon the
objects that claim his first regards. For as no one has ability to carry his
good will to all men into effect; so reason will teach every one, that his
first obligation is to those, with whom he is more immediately connected, and
where providence has assigned him his station and sphere of usefulness. Should
a man suppress a particular affection for the society, with which he is most
closely united, and neglect the interest of his own country under pretense of
exercising equal benevolence toward all mankind, it would be the same thing,
in effect as to resolve to be useless, and neglect the good of all. For there
is no other way, in which any one can render himself serviceable to those parts
of the great community of mankind, with which he has no special connection,
than by the exercise of an hearty zeal for the welfare of his own country, and
endeavoring, in the most effectual manner, to promote the good of that
society, which bounds the sphere of his influence and power. In this sense, and
in this way, all men, in all the distinct states and kingdoms of the world, may
and ought to subject to one another. It is thus only that we can fulfill our
obligations to all mankind.

True it is, patriotism is but a blind affection, and essentially defective as
to any virtuous excellence, if it prompts a man to defend the cause of his
country, when his country forms itself into a faction against the rights of
mankind, and is wickedly endeavoring to bring other states and nations under
it is arbitrary jurisdiction and government. No one, who will consult the sober
dictates of reason, can suppose himself obliged to espouse such an unrighteous
cause, or freely to afford any support to his country, in the prosecution of
such an evil design. The principle of benevolence to all, clearly forbids this.
But the same principle obliges the members of every community, to a zealous
exertion, in defense of their rights, laws and liberties, when the same are
endangered by the unrighteous claims, and violent proceedings of ambitious
enemies. In such a case, defensive war is a duty, founded not barely on the
principles of self-preservation and patriotism, but also on the principle of
unconfined universal benevolence; it being evidently for the interest of all
mankind, that in all parts of the world, those should be opposed, to the last
extremity, who are endeavoring to advance themselves upon the ruins or the
essential rights of human nature.

The man, who makes the happiness and prosperity of his country, a grand object
of his zealous pursuit, and generously risques his life and fortune, when the
case requires it, in the defense of it is constitution and laws, is a character
worthy of universal esteem and honor. Such an one, so far as his abilities
extend, exercises friendship to all men. What then shall we say of those who,
when the rights and liberties of their country, are in danger of falling a prey
to the aspiring ambition of proud invaders, who have waged an unjust war
against it, stand aloof, and not only refuse to assist in saving it from ruin,
but desert it, and, of free choice, join the standard of the enemy? Can such
persons make good their pretensions, I will not say to patriotism, but to
general benevolence? Whatever be their motives, are they not to be viewed as
enemies, if actions have any meaning? And should their country, which they have
thus neglected, and abandoned to its fate in a time of trouble and danger, be
successful in its endeavors to maintain its cause, and defeat the designs of
its enemies, must not their admission afterward to the freedom and privileges
of it, be an act of mere favor and special grace, to which they can lay no
equitable claim? It is far from the intention of the author to decide the
question, whether the faith of these states is plighted by treaty, for the
restoration of those disappointed people, who are commonly called absentees, to
the rights and privileges of citizenships He leaves the decision of this
question with those, who have better means of information, and more
discernment, than he can pretend to. He doubts not, but his countrymen are
^^^^^sed, in all cases, to preserve their national honor inviolate. If that is
not engaged or pledged, in behalf of those, who forsook us in our late contest,
and chose the side of the enemy; it must be determined by other considerations,
whether they shall be restored, or not, to forfeited favor.


Christianity indeed obliges us to love and forgive our enemies, and do good to
those who treat us ill. But this obligation does not extend so far, as to
exclude a regard to our own safety and defense. It would be unreasonable to
suppose, that our good will to enemies, ought to supercede our obligations to
ourselves and to our country; or that we are required to consult their welfare,
by methods that would encourage and promote their evil designs, and put us into
such a situation, as to lie at their mercy. It is allowed by all, that a
vindictive temper is inconsistent with the spirit and precepts of christianity.
Whoever does any thing merely for the sake of revenge, or in order to gratify
his malevolent resentments, transgresses the christian law of benevolence. But
a man may take such measures for his own security and defense, as shall operate
to the disadvantage of his enemies, and at the same time preserve a christian
temper. If by the conduct of enemies, we are unhappily reduced to this
alternative, either to take such measures, as will involve them in trouble and
distress; or to suppress our love to ourselves, to our friends, and to society;
common sense will teach us on which side our obligation lies. In cases of
competition, even private friendship ought to yield to the public good; much
more ought benevolence to an enemy to give way to the good of our country; and
to remain suspended, as to outward exercises, when the case is so
circumstanced, that it cannot be thus exerted, without counteracting the
interest of the community to which we belong. A regard to the public ought to
swallow up every partial affection, inconsistent with the general interest.

It is to the honor of America, that from the time we were first threatened
with British tyranny, to the commencement of the late war; and from the
commencement of the war, through all the stages and vicissitudes of it, to it is
happy conclusion; she has produced an illustrious band of worthy patriots, who,
unactuated by any unfriendly dispositions toward the rest of mankind, have,
with unshaken firmness and fortitude, defended her cause, in the cabinet and in
the field, by the pen and by the sword, against the arbitrary claims and
hostile violence of her unnatural and cruel enemies. Inspired with the love of
liberty, moved by the generous impulse of patriotic virtue, how many, quitting
the calm enjoyments of domestic ease and tranquillity, have magnanimously
encountered and braved all the fatigues and dangers of war, and voluntarily
sacrificed their lives for the support of the cities of our God, in the
unabridged enjoyment of their religion and liberties! Time would ^ail me to
give a catalogue of those worthies, who, unintimidated by the vaunting menaces
and fulminating proclamations of British Rabshakehs, have nobly dared to
espouse the cause of American liberty, and distinguished themselves by their
heroic exertions; not counting their lives dear, that they might save their
country. Their names are written on our hearts, as with a pen of iron, and
point of a diamond; and will be consecrated to honorable remembrance, in the
annals of America, till time shall be no more: while the name of every envious
sneering seoffer, calumniator, and wicked conspirator, is either lost in
oblivion, or doomed to perpetual infamy.

Some, it may be, whose frozen breasts have never yet been warmed with the
generous flame of patriotic fire, in order to detract from the merit of the
zealous assertors and defenders of the liberties of their country, will pretend
there is no such thing as public virtue. But if there are any such contracted
souls, who, without a blush, prosess to have no social affections, of force
enough to give them the least motion out of the narrow sphere of self, it may
be best not to dispute feelings with them; but to allow them all that sordid
selfishness which they claim, and not affront them by contradiction. But let us
not sacrifice our own generous feelings, to their system. They have no more
right to impose their feelings upon us, than we have to impose ours upon them.

It must give pleasure to every true friend of human kind, to consider, that
the late grand revolution, which has raised so great a part of America into a
state of independence, was undertaken, and, by the assistance of divine
providence, has been brought about; not from ambitious views, or a fondness for
dominion; but upon principles friendly to the rights and liberties of every
nation, upon the face of the whole earth. Unprompted by ambition to enlarge her
territories by unjust conquests, or to compel any other states or kingdoms to
submit to her usurped authority and government, America has contended only for
the common rights of men. Her grand aim, her ultimate object in all her
struggles and exertions, has been, not to prepare a yoke of bondage for the
necks of others; but to free herself and posterity from the tyranny of lawless
arbitrary power (that source of plagues to the weak and defenseless part of
mankind) and to secure those blessings, without which, the great ends of
society, must be lost. With the most perfect cordiality, we have wished, and
still wish, to cultivate friendship with all nations, on such a footing, as
shall be to mutual advantage, and conduce to the general good of the whole
world. In regard even to Britain, persuaded I am, that the inhabitants of these
states (with very few exceptions) night safely appeal to the great Searcher of
hearts, as a witness to their sincerity, should they declare, that though she
has treated them in the most barbarous and provoking manner, and forced them in
their own defense, to fly to arms, and engage in a long and bloody war; yet
they never wished to fee her deprived of freedom, or reduced to inglorious
subjection to any power on earth. Though she has cut the knot of kindred-love,
and effectually destroyed that predilection, which produced a special
attachment to her, in preference to others, yet we are not so implacable and
unforgiving, but that we can heartily wish her prosperity and happiness, in
common with other nations.

The independence of these American states, being founded on such a broad basis
of generous philanthropy, we have reason to hope they will still be the special
care and charge, of the gracious Parent of the universe, whose tender mercies
are over all his works; and that, under his almighty patronage, they will
become a permanent flourishing empire, supported by the principles of virtue,
religion and liberty without licentiousness.

Let me, on this occasion, with all the sensibility of lively joy, express my
hearty congratulations, on the happy cessation of hostilities, after a most
distressing, expensive and bloody war. Hail, auspicious happy day, that has put
a stop to the effusion of human blood and the horrors of war, and sheathed the
devouring sword; that has crowned our virtuous efforts with glorious success,
giving us established independence with the returning blessings of peace, and
filling our mouths with songs of triumph! Men, brethren and fathers, I
felicitate you, I felicitate my country, on this great, this glorious event; an
event, which cannot but cause every patriotic heart to expand with joy, at the
prospect of the bright scenes which it opens to view, after a long and gloomy
night of sorrow and trouble.

What acknowledgments do we owe to the supreme Governor of the world; who was
pleased to hear our cries, in the days of our distress, and to give us
persevering courage and fortitude in those trying times, when our affairs wore
the gloomiest aspect; when we were involved in awful scenes of havoc, blood
and carnage, and surrounded with the depredations and shocking ravages of a
war, carried on against us with savage wantonness; who was pleased to defend
us, by his mighty power, when we were weak, unprepared and unequal to the
conflict, and to enable us to make such a noble stand, and to gain such signal
victories, while we were without ally, as gave us respectability abroad, and
induced one of the first European powers, heartily to espouse our cause, and
assist us by a generous and friendly alliance: who has been our shield and
protection, from the first rise of the war, through all the hazardous progress
of it, and has led forth our armies, under the conduct of a wise, brave and
intrepid general, expert in war, of singular equanimity in success and
disappointment, endued with a soul formed for noble achievements, whom he was
pleased to raise up and qualify for the important command which has been
committed to him, and to honor as a distinguished instrument of the
emancipation of his country? These are the Lord's doings, and they are
mavelous in our eyes.

When we look back on the difficulties and hazards in which we have been
involved; when we consider what engines of mischief and destruction have been
employed to work our ^^in; when we reflect on the perils and dangers we were
in, not only from the policy and power, the stratagenis and violence of open
and prosessed enemies, but from the insidious arts, treacheries and
conspiracies of false and deceitful men among ourselves; who, under the
disguise of friendship or mask of neutrality, have constantly endeavored to
dishearten and discourage us, to obstruct our measures, retard our operations
and disappoint our enterprises, and, at the same time, secretly to aid the
cause of those, who had unjustly compelled us, to make our appeal to Heaven, as
our last resort: When we consider these things, what reason have we to adore
the merciful providence of almighty God, who, by many signal interpositions in
our favor, has finally baffled and defeated the mischievous machinations of
all our enemies, both secret and open; disconcerted the plans of those who
unrighteously rose up against us, and obliged them (notwithstanding all their
pride of power, and vain confidence of reducing us to unconditional submission)
to yield the grand point contended for, by negotiating a peace with us, upon
the footing of equality and independence! With the greatest pertinency may we
now adopt the language of the royal psalmist, and say, If it had not been the
Lord, who was on our side, when men rose up against us; then they had swallowed
us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us; then the waters had
overwhelmed us, the stream had gone over our soul; then the proud waters had
gone over our soul. Blessed be the Lord, who has not given us, as a prey to
their teeth. Our soul is escaped as a bird out of the snare of the fowlers; the
snare is broken, and we are escaped. Our help is in the name of the Lord, who
made heaven and earth.

If we have wisdom to make a good improvement of this happy event, what
blessings and felicities, that this world is capable of affording, may we not
secure to ourselves and to our posterity? When we look forward, what glorious
prospects open to view! How pleasant must it be to every sincere lover of his
country, to entertain his fancy with future scenes, and behold, through the
medium of probable conjecture, the future glory, grandeur and magnificence of
America! To behold her raised superior to all her enemies; extending her
friendly arms for the support and protection of other states and nations
against the attacks of restless encroaching ambition; and (while none dare to
distrust or affront her) offering a refuge and asylum, in her bosom, to the
injured and oppressed of the human race in all quarters of the globe! To behold
wealth and opulence flowing in upon her, in continual streams, from the
inexhaustible sources of agriculture, and a free trade and commerce with all
nations! To behold her spreading, by a rapid population, over those vast tracts
of uncultivated land, which are now the haunts of wild beasts, and fee the
wilderness, by the hand of industry, changed into a fruitful field, blossoming
as the rose, and yielding, in plentiful exuberance, every rural comfort and
delight! To behold her, exalted to noble heights of improvement, in every
useful art and science; mounting on the strong pinions of virtue, learning,
eloquence, religion, philosophy, and other sublime intellectual
accomplishments, above Greece and Rome, in their zenith of glory!

These are agreeable prospects; but whether America shall ever realize them,
depends much upon the wisdom and virtue of the present generation. Every
patriot, from the highest to the lowest order, has now an extensive field
opened before him, for the display of his utmost abilities, in providing for
the future peace and prosperity of his country. The consequences of our conduct
at this opportunity, will affect, not ourselves only, but unborn millions.

Every consideration proper to influence the human mind, obliges us to exert
ourselves, to make sure of the blessings, which are now offered by the
propitious hand of providence, and to transmit the same to succeeding
generations. Should we neglect the means necessary for these purposes, the
bright day, which now beams upon us, may soon be overcast with clouds; and our
songs of triumph end in new scenes of sorrow and trouble.

The British troops are not yet removed. Their withdrawment, as soon as
convenience will permit, is necessary to give us full assurance that the
reconciliation on the part of Britain, is sincere. Suspicion therefore should
not sleep, until they are withdrawn. Prudence, wisdom, reason, require
vigilance and caution, and oblige us to be on our guard.

Though the land now rests from war, and we daily expect to hear that the
definitive treaty of peace is completely ratified, yet it would be exceedingly
unsafe for people to lay by their arms, and neglect all military matters. Our
country affords so many tempting objects to excite the ambition of other
nations (especially of those, who can have easy access, by reason of a
proximity of territory) that we can have no security of a lasting peace, or of
enjoying long the blessings of freedom, if we should totally withdraw our
attention from the arts of war, and be unprovided with the means of defense.
Standing armies in a time of peace are indeed dangerous to liberty; but a well
furnished and well disciplined militia is of great importance to a state, being
necessary either to prevent a war, or to put people into a capacity to defend
themselves against any invasion or attack from their enemies. The public
welfare requires that our militia be kept on such a respectable footing, as
shall render us secure at home, and formidable abroad. But leaving it to the
wisdom of our rulers to determine what is best in reference to this matter, let
me observe, that

The inhabitants of these states are under the most sacred obligations, not
only to consult the happiness of the states, to which they respectively belong,
by discountenancing all disorders, suppressing those vices, that are
inconsistent with the interest of society, and giving encouragement and support
to every virtue, upon which the peace, prosperity and stability of each state,
separately considered, depend; but by endeavoring to strengthen those bands of
union, which have connected the whole together, as one independent nation. By
solemn confederacy and compact every one is bound, to keep the good of all the
states in view, while he aims to promote the good of the particular state with
which he is more Immediately connected. In order to preserve the union between
the states, and establish it upon a permanent basis, whatever is inconsistent
with the principles, which, upon the maturest deliberation, have been adopted,
as the grand cement of it, must be carefully avoided; and a proper attention be
paid to the interest and welfare of the whole. The separate good of the several
states, is to be pursued only by such measures, as shall harmonize with the
good of all in the confederacy.

Nothing did more encourage Britain to undertake and protract the late war,
than a pres;umption, that it would be impossible for states, so distant from
one another; so different, in many respects, in their education and manners;
and between which, from situation and other circumstances, there would often be
an interference and competition of interest; to unite, or remain long united in
one common cause. By mortifying experience she is now convinced of her mistake;
having seen the union gather strength and confirmation, under the overruling
hand of providence, from the very measures which she took, in hopes to break
and destroy it. Chagrined at this disappointment of our enemies, it is possible
there may be some among us, who having always been disaffected to our cause,
and all along endeavored to alarm people's minds with presages of divisions
and dissensions between the states, may still wish and hope to promote such an
event, left their reputation for foresight should suffer; as Jonah wished for
the destruction of Nineveh, left his prophetic abilities should be called in
question. But should any be so inimical as to attempt any thing of this sort,
by sowing diseord; fomenting animosities; endeavoring to propagate
unreasonable jealousies and suspicions, or to nourish and strengthen local
prejudices; it is hoped there is wisdom, virtue and resolution enough among the
friends of the country, to defeat their evil designs, and (m^ugre the utmost
efforts of every incendiary and mischief-maker) to preserve the union unbroken,
and the confederacy uninturrupted and entire.

It is evidently of the greatest importance to these states, both conjunctly
and separately considered, to keep the public faith, sacred and inviolate. This
is a main pillar in the politic fabric; without which the building must soon
fall. This is necessary to gain us honor and confidence among other nations,
and to preserve peace and union among ourselves. Every one therefore is obliged
to contribute his share toward fulfilling the engagements and promises, made
by lawful authority, in behalf of all the states, or of the particular state to
which he belongs; that all, whether countrymen or foreigners, who have afforded
or shall afford any assistance or service to the public, may receive justly
expected rewards; and none have reason to complain, that they have been
decieved and injured, by depending on public faith. Should any be disposed to
violate their obligations, in this respect, the civil magistrate has undoubted
authority, and ought to compel them to their duty; for if every one might be
left at liberty, to do what is right in his own eyes, public credit would stand
upon a precarious foundation, and be continually liable to be sacrificed to the
humor, caprice and avarice of individuals.

Though public credit has been in a declining state, yet we are glad there is
an hopeful prospect of its recovery. What particular methods are best for
placing it on a firm and durable basis, I have not the vanity to think myself
capable of determining. But it is conceived, no method can be adopted for this
purpose, but what will require the aid of taxes, in some mode or other; and
consequently give umbrage to those (if any such there are) who never can be
satisfied, unless they can enjoy the blessings of good government without cost.
But he, who has just conceptions of things, cannot sure expect to enjoy the
blessings of society, or suppose it possible to support the honor and credit
of government, and attain the ends of it, without considerable expense, even in
the most peaceable times; much less, in times of danger, difficulty and general
calamity.

It cannot be thought strange, that a distressing war, of eight years
continuance, has involved us in a great debt. But considering the magnitude of
the object, which we have had in pursuit, and the great exertions which we have
been obliged to make in order to attain it, our debt is not so great, as might
have been expected. Those nations, which are now groaning under the iron yoke
of oppression, and despotic government, would think themselves happy, if they
could purchase the invaluable blessings of liberty, at so cheap a rate. There
is yet another consideration, which alone is sufficient to silence all
complaints, on this head. It is this, that if we had been reunited to Britain,
and in addition to other expenses, had had a proportional share of her enormous
debt laid upon us, it would have hung like a millstone about our necks, and
plunged us into inevitable banckrupty, from which we never could have recovered
ourselves. Our present burden, though somewhat pressing, is comparatively light.
Let prodigality, luxury, and other impoverishing vices be banished from among
us; and let frugality, economy and industry supply their place; and then
considering our means and resources, it will not be so difficult to discharge
our debt, in the course of a few years, as some may imagine. And while the
legislature, in levying taxes, for this and other important purposes, take all
possible care to make the burden as light as the public exigences will permit,
and to adjust each man's share of the public expense to his interest and
circumstances, every one, instead of indulging a murmuring temper, should
cheerfully endeavor to defray his part, rejoicing that such wile provision is
made for judgment to run down as waters, and righteousness as a mighty stream.

Convinced of the necessity of a strict regard to justice, for preserving the
credit of government, and mutual confidence between the members of a community,
every true friend to society will wish and endeavor to promote it, in all
orders of men, from the highest to the lowest. It is an observation of a king,
as much celebrated for his wisdom as magnificence, and may be laid down as a
maxim, confirmed by the experience of all ages, that righteousness exalts a
nation. According to the natural course of things, and common order of
providence, that society has the fairest prospect of prosperity, and lasting
felicity, where government, first founded in equity, is administered according
to the rules of impartial justice; and where truth, honesty and fidelity are
encouraged, maintained and promoted between man and man, in their private
intercourse and transactions. In this case, peace and harmony will prevail
among the members of a society; who will consequently be in a suitable
disposition to serve one another, and to unite in such measures as the general
interest shall, at any time, require. But when the opposite vices predominate;
when faith and truth, uprightness and integrity take their flight; when justice
is made a matter of traffic, and is bought and fold for money; when deciet,
falsehood, unrighteousness and oppression bear sway without controal; then
disorder and confusion, schism, tumult and misery, may be expected as a natural
consequence and effect.

Though unrighteousness may sometimes answer a present purpose; yet follow it a
little way, in it is consequences, and it will be found to be the parent of
difficulty and trouble of embarrassment and perplexity. There can be no danger
or hazard in adhering to the rules of justice; but what is morally wrong can
never be good policy, in reference either to public or private affairs.

There is nothing more manifest, than that the interest of a people is greatly
affected, by the virtues and vices prevalent among them. From hence the
inference is obvious, that the morals of a people are among the great objects,
which claim the particular attention of the legislature and civil authority. It
evidently falls within their province, to provide means, by law, for the
suppression of vice and wickedness, and the promotion of good morals. In order
effectually to answer these ends, care should be taken for the diffusion of
learning and religion through a society; that people may entertain just
conceptions of the dignity and rights of human nature, and be early initiated
in the principles of a sober, honest and pious life. The general prevalence of
ignorance and irreligion must be productive of very mischievous effects in
society. For ignorant minds, unimpressed with a sense of a Deity, of a
providence and a future state, must be unprincipled, and prepared, whenever
occasions offer, for the most atrocious crimes. I would just add, that an
ignorant people, are continually liable to be imposed upon, and seduced into a
surrender of their liberties, by the specious arts, eloquence and address of
designing men. whose enterprizing ambition will not fail to lay hold on such an
advantage, for the acquisition of power.

Sensible of how great importance it is to the happiness of a people, to be
early instructed in the principles of piety and virtue, and furnished with good
degrees of knowledge, respecting the things of this world and that to come, our
worthy ancestors were induced to take effectual care for the encouragement and
support of the liberal arts and sciences; for the preservation of a reverential
sense of a Deity on people's minds; for the instruction of all in religion and
good literature. Great and invaluable are the blessings, that have been derived
to us, their posterity, from their pious care, in these respects; a
consideration whereof should provoke us to imitation; that as we have reason to
honor their memory, for the excellent provision they made for our happiness
and welfare, so our descendents may have equal reason to rise up and call us
blessed.

Our new constitution, while it has provided every guard, which human wisdom
can invent, to defend our liberties, civil and religious, against every
encroachment of arbitrary power, has authorized but civil rulers to take care
of the morals of people, by furnishing them with the means of instruction in
virtue, piety and every branch of useful knowledge. They will therefore
consider themselves as obliged to adopt suitable measures for the encouragement
of literature, the advancement of the sciences, and the preservation of a sense
of religion among all orders of men.

To say nothing of other literary institutions, which claim the patronage of
our political fathers, and of all the friends of science; let me observe, that
the laws providing for the establishment of schools, in our several towns and
plantations, are wisely calculated to promote the great ends of society, by
affording to all, the necessary means of education and instruction in the most
important, useful and profitable branches of learning. But of what service or
significance are the best laws, while they lie dormant, and may be transgressed
with impunity? A law unexecuted is without life; and can answer no end, but to
bring civil authority into disrepute.

As to laws obliging people to assemble for public worship, and provide
themselves with public teachers of religion; such laws are evidently well
adapted to promote the good order of civil government, and advance the
happiness of a people, by enforcing the use of proper means for impressing
men's minds with an awe of the supreme Governor of the world, and engaging them
from a sense of their accountableness to him, to fulfill all moral obligation,
and live in the practice of the virtues of a good life. And it is conceived
that such laws can be no reasonable ground of complaint, so long as the sacred
rights of conscience are sufficiently guarded and secured, by leaving people at
liberty to choose their own teachers, and modes of worship; and while none are
subjected to fines, forfeitures or any disadvantages of a civil nature, for
their particular religious sentiments and profession, if they be peaceable
members of society, and do not propagate any doctrines, inconsistent with the
safety of the state.

To carry the idea of religious liberty so far, as to make it an effectual
hindrance to the providing and using necessary means, for the preservation of a
sense of religion and moral obligation among the members of a community, is to
oppose it to the interests of human society, and to rob civil government of one
of it is main supports. For the most powerful enforcements of obedience to civil
authority, are derived from a consideration and belief, that there is a supreme
invisible Power, presiding over the world, to whom all men are accountable, and
who will reward or punish every man, in a future state, according to his works.
Obedience that proceeds wholly from fear of punishment from men, is precarious
and uncertain; and will be withdrawn, upon the slightest temptations of
pleasure or profit, whenever a person believes, that he can escape with
impunity. Religion therefore forms a more steady and permanent principle of
obedience to civil government, than any penal sanctions, of a temporary nature,
by which the laws of men can be enforced.

It would evidently conduce greatly to the happiness and tranquillity of
society, and facilitate the administration of government and public justice,
could people, in general, be persuaded to submit to the authority of the
community, vested in it is rulers, and to obey the laws, not only for wrath, but
for conscience sake. It is not conceivable how any society should enjoy this
advantage, where the public worship of God is neglected, and no proper means
made use of, for the instruction of people in piety, religion and morality.

The design of the institution of civil government being the good of the
people, they who are entrusted with the management of it, should make this the
grand object of their attention and pursuit, and in the exercise of their
constitutional powers, use all means and methods, that are of manifest
importance and necessity to answer this end. This will make them a terror to
evil doers, and an encouragement to them who do well. This will not only
command a general reverence; but insure to them the particular esteem,
assistance and support of every true friend to the commonwealth; and cause the
censures and calumnies of the envious, malicious and factious, to recoil on
their own heads. This will make them public blessings and benefactors; and give
them those sincere delights and supporting consolations, which arise from
reflections on such good and useful actions, as have greatly contributed to the
general interest and prosperity, and advanced the happiness of society.

It might be though it an inexcusable omission, should I close this discourse,
without paying a particular honorable attention to the worthy gentlemen, who
have lately been vested with the sovereign powers of this commonwealth. Their
promotion to such high stations of authority, by the suffrages of a free
people, gives them respectability, and entitles them to our confidence.

It affords us singular pleasure, that the highest seat in government, is
filled, the fourth time, with a generous, uniform, persevering and resolute
(...); who has acquitted himself with integrity and honor, in the several
important departments, in which he has been employed, since the beginning of
our late contests. Nor shall we forget, that for the early decided and
distinguishing part, which he took, in the cause of his country, he had the
honor to be marked out, in conjunction with an eminent compatriot, for the
first victim of British vengeance. Our satisfaction on account of his being
again chosen first magistrate of this commonwealth, would be without allay, on
this occasion, was he not prevented, by sickness, from honoring the
solemnities of the day with his presence.

We are happy to find, that the second rank in government, by the voice of the
people, is again conferred on a gentleman, who, by an unwearied inflexible
attachment to the cause of America, through all the hazzardous scenes of the
late war, from first to last, has given full proof of his patriotism, and
justify merited public respect and honor.

We rejoice that so many other worthy characters, that have approved themselves
fast friends to their country, in the most perilous times, are entrusted with a
share in the administration of government, and the important powers of
legislation.

The testimony, which his Excellency; his Honor, the lieutenant governor; and
the honorable gentlemen, that compose the two branches of the general court,
have received; and which the council, still to be chosen, will receive, of the
esteem and confidence of the people, by their election to such high offices;
must be an encouragement and animating motive to them, to improve the
advantages resulting from their exalted stations, for the good of the public,
the end of their advancement. We know that their business must be peculiarly
difficult and arduous, at such a day as this. Until the body politic shall be
cured of those distempers and disorders, which have been introduced by the
convulsions of war, it will require great strength and fortitude of mind, to
hold the reins, and sustain the burden of government. Great skill and wisdom,
great firmness and resolution tempered with prudence, are necessary, at the
present crisis; to retrieve public credit; to do equal justice to all; to quiet
the agitations of people's minds; to put the affairs of the public into a
proper train and arrangement; to repair the disorders of the political machine,
and adjust the wheels and springs of it, in such a manner, that every part may
answer its end, and contribute to the beauty, order and usefulness of the
whole. We therefore most heartily commend our civil fathers to the blessing of
that God, who gives wisdom to the wise, and understanding to the prudent. May
the legislature, and all in authority, from the first magistrate to the lowest
officer, be endued with wisdom and armed with prowess, suitable to their
stations, and be public blessings.

And let all people, of every class and denomination, seriously consider, how
much it behooves them to submit to those, who are in authority over them, and to
conform to the constitution and laws of the commonwealth, in order effectually
to secure the blessings of civil government. While civil rulers are to be
cautioned against an abuse of authority, and exhorted to employ their powers
for the good of the public; people are to be put in mind to honor and obey
magistrates; to be subject unto the higher powers, and to submit themselves to
every ordinance of man, for the Lord's sake.

When people give way to a refractory temper; set themseles up in opposition to
government; and by continual groundless invectives, endeavor to bring an odium
upon their rulers, and upon all public measures; they take a direct method to
overthrow ail civil authority, and to disband and abolish society. Let people
be vigilant and guarded against the encroachments of arbitrary power; but let
them, at the same time, take heed, that they deprive not themselves of the
blessings of good government, and plunge themselves into all the disorders and
mischiefs of anarchy, in order to secure themselves against tyranny. This would
be as preposterous, as for a mariner to suffer voluntary shipwreck upon the
rocks of Seilly, in order to avoid the dangers of Charybdis. No wise man will
run into one extreme, in order to avoid its opposite, while he can steer
safely, in a middle course, between both.

Sensible of the importance of good government, the true friends of society
will cheerfully submit to lawful authority, and endeavor to encourage and
support those, who are in public stations, in the execution of their high
offices, for the public good. And while they do thus, they will cultivate in
themselves and others, those benevolent dispositions, and those principles of
integrity, honesty and justice, which are necessary to preserve peace and
amity, good humor, order and mutual confidence among neighbors and to lay a
foundation for those private friendships, which afford some of the most refined
social pleasures and delights.

And let it be remembered, that by the virtues of a good life, added to their
religious devotions and acts of homage and worship, the people put themselves
under the protection and patronage, and secure the friendship of that almighty
Being, whose providence governs the world; whose voice all nature obeys; to
whose control all second causes and subordinate agents are subject; and whose
sole prerogative it is to dispense blessings or calamities, as to his wisdom
seems best. A people under the smiles of Heaven must be prosperous and happy.
If God be for us, who can be against us?

What happiness might we enjoy, as a people, and as individuals, if every one
would reform his vices; cultivate a meek, peaceable and benevolent spirit; and
use his best endeavors to promote the good of others, as well as his own? What
blessings might we procure to ourselves and to the community, if with one heart
and one soul, we would apply ourselves to the duties, that we owe to one
another, as brethren and fellowcitizens, and make it our business to fulfill all
moral, social and civil obligations? By thus doing, at the same time that we
should brighten our prospects into the future world, and, through the merits of
our most merciful Redeemer, provide for immortal blessedness in another state
of existence, we might also secure to ourselves all the blessings of society on
earth, and change this world into a sort of paradise.

We have therefore every inducement suitable to work upon us as rational
creatures, to engage us to conform to the rules of virtue, and comply with the
great and comprehensive law of subjection to one another. Let us lay our minds
open to the sacred influence of such mighty motives, that we may be happy in
our connections, both public and private, in this world; and in the world to
come, be admitted to the society of those blessed beings, who, knit together by
the indissoluble ties of the most sincere and ardent love, have happy and
uninterrupted experience of the most pure, perfect and sublime pleasures of
friendship, for ever and ever.

May the benevolent Parent and supreme Ruler of the universe bestow his
benediction on us; unite our hearts in love to one another, and in the love of
virtue; and dispose us to keep all his commandments always; that, the scenes of
our troubles closed, we may see good days; rejoice in the happy effects of his
favor to us, and in the promising prospects of the blessedness and prosperity
of our descendents, to the latest generation.

AMEN.

