MR. MARSH's SERMON AT THE FUNERAL OF THE FAMILY OF WILLIAM BEADLE.

The great Sin and Danger of striving with GOD. A SERMON PREACHED AT
WETHERSFIELD, DECEMBER 13th, 1782. AT THE FUNERAL OF Mrs. LYDIA BEADLE, WIFE OF
THE LATE WILLIAM BEADLE, And their Four CHILDREN, Who were all murdered by his
own Hands on the Morning of the 11th Instant.

BY JOHN MARSH, A. M. PASTOR OF THE FIRST CHURCH IN WETHERSFIELD.

TO WHICH IS ANNEXED A LETTER, from a Gentleman in Wethersfield to his Friend,
containing a NARRATIVE of the Life of WILLIAM BEADLE, (so far as it is known)
and the Particulars of the Massacre of himself and Family.

HARTFORD: PRINTED BY HUDSON AND GOODWIN.

A FUNERAL SERMON.
ISAIAH xlv. 9. Woe unto him that striveth with his Maker.
SIN brings misery with and after it. Had man maintained his primitive
rectitude, trouble, sorrow and death would never have been found among the race
of Adam. Ever since the defection of the first human pair from God, there has
been a strange propensity in mankind, to dispute his authority and find fault
with his administration. Such conduct is highly dishonorable, affronting and
provoking to the Deity. He is pleased frequently to animadvert upon it in this
world, and sometimes, in a manner very alarming: And will not fail to make all,
who persist in opposing him, to feel, sooner or later, the direful effects of
his righteous vindictive resentment. Woe, says he in the text, unto him that
striveth with his Maker. In discoursing on which I propose,

FIRST, To show when men may be said to strive with God.

SECONDLY, To consider the great guilt and danger of striving with him.

THIRDLY, To apply the subject to the present very solemn and awful occasion.

FIRST, I am to show when men may be said to strive with God.

THIS I shall do in several particulars. And,

FIRST, Men strive with God when they refuse to submit to him as their Law
giver.

HAVING made them he has an absolute propriety in them, and an indisputable
right to enact such laws for the direction of their conduct as seems good to
him.

HAPPY it is for us, that this Being, on whom we depend for existence, and who
has a sovereign authority over us, is possessed of all perfection; and
therefore we may be certain, that it never was, and never will be his pleasure
to ordain rules for the observance of any of his creatures, which have not
their foundation in infinite goodness directed by consummate wisdom.

ALL the laws the Supreme Being has promulgated, and to which he requires our
submission, both by the voice of reason and revelation, are adapted to our
capacities, and plainly calculated to advance and secure our best welfare, as
well as his glory. Indeed, should the Deity require our obedient regard to a
positive precept, the utility of which we could not comprehend, we should be
indispensably obliged to yield a ready submission to it, not doubting of the
wisdom and goodness of his design therein. His right to give law to us being
founded in his absolute propriety in us, we are bound to obey his precepts from
a regard to his authority, exclusive of any consideration of suitableness in
the precepts themselves to promote our own felicity. Nevertheless, whenever
such suitableness is apparent in any of his laws, it affords an additional
argument for our compliance with them.

IN every allowed instance of disobedience we practically deny the authority of
God over us, and contend with him for dominion.

No partial regard to his commandments is sufficient to save us from the
imputation of striving with him. St. James says, Whoever shall keep the whole
law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty of all. chap. ii. v. 10.
Whosoever allowedly and habitually violates any one of the laws of God is
guilty of a wicked contempt of his sovereignty, and does not obey him in any
instance from a proper affection to him and his government. The language of the
practice of every person of such a character is, That he will not have God to
rule over him -- that he is his own, and will pay no higher regard to the laws
of the Deity than is consistent with the gratification of his own irregular and
vicious inclinations.

SECONDLY. Men strive with God, when they find fault with the dispensations of
his grace.

THE Father of mankind, in his abundant wisdom, goodness and mercy, has
contrived a method of recovering them from the ruins of the apostasy to his
favor and happiness. At sundry times and in diverse manners has he made
discoveries of his mind and will relating to this plan of grace. In the fullness
of time he sent his only begotten Son into the world to perfect what was
wanting in preceding revelations, and to exhibit to men a clear and full
account of all those things respecting their salvation, with which, in this
state of probation, infinite wisdom saw fit to make them acquainted.

THE attestations given to the revelation contained in the sacred scriptures of
the Old and New Testament are ample, illustrious, and worthy of God. Every
serious, unprejudiced enquirer after truth soon feels their force, and is
constrained to acknowledge the divinity of the religion taught in the Bible.

THAT any should find fault with a scheme of religion so benevolent -- so pure
-- so honorable to God, and advantageous to men -- so admirably supported by
external, as well as internal evidence, is an argument of great blindness and
obstinacy.

To creatures in our circumstances of guilt and depravity, who stand in
absolute need of a dispensation of grace, how welcome ought such a dispensation
to be! How worthy of the most grateful acceptance of all men is the Christian
revelation!

No man, who rejects this revelation, either upon the supposition that it is
needless, or on account of any difficulties with which some of its doctrines
are attended, difficulties incomprehensible by our limited understandings; or
because of the corruptions of its professors; no man, who opposes or treats it
with neglect and contempt, on any account whatever, can exculpate himself from
the charge of striving with God.

To suppose supernatural revelation needless, implies, either a denial of a
criminal departure in man from the state of rectitude in which he was
originally placed by God; or presumption, that the uncovenanted goodness and
mercy of God oblige him to pardon and receive into favor the guilty: Both of
which are inconsistent with the light of nature.

To reject the Gospel, on account of mysteries with which some of it is
doctrines are attended, is highly unreasonable, unless it be reasonable to
reject all religion on the same account. The religion of nature is attended
with difficulties as incomprehensible by us as any of the mysteries of the
Christian religion. Yes, if once it be admitted, that we can have no
satisfactory evidence of the truth of any thing we cannot comprehend, we must
then commence universal scepticks, and doubt of the truth even of our own
existence, the manner of which is wholly unaccountable to us.

As to the corruptions of professed Christians, they are, indeed, a humbling
consideration; but these corruptions the Christian religion is not accountable
for. It every where discountenances and condemns them; and of all religions,
that ever appeared in the world, is the best calculated to discourage vice,
profanenss and immorality; and to promote the cause of piety, virtue and
righteousness. It gives the most pure and excellent, the clearest and fullest
instructions and directions respecting our temper and behavior toward God,
mankind and ourselves, and enforces them with the most weighty, pungent and
effectual arguments and motives; arguments and motives superior to any that
could have entered the human mind, without a revelation from Heaven. And
"notwithstanding the corruptions so complained of in the Christian world, it is
undeniable, that what there is of knowledge and true religion among men, is
principally where Christianity is professed."

To reject this religion, wherein God has abounded toward us in all wisdom and
goodness, is to fight against him in the most criminal and dangerous manner.

MANY professed Christians virtually find fault with the gospel dispensation.

THE doctrines of Christianity are truly humiliating -- well calculated to
bring down the pride of apostate men. Sinners, as we are taught in the book of
inspiration, are justified freely by God's grace, through the redemption that
is in Jesus Christ: whom God has set forth to be a propitiation, through faith
in his blood, to declare his righteousness for the remission of sins; that he
might be just and the justifier of him that believes in Jesus Romans iii. 24,
25, 26.
. This being God's method of justifying sinners, whosoever does not duly attend
to it, but, like a self-sufficient Pharisee, goes about to establish his own
righteousness, is guilty of striving with his Maker, and attempting to force
his way to heaven without submitting himself to the righteousness of God.

THERE is another sort of men, who virtually find fault with the dispensation
of grace by sitting still, and endeavoring nothing of a religious nature,
because of themselves they can do nothing spiritually good.

THE great God is sovereign in the bestowment of his favors; and for wise
reasons may see fit, in some instances, suddenly to stop sinners in their
career of wickedness, and communicate to them, at once and unsought, the
special renewing and sanctifying influences of the Holy Spirit: But, since this
is not his ordinary way of dealing with those whom he is graciously pleased to
bring into a saving acquaintance with, and peculiar relation to himself --
since he has given no particular sinners any encouragement that he will pour
out his spirit upon them, unless they endeavor to turn at his reproof --
unless they strive to enter in at the strait gate -- unless they labor for the
meat which endures unto everlasting life; -- unless they attend to the calls
and invitations of the gospel, cherish the good motions he is wont to
communicate to all in common, who are favored with the gospel, and make some
proper improvement of the means of grace; I say, since this is the case, every
one who fits still, or rather goes on in a course of sin, neglecting and
despising the means of grace, faith and repentance, with an expectation of
being renewed and made happy by the irresistible grace of God, is justly
chargeable with the sin of opposing the glorious method of pardon, grace and
salvation, published in the gospel.

OTHERS virtually find fault with the dispensation of the gospel, by depending
on such a faith in the blood of Christ, for pardon and life everlasting, as
does not work by love, purify the heart and overcome the world. Whilst they
profess to own him as a Priest, they practically deny him as a King; and may
justly be ranked with those who refuse to yield submission to God as their
Lawgiver.

THIRDLY, Men strive with God when they are uneasy with his ordering and
disposing of their circumstances in a temporal view. As

1. WHEN they are discontented with the original constitution of things with
respect to themselves -- such as the figure of their bodies, the natural powers
of their minds, the quality of their parents and relatives, and the infirmities
of human nature.

To complain of such things, is as wicked and preposterous, in any of the human
species, as to be uneasy, because they were not created angels and ranked with
the highest order of them. Shall the thing formed say to him that formed it,
Why host thou made me thus? Shall the clay say to him that fashioneth it, What
make thou? Or thy work, He has no hands? Romans ix. 20. Isaiah, xlv. 9.


2. THEY strive with him in afflictions with which they are threatened or
visited.

1. WHEN they use unlawful methods to prevent, support themselves under, or
remove them.

IT is natural to all threatened with calamity, or oppressed with trouble, to
enquire how they may avoid it, or obtain support under, or deliverance out of
it. But by those who have a proper regard for God an unlawful way of attaining
help and deliverance is esteemed as no way.

IT is much better to suffer natural evil, than to do moral evil that good may
come.

WHEN there is no regular way of deliverance from affliction, it is evidently
the will of God, that we should bear it, patiently, for the present, and
quietly wait till he shall please to remove it, or open a door for our escape.
In such a case, to refuse to receive correction -- to take irregular courses
for the purpose of mitigating our sorrows, or to fly out of the world in order
to get rid of adversity, is a daring opposition to God, and betrays great want
of manly fortitude and bravery.

Curse God and die was the advice of the wife of Job, when he was called to
endure a sad succession of the most trying calamities: But his answer was such,
as will forever do him honor, as a man, and a subject of the divine
providential government. He said unto her, "Thou speak as one of the foolish
women speaks: What? Shall we receive good at the hand of God, and shall we
not receive evil? How mean and unmanly, in comparison of Job's, is the
behavior of that gloomy race of mortals, who have recourse to the instruments
of death under any severe affliction, who launch out into another world, weary
of the pleasures, or impatient under the pains of this? Who without
understanding the value of life, or the true ends of living, contemptuously
return back to God the present, which he has made, as if, what he, the author
of every good gift, had bestowed, was a trifle not worth the keeping? Their
friends may view with weeping eyes, and even an unrelenting crowd with some
concern, a mangled and disfigured carcass: But men of larger views will extend
their reflections farther, and lament the miseries of a wounded Spirit, which
has rushed unprepared into the presence of an incensed Deity. A ghastly corpse
will give them the least touches of compassion: But to consider the case of a
soul, that has done a fact which leaves no room for repentance, that has
plunged itself into an abyss of endless misery; to consider that a new light is
probably let in upon the unbodied mind, a light more sharp, powerful and
piercing, than even that instrument, which dissolved the vital union, and
divorced the soul from the body; -- this is what will make the deepest
impressions upon any thinking spectator God has joined soul and body together
And what he has joined together, let no man, unauthorised by him, put asunder.
To commit self-murder is an absolute defiance, or a desperate disbelief of his
providence. It is to dismiss ourselves from this state of probation, before God
thinks fit to dismiss us: It is in effect to tell him, we will not patiently
endure the chastisements, which he wisely inflicts.

Not so holy Job: He considered, that he, who sent him into the world, alone
knew when he had fulfilled those ends for which he sent him: That he alone
therefore was a competent judge. when he was to be discharged from any further
service here, and to be admitted to a better state. All my appointed time, says
he, will I wait, till my change come.

Mr. Seed.
"

2. MEN strive with God in afflictions that are brought upon them, when they
are sullen under them.

A mournful sense of afflictions is allowable, if not commendable. Such is the
constitution of man, and such the desire of happiness implanted in the human
breast by our great Creator, that what "opposes this desire, or appears to have
that tendency," will be productive of disagreeable sensations, and affect us
with grief. Not to be thus affected in a degree somewhat correspondent to the
adversity with which we are visited, would argue a deviation from the regular
state of nature.

A due sensibility with respect to afflictions renders them a proper means of
promoting important moral purposes in the hearts of men.

BUT, there is a wide difference between a mournful sense of misfortunes, and
sullenness under them: The former is suitable to the "law of our creation," and
may be a powerful means of introducing into the soul that Godly sorrow, which
works repentance to salvation not to be repented of: Whereas the latter is a
sorrow that works death.

To suffer grief so far to exceed its real cause as to bear no proportion to
it; -- to refuse to be comforted; to give place to melancholy so far as to
become unfitted for the necessary duties of life, -- for the thankful enjoyment
of the remaining blessings of goodness, -- for entertaining worthy thoughts of
God, and just and benevolent sentiments with respect to our fellow creatures;
this is absolutely wrong: It is an implicit denial of the justice, the wisdom,
the goodness of Providence.

3. THEY strive with God in afflictions, when, instead of improving them to
good purpose, they grow no better, but wax worse under them.

GOD does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the children of men. Did we not
refuse to be drawn with the cords of love, and the bands of a man, he would not
take harsh methods with us. By our obstinacy and perverseness we "constrain
him, and almost force him against his inclination" to treat us with severity.

"AND yet, when he comes to take this course with us, he still, like a kind and
tender hearted father, aims at our benefit and advantage. He designs kindness
to the sons of men by all those judgments which do not kill them, and cut them
off from the opportunity and possibility of improving them. If he sends evils
upon us, it is that thereby he may do us some greater good: If he afflicts us,
it is not because it is pleasant to him to deal harshly with us, but because it
is profitable and necessary for us to be so dealt with: And if at any time he
imbitter our lives by miseries and sufferings, it is because he is loath to see
us perish in pleasant ways, and chooses rather to be somewhat severe toward
us, than suffer us to be utterly undone."

AFFLICTIONS have a natural tendency to bring men to consideration, and, in the
hand of providence, are a most powerful means of repentance. Elihu represents
their good effects upon sinners in such language as this, If, says he, they be
bound in fetters, and held in cords of affliction; then God shows them their
work, and their transgressions that they have exceeded. He opens also their
ear to discipline, and commands that they return from iniquity Job, xxxvi. 8,
9, 10,
.

THIS being the design and tendency of afflictions, surely it is meet to be
said unto God, by every one who is brought into circumstances of adversity, I
have born chastisement, I will not offend any more. That which I see not teach
thou me; if I have done iniquity, I will do no more. Job xxxiv. 31, 32.


DAVID, upon whom they had their genuine effects, acknowledged, and said, I
know, O Lord, that thy judgments are right, and that in faithfulness thou have
afflicted me. It is good for me that I have been afflicted. Before I was
afflicted I went astray; but now have I kept thy word.

BUT, to pay no attention to the voice of Providence in afflictions, to conduct
under them like Pharaoh, who as God multiplied his judgments upon him, sinned
yet more, and hardened his heart, is to strive with God, as if sinners were
resolved that he should not have the mastery.

PERSONS of such a character have great reason to fear, lest God should let
them alone, lest he should give them over to judicial blindness of mind, and
hardness of heart, and leave them, without check or control, to treasure up
unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath. I proceed,

SECONDLY, To show the great guilt and danger of striving with God, our Maker.

THIS I will endeavor, briefly, by considering that they, who strive with
their Maker, are guilty of opposing their rightful Lord and Sovereign, who
alone can make them happy, in those methods he is graciously pleased to take
for the promotion of that benevolent purpose, and are continually liable to be
exposed to his vindictive displeasure, and will finally be made the monuments
of his eternal vengeance, if they persist in opposing his compassionate efforts
to save them from perishing.

1. THEY are guilty of opposing their supreme Lord and Sovereign in those
methods he is graciously pleased to take for the promotion of their best
happiness.

As our lawgiver God may well be considered as our benefactor. We need
directions for the regulation of our temper and behavior. Being formed with
capacities for moral government, we cannot be happy without well ordered
actions and inclinations. Such is the nature of the divine commands that in
keeping them there is great reward.

A GRAND design of the dispensations of his grace is, to rectify the disorders
into which we have run by our disregard to his holy law, -- to reduce us to
submission to his government -- to settle and establish in our souls that
kingdom, which consists in righteousness, and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost.

WITH this benevolent design all God's providential dealings with us truly
harmonize. -- This being the case; What baseness! What ingratitude! What folly
is involved in the sin of striving with him! In opposing him we oppose our own
most important interest. Sad beyond expression would be our case should God
leave us under the power of a carnal mind. Sin carries much of its own
punishment with it: The confusion and disorder into which it plunges the soul
are very fearful.

GREATLY alarming is their condition who contend with God: They are chargeable
with the guilt of contemning his infinite Majesty, vilifying his wisdom,
disparaging his justice, abusing his goodness and defying his power, as if they
were stronger than he. His patience will not endure forever. His spirit will
not always strive with man. Which brings me to say,

2. THAT all who strive with God are continually liable to be made examples of
his vindictive displeasure, and will finally be monuments of his eternal
vengeance, if they persist in opposing his compassionate efforts to save them
from perishing.

WE are absolutely in his hands. It is not for want of power to punish that he
bears with any who treat him with indignity. Whenever he pleases, he can ease
himself of his adversaries, and avenge himself of his enemies -- he can pour
out upon them the vials of his hot displeasure, which will make them curse
their folly in rising up against and contending with him.

THE Woe denounced by him no one can escape, who continues to oppose his
administration. There is an appointed "day of wrath, and revelation of the
righteous judgment of God, when he will render to every man according to his
deeds: To them, who by patient continuance in well doing, seek for glory, and
honor and immortality, eternal life: but unto them that are contentious, and do
not obey the truth, but obey unrighteousness; indignation and wrath;
tribulation and anguish upon every soul of man that does evil". Romans ii 5, 6,
7, 8.
At that great and terrible day "the Lord Jesus," by whom God will judge the
world, "shall be revealed from heaven, with his mighty angels, in flaming fire,
to take vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the gospel of
our Lord Jesus Christ: Who shall be punished with everlasting destruction from
the presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power" 2 Thessalonians. i. 7, 8, 9.
. It remains for me,

THIRDLY, To make an application of the subject to the present very solemn and
awful occasion.

THE very shocking and execrable deeds perpetrated last Wednesday morning by a
man in this society have led me to the observations in this discourse.

THAT a person, favored with Christian light and liberty, who appeared to be
an affectionate husband, and a tender, fond parent, should, with deliberation
and in cool blood, massacre an amiable wife, and four lovely and promising
children, and then take away his own life, is an event so extraordinary,
surprising, and unheard of, that we can scarcely believe it a reality, though
the corpses of the unhappy woman and children, with the most affecting marks of
violence upon them, are here present before our eyes.

HAD he left no written account of his intentions and views respecting the
destruction of himself and family, we should have been ready to consider it as
the effect of a sudden and most vehement frenzy. But by his writings he appears
to have had it in contemplation for three years.

THE time he first fixed upon for carrying into execution his horrid and
detestable purpose was the 18th of last month. Not long before this he writes
thus: "I mean to close the eyes of six persons through perfect humanity, and the
most endearing fondness and friendship; for mortal father never felt more of
these tender ties than myself. -- How I shall really perform the task I have
undertaken I know not 'till the moment arrives; But I believe I shall perform
it as deliberately, and as steadily as I would go to supper, or to bed."

IN one of the last letters he wrote, there is the following passage: "Any man
that undertakes any great affair, and at the same time thinks, ought to be very
deliberate indeed; and think and reflect again and again. On the morning of the
sixth of December I rose before the sun, felt calm, and left my wife between
sleep and wake, went into the room where my infants lay, found them all sound
asleep; the means of death were with me, but I had not before determined
whether to strike or not, but yet thought it a good opportunity. I stood over
them, and asked my God whether it was right or not, now to strike; but no
answer came: nor I believe ever does to man while on earth. I then examined
myself, there was neither fear, trembling nor horror about me. I then went into
a chamber next to that, to look at myself in the glass; but I could discover no
alteration in my countenance or feelings: this is true as God reigns, but for
further trial I yet postponed it." And when the fatal morning was come it does
not appear by any one circumstance, but that he set himself about and went
through the abominable work of murdering his wife, four children and himself,
with as much steadiness, composure and firmness as he supposed he should.

What a monster of a man was this! What were his principles that could lead him
into such detestable and more than savage conduct? Surely it concerns us to
know that we may guard against and avoid them as most pernicious to individuals
and societies. These he has left a written account of.

SPEAKING of the Christian religion he says, "It is a most benevolent system,
and would produce grand effects, if it was really believed and universally
practiced. I firmly believed it for many years; but my adherence to its
precepts when every one else forsook them, has been my bane on earth: But never
mind that, if it is really true I shall be saved by it yet. And now I must
generously own, that I have as many doubts about the truth of that, as I have
about the truth of any other scheme of religion, that ever appeared in the
world. -- When I consider men as Christians, I look on them as free agents; I
have examined both old and new Testaments, and must think that is their true
meaning and intent. But when I consider man as a Deist, or one that does not
believe revelation, I think him a perfect machine, and that he can do nothing,
but as he is operated upon by some superior power -- I have renounced all the
popular religions in the world, and mean to die a proper Deist. I really think
that there never was any thing done wrong in the world, but believe that all is
right; -- that we are all impelled to say and act, every thing that we do say
and act. -- That a tyrant king, or two or three fierce republicans deluging
three quarters of the world in blood -- that my killing my family -- that a
man's destroying a nest of wasps, or a fly, is as much directed by the hand of
heaven as the making this whole world was -- And if this is the case there is
no such thing as sin."

THUS he frankly owns, that he had apostatized from the Christian religion and
embraced the principles of deism and fatalism, -- that he believed men to be
mere machines, and God the author of all their actions in such a sense as to
exclude the possibility of sin from the world. The idea of future punishment he
also rejects, as inconsistent with the goodness of God, though he says, "I know
by experience there is no want of hells in this state of things." And seems to
be full in the opinion that he and his shall be happy in the future world
whether he be right or not in rejecting the Christian revelation.

THESE principles appear to have had a main influence in reconciling him to
actions which have a selfevident criminality in them, and which every man's
mind, at first view, cannot but abhor and condemn.

PRIDE, impatience, and cowardice first led him to think of destroying himself
and family, and operated powerfully in bringing him to determine upon it. He
had a high opinion of his intellectual abilities; and was uneasy with the
meanness of his personal appearance, and slenderness of his fortune. He writes,
"My person is small and mean to look on, and my circumstances were always
rather narrow; which were great disadvantages in this world: But I have great
reason to think that my soul is above the common mould. -- There are but few
men capable of deism; they are when found like a diamond among a million of
pebbles."

HE murmured and complained of Providence in the following language: "I was
determined not to hasten the matter" (of destroying himself and family) "but
kept hoping that yet Providence would turn up some thing to prevent it, if the
intent were wrong: but instead of that every circumstance, from the greatest to
the smallest trifle, during the whole of that term" (i. e. three years) "and
long before, only tended to convince me that the utmost malevolence of fortune
was, and is, against me, on earth. I have born the "stings and arrows of
outrageous fortune" long enough; and "by opposing I can only end them."

BEING too haughty to submit to the humbling dispensations of Providence, and
not having fortitude and courage enough to encounter and sustain the
inconveniences arising from straitened circumstances, he entertained the
cowardly thought of flying from them and taking sanctuary in the unknown world:
But the guilt and danger of such conduct, upon supposition of the truth of the
sacred scriptures, were to apparent to suffer him to resolve upon it, before he
had brought himself to disbelieve and reject them. And to render it still less
hazardous in his view he gave into the fatalistic scheme, judging God to be so
far the author of all the actions of men as to allow them no other agency than
that of mere machines; and upon this Hypothesis concluded that there is no sin.
In which he is doubtless more consistent than those who admit the same
hypothesis, and yet hold that men are accountable for their conduct.

BUT even such a view of the actions of men, added to his professed disbelief
of the Revelation of the Bible and future punishment, was not sufficient fully
to satisfy him with respect to his safety in perpretating deeds so unnatural
and atrocious; and therefore he called in the aid of fanaticism and
superstition.

IN one of his letters he says, "You may believe the hand of heaven is in this
matter. I used to be a great enemy to superstition: But, however it is, I have
lately had sundry intimations, I really think, from God to convince me that I
am right; but these I shall not describe. -- I mentioned before, that my wife
had a dream concerning this affair," (which in another paper, dated November
18, he relates in these words: "Yesterday morning she told me her dream -- that
she thought I had wrote many papers, and was earnestly concerned about her --
that these papers were spotted with blood -- that she also saw a man wound
himself past recovery; and blood guggle (as she expressed it) from different
parts of his body. Poor woman! She little thought that the greater part of that
dream would be realized within three days -- But I am unappalled and think the
hand of heaven is really with us.") "She has since had two more -- one of them,
That she was suddenly seized, and liable to great punishment -- that it created
great confusion; but she afterward got free and was happy. From her excellence
of heart I have no doubt but this will be the case with her. On the
thanksgiving night she dreamed that her three daughters all lay dead, and they
even froze in that situation; and even yet I am little affected. O my God,
wonderful indeed are thy works; in the highest wisdom have thou contrived them
all! All must be right, or I am hardened indeed. -- Some of these will be
called the suggestions of the devil: But men may rely upon it, that I have ever
trusted in a much higher power; and it is he alone that now directs me and
supports me."

IN another letter, speaking of the intended massacre of himself and family, he
says: "In fine clear days, when I am most cheerful, and in a morning when I
first wake, free from any disturbance, I seem to be convinced in a steady, calm
and reasonable way, that it is appointed for me to do it -- that it is my duty
and that it must be done. That it is God himself that prompts and directs me,
in all my reflections and circumspection, I really believe. But if it should at
last prove Mr. Devil, or any other evil spirit, all that I can say about it is,
that I was born a very unlucky fellow."

DREADFUL delusion! Strange inconsistencies! Horrid blasphemy! How surprising
is it, that a man, who rejects the infallible evidences in favor of the
divinity of the Christian religion, a religion which he allows to be most
benevolent, and with whom it seems to be a maxim, that God never makes an
extraordinary revelation of himself to man while upon earth, should pretend,
and be confident, that He has given him sundry intimations that he is right in
forming, and taking measures to carry into execution, designs condemned by the
light of nature as absolutely wrong, and which no man* whose conscience is not
seared as with a hot iron, can think of without abhorrence! How surprising,
that one, who ranked himself among the few sublime geniuses, who only, as he
supposed, are capable of deism, that is, of withstanding the force of the
mighty evidence in support of the divine authority of the Bible, should produce
his wife's dreams and his own feelings at her narration of them as a convincing
argument that the hand of heaven was with him! Such dreams, related in the
manner we may suppose they were by her, had a natural tendency to move the
tender passions, and give a check to his pernicious designs. This he seemed to
be aware of, and considered his being unaffected and unappalled as owing either
to supernatural divine help and support, or to his own hardness; the latter he
would not admit: How astonishing that he could imagine it to be the former!

BUT why do I say astonishing? Can any thing be so in one, who, in an
enlightened age, so far sets himself against God as to reject a revelation
attended with all the evidence, both internal and external, of it is divine
original, that the nature of the thing will admit?

CAN any thing be surprising in one, who in contradiction to the light of
reason, and his own consciousness of human liberty and free agency, considers
mankind as perfect machines, and God as the efficient cause of all the actions
of wicked men?

CAN we suppose any opinion too absurd to be received by such an one -- any
inconsistency too glaring for him to be guilty of?

CAN we suppose it strange, that such an one should be given over by God to
strong delusion, that he should believe a lie, that he might be damned, who
believed not the truth, but had pleasure in unrighteousness?

THE horrid deeds perpetrated by this man under the influence of such
principles, are a more effectual confutation of those principles, than any it
is in the power of language to produce.

The terrible judgment of heaven in permitting one, who prided himself in the
character of a deist and fatalist, to be carried by his error to so dreadful a
length as with deliberation and dispassion to murder himself and his whole
family, I am ready to think, will, wherever it is known, strike terror into the
minds of all who glory in such a character, if any thing will produce such an
effect, short of the coming of the Judge of the world in flaming fire, to take
vengeance on his enemies.

IF any dare avow such principles after they have been acted out in this most
awful manner, and we have such shocking evidence of their mischievous and fatal
tendency, they ought to be treated as persons most dangerous to society.

How greatly to be dreaded are all who embrace such principles?

How unfit are such persons to be entrusted either with private or public
important affairs, whatever their accomplishments may be in other respects?

How unsafe must a woman, or family be in the hands of a man under the
influence of such principles? His affection, his fondness for them instead of
being their security may prove the very occasion of their destruction. This was
the case with the unhappy woman and children whose remains are here before us.

IT is a very threatening aspect upon us that there are so many in this land, a
land greatly distinguished in respect of religious light and liberty, who scoff
at and ridicule the glorious gospel of the blessed God.

O THAT all, who thus strive with their Maker and Redeemer, might be awakened
by his voice, which cries with such terrible accents in this event, and alarmed
with a sense of their guilt and danger.

BUT if such bold opposers of God are become so far judicially blinded, that
the things of their peace shall be forever hidden from their eyes; yet it is
hoped that others, who are not fixed in loose principles, though often guilty
of thinking and speaking lightly of the doctrines of Christianity, will take
the alarm, and beware lest they be hardened through the deceitfulness of sin,

ALL who are impatient under adverse providence, being disposed to murmur and
complain, and take unlawful methods for relief, have great reason to tremble.

BY thus striving against God they dishonor and provoke him to anger. Should he
leave them to themselves they would pursue measures that would end in their
eternal ruin.

IT becomes us as men, and especially as Christians, to endure afflictions with
humility, patience and fortitude, and learn in whatsoever state we are
therewith to be content.

HAD the unhappy man, who chose to destroy himself and family rather than live
in a style below what he vainly imagined became a person of his consequence,
been contented with food and raiment which he had, and might have procured --
had he been humble -- had he not distrusted God, he might have been among the
living, and his season of probation lengthened out; but giving way to pride and
impatience he was permitted to commit crimes of great magnitude, the last of
which he could have no opportunity to repent of, and his account is sealed up
to the judgment of the great day.

THAT he should be suffered to manage his hellish purposes with such secrecy
for so long a time, and at last put them into execution unsuspected, is one of
the deep things of God which calls for humiliation.

-- WE we are now come together to solemnize the funeral rites of the victims
who fell a sacrifice to a husband's and father's dreadful error, and to lament
their very singular fate. They have no relatives present to mourn for them. The
countenances and tears of this large assembly make it manifest that every one
is affected with grief, and disposed to bewail their untimely, sudden and
shocking death.

WHILST we weep for the very unfortunate woman and children who are not -- let
us think with tender sympathy of her aged surviving mother and other near
relatives at a distance, and pray for them -- that they may be prepared for
evil tidings -- that their hearts may be fixed trusting in the Lord, and that
they may have all that divine support and consolation which such a very
singular trial and affliction may call for.

To draw to a close --

LET us all lay it to heart, that it is appointed to all men once to die, but
after this is the judgment.

THE day and manner of our death we know not. Our times are in the hand of God.
It is of the last importance that we make our peace with him before it be too
late. The awful event which has brought together such a concourse of people, at
this time, is a most humbling and alarming evidence of the dreadful depravity
of human nature and the great danger of striving with our Maker.

IT is astonishing to think what crimes the human mind is capable of when left
to itself. Did not God sometimes in righteous judgment take off his restraint
from sinners, we should not believe it possible for them to rise to such a
pitch of inhumanity and wickedness as some have done.

LET us be afraid to strive with our Maker and oppose him in any way whatever.
None ever hardened themselves against him and prospered. Wherein any of us have
striven with him may we be engaged to do so no more; but be solicitous heartily
to submit to his laws, which are all holy, just and good -- thankfully to
receive the dispensations of his grace -- humbly acquiesce in his afflicting
providence and cheerfully comply with the kind designs of it.

AND may the Lord be pleased to pour out his spirit upon us all, and bring
every thought, inclination and desire of our souls into a complete subjection
to his will, that we way be found of him in peace, without spot, and blameless
at the great day of his appearing.

WATCH ye therefore and pray always, that ye may be accounted worthy to escape
all these things that shall come to pass, and to stand before the Son of Man.

THE END.
A LETTER from a Gentleman in Wethersfield, to his Friend, containing a
Narrative of the Life of William Beadle (so far as it is known) and the
particulars of the Massacre of himself and Family.
SIR,
IT IS not strange that reports various and contradictory should have circulated
on so interesting and terrible a subject as that of a man's consigning to the
grave himself and family in a moment of apparent ease and tranquillity. The
agitation of mind which must be the consequence of being near such a scene of
horror, will sufficiently apologize for not answering your request for the
particulars ever this. Our ignorance of the history of this man at first
precluded a possibility of giving you satisfaction on this head. Perhaps no one
in this town had more favorable opportunities of obtaining the particulars of
his history: yet, could never induce him to mention a single syllable relating
to his age, parentage, or early occupation. To have asked him directly would
have been rude when he evidently meant to be silent on these subjects. My
conjecture was, that he was the natural son of some gentleman in England, and
that he had been brought up in or near London, and had been about the Court.
Since his decease have been able to learn from undoubted authority, that he was
born in the county of Essex, in a village not very far from London. As to his
business in youth am still left in the dark, but find he has once mentioned to
a gentleman, some little incidents which happened to him while in company with
his father, and that he very early became acquainted with a club in London who
were Deists, where it is probable he received the first rudiments in those
principles. While in England, where he left a mother and sister, he had a fair
character for integrity and honesty. In the year 1755 he went out to the island
of Barbados, in the family of Charles Pinfold, Esquire Governor of that island,
where he tarried six years, then returned to England, purchased some
merchandise, and from thence came to New York in the year 1762, and immediately
removed to Stratford in this State, from thence to Derby, and then to
Fairfield, where he married and dwelt some years. -- By this time he had
acquired about twelve hundred pounds property, with which he removed to this
town, about ten years since, where he resided until his death. His business was
that of retailing, he formerly credited his goods, but since his residence in
this town he has refused to give any credit, intending to keep his property
within his own reach, believing it always secure while his eye was upon it.
While here he added considerable to his stock, none of which he ever vested in
real estate; the Continental currency taught him that wealth could take to
itself wings and fly away: Notwithstanding all his vigilance.

When the war commenced he had on hand a very handsome assortment of Goods for
a country store, which he sold for the currency of the country, without any
advance in the price* the money he laid by, waiting and expecting the time
would soon arrive when he might therewith replace his goods, resolving not to
part with it until it should be in as good demand as when received by him. His
expectations from this quarter daily lessening, finally lost all hope, and was
thrown into a state little better than despair, as appears from his writtings;
he adopted a plan of the most rigid family economy, but still kept up the
outward appearance of his former affluence, and ever to the last entertained
his friend with his usual decent hospitality, although nothing appeared in his
outward deportment, which evinced the uncommon pride of his heart; his writings
show clearly that he was determined not to bear the mortification of being
thought by his friends poor and dependent. On this subject he expresses himself
in the following extraordinary manner: "If a man, who has once lived well,
meant well and done well, falls by unavoidable accident into poverty, and then
submits to be laughed at, despised and trampled on, by a set of mean wretches
as far below him as the moon is below the sun; I say, if such a man submits, he
must become meaner than meanness itself, and I sincerely wish he might have ten
years added to his natural life to punish him for his folly."

He fixed upon the night succeeding the 18th of November for the execution of
his nefarious purpose, and procured a supper of oysters, of which the family
eat very plentifully; that evening he writes as follows: "I have prepared a
noble supper of oysters, that my flock and I may eat and drink together, thank
God and die." After supper he sent the maid with a studied errand to a friend's
house at some distance, directing her to stay until she obtained an answer to
an insignificant letter he wrote his friend intending she should not return
that evening -- she did however return, perhaps her return disconcerted him and
prevented him for that time. The next day he carried his pistols to a smith for
repair; it may be, the ill condition of his pistols might be an additional
reason for the delay.

On the evening of the 10th of December some persons were with him at his
house, to whom he appeared as cheerful and serene as usual; he attended to the
little affairs of his family as if nothing uncommon was in contemplation. The
company left him about nine o'clock in the evening, when he was urgent as usual
for their stay; whether he slept that night is uncertain, but it is believed he
went to bed. The children and maid slept in one chamber; in the gray of the
morning of the 11th of December he went to their bed chamber, awaked the maid
and ordered her to arise gently without disturbing the children; when she came
down stairs he gave her a line to the family physician, who lived at the
distance of a quarter of a mile, ordered her to carry it immediately, at the
same time declaring that Mrs. Beadle had been ill all night, and directing her
to stay until the physician should come with her; this he repeated sundry times
with a degree of ardor. There is much reason to believe he had murdered Mrs.
Beadle before he awaked the maid. Upon the maid's leaving the house he
immediately proceeded to execute his purpose on the children and himself. It
appears he had for some time before, carried to his bed side every night an ax
and a carving knife; he smote his wife and each of the children with the ax on
the side of the head as they lay sleeping in their beds; the woman had two
wounds in the head, the scull of each of them was fractured; he then with the
carving knife cut their throats from ear to ear; the woman and little boy were
drawn partly over the side of their beds, as if to prevent the bedding from
being besmeared with blood; the three daughters were taken from the bed and
laid upon the floor side by side, like three lambs, before their throats were
cut; they were covered with a blanket, and the woman's face with an
handkerchief. He then proceeded to the lower floor of the house, leaving marks
of his footsteps in blood on the stairs, carrying with him the ax and knife,
the latter he laid upon the table in the room where he was found, reeking with
the blood of his family. Perhaps he had thoughts he might use it against
himself if his pistols should fail; it appears he then seated himself in a
Windsor chair, with his arms supported by the arms of the chair; he fixed the
muzles of the pistols into his two ears and fired them at the same instant: the
balls went through the head in transverse directions. Although the neighbors
were very near and some of them awake, none heard the report of the pistols.
The capital facts of the massacre you have seen in the public papers; a minute
detail was too horrible to be given at first, until the mind (especially of the
relatives of the unhappy woman) had been prepared for it by a summary
narrative, and even now it is enough to give feelings to apathy itself to relate
the horrid tale.

The line to the physician obscurely announced the intentions of the man; the
house was soon opened, but alas too late! The bodies were pale and motionless,
swimming in their blood, their faces white as mountain snow, yet life seemed to
tremble on their lips; description can do no more than saintly ape and trifle
with the real figure.

Such a tragical scene filled every mind with the deepest distress; nature
recoiled and was on the rack with distorting passions; the most poignant sorrow
and tender pity for the lady and her innocent babes, who were the hapless
victims of the brutal, studied cruelty of an husband and father, in whose
embraces they expected to find security, melted every heart. -- Shocking
effects of pride and false notions about religion.

To paint the first transports this affecting scene produced, when the house
was opened, is beyond my reach. -- Multitudes of all ages and sexes were drawn
together by the sad tale. -- The very in most souls of the beholders were
wounded at the sight, and torn bycontending passions: Silent grief, with marks
of astonishment, were succeeded by furious indignation against the author of
the affecting spectacle, which vented itself in incoherent exclamations. --
Some old soldiers accidentally passing through the town that morning, on their
way from camp to visit their friends, led by curiosity turned in, to view the
sad remains; on sight of the woman and her tender offspring, notwithstanding
all their firmness, the tender sympathetic tear stealing gently down their
furrowed cheeks, betrayed the anguish of their hearts; on being showed the body
of the sacrificer they paused a moment, then muttering forth an oath or two of
execration, with their eyes fixed on the ground in silent sorrow, they slowly
went their way. So awful and terrible a disaster wrought wonderfully on the
minds of the neighborhood; nature itself seemed rustled, and refused the
kindly aid of balmy sleep for a time.

Near the close of the day on the 12th of December, the bodies being still
unburied, the people, who had collected in great numbers, grew almost frantic
with rage, and in a manner demanded the body of the murderer; the law being
silent on the subject, it was difficult to determine where decency required the
body should be placed, many proposed it should be in an ignominious manner
where four roads met, without any coffin or insignia of respect, and perforated
by a stake. Upon which a question arose, where that place could be found which
might be unexceptionable to the neighborhood -- but no one would consent it
should be near his house or land. After some consultation it was thought best
to place it on the bank of the river between high and low water mark; the body
was handed out of the window and bound with cords on a fled, with the clothes
on as it was found, and the bloody knife tied on his breast, without coffin or
box, and the horse he usually rode was made fast to the sled -- the horse,
unaccumstomed to the draught, proceeded with great unsteadiness, sometimes
running full speed, then stopping, followed by a multitude, until arriving at
the water's edge, the body was tumbled into a hole dug for the purpose, like
the carcass of a beast. Not many days after there appeared an uneasiness in
sundry persons at placing the body so near a ferry much frequented; some
threatenings were given out that the body should be taken up and a second time
exposed to view. It was thought prudent it should be removed, and secretly
deposited in some obscure spot, it was accordingly removed with the utmost
secrecy; notwithstanding which some children accidentally discovered the place,
and the early freshes partly washed up the body, and it has had a second remove
to a place where it is hoped mankind will have no further vexation with it.

On the 13th of December the bodies of the murdered were intered in a manner
much unlike that of the unnatural murderer. -- The remains of the children were
borne by a suitable number of equal age, attended with a sad procession of
youths of the town, all bathed in tears; side by side the hapless woman's
corpse was carried in solemn procession to the parish church yard, followed by
a great concourse, who with affectionate concern and every token of respect
were anxious to express their heartfelt sorrow in performing the last mournful
duties.

The person of Mr. Beadle was small, his features striking and full of
expression, with the aspect of fierceness and determination; his mind was
contemplative, when once he had formed an opinion, was remarkably tenacious; as
a merchant or trader, he was esteemed a man of strict honor and integrity, and
would not descend to any low or mean artifice to advance his fortune. He was
turned of 52 years of age when he died.

Mrs. Beadle was born at Plymouth, in Massachusetts, of reputable parents -- a
comely person, of good address, well bred, unusually serene, sincere,
unaffected and sensible; died in the middle of life, aged 32 years.

The children (the eldest of which was a son, aged 12 years, the other three,
daughters, the youngest aged 6 years) were such as cheared the hearts of their
parents, who were uncommonly fond of displaying their little virtues and
excellencies, and seemed to anticipate a continuance of growing parental
satisfaction; alas, like early tender buds nipped by untimely frosts, they did
but begin to live!

It is more than probable, this man had for months past desired that some or
all of his children might be taken out of the world by accident; be removed all
means of security from a well near his house, which he was careful heretofore
to keep covered. His little boy he often sent to swim in the river, and has
been heard to chide the child for not venturing further into deep water than
his fears would suffer him. He has at times declared it would give him no pain
or uneasiness to follow his children to the grave -- his acquaintance knew
these expressions could not arise from want of affection or tenderness for his
children, but rather imagined him speaking rashly in jest. He ever spoke
lightly of death as a bugbear the world causlessly feared. It appears from his
writings, he at first had doubts whether it was just and reasonable for him to
deprive his wife of life, and offers against it, only this reason, that he had
no hand in bringing her into existence, and consequently had no power over her
life. -- She set out about the first of November on a journey to Fairfield,
which he thought was by direction of Heaven to clear him of his doubts and
remove her out of the way, at the time the business was to be done; and his
intention was to have executed his design on himself and children in her
absence. She proceeded no further than New Haven, and by reason of some
disappointment, returned ten days earlier than expected; he appeared chagrin'd
at her early return, and soon began to invent some justifying reasons for
depriving her of life also. He finally concludes it would be unmerciful to
leave her behind to languish out a life in misery and wretchedness, which must
be the consequence of the surprising death of the rest of the family, and that
since they had shared the frowns and smiles of fortune together, it would be
cruelty to her, to be divided from them in death.

It Is very natural for you to ask, whether it was possible a man could be
transformed from an affectionate husband and an indulgent parent to a secret
murderer, without some previous alteration, which must have been noticed by the
family or acquaintance? Yet this was the case in this instance, there was no
visible alteration in his conduct. It appears by his writings that he thought
he had a right to deprive himself of life and intended to exercise that right
if ever he should think himself unfortunate, the extension of this right to his
children, was very easy. It Is probable, the principle had grown up gradually to
the last stage. Since his death I have seen a letter he wrote to a friend as
early as 1777, in which he has an expression like this -- "I believe I and my
family shall not live to see the end of the war." -- It was then understood to
mean nothing more than his expectation, the war would continue a long time, his
late conduct has explained it very differently -- Whether Mrs. Beadle had any
fears of his evil intentions or not, is uncertain, that she had fears some
great calamity would befall the family is evident, both from what she said, and
what he has left in writing. -- He writes on the 18th of November, that on the
morning of the 17th she told him, "She dreamed he had wrote many papers, and
was earnestly concerned for her, and that those papers were spotted with blood;
and that she also saw a man wound himself past recovery and blood guggle (as
she expressed it) from different parts of his body." -- In another letter, of a
later date, he writes as follows, viz. "I mentioned before that my wife had a
dream concerning this affair, she has since had two more, one of them. That she
was suddenly seized and liable to great punishment, that it created great
confusion, but she afterward got free and was happy; from her excellence of
heart, I have no doubt but this will be the case with her. -- On the
thanksgiving night she dreamed, that her three daughters all lay dead, and that
they even froze in that situation; and even yet I am little affected". The
Editor is sensible that it may be disgustful to some readers to observe these
dreams repeated after inserting them in the sermon, but this letter was written
before it was known the sermon would be published, and the observations upon
the subject being very different, and since the sense would not be complete
without a repetition of them he hopes the reader will take no exception thereat.


The afternoon before this terrible execution, Mrs. Beadle walked abroad to
visit an acquaintance, and it was observed by the lady, she was uncommonly
pensive; she asked the reason, Mrs. Beadle with much concern told her, "She had
for months been troubled with frightful and uncommon dreams, and that very
morning she dreamed violence had been offered her family and her children
destroyed; she said those dreams wrought on her mind to a very great degree, to
divert her thoughts from them she had walked abroad that afternoon; and that
she verily believed Providence had judgments in store for their family, which
he was about to inflict on them by some sweeping sickness, or in some other
awful manner." -- Mr. Beadle, who, as appears by his writings, was alone privy
to his malevolent intentions, put a very different construction upon her
dreams. He doubtless considered them as premonitions from Heaven, and
convincing proof to him that his purpose was right, of which he says he had
sundry intimations he really thought from God himself, which he does not
describe.

From whence those dreams originated it is impossible to determine; whether
'the weapons he carried to his bed side gave her uneasiness and excited a
jealousy in her mind of his intentions, or whether any of his conduct which
fell under her observation might be alarming to her, which might trouble her
sleep, no one can tell. She has lately mentioned sundry dreams of a similar
nature, which she had near six months since. Some great and good characters
have thought such intimations were at times given from on high, to convince
mankind of the reality of the invisible world -- to hazard such a conjecture in
these modern days would perhaps be thought by the learned world a great mark of
fanatacism -- every man must think for himself, no one can pronounce with
satisfactory certainty with respect to the origin and cause of such thoughts in
sleep, which so nearly correspond with the true state of facts. Her last dream
penned by him was nearly literally verified. Although the weather was serene
and pleasant on the 10th, and near full moon: neither the sun or moon were
visible from the time this horrid deed was done, until the body of this man was
laid beneath the clods, which redoubled the horror: when suddenly the wind blew
from the northwest, dispelled the vapors and discovered a cloudless sky. The
air grew cold, and the faces of the other five being opened to view in their
coffins, in the front of the meeting house, the concourse was so great that
much time was spent to give opportunity for all to take a view; the cold still
increasing, the bodies in all probability were stifned with frost.

Mr. Beadle left sundry letters directed to his acquaintance, and one labored
treatise in justification of his conduct; they contain many inconsistencies. He
professes himself a Deist, but reprobates Atheism. While in life and prosperity
he claimed to be a Christian, and offered two of his children in baptism. Much
has been said in favor of publishing his writings by those who have not seen
them; those who have perused them have doubted the propriety of such a measure;
not because his reasonings against revelation were in any degree unanswerable,
but lest they might have some effect on weak and melancholy minds. He attempts
to attack all rulers in Church and State, treats the Christian religion with a
great degree of bitterness and bigotry; and yet absurdly concludes by saying,
"if it is true he shall be saved by it." -- He is very unsettled, wavering and
inconsistent in his own beloved system of Deism. He flatters his pride by
believing it was the height of heroism to dare to die by his own hands, and
that the Deity would not willingly punish one, who was impatient to visit his
God and learn his will from his own mouth, face to face in some future world,
or worlds (which he thinks may be many) and seems to think there is as great
probability of succeeding advantageously, in removing from one world to another
as from one country, or calling to another; and seeing all men must be jugged
off at last (as he expresses it) he was determined to make the experiment
voluntarily which all must do through necessity. As he was much out of temper
with the world, he was unwilling any of his family should stay behind to
encounter its troubles, and since it is a father's duty to provide for his
flock, he chose to consign them over to better hands.

It Is doubtful whether any history of modern times can afford an instance of
similar barbarity, even in the extreme distress of war. The ancients encouraged
by numbers and example, did in hours of despair destroy themselves and
families, to avoid the shame of becoming captives to be led in triumph, and the
cruelty commonly exercised in those barbarous ages.

By this time your curiosity itself will be pleased to find me subscribing
myself,

Your very humble Servant.
Wethersfield, February, 1783.

