NARRATIVES OF A LATE EXPEDITION AGAINST THE INDIANS; WITH An ACCOUNT of the
BARBAROUS EXECUTION of Col. CRAWFORD; AND The WONDERFUL ESCAPE of Dr. Knight
and John Slover from CAPTIVITY, in 1782.

PHILADELPHIA: Printed by FRANCIS BAILEY, in Market Street. M,DCC,LXXIII.

To the PUBLIC.
The two following narratives were transmitted for publication in September
last, but shortly afterward the letter from sir Guy Carleton to his excellency
general Washington, informing that the savages had received orders to desist
from their incursions, gave reason to hope that there would be an end to their
barbarities. For this reason it was not thought necessary to hold up to view
what they had heretofore done. But as they still continue their murders on our
frontiers, these narratives may be servicable to induce our governments to take
some effectual steps to chastise and repress them; as from hence they will see
that the nature of an Indian is fierce and cruel, and that an extirpation of
them would be useful to the world, and honorable to those who can effect it.

Mr. BAILEY,
Enclosed are two narratives; one of Dr. Knight, who acted as surgeon in the
expedition under col. Crawford; the other of John Slover: That of Dr. Knight
was written by himself at my request; that of Slover was taken down by myself
from his mouth as he related it. The man from his early and long captivity,
amongst the Indians, though perfectly sensible and intelligent, yet cannot
write. The character of Dr. Knight is well known to to be that of a good man,
of great veracity, of a calm and deliberate mind, and using no exaggeration in
his account of any matter. As a testimony in favor of the veracity of Slover,
I thought proper to procure a certificate from the clergyman to whose church he
belongs, and which is as follows:

"I DO hereby certify that John Slover has been for many years a regular member
of the church under my care, and is worthy of the highest credit, WILLIAM RENO."

These narratives you will please to publish in your useful paper or in any
other way you may judge proper. I conceive the publication of them may answer a
good end in showing America, what have been the sufferings of some of her
citizens by the hands of the Indian allies of Britain. To these narratives I
have subjoined some observations which you may publish or omit as it may be
convenient.

H. BRACKENRIDGE.
Pittsburgh, Aug. 3, 1782.

Dr. KNIGHT'S Narrative.
ABOUT the latter end of the month of March or the beginning of April, of the
present year, the western Indians began to make incursions upon the frontiers
of Ohio, Washington, Youghagany, and Westmoreland counties, which has been
their constant practice ever since the commencement of the present war between
the United States and Great Britain.

In consequence of these predatory invasions the principal officers of the
abovementioned counties, namely, colonels Williamson and Marshall, tried every
method in their power to set on foot an expedition against the Wyandot towns,
which they could effect no other way than by giving all possible encouragement
to volunteers. The plan proposed was as follows: Every man furnishing himself
with a horse, a gun, and one months provision, should be exempted from two
tours of militia duty. Likewise, that every one who had been plundured by the
Indians, should, if the plunder could be found at their towns, have it again,
proving it to be his property: and all horses lost on the expedition by
unavoidable accident were to be replaced by horses taken in the enemy's country.

The time appointed for the rendezvous, or general meeting of the volunteers,
was fixed to be on the 20th of May, and the place, the old Mingoe town on the
west side of the river Ohio, about forty miles below Fort Pit by land, and I
think about 75 by water.

Col. Crawford was solicited by the general voice of these western counties and
districts to command the expedition. He accordingly set out as a volunteer and
came to Fort Pit two days before the time appointed for the assembling of the
men. As there was no surgeon yet appointed to go with the expedition, colonel
Crawford begged the favor of genesis Irvine to permit me to accompany him, (my
consent having been previously asked) to which the general agreed provided col.
Gibson did not object.

Having obtained permission of the colonel I left Fort Pit on Tuesday, May
1st, and the next day about one in the afternoon arrived at the Mingoe bottom.
The volunteers had not all crossed the river until Friday morning the 24th,
they then distributed themselves into eighteen companies, choosing their
captains by vote. There were chosen, also, one col commandant, four field and
one brigade major. There were four hundred and sixty five who voted.

We began our march on Saturday May 25th, making almost a due west course, and
on the fourth day reached the old Moravian town, upon the river Muskingum about
60 miles from the river Ohio. Some of the men having lost their horses on the
night preceding, returned home.

Tuesday the 28th in the evening, major Brenton and captain Bean went some
distance from camp to reconnoitre: having gone about one quarter of a mile they
saw two indians, upon whom they fired, and then returned to camp. This was the
first place in which we were discovered, as we understood afterward.

On Thursday the fourth of June, which was the eleventh day of our march, about
one o'clock we came to the spot where the town of Sandusky formerly stood: the
inhabitants had moved 18 miles lower down the creek, nearer the lower Sandusky;
but as neither our guides or any who were with us, had known any thing of their
removal, we began to conjecture there were no Indian towns nearer than the
lower Sandusky, which was at least 40 miles distant.

However, after refreshing our horses we advanced on in search of some of their
settlements, but had scarcely got the distance of three or four miles from the
old town when a number of our men expressed their desire to return, some of
them alleging that they had only five days provision; upon which the field
officers and captains, determined, in council, to proceed that afternoon and no
longer. Previous to the calling of this council, a small party of light horse
had been sent forward to reconnoitre.

I shall here remark, by the way, that there are a great many extensive plains
in that country: The woods in general grow very thin, and free from brush and
underwood; so that light horsemen may advance a considerable distance before an
army without being much exposed to the enemy.

Just as the council ended, an express returned from the above mentioned party
of light horse with intelligence, "that they had been about three miles in
front, and had seen a large body of Indians running toward them." -- In a
short time we saw the rest of the light horse, who joined us, and having gone
one mile further met a number of Indians who had partly got possession of a
piece of woods before us, whilst we were in the plains, but our men alighting
from their horses and rushing into the woods soon obliged them to abandon that
place.

The enemy being by this time reinforced flanked to the right, and part of them
coming in our rear quickly made the action more serious. The firing continued
very warm on both sides from four o'clock until the dusk of the evening, each
party maintaining their ground. Next morning about six o'clock some guns were
discharged at the distance of two or three hundred yards, which continued till
day, doing little or no execution on either side.

The field officers then assembled and agreed, as the enemy were every moment
increasing and we had already a number wounded, to retreat that night. The
whole body was to form into three lines, keeping the wounded in the center. We
had four killed and twenty three wounded, of the latter, seven very
dangerously, on which account as many biers were got ready to carry them: most
of the rest were slightly wounded and none so bad but they could ride on
horseback. After dark the officers went on the out posts and brought in all the
men as expeditiously as they could. Just as the troops were about to form
several guns were fired by the enemy, upon which some of our men spoke out and
said, our intention was discovered by the Indians who were firing alarm guns.
Upon which some in front hurried off and the rest immediately followed, leaving
the seven men that were dangerously wounded, some of whom however got off on
horseback, by means of some good friends, who waited for, and assisted them.

We had not got a quarter of a mile from the field of action when I heard col.
Crawford calling for his son John Crawford, his son in law major Harrison,
major Rose and William Crawford, his nephews, upon which I came up and told him
I believed they were before us -- He asked, was that the doctor? -- I told him
it was -- he then replied, they were not in front, and begged of me not to
leave him -- I promised him I would not.

We then waited, and continued calling for these men till the troops had passed
us. The colonel told me his horse had almost given out, that he could not keep
up with the troops, and wished some of his best friends to remain with him: he
then exclaimed against the militia for riding off in such an irregular manner,
and leaving some of the wounded behind, contrary to his orders. Presently there
came two men riding after us, one of them an old man, the other a lad: we
enquired if they had seen any of the above persons? they answered they had not.

By this time there was a very hot siring before us, and, as we judged, near
where our main body must have been. Our course was then nearly south-west, but
changing it, we went north about two miles, the two men remaining in company
with us. Judging ourselves to be now out of the enemy's lines, we took a due
east course, taking care to keep at the distance of fifteen or twenty yards
apart, and directing ourselves by the north star.

The old man often lagged behind and when this was the case never failed to
call for us to halt for him. When we were near the Sandusky Creek he fell one
hundred yards behind, and bawled out, as usual, for us to halt. While we were
preparing to reprimand him for making a noise, I heard an Indian halloo, as I
thought one hundred and fifty yards from the man and partly behind him; after
this we did not hear the man call again neither did he ever come up to us any
more. It was now past midnight, and about day break col. Crawford's and the
young man's horses gave out, and they left them. We pursued our journey
eastward, and about two o'clock fell in with capt. Biggs who had carried lieut.
Ashley from the field of action, who had been dangerously wounded. We then went
on about the space of an hour, when a heavy rain coming on we concluded it was
best to encamp, as we were encumbered with the wounded officer. We then barked
four or five trees, made an encampment and a fire and remained there all that
night. Next morning we again prosecuted our journey, and having gone about
three miles found a deer which had been recently killed. The meat was sliced
from the bones and bundled up in the skin with a tomahawk lying by it. We
carried all with us and in advancing about one mile further espied the smoke of
a fire. We then gave the wounded officer into the charge of the young man,
desiring him to stay behind whilst the colonel, the captain, and myself, walked
up as cautiously as we could toward the fire. When we came to it, we concluded
from several circumstances some of our people had encamped there the preceding
night. We then went about roasting the venison, and when just about to march
observed one of our men coming upon our tracks. He seemed at first very shy,
but having called to him he came up and told us he was the person who had
killed the deer, but upon hearing us come up, was afraid of Indians, hid it in
a thicket and made off. Upon this we gave him some bread and roasted venison,
proceeded altogether on our journey and about two o'clock came upon the paths
by which we had gone out. Capt. Biggs and myself did not think it safe to keep
the road, but the colonel said the Indians would not follow the troops farther
than the plains, which we were then considerably past. As the wounded officer
rode capt. Biggs' horse I lent the captain mine; the colonel and myself went
about one hundred yards in front, the captain and the wounded officer in the
center, and the two young men behind. After we had traveled about one mile and
a half, several Indians started up within fifteen or twenty steps of the
colonel and me. As we at first discorvered only three I immediately got behind
a large black-oak, made ready my piece and raised it up to take fight, when the
colonel called to me twice not to fire; upon that one of the Indians ran up to
the colonel and took him by the hand. The colonel then told me to put down my
gun, which I did. At that instant one of them came up to me whom I had formerly
seen very often, called me doctor and took me by the hand. They were Delaware
Indians of the Wingenim tribe. Captain Biggs fired amongst them but did no
execution. They then told us, to call these people and make them come there,
else they would go and kill them, which the colonel did, but they four got off
and escaped for that time. The colonel and I were then taken to the Indian
camp, which was about half a mile from the place where we were captivated. On
Sunday evening five Delawares who had posted themselves at some distance
further on the road brought back to the camp, where we lay, captain Biggs' and
lieutenant Ashley's scalps, with an Indian scalp which captain Bigg's had taken
in the field of action: they also brought in Biggs' horse and mine, they told
us the two other men got away from them.

Monday morning the tenth of June we were paraded to march to Sandusky, about
33 miles distant: they had eleven prisoners of us and four scalps, the Indians
being seventeen in number.

Col. Crawford was very desirous to see a certain Simon Girty, who lived with
the Indians, and was on this account permitted to go to town the same night,
with two warriors to guard him, having orders at the same time to pass by the
place where the col. had turned out his horse, that they might if possible,
find him. The rest of us were taken as far as the old town which was within
eight miles of the new.

Tuesday morning the 11th, col. Crawford was brought out to us on purpose to be
marched in with the other prisoners. I asked the colonel if he had seen Mr.
Girty? -- He told me he had, and that Girty had promised to do every thing in
his power for him, but that the Indians were very much enraged against the
prisoners; particularly captain Pipe one of the chiefs: he likewise told me
that Girty had informed him that his son in law col. Harrison and his nephew
William Crawford, were made prisoners by the Shawanese, but had been pardoned.
This capt. Pipe had come from the towns about an hour before col. Crawford, and
had painted all the prisoners faces black.

As he was painting me he told me I should go to the Shawanese towns and see my
friends. When the colonel arrived he painted him black also, told him he was
(...) to see him, and that he would have him shaved when he came to see his
friends at the Wyandot town. When we marched the col. and I were kept back
between Pipe and Wyngenim, the two Delaware chiefs, the other nine prisoners
were sent forward with another party of Indians. As we went along we saw four
of the prisoners lying by the path tomahaked and scalped some of them were at
the distance of half a mile from each other. When we arrived within half a mile
of the place where the colonel was executed, we overtook the five prisoners
that remained alive: the Indians had caused them to sit down on the ground, as
they did also the colonel and me at some distance from them I was there given
in charge to an Indian fellow to be taken to the Shawanese towns.

In the place where we were now made to sit down there was a number of squaws
and boys who sell on the five prisoners and tomahawk'd them. There was a
certain John McKinly, amongst the prisonners, formerly an officer in the 13th
Virginia regiment, whose head on old squaw cut off, and the Indians kicked it
about upon the ground. The young indian fellows came often where the colonel
and I were, and dashed the scalps in our faces. We were then conducted along
toward the place where the colonel was afterward executed: when we came within
about half a mile of it Simon Girty met us, with several Indians on horseback:
he spoke to the colonel, but as I was about one hundred and fifty yards behind
could not hear what passed between them.

Almost every Indian we met struck us either with sticks or their fists. Girty
waited till I was brought up and asked, was that the doctor? -- I told him,
yes, and went toward him reaching out my hand, but he bid me begone and called
me a damned rascal, upon which the fellow who had me in charge pulled me along.
Girty rode up after me and told me I was to go to the Shawanese towns.

When we were come to the fire the colonel was stripped naked, ordered to sit
down by the fire and then they beat him with sticks and their fists. Presently
after I was treated in the same manner. They then tied a rope to the foot of a
post about fifteen feet high, bound the colonel's hands behind his back and
fastened the rope to the ligature between his wrists. The rope was long enough
either for him to sit down or walk round the post once or twice and return the
same way. The colonel then called to Girty and asked if they intended to burn
him? -- Girty answered, yes. The colonel said he would take it all patiently.
Upon this capt. Pipe, a Delaware chief, made a speech to the Indians, viz.
about thirty or forty men, sixty or seventy squaws and boys.

When the speech was finished they all yelled a hideous and hearty assent to
what had been said. The Indian men then took up their guns and shot powder into
the colonel's body, from his feet as far up as his neck. I think not less than
seventy loads were discharged upon his naked body. They then crowded about him,
and to the best of my observation, cut off his ears: when the throng had
dispersed a little I saw the blood running from both sides of his head in
consequence thereof.

The fire was about six or seven yards from the post to which the colonel was
tied: it was made of small hickory poles, burnt quite through in the middle,
each end of the poles remaining about six feet in length. Three or four Indians
by turns would take up, individually, one of these burning pieces of wood and
apply it to his naked body, already burnt black with the powder. These
tormentors presented themselves on every side of him, so that which ever way he
ran round the post they met him with the burning faggots and poles. Some of the
squaws took broad boards upon which they would put a quantity of burning coals
and hot embers and throw on him, so that in a short time he had nothing but
coals of fire and hot ashes to walk upon.

In the midst of these extreme tortures he called to Simon Girty and begged of
him to shoot him; but Girty making no answer he called to him again. Girty
then, by way of decision, told the colonel he had no gun, at the same time
turning about to an Indian who was behind him, laughed heartily, and by all his
gestures seemed delighted at the horrid scene.

Girty then came up to me and bade me prepare for death He said, however, I was
not to die at that place* but to be burnt at the Shawanese towns. He swore by G
-- d I need not expect to escape death, but should suffer it in all its
extremities.

He then observed that some prisoners had given him to understand that if our
people had him they would not hurt him for his part, he said, he did not
believe it, but desired to know my opinion of the matter; but being at that
time in great anguish and distress for the torments the colonel was suffering
before my eyes, as well as the expectation of undergoing the same fate in two
days, I made little or no answer. He expressed a great deal of ill will for
col. Gibson, and said he was one of his greatest enemies, and more to the same
purpose, to all which I paid very little attention.

Col. Crawford at this period of his sufferings besought the Almighty to have
mercy on his soul, spoke very low, and bore his torments with the most manly
fortitude. He continued in all the extremities of pain for an hour and three
quarters or two hours longer, as near as I can judge, when at last being almost
spent, he lay down on his belly: they then scalped him and repeatedly threw the
scalp in my face, telling me "that was my great captain." -- An old squaw
(whose appearance every way answered the ideas people entertain of the Devil)
got a board, took a parcel of coals and ashes and laid them on his back and
head after he had been scalped: he then raised himself upon his feet and began
to walk round the post: they next put a burning stick to him as usual, but he
seemed more insensible of pain than before.

The Indian fellow who had me in charge now took me away to capt. Pipes' house,
about three quarters of a mile from the place of the colonel's execution. I was
bound all night and thus, prevented from seeing the last of the horrid
spectacle. Next morning, being June 12th, the Indian untied me, painted me
black, and we set off for the Shawanese town, which he told me was somewhat
less than forty miles from that place. We soon came to the spot where the
colonel had been burnt, as it was partly in our way; I saw his bones laying
amongst the remains of the fire, almost burnt to ashes, I suppose after he was
dead they had laid his body on the fire.

The Indian told me, that was my Big Captain and gave the scalp halloo. He was
on horseback and drove me before him.

I pretended to this Indian I was ignorant of the death I was to die at the
Shawanese town, affected as cheerful a countinance as possible and asked him if
we were not to live together as brothers in one house when we should get to the
town? -- He seemed well pleased, and said, yes. He then asked me if I could
make a wigwam? -- I told him, I could -- he then seemed more friendly -- we
went that day as near as I can judge about 25 miles, the course partly
southwest -- The Indian told me we should next day come to the town the sun
being in such a direction, pointing nearly south. At night when we went to rest
I attempted very often to unty myself but the Indian was extremely vigilant and
scarce ever shut his eyes that night. About day break he got up and untied me:
he next began to mend up the fire and as the gnats were troublesome I asked him
if I should make a smoke behind him? -- he said, yes. I then took the end of a
dogwood fork which had been burnt down to about 18 inches long: it was the
longest stick I could find, yet too small for the purpose I had in view: then I
picked up another smaller stick and taking a coal of fire between them went
behind him: then turning suddenly about, I struck him on the head with all the
force I was master of; which so stunned him that he fell forwards with both his
hands into the fire, but seeing him recover and get up, I siezed his gun while
he ran off howling in a most fearful manner -- I followed him with a
determination to shoot him down, but pulling back the cock of the gun with too
great violence I believe I broke the main spring. I pursued him, however, about
thirty yards still endeavoring to fire the gun, but could not; then going back
to the fire I took his blanket, a pair of new mokkisons, his hoppes, powder
horn, bullet bag, (together with the gun) and marched off, directing my course
toward the five o'clock mark about half an hour before sunset I came to the
plains which I think are about sixteen miles wide. I laid me down in a thicket
till dark and then by the assistance of the north star made my way through them
and got into the woods before morning. I proceeded on the next day and about
noon crossed the paths by which our troops had gone out: these paths are nearly
east and west but I went due north all that afternoon with a view to avoid the
enemy.

In the evening I began to be very faint, and no wonder; I had been six days
prisoner; the last two days of which I had eat nothing and but very little the
first three or four; there were wild goosberries in abundance in the woods, but
being unripe required mastication, which at that time I was not able to perform
on account of a blow received from an Indian on the jaw with the back of a
tomahawk: there was a weed that grew plentifully in that place, the juice of
which I knew to be grateful and nourishing; I gathered a bundle of the same,
took up my lodging under a large spreading beech tree and having sucked
plentifully of the juice, went to sleep. Next day I made a due east course
which I generally kept the rest of my journey. I often imagined my gun was only
wood bound and tried every method I could devise to unscrew the lock but never
could effect it having no knife nor any thing fitting for the purpose; I had
now the satisfaction to find my jaw began to mend and in four or five days
could chew any vegetable proper for nourishment, but finding my gun only a
useless burden left her in the wilderness. I had no apparatus for making fire
to sleep by so that I could get but little rest for the gnats and musketoes;
there are likewise a great many swamps in the beach ridge which occasioned me
very often to lie wet: this ridge through which I traveled is about 20 miles
broad, the ground in general very level and rich, free from shrubs and brush:
there are, however, very few springs, yet wells might easily be dug in all
parts of that ridge; the timber on it is very lofty, but it is no easy matter
to make a straight course through the same, the moss growing as high upon the
south side of the trees as on the north. There are a great many white oaks, ash
and hickory trees that grow among the beach timber; there are likewise some
places on the ridge, perhaps for three or four continued miles where there is
little or no beech, and in such spots, black, white oak, ash and hickory
abound. Sugar trees grow there also to a very great bulk: the soil is
remarkably good, the ground a little ascending and desending with some small
rivulets and a few springs. When I got out of the beech ridge and nearer the
river Muskingum the lands were more broken but equally rich with those before
mentioned, and abounding with brooks and springs of water: there are also
several small creeks that empty into that river, the bed of which is more than
a mile wide in many places: the woods consist of white and black oaks, walnut,
hickory and sugar tree in the greatest abundance. In all parts of the country
through which I came the game was very plenty, that is to say, deer, turkies
and pheasants, I likewise saw a great many vestiges of bears and some elks.

I crossed the river Muskingum about three or four miles below Fort Laurence,
and crossing all paths aimed for the Ohio river. All this time my food was
gooseberries, young nettles, the juice of herbs, a few service berries, and
some May apples, likewise, two young blackbirds and a turripine, which I
devoured raw. When my food sat heavy on my stomach, I used to eat a little wild
ginger which put all to rights.

I came upon Ohio river about five miles below fort McIntosh, in the evening of
the 21st day after I had made my escape, and on the twenty second, about seven
o'clock in the morning, being the fourth day of July, arrived safe, though very
much fatigued, at the fort.

A Short MEMOIR of the within mentioned Col. CRAWFORD.
COL. CRAWFORD, was about 50 years of age, had been an old warrior against the
savages. He distinguished himself early as a volunteer in the last war, and was
taken notice of by colonel (now general) Washington, who procured for him the
commission of ensign. As a partisan he showed himself very active, and was
greatly successful: He took several Indian towns, and did great service in
scouting, patrolling and defending the frontiers. At the commencement of this
war he raised a regiment in the back country by his own exertions: He had the
commission of colonel in the continental army, and acted bravely on several
occasions in the years 1776, 1777, and at other times. He held his commission
at the time he took command of the militia, in the aforesaid expedition against
the Indians: most probably he had it with him when he was taken: He was a man
of good judgment, singular good nature, and great humanity, and remarkable for
his hospitality; few strangers coming to the western country, and not spending
some days at the crossings of the Yochaghany river where he lived; no man
therefore could be more regretted.

The NARRATIVE of JOHN SLOVER.
HAVING in the last war been a prisoner amongst the Indians many years, and so
being well acquainted with the country west of the Ohio I was employed as a
guide in the expedition under col. William Crawford against the Indian towns on
or near the river Sandusky. It will be unnecessary for me to relate what is so
well known, the circumstances and unfortunate event of that expedition; it will
be sufficient to observe, that having on Tuesday the fourth of June sought the
enemy near Sandusky, we lay that night in our camp, and the next day fired on
each other at the distance of three hundred yards, doing little or no
execution. In the evening of that day it was proposed by col. Crawford, as I
have been since informed, to draw off with order; but at the moment of our
retreat the Indians (who had probably perceived that we were about to retire)
firing alarm guns, our men broke and rode off in confusion, treading down those
who were on foot, and leaving the wounded men who supplicated to be taken with
them.

I was with some others on the rear of our troops ^^eding our horses in the
glade, when our men began to break: The main body of our people had passed by
me a considerable distance before I was ready to set out. I overtook them
before they crossed the glade, and was advanced almost in front. The company in
which I was had separated from me, and had endeavored to pass a morass: for
coming up I found their horses had stuck fast in the morass, and endeavoring
to pass, mine also in a short time stuck fast I ought to have said, the company
of five or six men with which I had been immediately connected, and who were
some distance to the right of the main body, had separated from me, etc. I
tried a long time to disengage my horse, until I could hear the enemy just
behind me and o^ each side, but in vain. Here then I was obliged to leave him.
The morass was so unstable that I was to the middle in it, and it was with the
greatest difficulty that I got across it but which having at length done, I
came up with the six men who had left their horses in the same manner I had
done; two of these, my companions, having lost their guns.

We traveled that night making our course toward Detroit, with a view to shun
the enemy, who we conceived to have taken the paths by which the main body of
our people had retreated. Just before day we got into a second deep morass, and
were under the necessity of detaining until it was light to see our way through
it. The whole of this day we traveled toward the Shawanese towns* with a view
of throwing ourselves still far her out of the search of the enemy. About ten
o'clock this day we sat down to eat a little, having tasted nothing from
Tuesday, the day of our engagement, until this time which was on Thursday; and
now the only thing we had to eat was a scrap of pork to each. We had sat down
just by a warrior's path which we had not suspected, when eight or nine
warriors appeared Running off hastily we left our baggage and provisions, but
were not discovered by the party; for skulking some time in the grass and
bushes, we returned to the place and recovered our baggage. The warriors had
hallooed as they passed, and were answered by others on our flanks

In our journey through the glades, or wide extended dry meadows, about twelve
o'clock this day we discovered a party of Indians in front, but skulking in the
grass and bushes were not perceived by them. In these glades we were in great
danger, as we could be seen at a great distance. In the afternoon of this day
there fell a heavy rain, the coldest I ever felt. We halted while it rained,
and then traveling on we saw a party of the enemy about two hundred yards
before us, but hiding ourselves in the bushes, we had again the good fortune
not to be discovered. This night we got out of the glades, having in the night
crossed the paths by which we had advanced to Sandusky. It was our design to
leave all these paths to the right, and to come in by the Tuscarawas. We should
have made a much greater progress, had it not been for two of our companions
who were lame; the one having his foot burnt, the other with a swelling in his
knee of a rheumatic nature.

On this day, which was the second after the retreat, one of our company, the
person affected with the rheumatic swelling, was left behind some distance in a
swamp. Waiting for him some time we saw him coming within one hundred yards, as
I sat on the body of an old tree mending my mokkisins, but taking my eye from
him I saw him no more. He had not observed our tracks, but had gone a different
way. We whistled on our chargers, and afterward hallooed for him, but in vain
Nevertheless he was fortunate in missing us, for he afterward came safe into
Wheeling This is a post of ours on the Ohio, about 70 miles below Fort Pit.
. We traveled on until night, and were on the waters of Muskingum from the
middle of this day.

Having catched a fawn this day we made a fire in the evening, and had a
repast, having in the mean time eat nothing but the small bit of pork I
mentioned before. We set off at break of day. About nine o'clock the third day
we fell in with a party of the enemy about twenty miles from the Tuscarawas,
which is about 135 miles from fort Pit. They had come upon our tracks, or had
been on our flanks, and discovered us, and then having got before had way laid
us, and fired before we perceived them. At the first fire one of my companions
fell before me, and another just behind; these two had guns: there were six men
in company, and four guns, two of these rendered useless by reason of the wet,
when coming through the swamp the first night; we had tried to discharge them,
but could not. When the indians fired I ran to a tree, but an Indian presenting
himself fifteen yards before me, desired me to deliver myself up and I should
not be hurt: My gun was in good order, but apprehending the enemy behind might
discharge their pieces at me, I did not risk firing, which I had afterward
reason to regret, when I found what was to be my fate, and that the Indian who
was before me and presented his gun, was one of those who had just before
fired. Two of my companions were taken with me in the same manner, the Indians
assuring us we should not be hurt. But one in company, James Paul, who had a
gun in order made his escape, and has since come into Wheeling. One of these
Indians knew me, and was of the party by whom I was taken in the last war. He
came up and spoke to me calling me by my Indian name, Mannuchcothee, and
upbraiding me for coming to war against them. I will take a moment here to
relate some particulars of my first captivity, and my life since.

I was taken from New River in Virginia by the Miamese, a nation of Indians by
us called the Picts, amongst whom I lived six years; afterward being sold to a
Delaware, and by him put into the hands of a trader, I was carried amongst the
Shawanese, with whom I continued six years: so that my whole time amongst these
nations was twelve years, that is, from the eighth to the twentieth year of my
age. At the treaty at Fort Pit in the fall preceding what is called Dunmore's
war, which, if I am right was in the year 1773, I came in with the Shawanese
nation to the treaty, and meeting with some of my relations at that place was
by them solicited to relinquish the life of a savage, which I did with some
reluctance, this manner of life having become natural to me, inasmuch as I had
scarcely known any other. I enlisted as a soldier in the continental army at
the commencement of the present (...) and served fifteen months. Having been
properly discharged I have since married, have a family, and am in communion
with the church

To return: The party by whom we were made prisoners we had taken some horses,
and left them at the glades we had passed the day before They had followed on
our tracts from these glades; on our return to which we found the horses and
rode We were carried to Wachatomakak, a town of the Mingoes and Shawanese. I
think it was on the third day we reached the town, which when we were
approaching, the Indians, in whose custody we were, began to look (...), having
been kind to us before, and given us a little meat and flour to eat, which they
had found or taken from some of our men on their retreat. This town is small,
and we were told was about two miles distant from the main town to which they
meant to carry us.

The inhabitants from this town came out with clubs and tomhawks, struck beat
and abused us greatly. One of my two companions they seized, and having
stripped him naked blacked him with coal and water: This was the sign of being
burnt the man seemed to surmise it, and shed tears. He asked me the meaning of
his being blacked; but I was forbid by the enemy in their own language to tell
him what was intended. In English which they spoke easily, having been often at
Fort Pit, they assured him he was not to be hurt. I know of no reason for
making him the first object of their cruelty, unless it was that he was the
oldest.

A warrior had been sent to the greater town to acquaint them with our coming,
and prepare them for the frolic; for on our coming to it, the inhabitants came
out with guns, clubs and tomhawks. We were told that we had to run to the
council house, about three hundred yards. The man that was blacked was about
twenty yards before us, in running the gauntlet: They made him their principal
object, men, women and children beating him, and those who had guns firing
loads of powder on him as he ran naked, putting the muzzles of the guns to his
body, shouting, hallooing and beating their drums in the mean time.

The unhappy man had reached the door of the council house, beat and wounded in
a manner shocking to the sight; for having arrived before him we had it in our
power to view the spectacle: it was indeed the most horrid that can be
conceived: they had cut him with their tomhawks, shot his body black, burnt it
into holes with loads of powder blown into him; a large wadding had made a
wound in his shoulder whence the blood gushed.

Agreeable to the declaration of the enemy when he first set out he had reason
to think himself secure when he had reached the door of the council house. This
seemed to be his hope, for coming up with great struggling and endeavor, he
laid hold of the door but was pulled back and drawn away by them; finding they
intended no mercy, but putting him to death he attempted several times to
snatch or lay hold of some of their tomhawks, but being weak could not effect
it. We saw him borne off and they were a long time beating, wounding, pursuing
and killing him.

That same evening I saw the dead body of this man close by the council house.
It was mangled cruelly and the blood mingled with the powder was rendered
black. The same evening I saw him, after he had been cut into pieces and his
limbs and his head about two hundred yards on the outside of the town put on
poles. That evening also I saw the bodies of three others in the same black and
mangled condition: these I was told had been put to death the same day and just
before we had recahed the town. Their bodies as they lay were black, bloody,
burnt with powder; two of these were Harrison This was col. Harrison, son in
law to col. Crawford one of the first men in the western country: he had been
greatly active on many occasions in devising measure for the defense of the
frontiers, and his character as a citizen in every way, though a young man,
distinguished and respectable. He had been a magistrate under the jurisdiction
of Virginia, and I believe a delegate to the assembly of that state. I knew no
man with whose grave, sedate manners, prudent conduct, good sense and public
spirit on all occasions I was more pleased H. B.
and young Crawford This was a son to col. Crawford. I do not remember to have
seen him, nor was I acquainted with his character before the expedition, but
have since been informed universally that he was a young man greatly and
deservedly esteemed as a soldier and as a citizen.

H. B.
. I knew the visage of col. Harrison, and I saw his clothing and that of young
Crawford, at the town. They brought horses to me and asked if I knew them? -- I
said they were Harrisons and Crawfords. They said they were.

The third of these men I did not know, but believe to have been col. M,
Cleland, the third in command on the expedition.

The next day the bodies of these men were dragged to the outside of the town,
and their carcases being given to the dogs, their limbs and heads were stuck on
poles.

My surviving companion shortly after we had reached the council house was sent
to another town, and I presume he was burnt or executed in the same manner.

In the evening the men assembled in the council house: this is a large
building about fifty yards in length and about twenty five yards wide; and
about sixteen feet in height, built of split poles covered with bark: their
first object was to examine me, which they could do in their own language,
inasmuch as I could speak the Miame, Shawanese and Delaware languages, which I
had learned during my early captivity in the last war: I found I had not
forgotten these languages, especially the two former, as well as my native
tongue.

They began with interrogating me concerning the situation of our country, what
were our provisions? our numbers? the state of the war between us and Britain?
I informed them Cornwallis had been taken, which next day, when Matthew Elliot
These men, Elliot and Girty, were inhabitants of the western country and since
the commencement of the war, having for some time professed an attachment to
America, went off to the Indians. They are of that horrid brood called
Refugees, and whom the Devil has long since marked for his own property.
with James Girty These men, Elliot and Girty, were inhabitants of the western
country and since the commencement of the war, having for some time professed
an attachment to America, went off to the Indians. They are of that horrid
brood called Refugees, and whom the Devil has long since marked for his own
property.
came, he affirmed to be a lie, and the Indians seemed to give full credit to
his declaration.

Hitherto I had been treated with some appearance of kindness, but now the
enemy began to after their behavior toward me. Girty had informed them, that
when he asked me how I liked to live there, I had said that I intended to take
the first opportunity to take a scalp and run off. It was, to be sure, very
probable that if I had such intention, I would communicate it to him. Another
man came to me and told me a story of his having lived on the south branch of
Potowmac in Virginia, and having three brothers there, he pretended he wanted
to get away, but I suspected his design; nevertheless he reported that I had
consented to go. In the mean time I was not tied, and could have escaped, but
having nothing to put on my feet, I waited some time longer to provide for this.

I was invited every night to the war dances, which they usually continued
until almost day. I could not comply with their desire, believing these things
to be the service of the devil.

The council lasted fifteen days; from fifty to one hundred warriors being
usually in council, and sometimes more. Every warrior is admitted to these
councils; but only the chiefs or head warriors have the privilege of speaking.
The head warriors are accounted such from the number of scalps and prisoners
they have taken.

The third day M'Kee This man before the war was an Indian agent for the
British. He was put on parole, broke it, went to the Indians and has since
continued violently to incite them to make war against us.
was in council, and afterward was generally present. He spoke little, and did
not ask any questions or speak to me at all. He lives about two miles out of
the town, has a house built of squared logs with a shingled roof* he was
dressed in gold laced cloths. I had seen him at the former town through which I
passed.

I think it was on the last day of the council, save one, that a speech came
from Detroit, brought by a warrior who had been counselling with the commanding
officer at that place. The speech had been long expected, and was in answer to
one sometime before sent from the town to Detroit: It was in a belt of Wampum,
and began with addressing them, "My children," and enquiring why they continued
to take prisoners? "Provisions are scarce; when prisoners are brought in we are
obliged to maintain them, and still some of them are running away, and carrying
tidings of our affairs. When any of your people fall into the hands of the
rebels they show no mercy: why then should you take prisoners? Take no more
prisoners, my children, of any sort; man, woman or child."

Two days after a party of every nation that was near being collected, it was
determined on to take no more prisoners of any sort. They had held a large
council, and the determination was, that if it were possible they could find a
child of a span or three inches long, they would show no mercy to it. At the
conclusion of the council it was agreed upon by all the tribes present, viz.
the Tawaws, Chiappawaws, the Wiondots, the Mingoes, the Delawares, the
Shawanese, the Munses, and a part of the Cherokees, that should any of the
nations who were not present take any prisoner, these would rise against them,
take away the prisoners and put them to death.

In the course of these deliberations I understood what was said perfectly.
They laid plans against our settlements of Kentucky, the Falls, and toward
Wheeling. These it will be unnecessary for me to mention in this narrative,
more especially as the Indians finding me to have escaped, and knowing that I
would not fail to communicate these designs, will be led to alter their
resolutions.

There was one council held at which I was not present: The warriors had sent
for me as usual, but the squaw with whom I lived would not suffer me to go, but
hid me under a large quantity of skins. It may have been from an unwillingness
that I should hear in council the determination with respect to me, that I
should be burnt.

About this time twelve men were brought in from Kentucky, three of whom were
burnt on this day; the remainder were distributed to other towns, and all, as
the Indians informed me, were burnt. This was after the speech came from
Detroit.

On this day also I saw an Indian who had just come into town, and who said
that the prisoner he was bringing to be burnt, and who he said was a doctor,
had made his escape from him. I knew this must have been Dr. Knight, who went
as surgeon of the expedition. The Indian had a wound four inches long in his
head, which he acknowledged the doctor had given him: he was cut to the scull.
His story was, that he had untied the doctor, being asked by him to do so, the
doctor promising that be would not go away; that while he was employed in
kindling the fire, the doctor snatched up the gun, had come behind and struck
him; that he then made a stroke at the doctor with his knife, which he laid
hold of, and his fingers were cut almost off, the knife being drawn through his
hand* that he gave the doctor two stabs, one in the belly, the other in the
back; said the doctor was a great, big, tall, strong man. Being now adopted in
an Indian family, and having some confidence for my safety, I took the liberty
to contradict this, and said that I knew the doctor, who was a weak, little
man. The other warriors laughed immoderately, and did not seem to credit him It
is well known that Mr. Slover mentioned these circumstances at his first coming
into Wheeling, and before he could have known the relation of the doctor, so
that this is an evidence of the truth of the doctor's account, and of his own.

H. B.
. At this time I was told that col. Crawford was burnt, and they greatly
exulted over it.

The day after the council I have mentioned, about forty warriors accompanied
by George Girty came early in the morning round the house where I was. The
squaw gave me up; I was sitting before the door of the house; they put a rope
round my neck, tied my arms behind my back, stripped me naked, and blacked me
in the usual manner. George Girty as soon as I was tied, damned me, and said
that I now should get what I had deserved many years. I was led away to a town
distant about five miles, to which a messenger had been dispatched to desire
them to prepare to receive me: Arriving at this town I was beaten with clubs
and the pipe ends of their tomhawks, and was kept for some time tied to a tree
before a house door. In the mean while the inhabitants set out to another town
about two miles distant, where I was to be burnt, and where I arrived about
three o'clock in the afternoon.

Here also was a council house, part of it covered and part of it without a
roof. In the part of it where no cover was, but only sides built up, there
stood a post about sixteen feet in height, and in the middle of the house
around the post, there were three piles of wood built about three feet high and
four feet from the post. Being brought to the post my arms were tied behind me,
and the thong or cord with which they were bound was fastened to the post; a
rope also was put about my neck, and tied to the post about four feet above my
head. During the time they were tying me, piles of wood were kindled and began
to flame.

Death by burning, which appeared to be now my fate, I had resolved to sustain
with patience. The divine grace of God had made it less alarming to me; for on
my way this day I had been greatly exercised in regard to my latter end. I knew
myself to have been a regular member of the church, and to have sought
repentance for my sins; but though I had often heard of the faith of assurance,
had known nothing of it; but early this day, instantaneously by a change
wrought upon me, sudden and perceivable as lightning, an assurance of my peace
made with God, sprung up in my mind. The following words were the subject of my
meditation -- "In peace thou shall see God. Fear not those who can kill the
body. In peace shall thou depart." I was on this occasion by a confidence in
mind* not to be resisted, fully assured of my salvation: This being the case, I
was willing, satisfied, and glad to die.

I was tied to the post, as I have already said, and the flame was now kindled.
The day was clear, not a cloud to be seen; if there were clouds low in the
horison, the sides of the house prevented me from seeing them, but I heard no
thunder, or observed any sign of approaching rain. Just as the fire of one pile
began to blaze, the wind rose; from the time they began to kindle the fire and
to tie me to the post, until the wind began to blow, was about fifteen minutes.
The wind blew a hurricane, and the rain followed in less than three minutes.
The rain fell violent; and the fire, though it began to blaze considerably, was
instantly extinguished. The rain lasted about a quarter of an hour.

When it was over the savages stood amazed, and were a long time silent. At
last one said, We will let him alone till morning, and take a whole days frolic
in burning him. The sun at this time was about three hours high. It was agreed
upon, and the rope about my neck was untied, and making me sit down, they began
to dance around me. They continued dancing in this manner until eleven o'clock
at night; in the mean time, beating, kicking, and wounding me with their
tomhawks and clubs I observed marks on the man when I saw him, which was eight
or ten days after he came in, particularly a wound above his right eye brow,
which he had received with the pipe end of a tomhawk; but his back and body
generally had been injured.

H. B.
.

At last one of the warriors, the Half Moon, asked me if I was sleepy? I
answered, Yes. The head warrior then chose out three men to take care of me. I
was taken to a block house; my arms were tied until the cord was hid in the
flesh; they were tied in two places, round the wrist and above the elbows. A
rope was fastened about my neck, and tied to a beam of the house, but
permitting me to lie down on a board. The three warriors were constantly
harrassing and troubling me, saying, "How will you like to eat fire to morrow
-- you will kill no more Indians now." I was in expectation of their going to
sleep; when at length, about an hour before day break, two laid down; the third
smoked a pipe, talked to me, and asked the same painful questions. About half
an hour after he also laid down, and I heard him begin to snore. Instantly I
went to work, and as my arms were perfectly dead with the cord, I laid myself
down upon my right arm which was behind my back, and keeping it fast with my
fingers, which had still some life and strength, I slipped the cord from my
left arm over my elbow and my wrist. One of the warriors now got up and stirred
the fire: I was apprehensive that I should be examined, and thought it was over
with me; but my hopes revived when now he lay down again. I then attempted to
unloose the rope about my neck, tried to gnaw it but in vain, as it was as
thick as my thumb and as hard as iron, being made of a buffaloe hide: I wrought
with it a long time, gave it out, and could see no relief. At this time I saw
day break and heard the cock crow: I made a second attempt almost without hope,
pulling the rope by putting my fingers between my neck and it, and to my great
surprise it came easily untyed: it was a noose with two or three knots tied
over it.

I stepped over the warriors as they lay, and having got out of the house looked
back to see if there was any disturbance; I then ran through the town into a
corn field; in my way I saw a squaw with four or five children lying asleep
under a tree: going a different way into the field I untyed my arm which was
greatly swelled and turned black: having observed a number of horses in the
glade as I ran through it, I went back to catch one, and on my way found a
piece of an old rug or quilt hanging on a fence which I took with me: having
caught the horse, the rope with which I had been tied serving for a halter, I
rode off: the horse was strong and swift, and the woods being open and the
country level, about ten o'clock that day I crossed the Siota river at a place
by computation fifty full miles from the town. I had rode about twenty five
miles on this side Siota by three o'clock in the afternoon, when the horse
began to fail and could no longer go on a trot. I instantly left him and on
foot ran about twenty miles farther that day, making in the whole the distance
of near one hundred miles, In the evening I heard hallooing behind me and for
this reason did not halt until about ten o'clock at night, when I sat down, was
extremely sick and vomited; but when the moon rose which might have been about
two hours after, I went on and traveled until day.

During the night I had a path, but in the morning judged it prudent to forsake
the path and take a ridge for the distance of fifteen miles, in a line at right
angles to my course, putting back as I went along with a stick the weeds which
I had bended, lest I should be track'd by the enemy. I lay the next night on
the waters of Muskingum: the nettles had been troublesome to me after my
crossing the Siota, having nothing to defend myself but the piece of a rug
which I had found, and which while I rode I used under me by way of saddle; the
briars and thorns were now painful to and prevented me from traveling in the
night until the moon appeared: In the mean time I was hindered from sleeping by
the musketoes, for even in the day I was under the necessity of traveling with
a handful of bushes to brush them from my body.

The second night I reached Cushakim; next day came to Newcomer's town, where I
got about seven rasberries, which were the first thing I ate from the morning
in which the Indians had taken me to burn me until this time, which was now
about three o'clock the fourth day. I felt hunger very little, but was
extremely weak; I swam Muskingum river at Oldcomers town, the river being about
two hundred yards wide having reached the bank I sat down, looked back and
thought I had a start of the indians if any should pursue. That evening I
traveled about five miles, next day came to Stillwater a small river, in a
branch of which I got two small crafish to eat: Next night I lay within five
miles of Wheeling, but had not slept a wink during this whole time, being
rendered impossible by the musketoes, which it was my constant employment to
brush away. Next day came to Wheeling and saw a man on the island in the Ohio
opposite to that post, and calling to him and asking for particular persons who
had been on the expedition, and telling him I was Stover, at length, with great
difficulty, he was persuaded to come over and bring me across in his canoe It
has been said, that the putting to death the Moravian Indians has been the
cause of the cruelties practiced on the prisoners taken at Sandusky. But though
this has been made an excuse by the refugees amongst the savages, and by the
British, yet it must be well known, that it has been the custom of the savages
at all times. I have it from colonel John Campbell, who is lately from
Chamblee, where he has been in confinement a long time, and was taken on the
Ohio some years ago, that two men who were taken with him were put to death at
the Shawnese towns in the same manner in which Harrison was afterward
executed, viz. by blowing powder into their bodies. A large load blowed into
the body of one of these men, reached his kidneys; the pain throwing him into
rage and madness, the savages were uncommonly diverted with the violence of his
exclamation and gestures; boys of the town particularly following him, and
considering it as excellent sport. In the evening his head was cut off, and an
end put to his misery. Col. Campbell himself was led out to make sport of the
same kind, but was saved, by the interposition, I think, of Elliot.

At the same time, though I would strike away this excuse which is urged for
the savages, I am far from approving the Moravian slaughter. Doubtless the
existence of that body of people in our neighborhood, was of disadvantage, as
they were under the necessity of receiving and refreshing the Sandusky savages
as they came to war, and as they returned; and as no doubt some amongst them
communicated intelligence of any expedition on foot against the enemy. I am
also disposed to believe, that the greater part of the men put to death were
warriors; this appears from the testimony of one against another, from the
confession of many, from their singing the war song when ordered out to be
tomhawked, from the cut and painting of their hair, and from other
circumstances. The greater part of the Moravian men who were really peaceable
or well affected to us, having been carried off the fall before, and still
detained at Sandusky. But the putting to death the women and children, who sang
hymns at their execution, must be considered as unjustifiable inexcusable
homicide; and that the colonel who commanded the party, and who is said
perseveringly, contrary to the remonstrances of officers present, to have
enjoined the perpetration of the act, has not yet been called to an account, is
a disgrace to the state of Pennsylvania.

H. BLACKENRIDGE.
.

Mr. BAILEY,
WITH the narrative enclosed, I subjoin some observations with regard to the
animals, vulgarly called Indians. It is not my intention to write any labored
essay; for at so great a distance from the city, and so long unaccustomed to
write, I have scarcely resolution to put pen to paper. Having an opportunity to
know something of the character of this race of men, from the deeds they
perpetrate daily around me, I think proper to say something on the subject;
indeed several years ago, and before I left your city, I had thought different
from some others with respect to the right of soil, and the propriety of
forming treaties and making peace with them. In the United States Magazine, in
the year 1779, I published a dissertation denying them to have a right to the
soil: I perceive a writer in your very elegant and useful paper, has taken up
the same subject, under the signature of Caractacus, and unanswerably shown,
that their claim to the extensive countries of America, is wild and
inadmissible: I will take the liberty in this place, to pursue this subject a
little.

On what is their claim founded? -- Occupancy. A wild India with his skin
painted red, and a feather through his nose, has set his foot on the broad
continent of North and South America: a second wild Indian with his ears cut in
ringlets, or his nose slit like a swine or a malefactor, also sets his foot on
the same extensive tract of soil: Let the first Indian make a talk to his
brother, and bid him take his foot off the continent, for he being first upon
it, had occupied the whole, to kill buffaloes, and tall elks with long horns.
This claim, in the reasoning of some men would be just, and the second savage
ought to depart in his canoe, and seek a continent where no prior occupant
claimed the soil. Is this claim of occupancy of a very early date? When Noah's
three sons, Shem, Ham, and Japhet, went out to the three quarters of the old
world, Ham to Africa, Shem to Asia, and Japhet to Europe, did each claim a
quarter of the world for his residence? Suppose Ham to have spent his time
fishing or gathering oysters in the Red Sea, never once stretching his leg in a
long walk to see his vast dominions, from the mouth of the Nile, across the
mountains of Ethiopia and the river Niger to the cape of Good Hope, where the
Hottentotts, a cleanly people, now stray; or supposing him, like a Scots
pedlar, to have traveled over many thousand leagues of that country: would
this give him a right to the soil? -- In the opinion of some men it would
establish an exclusive right. Let a man in more modern times take a journey or
voyage like Patrick Kennedy and others, to the heads of the Missisippi or
Missouri rivers, would he gain a right ever after to exclude all persons from
drinking the water of these streams? Might not a second Adam make a talk to
them and say, is the whole of this water necessary to allay your thirst, and
may not I also drink of it?

The whole of this earth was given to man, and all descendents of Adam have a
right to share it equally. There is no right of primogeniture in the laws of
nature and of nations. There is reason that a tall man, such as the chaplain in
the American army we call the High Priest, should have a larger spot of ground
to stretch himself upon; or that a man with a big belly, like a goodly alderman
of London, should have a larger garden to produce beans and cabbage for his
appetite, but that an agile, nimble runner, like an Indian called the Big Cat,
at Fort Pit, should have more than his neighbors because he has traversed a
greater space, I can see no reason.

I have conversed with some persons and found their mistakes on this subject,
to arise from a view of claims by individuals in a state of society, some
holding a greater proportion of the soil than others; but this is according to
the laws to which they have consented; an individual holding one acre, cannot
encroach on him who has a thousand, because he is bound by the law which
secures property in this unequal manner. This is the municipal law of the state
under which he lives. The member of a distant society is not excluded by the
laws from a right to the soil: He claims under the general law of nature, which
gives a right, equally to all, to so much of the soil as is necessary for
subsistence. Should a German from the closely peopled country of the Rhine,
come into Pennsylvania, more thinly peopled, he would be justifiable in
demanding a settlement, though his personal force would not be sufficient to
effect it. It may be said that the cultivation or melioration of the earth,
gives a property in it. No -- if an individual has engrossed more than is
necessary to produce grain for him to live upon, his useless gardens, fields
and pleasure walks, may be seized upon by the person who not finding convenient
ground elsewhere, chooses to till them for his support.

It is a usual way of destroying an opinion, by pursuing it to its consequence.
In the present case we may say, that if the visiting one acre of ground could
give a right to it, the visiting a milion would give a right on the same
principle; and thus a few surly ill natured men, might in the earlier ages,
have excluded half the human race from a settlement, or should any have fixed
themselves on territory, visited before they had set a foot upon it, they must
be considered as invaders of the rights of others.

It is said that an individual, building a house or fabricating a machine has
an exclusive right to it, and why not those who improve the earth? I would say,
should a man build houses on a greater part of the soil than falls to his
share, I would, in a state of nature, take away a proportion of the soil and
the houses from him, but a machine or any work of art, does not lessen the
means of subsistence to the human race, which an extensive occupation of the
soil does.

Claims founded on the first discovery of soil are futile. When gold, jewels,
manufactures, or any work of men's hands is lost, the finder is entitled to
some reward, that is, he has some claim on the thing found, for a share of it.

When by industry or the exercise of genius, something unusual is invented in
medicine or in other matters, the author doubtless has a claim to an exclusive
profit by it, but who will say the soil is lost, or that any one can found a
claim by discovering it. The earth with its woods and rivers still exists, and
the only advantage I would allow to any individual for having, cast his eye
first on any particular part of it, is the privilege of making the first choice
of situation. I would think the man a fool and unjust, who would exclude me
from drinking the waters of the Missisippi river, because he had first seen it.
He would be equally so who, would exclude me from settling in the country west
of the Ohio because in chasing a buffaloe, he had been first over it.

The idea of an exclusive right to the soil in the natives had its origin in
the policy of the first discoverers, the kings of Europe. Should they deny the
right of the natives from their first treading on the continent, they would
take away the right of discovery in themselves, by sailing on the coast. As the
vestige of the mokkison in one case gave a right, so the cruize in the other
was the foundation of a claim.

Those who under these kings, derived grants, were led to countenance the idea,
for otherwise why should kings grant or they hold extensive tracts of country.

Men become enslaved to an opinion that has been long entertained. Hence it is
that many wise and good men will talk of the right of savages to immense tracts
of oil.

What use do these ring streaked, spotted and speckled cattle make of the soil?
Do they till it? Revelation said to man, "Thou shall till the ground." This
alone is human life. It is favorable to population, to science, to the
information of a human mind in the worship of a God. Warburton has well said,
that before you can make an Indian a christian you must teach him agriculture
and reduce him to a civilized life. To live by tilling is more humano, by
hunting is more bestiarum. I would as soon admit a right in the buffaloe to
grant lands, as in Killbuck, the Big Cat, the Big Dog, or any of the ragged
wretches that are called chiefs and sachems. What would you think of going to a
big lick, or place where the beasts collect to lick the saline and nitrous
earth and water, and addressing yourself to a great buffaloe to grant you land?
It is true he could not make the mark of the stone or the mountain in his deed;
but he could set his cloven foot to the paper like the great Ottoman, the
father of the Turks, who when he put his signature to an instrument, dipped his
hand and spreading fingers in the ink and laid them on the parchment. To see
how far the folly of mankind would go, I had once a thought of supplicating one
of these great elkes or buffaloes that run to the westward, to make me a grant
of a hundred thousand acres: I could prove he had brushed the weeds with his
tail, and run fifty miles. I wonder if Congress or the different states would
recognize the claim. I am so far from thinking the Indians have right to the
soil, that not having made a better use of it for many hundred years, I
conceive they have forfeited all pretense to claim, and ought to be driven from
it.

With regard to forming treaties or making peace with this race, these are my
ideas: -- They have the shapes of men and may be of the human species, but
certainly in their present state they approach nearer the character of Devils:
take an Indian is there any faith in him? Can you bind him by favors? Can you
trust his word or confide in his promise? When he makes war upon you, when he
takes you prisoner and has you in his power will he spare you? In this he
departs from the law of nature, by which, according to baron Montesquieu and
every other man who thinks on the subject, it is unjustifiable to take away the
life of him who submits; the conqueror in doing otherwise becomes a murderer,
who ought to be put to death. On this principle are not the whole Indian
nations murderers? Many of them may have not had an opportunity of putting
prisoners to death, but the sentiment which they entertain leads them
invariably to do this when they have it in their power or judge it expedient:
these principles constitute them murderers, and they ought to be prevented from
carrying them into execution, as we would prevent a common hommicide, who
should be mad enough to conceive himself justifiable in killing men.

The tortures which they exercise on the bodies of their prisoners, justify
extirmination. Gelo of Syracuse made war on the Carthaginians, because they
offered up human victims, and made peace with them on condition they would
cease from this unnatural and cruel superstition If we could have any faith in
the savages, I would suffer them to live, provided they would no longer make
war amongst themselves, or against others by lurking privately on the path ways
of the wood, and putting unarmed and defenseless inhabitants to death or
attacking women and children in the frontier families, and on their ceasing in
the mean to exercise torture.

I do not know but I ought to recall my word and say, that even reforming from
these practices, they ought not to live: These nations are so degenerate from
the life of man, so devoid of every sentiment of generosity, so prone to every
vicious excess of passion, so faithless, and so incapable of all civilization,
that it is dangerous to the good order of the world that they should exist in
it. Why was it that a stream of fire was sent to burn up Sodom and Gomorrah, or
some years before a deluge of water to wash the old world, but that the evil
example of wicked men and horrid deeds might be struck from the knowledge and
memory of the world? Why was it that the Canaanites were sentenced to
extirpation, but because their rites and practices rendered them unfit to live.
With what zeal did that good man Samuel hew Agag in pieces? With the same zeal
ought every whig in America to hew the Big Pipe, or the Big Rattlesnake, or any
of these, yclept by whatever name, wherever he can find them It may be said the
Israelites had an order from the Lord to put to death the Canaanites. I think
when we see men by their practice murderers, by every sentiment and principle
of heart carried out to shed blood privately; it is a sufficient order to
exterminate the whole brood. As the Seceder said of Satan, what will you make
of them, my beloved, but ill, vile, evil devils?

There have been instances of several of these creatures that have been taken
young from the woods, and put to public schools in America; I do not know one
who has even by these means been rendered a useful member of society: They
retain the temper of their race. I knew one of these, a certain John Montour,
who had been educated at one of the northern seminaries, taught Greek and
Latin, and in this war dignified by Congress with a commission of captain. No
greater savage ever existed. He had murdered several of his own people, and
being obliged to avoid the resentment of their relations, had fled from one
place to another, and at last joined our arms at Fort Pit. I saw this man with
the bloody scalp of an Indian in his hand, which he had just taken off, having
first tomhawked the creature, though submitting and praying for his life. The
Indian had been for some time a prisoner with us, on suspicion of having acted
against us, but having always professed himself a friend, and not being yet
convicted of any murder, it was ruthful in his fellow savage to put him to
death. I am well persuaded, that for a keg of whiskey you might induce any
Indian to murder his wife, child, or best friend. I am informed, that the
experiment was actually made by a trader. An Indian for a quart of whisky, in
one of the western towns cut the throat of his own child.

This being the character of these men, shall we not wish to dispossess them of
the goodly lands, springs and rivers to the westward, which they have so long
made a scene of horror by their practices. At the termination of the present
war, when they are no longer assisted by our enemies, it will be easy to drive
them beyond the lakes: Instead of forming treaties, and sending any other talk
to them, and profaning ourselves by calling them brothers, I would simply let
them know that they are no longer to show themselves below the heads of the
great rivers that fall from the westward into the Ohio and Missisippi waters:
After some period they may be reduced to more distant bounds, until driven to
the cold snows of the north west, where darkness reigns six months in the year,
if the continent extends so far, their practices shall be obscured, and the
tribes gradually abolished.

H. BRACKENRIGE.


